Romae Antiquae Notitia: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF ROME.

In Two PARTS.

I. A short History of the Rise, Progress, and Decay of the Commonwealth. II.
A Description of the City. An Account of the Religion, Civil Government, and
Art of War; with the Remarkable Customs and Ceremonies, Public and Private.
With COPPER CUTS of the Principal Buildings, etc.

To which are prefixed Two ESSAYS: Concerning the Roman Learning, and the Roman
Education.

By BASIL KENNETT of C. C. C. Oxon.

Dedicated to His HIGHNESS the DUKE of GLOUCESTER.

En tibi prima, puer, nullo munuscula cultu!
Virgil. -- Nec desinat unquam
Tecum Graia loqui, tecum Romana vetustas.
Claudian. LONDON, Printed for A. Swall and T. Child, at the Unicorn, at the
West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

TO His HIGHNESS THE DUKE of GLOUCESTER.
SIR,
AMong all the Noble Presages of Wit, and Honor, there is not one by which
YOUR HIGHNESS has given greater Encouragement to the Hopes of these Kingdoms,
than by a surprising Curiosity, and an impatient Desire of Knowledge. For the
satisfying of so Generous Inclinations, YOUR HIGHNESS cannot but seek an early
Acquaintance with the Roman State. It must needs please YOU, SIR, to understand
the Constitution of that People, before YOU appear the Rival of their Glory:
And the first Steps to both these Seize will be alike uneasy. Many
Fatigues are to be undergone ere YOU surpass them in Action and Conduct: And in
the same Manner, before YOU are introduced into the more delightful Scenes of
their Policy and Government, YOUR HIGHNESS should be first presented with the
rougher Prospect of their Customs and Ceremonies.

For Your Direction in so Noble (though so Intricate) a Path of Ancient Story,
YOUR HIGHNESS is desired to accept this small Endeavor; no otherwise than YOU
would a few Shadows or a little Model, to give YOU, SIR, the first Notion of
some admired Picture, or some magnificent Building.

There is one Custom which I am apt to fancy YOUR HIGHNESS will read with
particular Pleasure; I mean, SIR, the TROJAN GAME; a Martial Exercise,
performed by the Youth of the first Quatity in Rome, under such a Captain as
Your self: And deriving its Original from young Ascanius, whom I need not fear
to mention as your Precedent, since YOU have already honored Him with your
Imitation.

It may be expected perhaps that out of the many Illustrious Romans, I should
here propose to YOUR HIGHNESS some of the most Celebrated Examples of Virtue
and great Achievements. But this would prove a needless Piece of Service;
since YOU cannot miss Your Way in the pursuit of the First, while YOUR HIGHNESS
go's on like the Trojan Prince, Matre Dea monstrante viam.

And to the Other, the short Advice which that Hero gave his Son, will engage
YOU as the Highest Motive: -- Te animo repetentem exempla tuorum
Et Pater Aeneas and Avunculus excitet Hector.


I am, SIR, YOUR HIGHNESS's Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, Basil
Kennett.

PREFACE.
THE usefulness of this Design not being like to be called in question, I am
obliged no farther than to give a short History of what attempts have hitherto
been made of the same Nature, with some Account of the present Undertaking.

Not to make a Catalogue of the many Tracts on particular Subjects of Roman
Antiquities, the Two Authors most in request for this Piece of Knowledge, are
Rosinus and Godwin; the first as a full System, the other as an Abridgement or
Compendium. We have nothing more complete than Rosinus taken altogether: But he
will appear very deficient in many Points, if compared with other Learned Men
who have labored in the adorning some one Part of his General Subject. Thus, I
believe, his Book of War has Scarce been looked into since the Publishing of
Lipsius his admirable Comment on Polybius. His Accounts of the Habits, Senate,
Laws and Funerals, will never be set in Competition with the more accurate
Pieces of Ferrarius and Rubenius, of Paulus Manutius and Kirchman. Not to urge
that the Names, the Money, the Private Games, with several lesser Topics are
entirely omitted; and many more substantial Customs but lightly touched. The
Paralipomena of Dempster, which are added in the best Editions, under the Name
of Notes on this Author, seem for the most part purely a Transcript of Common
Places, gathered from the Classicks and other Writers, with little Connection.
And therefore though they serve now and then for a Supplement to Rosinus, yet
it is impossible they should be very instructive.

Godwin's Anthilogia (which we usually meet with in our Schools) besides that
it wants all the Advantages which we have received from the Learned within
these Threescore Years, is so Short and Vnsatisfactory in Subjects of the
greatest Consequence; so lined with Phrases, which are to be found in all our
Dictionaries; so stuffed with long Passages of Latin, untranslated; has so
little Method, and runs so dry and heavy in the reading, that I fancy it is a
general Wish it were exchanged for something else in the same Kind, of greater
use, and more agreeable Entertainment.

For Cantelius de Romana Republica, To me the Jesuit seems very unhappy, that
by spending half his Book in giving us a long Relation of the Roman Wars,
Battles, Deaths, etc. which most Persons would rather learn from the Original
Historians; he has so straitn'd himself in the remaining Part, as to pass for
no extraordinary Epitomizer. Besides that he cannot spare Room to set down one
Word of Authority for what he says.

As for these Papers: The Two Essays of the Roman Learning and Education, are,
I think, what has not been before attempted in any Language; and on that
Account will be the more easily Pardoned if not the better Accepted in the
World. The Compendious History of the Rise, Progress, and Decay of the State,
has this to say for it self, That it carries its own Credentials along with it
in constant References to the Ancient Writers. I will not here compose a Table
of Contents for the Second Part, which has run out into such length as to make
the Body of the Work; only I may hint in a Word or Two, that the many Omissions
of Rosinus and Godwin are largely supplied, and scarce any thing material (that
I know of) passed by. That the City with the Famous Structures of all Sorts are
described from the Relations of Eyewitnesses, and Authors of Credit. That the
Laws which occur in the best Classicks, and often prove a great Hindrance to
the Reader, are disposed of under proper Heads in a very convenient Manner; and
the truest Accounts of their Import, and the Time when they were made,
collected from the most approved Commentators, and from the admired Treatise of
Manutius. That in some Subjects it was thought proper to follow (for the most
Part) one particular Author, who had managed his Province with universal
Approbation: As Sigonius, in the Comitia and the Judgments: Lipsius in the Art
of War, in the Gladiators, and in the Names. Kirchman in the Funerals, and
Brerewood in the Account of the Money. That the curious Remarques of Scaliger,
Casaubon, Graevius, Monsieur and Madam Dacier are inserted on many Occasions.
In short, that no Pains or Charges have been spared, which might render the
Attempt truly serviceable, to the good End, for which 'twas designed, the
Pleasure and Benefit of the Reader.

ESSAY I. Of the Roman Learning.
WHoever considers the strange Beginning of the Roman State, the Frame and
Constitution on which it was First settled, together with the Quality of the
Original Members, will think it no Wonder that the People in that early Age
should have a kind of Fierceness, or rather Wildness in their Temper, utterly
averse to every thing that was Polite and Agreeable. This savage Disposition by
degrees turned into a rigid Severity, which encouraged them to rely solely on
the Force of their Native Virtue and Honor, without being beholden to the
Advantages of Art for the improvement of their Reason, or for the assistance of
their Courage. Hence a grossness of Invention passed current with them for Wit,
and Study was looked on as an unmanly Labor: especially while they found that
their exact Discipline and unconquered Resolution, rendered them Masters of
Nations much more Knowing than themselves. All this is frankly acknowledged by
their own Authors: Literae in homine Romano goes for a Wonder with Tully De
Not. Deor. lib. 1. De Senectute.
. And Virgil in a Reign when all the Civility and Learning of the World were
transplanted to Rome, chooses to make the Arts of Government and War the
distinguishing Excellencies of his Countrymen.

Excudent alii spirantia mollius era,
Credo equidem: Vivos ducent de marmore vultus;
Orabunt causas melius; coelique meatus
Describent radio, and surgentia sydera dicent:
Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento:
Hae tibi erunt arts. Pacique imponere morem:
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos Aen. 6.
.
Others shall best inspire the Mimick Brass,
Or out of Marble carve a living Face:
Plead with more force, and trace the Heavenly Roads,
Describing the wide Empire of the Gods:
The wandering Stars to steady Rules Confine,
And teach exspecting Mortals when they will shine.
Thee Heaven, brave Roman, formed for high Command,
Be these thy Arts, from thy victorious Hand
To make glad Nations own their Peace bestowed,
To spare the Suppliant and pull down the Proud.
The Reason which Horace gives for the slow advances of Poesy, will hold in
every other Part of Polite Learning:

Serus enim Gr^ecis admovit acumina chartis Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
. Their little Acquaintance with the fine Wits of Greece, who had settled the
Staple of Arts and Learning in that Country, deprived them of an Opportunity to
cultivate and beautify their Genius, which was formed by Nature, capable of
the Highest Seize. Some kind of Poetry indeed they had in their Rustic
Times; but then the Verses were such rude doggrel Stuff, as old Ennius
describes.

-- Quales Fauni vatesque canebant,
Quem neque Musarum scopulos quisquam superarat,
Nec dicti studiosus erat.
Cicero is inclined to think, that the old Romans might probably have gained
some little Knowledge in Philosophy from the Instruction of Pythagoras, the
famous Author of the Italick Sect, who flourished in Italy about the same time
as the Tarquins were expelled the City. But the ancient Custom of singing to
the Flute the Praises of Famous Men at great Entertainments, is the only
Relic he can find of this Doctrine, which was delivered in Poetical Numbers
Cicero Tusc. Quaest. lib. 4.
.

Their Intercourse with Greece begun upon their undertaking the Defense of
those Parts, against Philip of Macedon, who had a design on its Liberty, about
the Year of Rome 55^, when, according to their usual Practice, under the Name
of Deliverers, they made themselves rather the Masters of that People. And
then, Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit, and arts
Intulit agresti Latio Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
.


The greatest Number of eminent Poets, especially Dramatic Writers, flourished
between the end of the First and the Third Punic Wars; or from the Year of the
City 512 to 607. The most considerable were Livius Andronicus, Naevius, Ennius,
Pacuvius, Accius, Caecilius, Plautus, Afranius, Terence and Lucilius. And
therefore Horace means only the First Punic War, when he says, Et post Punica
Bella quietus quaerere coepit
Quid Sophocles, and Thespis and Aeschylus utile ferrent:
Tentavit quoque rem si digne vertere posset Ibid.
.


The Studies of Philosophy and Rhetoric never had any tolerable Progress
before the Arrival of the Achaians, who in the Year of Rome 586 or 587, to the
Number of a Thousand, and more were sent for out of their own Country, where
they had shown themselves disaffected to the Romans, and were dispersed in
several Parts of Italy. Among these was the Famous Polybius the Megalopolitan,
whose great Parts and Learning not only gained him the entire Friendship of
Scipio Aemylianus and Laelius, two of the greatest Romans in that Age, but
procured too the Release of all his Countrymen, that remained after some Years
Exile.

Most of that Company, though not equal to Polybius; yet being the Principal
Members of the Chief Cities in Greece, brought away a great Share of the
Politeness and refined Arts of that Country: And being now reduced to a State
of Life, which took from them all Thoughts of Public Action, they applied
themselves wholly to the Pursuit of Letters, as well to divert the sad
Reflections on their Banishment, as to improve and cultivate their Mind Vid.
Casaubon Chro^ol. ad P^^yb. and Comment. ad Sueten de Grammat.
.

In a few Years their Example and Instructions had wrought such a strange
Conversion in the Roman Youth, that the Senate fearing least the Ancient
Discipline should by this means be corrupted, and the Minds of the People
softn'd and enervated by Study, consulted how to put a Stop to this Vein of
Politeness, so contrary to the Rough and Warlike Disposition of their
Ancestors. To this Purpose we meet with a Decree bearing Date in the Consulship
of C. Fannius Strabo and M. Valerius Messala, A. U. C. 592; by which it
appears, that whereas Marcus Pomponius the Praetor had made a Report to the
Senate about the Philosophers and Rhetoricians, the Fathers did hereby order
the aforesaid Praetor to take Cognizance of the Business, and to suffer no such
Men in Rome Sueton. de Clar. Grammat. cap. 1. A. Gell. lib. 15. cap. 11.
.

The eager Passion for Learning which this Prohibition had in some measure
allayed, broke out with greater Heat and Force about Sixteen Years after, upon
this Famous occasion, as the Story may be made up out of several Authors
Plutarch in Cat. Majer. Of. G^l. lib. 7. cap. 14. Macrob. Sat. 1. c. 15.
.

The Athenians having plundered Oropus a City of Baeotia, the Inhabitants made
their Complaint to Rome; the Romans referring the Case to the Judgment of the
Scycionians, a Mulct of 500 Talents was imposed on the Athenian State. Upon
this Account it was resolved, that Commissioners should be sent to the Roman
Senate, to procure a Mitigation of the Fine. The Persons pitched on for this
Service were Carneades the Academick, Diogenes the Stoic, and Critolaus the
Peripatetick. About the time of their coming, Authors are very little agreed;
but Petavius and Casaubon, fix it in the Six Hundred and Third Year after the
building of Rome. Most of the Studious Youths immediately waited on the old
Gentlemen at their Arrival, and heard them discourse frequently, with
Admiration. It happened too, that they had each of them a different way in
their Harangues; for the Eloquence of Carneades was Violent, and Rapid,
Critolaus's Neat and Smooth, that of Diogenes Modest and Sober. Carneades one
Day held a full and accurate Dispute concerning Justice; the next Day he
refuted all that he had said before, by a Train of contrary Arguments, and
quite took away the Virtue that he had so much commended. This he did to show
his Faculty of confuting all manner of Positive Assertions: for he was the
Founder of the Second Academy, a Sect that denied any thing to be perceived or
understood in the World, and so introduced an universal Suspension of assent.
It soon flew about the City that a certain Grecian (by whom they meant
Carneades) carrying all before him, had impressed so strange a Love upon the
young Men, that quitting all their Pleasures and Pastimes, they run mad, as it
were, after Philosophy. This to the generality of ^^^ple, was a very pleasant
Sight, and they Rejoiced extremely to find their Sons welcome the Grecian
Literature in so hearty a Manner. But old Cato the Censor, took it in great
Dudgeon, fearing least the Youth being diverted by such Entertainments, should
prefer the Glory of speaking, to th^^ of acting. So that, the Fame of the
Philosopher^ increasing every Day, he resolved to send them packing as s^^n as
possible. With this Design coming into the Senate, he accu^^d the Magistrates
for not giving the Ambassadors a speedier Dispatch; they being Persons who
could easily persuade the People, to what ever they pleased: He advised
therefore that in all have something should be concluded on, that being sent
home to their own Schools, they might Declaim to the Grecian Children; and the
Roman Youth might be obedient to their own Laws and Governors as formerly.

The same grave Disciplinarian, to fright his Son from any thing of the
Graecians, used to pronounce like the Voice of an Oracle, in a harsher and
louder Tone than ordinary, That the Romans would certainly be destroyed, when
they began once to be infected with Greek. But it is very likely that he
afterward altered his Mind, since his learning Greek in his old Age is a known
Story, and depends on good Authority Cicero Academ 1. De Senect. Quinctilian
Inst. lib. 12 cap. 11.
. The Lord Bacon says 'Twas a Judgment on him, for his Former Blasphemy
Advancement of Learning, Book 1.
.

The Ambassadors upon the Motion of Cato, had a quick Dismission, but left so
happy an Inclination in the young Gentlemen to Philosophy and good Letters,
that they grew every Day more enamored of Study; and showed as much Diligence
in their Pursuits of Knowledge, as they had ever done in their Applications to
War.

In the Year of the City 608 or 609, Greece, which had hitherto retained some
Shadow of Liberty, though it had been along while at the Roman Command, was upon
some slight Occasion entered with an Army under L. Mummius, and reduced to the
common State of the other conquered Nations. This Exploit happening in the very
same Year that Carthage was destroyed by P. Scipio Aemylianus, it will be very
pleasant to observe the different Genius of the Two Commanders, who had the
Honor of these Achievements; and to see how Politeness and the ancient
Simplicity were now in a Strife at Rome. Mummius was so far unskilled in the
curious Inventions of Art, that after the taking of Corinth, when a great
Number of admirable Pictures and Statues, by the best Masters, came into his
Hands, he told the Servants that were to carry them into Italy, If they lost
any by the Way, they should certainly find him new ones in their room Vel^.
Pat^r^. lib. 1. cap. 13.
.

Scipio on the other Hand to the Courage and Virtue of ancient Heroes, had
joined a profound Knowledge of the Sciences, with all the Graces and Ornaments
of Wit. His Patronage was courted by every one that made any Figure in
Learning. Panaetius whom Tully calls the Prince of the Stoics, and the
incomparable Historian Polybius, were his Bosom-Friends, the assisters of his
Studies at home, and the constant Companions of his Expeditions Ibid.
. To which may be added the Remark of a very great Man, that he passed the soft
Hours of his Life, in the Conversation of Terence, and was thought to have a
Part in the Composition of his Comedies Sir Will. Temple's Miscell. P. 2. Essay
4.
.

The highest pitch of the Roman Grandeur, in the Time of the Commonwealth, is
thought to have been concluded before the final Reduction of Carthage, and of
Greece Vid C^saubon. Chronolog ad Polyb.
; and the common Reason assigned for its decay, is, that Athens being now
become the Mart of the World, for Wit and Breeding, imported the Arts of
Debauchery among her more Noble Productions to Rome; and maintained their
Luxury as well as their Studies and Conversation at her Charge. But however
their ancient Prowess might decline, it is certain the Conquest of the great
Empire of Science, was now carried on more vigorously than ever. The Tide of
Learning and Humanity run every day with greater Force, and after the Famous
Cato scarce met with any to oppose it. Between this Period, and the Death of
Sylla (scarce Seventy Years) the Most Renowned Orators, Crassus and Antony,
ruled the Forum, who were Succeeded, by Sulpicius, Cotta, Hortensius, and other
great Names recorded by Tully in his Brutus. At the same time, the Two
Scaevola's, the Augur and the Pontiff, advanced Civil-Law to its full
Perfection. And Lucretius (who wrote about the Time of the Jugurthine War) as
he excelled even the Grecian Disciples of Epicurus, in explaining and
defending his Doctrine, so he directs us where to begin, in fixing the Height
and Purity of the Roman Poesy and Style Sir Will. Temple. Miscell. P. 2. Essay
1.
. Philosophers were now in universal Honor and Request, being invited from all
Parts for the Education and Instruction of young Noblemen, and for Advice and
Assistance of the greatest Ministers of State. And what is most surprising,
Arts and Civility were rather encouraged than frighted away by the Wars, and
the Muses, like their Patroness Minerva, had very often their residence in the
Camp. Sylla himself wrote Two and Twenty Books of Memoirs Plutarch in Sylla.
, and contributed in an extraordinary Manner, to the Advancement of Knowledge,
by transporting to Rome the Famous Library of Apellicon, the Peripatetick in
which were most of Aristotle and Theophrastus his Works, which had been long
unknown to the greatest part of their Followers Ibid. and Strabo lib. 13.
.

Sylla's Rival Marius was the only Man of Note, in that Age, who retained the
old Sowreness and unpolished Manner of the first Romans. He indeed would never
study Greek, nor suffer that Language to be used in any Matters of Consequence;
as thinking it Ridiculous to bestow Time in that Learning, the Teachers whereof
were little better than Slaves Plutarch in Marius.
.

But then Lucullus who succeeded Sylla in the Military Glory, as to matters of
Learning was much his Superior. In his Youth he had so absolute a Command of
the Two only Tongues then in Request, that upon a Project of compiling an
History, he fairly took his Chance, whether he should write in Greek or Latin,
in Prose or Verse. And after all his Feats of Arms in the Mithridatick War,
when he was deprived of his Command by the prevailing Faction of Pompey, the
great Employment of his Privacy and Retreat, was the promoting of Knowledge.
With this Design he built a Library, furnished it with a vast Number of Books,
fairly transcribed, and made it free to all Comers. The Walks and Schools,
which he raised near the Library, were always full of Graecians, who retiring
hither from Business, diverted one another with Conferences and Debates, in the
same Manner as was used in their own Country; making Advantage of Friendly
Conversation toward the improvement of their Understandings. Lucullus himself
often studied there, sometimes disputing with the Learned Men, and sometimes
giving his Advice in Matters of State, to those that desired it; though he
meddled with no Public Business in Person. He was very well versed in all the
Sects of Philosophy, but adhered closely to the old Academy, whereas his Friend
Cicero was a great Stickler for the New. Hence it is that we find the latter
Book of the Academic Questions inscribed Lucullus, where that great Man is
brought in defending the Opinions of his Sect Plutarch in Lucull.
.

The whole Majesty of Language, and Height of Eloquence shown out, as it were,
all at once in Tully; so that Paterculus has well observed, delectari ante eum
paucissimis, mirari vero neminem possis, nisi aut ab illo visum, aut qui illum
viderit Hist. lib. 1. cap 17.
.

Perhaps the same Remark will hold good in his Philosophy: Or at least with
respect to his Predecessors, the latter Study will yield him an equal Praise
with the former. For to handle the Subject of Naturals and Morals in the Latin
Tongue, was purely a new Province reserved for his management, and left
untouched 'till that Time by the Learned. This he lets us know in several Parts
of his Works, particularly in his Proem to the Tusculan Questions; where at the
same time he gives us a short Account of the Progress and Advances of Arts
among the Romans, infinitely worth the transcribing. Meum semper judicium fuit,
etc. It was always my Opinion (says he) that either our Countrymen have been
more happy in their Inventions of every Kind than the Greeks, or that they have
made a vast Improvement in whatever they borrowed from that Nation; and thought
worth their while to polish and refine. For as to the Conduct of Life, and the
Rules of Breeding and Behavior, together with the management of Family
Concerns, we are Masters of more exactness, and have a much gentiler Air. If we
ascend to the governing and regulating of Public States, our Ancestors may
justly claim the Preference in this part of Wisdom, on account of their
admirable Laws and Institutions. In Military Affairs we have made a more
considerable Advance than any before us; which is owing no less to our
Discipline than to our Native Bravery........ It Is true Greece has always had
the Renown beyond us, for their seize in every Part of Learning; and it
was an easy matter to Conquer, when they met with no Opposition. Poetry (the
most ancient sort of Writing) had but a late reception among us: For Livius
Andronicus presented his first Dramatick Piece 510 (it should be 514) Years
after the Building of Rome, in the Consulship of C. Claudius, ( Son to Appius
Caecus) and M. Tuditanus, a Year before the Birth of Ennius, who is senior to
Plautus and Naevius.

As he goes on, he attributes the slow Progress of Poesy, to the want of due
Reward and Encouragement, and tells us that in a public Oration of Cato's, it
was Objected as a Reproach to Marcus Nobilior, that he had carried the Poet
Ennius with him into Aetolia, when he went to reside there as Governor. That
there was no Part of the Mathematics (which the Graecians esteemed so
honorable a Study) of use in Rome, but the bare Practice of measuring and
casting Account. For Oratory, he observes that the Romans embraced this very
soon: but at first without the Advantages of a learned Institution; which were
afterward added with so good Success, as to set them on equal Terms, with the
most Eloquent Masters of Greece. But that Philosophy had lain neglected 'till
that time, and had met with no eminent Author to adorn it in the Latin
Tongue. This therefore he professes to undertake as his proper Office, and how
happily he succeeded in the Attempt, his Works on that Subject will be a
lasting Argument.

If we compare Tully with his Friend Atticus, we find them both together
answering the Two excellent Ends of Philosophy, the Service of the Public, and
the private Ease and Tranquillity of an inoffensive Life. The former directed
all his Studies to Action, in the defense of the Commonwealth, and the
opposing all Designs on its Liberty. The latter by never entering the Scene of
Business, made himself equally honored and courted by all Parties from Sylla
to Augustus Caesar. The one gained to himself more Glory, the other more hearty
Love and Esteem; and I believe most Persons would be inclined to follow
Atticus, and to commend Cicero.

Crassus, Pompey, Antony, Caesar, Cato, and Brutus, who made such a Noise in
the World almost all at the same time, were the most refined Scholars of their
Age. The Three first indeed confined themselves to the Practice of Eloquence,
'till they were wholly diverted by the Profession of Arms. But the Three last,
as they out-shone the former in Oratory, so they had made much greater Advances
in the other Parts of Humane Learning. Poetry and Philosophy were the diversion
of Caesar's leisure Hours, and his History will be the Model of good Language,
as long as himself the Example of great Achievements.

The Whole Conduct of Cato's Life, shows him a greater Stoic than the most
rigid Professors of that Sect; or however they might equal him in Knowledge,
it is certain he shamed them in Practice.

Brutus had been a Hearer of all the Sects of Philosophers, and made some
Proficiency in every one. When a Soldier under Pompey, in the Civil Wars, all
the time that he was in the Camp, except what he spent in the General's
Company, he Employed in reading and study. And the very day before the decisive
Battle at Pharsalia, though it was then the middle of Summer, and the Camp under
many inconveniences, and he himself extremely harrass'd and out of Order; yet
while others were either laid down to sleep, or taken up with Apprehensions
about the issue of the Fight, he spent all his Time 'till the Evening, in
writing an Epitome of Polybius Plutarch in Brut.
.

It Is universally known, that the Roman Literature as well as Empire, was in
its highest Ascendant under Augustus. All the delicate Fruits Transplanted from
Greece, were now in their Blossom, being cherished by the Calmness of the
Season, and cultivated by the Hand of an Emp^ror.

I have often wondered that Maecenas shoul'd all along carry away the sole
Honor of encouraging the Wit and Knowledge of this Reign; when it seems
Probable that he acted only in imitation of his Master; as the Humors of
Princes commonly determine the Inclinations of their Favorites. The quite
contrary happened to the other great Minister Agrippa; the Glory of his
Exploits was referred to the Emperor, while the Emperor's Bounty advanced
Maecenas his Esteem. And indeed the Celebration of Augustus his Triumphs, and
the Panegyricks on his Piety, were sufficient to set him out in the most taking
Colors: But had Maecenas been denied the shining Character of a Patron, he
might have rolled on in Silence among Epicurus his Herd, and scarce have been
ever drawn by the Poet's Hand, unless in the same Posture as Silenus.

Inflatum hesterno venas ut semper Iaccho:
Serta procul capiti tantum delapsa jacebant,
Et gravis attrita pendebat cantharus ansa Virgil. Eclog. 6.
.
But whoever of the Two was the Nobler Patron, Augustus must be acknowledged to
have been the greater Scholar: And for proof we need go no farther than
Suetonius, who has spent no less than Six Chapters on the Learning of this
Emperor: His prodigious Industry in the Study of Eloquence, and Liberal Arts;
his Labor in composing every thing that he spoke in Public, though he had a
very good Faculty at extempore Harangues; his polite and clean Style; his
accurate Knowledge of the Grecian Literature, by the assistance of their best
Masters of Rhetoric and Philosophy; the Thirteenth Book of the History of his
own Life; his Exhortation to Philosophy, with several other works in Prose; his
Book of Hexameters and another of Epigrams, all considered together may equal
him with the most Learned Princes in Story.

Being thus arrived at the Highest Point of the Roman Seize, it cannot be
unpleasant to look about us, and to take a short survey of the Productions in
every Kind. Eloquence indeed will appear at some Distance, rather in the
Augustan Age, than in Augustus his Reign, ending in Cicero, at the Dissolution
of the Commonwealth. Not that his Death was properly the Ruin of his
Profession; for the Philosopher might have lived much longer, and yet the
Orator have been gone; when once the ancient Liberty was taken away, which
inspired him with all his lofty Thoughts, and was the very Soul of his
Harangues. But then the Bounds of History and Poesy, were six'd under the
Emperors Protection by Livy, Virgil and Horace. And if we desire a view of
Philosophy, the two Poets will account for that as well as for their own
Province.

I think none will deny Horace the Elogy given him by a celebrated Writer, That
he was the greatest Master of Life, and of true Sense in the Conduct of it Sir
Will. Temple. Miscellan. P. 2. Essay 2.
. Especially since the Author of that Judgment is one of those whom (had he
lived then) Horace himself would have willingly chose for his Judge, and
inserted in that short Catologue of Men of Wit and Honor, whom he desired
should approve his Labors Book 1. Sat. 10.
.

Whether or no the common Saying be True, that if all Arts and Sciences were
lost, they might be found in Virgil; it is plain he dived very deep into the
Mysteries of Natural Science, which he sets forth in all its Ornaments, in
several Parts of his Divine Work. And in that admirable Place of his Second
Georgie, when he expresses, in a sort of Transport, his Inclinations to Poesy,
he seems to Direct its whole End toward the Specularious of the Philosophers;
and to make the Muses Handmaids to Nature.

Me vero primum dulces ante omnia Musae,
Quarum sacra fero ingenti perculsus amore,
Accipiant, coelique vias and sydera monstrent,
Defectus solis varios, Lunaeque Labores:
Vnde tremor terris; qua vi maria alta tumescant
Obicibus ruptis, rursusque in seipsa recidant:
Quid tantum Oceano properent se tingere soles
Hyberni: vel quae tardis mora noctibus obstet.
For me, the first desire which does control
All the inferior Wheels that move my Soul,
Is, that the Muse me her High Priest would make;
Into her holy Scenes of Mystery take,
And open there to my Mind's purged Eye,
Those Wonders which to Sense the Gods deny;
How in the Moon such change of Shapes is found;
The Moon, the changing World's eternal Bound.
What shakes the solid Earth, what strong Disease
Dares trouble the fair Centre's ancient Ease?
What makes the Sea Retreat, and what Advance?
Varieties too regular for Chance.
What drives the Chariot on of Winters's Light,
And stops the lazy Wagon of the Night?
[Mr. Cowley. After Augustus, the Roman Muses as well as the Eagles stooped
from their former Height: and perhaps one of these Misfortunes might be a
necessary Consequence of the other. I am very sorry when I find either of them
attributed to the Change of Government, and the Settlement of the Monarchy. For
had the Maxims and the Example of Augustus been pursue'd by his Successors, the
Empire in probability might have been much more Glorious than the
Commonwealth. But while a new Scheme of Politics was introduced by Tiberius,
and the Caesar's began to Act what the Tarquins would have been ashamed of, the
Learning might very well be corrupted, together with the Manners and the
Discipline, and all beyond any Hopes of a Recovery.

It cannot be denied that some of the worst Princes were the most passionate
affecters of Learning, particularly Tiberius, Claudius and Nero: But this
rather deterred other Men from such Attempts, than encouraged them in their
Pursuits; while an applauded Scholar was as much envied, as a fortunate
Commander; and a Rival in Wit, accounted as dangerous as a Contender for the
Empire: The first being certainly the more hardy Fellow, who dared Challenge
his Masters at their own Weapons.

Whatever Essays were made to recover the languishing Arts under Vespasian,
Titus, and Domitian (for this last too was an encourager of Poesy, though he
banished the Philosophers) scarce served to any better Purpose, than to
demonstrate the poor Success of Study and Application, while the ancient Genius
was wanting.

In the Six next Reigns, immediately following Domitian, Learning seems to have
enjoyed a sort of lucid Interval, and the Banished Favorite was again admitted
to Court, being highly countenanced and applauded by the best set of Princes
Rome ever saw.

Not to enquire after the Productions of the other Reigns, the useful Labors
of Tacitus, Suetonius and Pliny Junior will make the Government of Trajan more
famous than all his Feats of Arms. If they are less happy in their Language
than the Ancients, in other respects perhaps they have over-march'd them. The
Historians in the delicacy of their Politics, and the sincere Truth of their
Relations; and the Orator in his Wit and good Sense. If we add to these
Plutarch, who wrote most of his Works in Rome, and was honored by Trajan with
the Consulship; and Quinctilian who flourished a very little Time before; they
may pass for the Twilight of Learning after the Sunset of the Augustan Age; or
rather be resembled to a glimmering Taper which casts a double Light when its
just on the Point of Expiring.

It Is an Observation of Sir William Temple, that all the Latin Books which we
have 'till the End of Trajan, and all the Greek 'till the End of Marcus
Antoninus, have a true and very esteemable Value; but that all written since
that time, owe their Price purely to our Curiosity, and not to their own Worth
and Excellence.

But the puri^ty of the Tongue was long before corrupted, and ended, in Sir
William Temple's Judgment, with Velleius Paterculus under Tiberius. The Reason
he assigns for this Decay, is, the strange resort of the ruder Nations to Rome,
after the Conquest of their own Country.

Thus the Gauls and Germans flocked in Multitudes both to the Army and the
City, after the reducing of those Parts by Julius Caesar, Augustus and
Tiberius; as many Spaniards and Syrians had done before on the like account.
But the greatest Confluence of Foreigners followed upon the Victories of Trajan
in the East, and his Establishment of the Three new Provinces, Armenia, Assyria
and Mesopotamia: And though Adrian voluntarily relinquished these new
Acquisitions, yet the prodigious Swarms of the Natives, who had waited on his
Predecessor's Triumphs, were still obliged to live in Rome, in the condition of
Slaves.

The greatest part of the succeeding Princes, who found it so hard an
Enterprise to defend their own Territories, had little leisure or concern to
guard the Possessions of the Muses. And therefore Claudian in those Verses of
his Panegyric on Stilico, Hinc prisee redeunt arts, felicibus inde
Ingeniis aperitur iter, despectaque Mus^e
Colla levant.
is guilty of a grand piece of Flattery, in making that Minister the Restorer
of Polite Studies, when it is plain that in his time (under Honorius) were the
last strugglings of the Roman State.

The Goths and Vandals, who soon carried all before them, might easily fright
Learning and Sciences off the Stage, since they were already so much out of
Countenance, and thus render the Conquerors of the Universe as Rough and
Illiterate as their first Progenitors.

In this manner the Inundations of the barbarous People, proved equally fatal
to Arts and Empire; and Rome herself, when she ceased to be the Mistress of the
World, in a little time quite forgot to speak Latin.

ESSAY II. Of the Roman Education.
IT IS an Obvious remark, that the strongest Body owes its Vigor in a great
Measure to the very Milk it received in its Infancy, and to the first knitting
of the Joints. That the most stately Trees, and the fairest of Herbs and
Flowers, are beholden for their Shade and Beauty to the Hand that first fixed
them in an agreeable Soil: An Advantage which if they happen to want, they
seldom fail to degenerate into Wildness, and to assume a Nature quite different
from their proper Species. Every own knows how to apply the same Observation to
Morals, who has the Sense to discover it in Naturals. Hence the most renowned
People in Story, are those whose Lawgivers thought it their noblest and most
important Work, to prescribe Rules for the early Institution of Youth. On this
Basis Lycurgus founded the glorious Discipline of the Spartans, which continued
for Five Hundred Years, without any considerable Violation. The Indian
Brachmans had a Strain beyond all the Wit of Greece, beginning their Care of
Mankind even before the Birth, and employing much thought and diligence about
the Diet and Entertainment of their breeding Women; so far as to furnish them
with pleasant Imaginations, to compose their Minds and their Sleep with the
best Temper, during the time that they carried their Burden Sir Will. Temple's
Miscell. P. 2. Essay 1.
.

Plutarch severely reprehends the Conduct of Numa, that in his settlement of
the Roman State, he did not in the first Place provide and constitute Rules for
the Education of Children; and makes the Remissness in this early Discipline,
the chief Cause of the seditious and turbulent temper of that People, and what
contributed highly to the Ruin of the Commonwealth Plutarch, Compar. of Numa
and Lycurg.
Thus much indeed seems agreed on by all the later Historians, that in the
looser times of the Empire, the shameful Negligence of Parents and Instructors,
with its necessary Consequence, the Corruption and Decay of Morality and good
Letters, struck a very great blow toward the dissolving of that glorious
Fabric. But in the rising Ages of Rome, while their primitive Integrity and
Virtue flourished with their Arms and Command, the training up of Youth was
looked on as a mos^ Sacred Duty; and they thought themselves in the highest
Manner Obliged to leave fit Successors to the Empire of the World. So that upon
a short Survey of their whole Method and Discipline from the Birth to the
entrance on public Business they will appear so far to have exceeded the
Wisdom and Care of other Nations, as to contend for this Glory, ever with the
ancient Spartans, whom Plutarch has magnified (...) much beyond them:
especially, if we agree with a very great Judge that the taking no Care about
the Learning, but only about the Lives and Manners of Children, may be justly
though^ a defect in Lycurgus his Institution Archbishop Tillotson's Sermon of
Education.
.

Quinctilian (or Tacitus) in the Dialogue de Oratoribus, gives an excellent
Account of the old way of breeding Children and sets it off with great
Advantage, by comparing it with the Modern.

As soon as the Child was born, he was not given in charge to an hired Nurse,
to live with her in some pitiful Hole that served for her Lodgings; but was
brought up in the Lap and Bosom of the Mother, who reckoned it among her chief
Commendations to keep the House, and to wait on the Children. Some ancient
Matron was pitched on out of the Neighbors, (whose Life and Manners rendered
her worthy of that Office) to whose Care the Children of every Family were
committed: Before whom 'twas reckoned the most heinous thing in the World to
speak an ill Word, or to do an ill Action. Nor had she an Eye only on their
Instruction, and the Business that they were to follow, but with an equal
Modesty and Gravity she regulated their very Divertisements and Recreations.
Thus Cornelia, Aurelia and Attia, Mothers to the Grachi, Julius Caesar and
Augustus are reported to have undertaken the Office of Governesses, and to have
employed themselves in the Education of Noblemens Children. The strictness and
severity of such an Institution had this very good Design, that the Mind being
thus preserved in its primitive Innocence and Integrity, and not debauched by
ill Custom or ill Example might apply its self with the greatest willingness to
the Liberal Arts, and embrace them with all its Powers and Faculties. That
whether it was particularly inclined either to the Profession of Arms, or to
the understanding of the Law, or to the practice of Eloquence, it might make
that its only Business, and greedily drink in the whole Knowledge of the
beloved Study.

But now the young Infant is given in charge to some poor Graecian's Wench, and
one or two of the Serving-Men perhaps are joined in the Commission; generally
the meanest and most ill-bred of the whole Pack, and such as are unfit for any
serious Business. From the Stories and Tattle of such fine Companions, the soft
and flexible Nature must take its first Impression and bent. Over the whole
Family there is not the least Care taken of what is said or done before the
Child: while the very Parents instead of inuring their dear little Ones to
Virtue and Modesty, accustom them on the quite contrary, to Licentiousness and
wantonness, the natural result of which is a settled Impudence, and a contempt
of those very Parents, and every Body else.

Thus, although the Care and Instruction of Youth, among the old Romans, had been
provided for by the public Laws, as in the Spartan State, yet the voluntary
Diligence of Parents would have made all such Regulations useless.

Among the domestic Cares, it will not be from the Purpose to take particular
Notice of one, which required little Trouble or Difficulty, and yet proved as
Beneficial and Serviceable as any other Institution. I mean the using Children
to speak the Language purely at first; by letting them hear nothing but the
truest and most proper Phrase. By this only Advantage, several Persons arrived
at no ordinary Repute in the Forum, who were so unhappy to want many other
Qualifications.

Tully Says that the Gracchi were educated, non tam in gremio, quam in sermon
matris: And he reports of C. Curio, who was reckoned the third Orator of his
time, that he understood no Poet, had read no Books of Eloquence, had made no
Historical Collection, and had no Knowledge of the public or private Part of
the Law. The only thing which gained him his Applause was a clean shining
Phrase, and a sudden quickness and Fluency of Expression. This he got purely by
the Benefit of his private Education; being used to such a correct and polished
way of speaking in the House where he was brought up C^^ i^ Brat.
.

For Masters, in the first Place they had the Literatores or (...), who taught
the Children to write and read: To these they were committed about the Age of
Six or Seven Years Vid. D^^^r ad H^rat. Sat. 1. Lib. 1.
Being come from under their Care they were sent to the Grammar-Schools, to
learn the Art of speaking well, and the understanding of Authors: Or more
frequently in the Houses of great Men, some eminent Grammarian was entertained
for that Employment.

It is pleasant to consider what Prudence was used in these early Years, to
instill into the Children's Mind^^ Love and Inclination to the Forum, whence
they were to expect the greatest Share of their Honors and Preferments. For
Cicero tells Atticus in his second Book de Legibus, that when they were Boys
they used to learn the famous Laws of the Twelve Tables by Heart, in the same
Manner as they did any excellent Poem. And Plutarch relates in his Life of the
Younger Cato, that the very Children had a Play in which they acted Pleadings
of Causes before the Judges, accusing one another and carrying the condemned
Party to Prison.

The Masters already mentioned, together with the Instructors in the several
sorts of Manly Exercises, for the improving of their natural Strength and
Force, do not properly deserve that Name, if set in view with the Rhetoricians
and Philosophers; who, after that Reason had displayed her Faculties, and
established her command, were employed to cultivate and adorn the Advantages of
Nature, and to give the last hand toward the forming of a Roman Citizen. Few
Persons made any great Figure on the Scene of Action in their own time, or in
History afterward, who besides the constant frequenting of Public Lectures,
did not keep with them in the House some eminent Professor of Oratory or Wisdom.

I have often thought that one main Reason of the prodigious Progress made by
young Gentlemen, under these private Tutours, was the perfect Love and
Endearment which we find to have been between Master and Scholar, by which
means Government and Instruction proceeded in the sweetest and easiest way. All
Persons in the happy Ages of Rome, had the same Honor and Respect for their
Teachers, as Persius had for his Master, Cornutus the Stoic, to whom
addressing himself in his fifth Satire, he thus admirably describes his own
Love and Piety to his Governor, and the strict Friendship that was between
them.

Cumque iter ambiguum est, and vit^e nescius error
Diducit trepidas ramosa in compita mentes,
Me tibi supposui: Teneros tu suscipis annos
Socratico, Cornute, sinu; tunc fallere solers
Apposita intortos extendit regula mores;
Et premitur ratione animus, vincique laborat,
Artificemque tuo ducit sub pollice vultum.
Tecum etenim longos memini consumere soles;
Et tecum primas epulis decerpere noctes.
Vnum opus, and requiem pariter disponimus ambo,
Atque verecunda laxamus seria mensa.
Non equidem hoc dubites amborum foedere certo
Consentire dies, and ab uno sidere duci.
Nostra vel aequali suspendit tempora libra
Parca tenax very, seu nata sidelibus hor^
Dividit in Geminos concordia fata duorum;
Saturnumque gravem nostro Jove frangimus una
Nescio quod certe est quod me tibi temperat astrum,
Just at the Age when Manhood sets me free,
I then deposed my self, and left the Reins to thee.
On thy wise Bosom I reposed my Head,
And by my better Socrates was bred.
Then thy straight Rule set Virtue in my sight,
The crooked Line reforming by the right.
My Reason took the Bent of thy Command;
Was formed and polished by thy skilful Hand.
Long Summer-days thy Precepts I rehearse,
And Winter-nights were short in our Converse.
One was our Labor, one was our Repose;
One frugal Supper did our Studies close.
Sure on our Birth some friendly Planet shone,
And as our Souls, our Horoscope was one.
Whether the mounting Twins did Heaven adorn,
Or with the rising Balance we were born;
Both have the same Impression from above,
And both have Saturn's Rage repelled by Jove.
What Star I know not, but some Star I find,
Has given thee an Ascendant over my Mind.
[Mr. Dryden. Nor was the Reverence paid by the Public to the Informers of
Youth, less Remarkable than the Esteem and Duty of their Scholars. Which makes
Juvenal break out into that elegant Rapture,

Dii majorum umbris tenuem and sine pondere terram
Spira^tesque crocos, and in wna per peluum ver,
^ui p^^cepiorem sancti voluere parentis
Esse l^co S^^. 7.
.
In Peace ye Shades of our great Grandsires rest,
No heavy Earth your sacred Bones molest.
Eternal Springs and rising Flowers adorn
The Relics of each venerable Urn.
Who pious Reverence to their Turours paid;
As parents Honored, and as Gods obeyed.
[Mr. Charles Dryden. At the Age of Seventeen Years, the young Gentlemen, when
they put on their manly Gown, were brought in a solemn Manner to the Erum, and
entered in the Study of Pleading: Not only if they designed to make this their
chief Profession, but although their Inclinations lay rather to the Camp. For we
scarce meet with any famous Captain who was not a good speaker; or any eminent
Orator, who had not served some time in the Army. Thus it was requisite for all
Persons who had any Thoughts of rising in the World, to make a good Appearance
both at the Bar and in the Field; because, if the success of their Valor and
Conduct should advance them to any considerable Post, it would have proved
almost impossible without the Advantage of Eloquence, to maintain their
Authority with the Senate and People. Or if the Force of their Oratory should
in time procure them the honorable Offices of Praetor or Consul, they would
not have been in a Capacity to undertake the Government of the Provinces (which
fell to their Share, at the Expiration of these Employments) without some
experience in Military Commands.

Yet because the Profession of Arms was an Art, which would easily give them an
Opportunity of Signalizing themselves, and in which they would almost Naturally
excel, as Occasions should be afterward offered for their Service; their whole
applications and Endeavors were directed at present to the Study of Law and
Rhetoric, as the Foundation of their future Grandeur. Or perhaps they now and
then made a Campaign, as well for a Diversion from several Labors, as for
their Improvement in Martial Discipline.

In the Dialogue de Oratoribus, we have a very good Account of the Admission of
young Gentlemen to the Forum, and of the necessity of such a Course in the
Commonwealth; which coming from so great a Master cannot fail to be very
Pertinent and Instructive.

Among our Ancestors (says that Author) the Youth who was designed for the
Forum, and the Practice of Eloquence, being now furnished with the Liberal
Arts, and the Advantages of a Domestic Institution, was brought by his Father,
or near Relations, to the most celebrated Orator in the City. Him he used
constantly to attend, and to be always present at his performance of any Kind,
either in judicial Matters, or in the ordinary Assemblies of the People: So
that by this Means he learnt to engage in the Quarrels and Contentions of the
Bar, and to approve himself a Man at Arms, in the Wars of the Pleaders.

For in that ancient Constitution of a mixed State, when the Differences were
never referred to one supreme Person, the Orators determined Matters as they
pleased, by prevailing on the Minds of the ignorant Multitude. Hence came the
Ambition of Popular Applause; hence the great variety of I aws and Decrees;
hence the tedious Speeches and Harangues of the Magistrates, sometimes carried
on whole Nights in the Rostra: Hence the frequent Indictment and Impleading of
the most powerful Criminals, and the exposing of Houses to the Violence and
Fury of the Rabble: hence the Factions of the Nobility, and the constant Heats
and Bickerings between the Senate and People. All which, though in a great
Measure they Distracted the Commonwealth, yet had this good Effect, that they
exercised and improved the Eloquence of those times, by proposing the highest
Rewards to that Study. Because the more excellent any Person appeared in the
Art of Speaking, the more easily he arrived at Honors and Employments, the
more he surpassed his Colleague in the same Office; the greater was his Favor
with the leading Men of the City, his Authority with the Seuate and his Renown
and Esteem among the Commons. Th^se Men were courted and waited on by Clients
even of Foreign Nations: These when they undertook the Command of Provinces,
the very Magistrates reverenced at their departure, and adored at their return:
These the highest Offices of Praetor and Consul seemed to require, and call for,
and court their Acceptance: These when in a private Station abated very little
of their Authority, while they guided both the Senate and People by their
Counsel. For they took this for an insallible Maxim, that without Eloquence
'twas impossible either to attain or to defend a considerable Trust in the
Commonwealth: And no wonder when they were drawn to Business, even against
their Wills, and compelled to show their Parts in Public. When 'twas reckoned
but an ordinary Matter to deliver ones Opinion in short before the Senate,
unless a Man could maintain and improve it with the engaging Ornaments of Wit
and Elegance. When if they had contracted any Envy or Suspicion, they were to
answer the Accuser's Charge in Person. When they could not so much as give
their Evidence, as to Public Matters, in Writing; but were obliged to appear
in Court, and to deliver it with their own Mouth. So that there was not only a
vast Encouragement but even a necessity of Eloquence: To be a sine Speaker was
counted brave and glorious; on the other Hand, to act only a mu^e Pers^^ on the
public Stage, was highly Scandalous and Reproachful. And thus a Sense of
Honor, and desire of avoiding Infamy, was a main Incitement to their
Endeavors in these Studies: left they should be reckoned among the Clients
rather than among the Patrons; lest the numerous Dependances transmitted to
them from their Ancestors, should now at last pass into other Families, for
want of an able Supporter; lest, like a sort of useless and unprofitable
Creatures, they should either be fr^^^rated in their pretensions to Honors and
Preserments, or else d^sgrace themselves and their Office by the miscarriages
of their Administration.

Cr^ssus and Ant^n^us, the Two chief Managers of the Discourse, in Tully's
first Book de Oratore, are represented as very opposi^^ in their Judgments,
concerning the necessary Improvements of an accomplished Orator. The former
denies any Person the Honor of this Name, who does not possess in some Degree
all the Qualities both native and acquired, that enter into the Composition of
a general Scholar. The Force of his Argument lies in this, That an Orator ought
to be able to deliver himself copiously on all manner of Subjects: And he does
not see how any one can answer this Character, without some Excellency in all
the Mysteries of Arts and Learning, as well as in the happy Endowments of
Nature. Yet he would not have these Acquisitions set so loose about him, as to
be laid open to the Bottom on every Occasion; but that (as a great Man
expresses it) they should rather be ennamel'd in his Mind, than embossed upon
it. That as the Critics in Gates and Gestures will easily discover by the
Comportment of a Man's Body whether he has learnt to Dance, though he does not
practice his Art in his ordinary Motion: So an Orator when he delivers himself
on any Subject, will easily make it appear whether he has a full Understanding
of the particular Art or Faculty on which the Cause depends, though he does not
discourse of it in the Manner of a Philosopher or a Mechanic. Antonius on the
other Hand, reflecting on the shortness of Humane Life, and how great a part of
it is commonly taken up in the attainment of but a few Parts of Knowledge, is
inclined to believe that Oratory does not require the necessary Attendance of
its Sister Arts. But that a Man may be able to prosecute a Theme of any Kind,
without a Train of Sciences, and the Advantages of a learned Institution. That,
as few Persons are to seek in the cultivating of their Land, or the contrivance
and elegance of their Gardens, though they never read Cato de Re Rustica, or Mago
the Carthaginian: So an Orator may harangue with a great deal of Reason and
Truth on a Subject taken from any part of Knowledge, without any farther
Acquaintance with the nicer Speculations, than his common Sense and
Understanding, improved by Experience and Conversation, shall lead him. For who
ever (says he) when he comes to move the Affections of the Judges or People,
stops at this, that he has not Philosophy enough to dive into the First
Springs of the Passions, and to discover their various Natures and Operations:
Besides, at this Rate we must quite lay aside the Way of raising Pity in the
Audience, by representing the misery of a distressed Party, or describing
(perhaps) the Slavery which he endures: when Philosophy tells us that a good
Man can never be miserable, and that Virtue is is always absolutely free.

Now as Cicero without doubt sat himself for the Picture which in Crassu: his
Name he there draws of an Orator, and therefore strengthens his Argument by his
own Example as well as his Judgment; so Antonius in the next Dialogue does not
stick to own, that his former Assertion was rather taken up for the Sake of
disputing and of encountering his Rival, than to deliver the just Sentiments of
his Mind. And therefore the gentile Education in the Politer Ages of Rome being
wholly directed to the Bar, it seems probable that no part of useful Knowledge
was omitted, for the improving and adorning of the main Study; and that all the
other Arts were courted, though not with an equal Passion. And upon the whole it
appears, that a strange Assiduity and unwearied Application, were the very Life
and Soul of their Designs. When their Historians deseribe an extraordinary Man,
this always enters into his Character as an essential Part of it, that he was
incredibili industria, diligentia singulari; of incredible Industry, of
singular Diligence Archbishop T^ias. Seur. of Edu^.
. And Ca^o in Salust tells the Senate, that 'twas not the Arms so much as the
Industry of their Ancestors, which Advanced the Grandeur of Rome. So that the
Founders and Regulators of this State, in making Diligence and Labor necessary
Qualifications of a Citizen, took the same Course as the Poets will have
Jupiter to have thought on, when he succeeded to the Government over the
Primitive Mortals. -- Pater ipse colondi
^Iaud sacilem esse viam voluit; primusque per artem
Movit agros, curis acuens mortalia corda,
Neo torpere gravi passus sua regna veterno Virg. Georg. 1.
:


To confirm the Opinion of their extreme Industry and perpetual Study and
Labor, it may not seem impertinent to instance in the Three common Exercises
of Translating, Declaiming and Reciting.

Translation the ancient Orators of Rome looked on as a most useful, though a
most laborious Employment. All Persons that applied themselves to the Bar,
proposed commonly some one Orator of Greece for their constant Pattern; either
Lysias, Hyperides, Demosthenes or AEschines, as their Genius was inclined. Him
they continually studied, and to render themselves absolutely Masters of his
Excellencies, were always making him speak their own Tongue. This Cicero,
Quinctilian, and Pliny Junior enjoin as an indispensible Duty in order to the
acquiring any Talent in Eloquence. And the first of these great Men, besides
his many Versions of the Orators for his private use; obliged the Public with
the Translation of several Parts of Plato and Zenophon in Prose, and Homer and
Aratas in Verse.

As to Declaiming, this was not only the main Thing, at which they labored
under the Masters of Rhetoric, but what they practiced long after they
undertook real Causes, and had gained a considerable Name in the Forum.
Suetonius in his Book of famous Rhetoricians, tells us that Cicero declaimed in
Greek 'till he was elected Praetor, and in Latin 'till near the time of his
Death. That Pompey the Great, just at the breaking out of the Civil War,
resumed his old Exercise of declaiming, that he might the more easily be able
to deal with Curio, who undertook the Defense of Caesar's Cause in his Public
Harangues. That Marc Antony and Augustus did not lay aside this Custom, even
when they were engaged in the Seige of Mutina: And that Nero was not only
constant at his Declamations, while in a private Station, but for the first
Year after his Advancement to the Empire.

It is worth remarking, that the Subject of these old Declamations was not a
mere fanciful Thesis, but a Case which might probably be brought into the
Courts of Judicature. The contrary Practice, which crept into some Schools
after the Augustan Age, to the great debasing of Eloquence, is what Petronius
inveighs so severely against in the beginning of his Satyricon, in a Strain so
Elegant that it would lose a great Part of the Grace and Spirit in any
Translation.

When I speak of Recitation, I intend not to insist on the Public Performances
of the Poets in that kind, for which purpose they commonly borrowed the House
of some of their Noblest Patrons, and carried on the whole Matter before a vast
concourse of People, and with abundance of Ceremony. For, considering the
ordinary Circumstances of Men of that Profession, this may be thought not so
much the Effect of an industrious Temper, as the necessary way of raising a
Name among the Wits, and getting a tolerable Livelihood. And it is evident that
under some Princes the most celebrated of this Tribe, for all their Trouble and
Pains in proclaiming their Parts to the Multitude, could hardly keep themselves
from starving: as Juvenal observes of Statius, -- Sed cum fregit subsellia
versu,
Esurit, intactam Paridi nisi vendit Agaven.


I would mean therefore the Rehearsal of all, manner of Compositions in Prose
or Verse performed by Men of some Rank and Quality, before they obliged the
World with their Publication. This was done ordinarily in a meeting of Friends
and (...) ^^intance, and now and then with the admission of a more numerous
Audience. The Design they chiefly aimed at, was the correction and improvement
of the Piece. For the Author having a greater Awe and Concern upon him on these
Occasions, than at other times, must needs take more Notice of every Word and
Sentence, while he spoke them before the Company, than he did in the first
Composure, or in the common Supervisals. Besides, he had the Advantage of all
his Friends Judgments, whether intimated to him afterward in private
Conference, or racitely declared at the Recital by their Looks and Nods, with
many other Tokens of Dislike or Approbation, In the fuller Auditories he had
the Benefit of seeing what took, or what did not with the People; whose common
Suffrage was of so great Authority in this Case, that Pomponius Secundus a
celebrated Author of Tragedies, when he consulted with his Friends about the
polishing any of his Writings, if they happened to differ in their Opinion
about the Elegance, Justness, and Propriety of any Thought or Expression, used
always to say, AD POPVLVM PROVOCO, I APPEAL TO THE PEOPLE; as the best deciders
of the Controversy Pan. Lib. 7. Epist. 17.
.

The Example of the younger Pliny in this practice is very observable, and the
account which we have of it is given us by himself. I omit (says lie) no Way or
Method that may seem Proper for correction: And first I take a strict View of
what I have Written, and consider thoroughly of the whole Piece. In the next
Place I read it over to Two or Three Friends: and soon after send it to others
for the Benefit of their Observations. If I am in any doubt concerning their
Criticisms, I take in the assistance of one or two besides my self to judge and
debate the Matter. Last of all, I recite before a greater Number; And this is
the Time that I furnish my self with the Several Emendations Plin. lib. 7. Ep.
17.
.

It might be a farther Pleasure on this Subject to describe the whole
Institution and Course of Study of the most famous Romans, with their gradual
Advances to those Virtues and seize which we still admire in their Story.
But the account which Cicero gives of himself in his Brutus, and some hints
from other Parts of his Works, will excuse, if not command, the omission of all
the rest. And it is no ordinary Happiness that we are obliged with the History
of that excellent Person from his own Hand, whom we must certainly pitch upon
for the first and greatest Example, if we were beholden only to the Relations
of other Men.

For some while after his Admission to the Forum he was a constant Auditor of
the best Pleaders when ever they spoke in Public: every Day he spent some time
in writing, reading and improving his Invention; besides the Exercises he
performed in the Art of Oratory. For the Knowledge of the Civil Law he applied
himself with all imaginable Diligence to Q. Scaevola, the most celebrated
Professor of that Science; who though he did not make it his Business to procure
Scholars, yet was very ready and willing to assist such Persons in this Study
as desired his Advice and Directions. 'Twas to this Scaevola that Cicero's
Father when he put him on his Manly Gown, committed his Son, with a strict
Charge never to stir from him, but upon extraordinary Accounts.

About the 19th Year of his Age, in the Heat of the Contention, between Marius
and Sylla, when the Courts of Judicature were shut up, and all things in
Confusion; Philo the Prince of the Academy, leaving Athens on occasion of the
Mithridatick War, took up his Residence in Rome. Cicero wholly resigned himself
to his Institution, having now fixed the bent of his Thoughts and Inclinations
to Philosophy, to which he gave the more diligent Attendance, because the
distraction of the Times gave him little Reason to hope that the old judicial
Process, and the regular Course of the Laws, would ever be restored to their
sormer Vigor. Yet not entirely to forsake his Oratory, at the same time he
made his Applications to Molo the Rhodian, a famous Pleader and Master of
Rhethorick.

Sylla being now the second time advanced against Mithridates, the City was not
much disturbed with Arms for Three Years together. During this Interval,
Cicero, with unwearied Diligence, made his Advances Day and Night in all manner
of Learning; having now the Benefit of a New Instructor Diodotus the Stoic, who
lived and died in his House. To this Master besides his improvement in other
useful Parts of Knowledge, he was particularly obliged for keeping him
continually exercised in Logic, which he calls a concise and compact kind of
Eloquence.

But though engaged at the same time in so many and such different Faculties, he
let no Day slip without some performance in Oratory: Declaiming constantly with
the best Antagonists he could light on among the Students. In this Exercise he
did not stick to any one Language, but sometimes made use of Latin, sometimes
of Greek; and indeed more frequently of the latter; either because the Beauties
and Ornaments of the Greek Style, would by this means grow so Natural as easily
to be imitated in his own Tongue: or because his Grecian Masters would not be
such proper Judges of his Style and Method, nor so well able to correct his
Failures, if he delivered himself in any other than their Native I anguage.

Upon Sylla's Victorious return and his Settlement of the Commonwealth, the
Lawyers recovered their Practice, and the ordinary Course of judicial Matters
was revived. And then it was that Cicero came to the Bar, and undertook the
Patronage of Public and Private Causes. His first Oration in a Public
Judgment, was the Defense of Sextus Rescius, prosecuted by no less a Man than
the Diclator himself, which was the Reason that none of the old stanch
Advocates dared appear in his behalf. Cicero carried the Cause, to his great
Honor, being now about Six or Seven and Twenty: And having behaved himself so
remarkably well in his first Enterprise, there was no Business thought too
weighty or difficult for his management.

He found himself at this time to labor under a very weak Constitution, to
which was added the Natural Default in his make of a long and thin Neck: so
that in Probability the labor and straining of the Body required in an Orator
could not consist but with manifest Danger of his Life. This was especially to
be feared in him, because he was observed in his Pleadings to keep his Voice
always at the highest Pitch in a most vehement and impetuous Tone, and at the
same time to use an agreeable Violence in his Gesture and Action. Upon this
Consideration the Physicians and his nearest Friends were continually urging
him to lay aside all thoughts of a Profession which appeared so extremely
prejudicial to his Health. But Cicero showed himself equally inflexible to the
Advice of the one, and to the Entreaties of the other; and declared his
Resolution rather to run the risque of any Danger that might happen, than
deprive himself of the Glory which he might justly challenge from the Bar.

Confirming himself in this Determination he began to think, that upon altering
his Mode of speaking and bringing his Voice down to a lower and more moderate
Key, he might abate considerably of the Heat and Fury which now transported
him, and by that Means avoid the Damage which seemed now to threaten his Design.

For the effecting of the Cure, he concluded on a Journey into Greece: And so,
after he had made his Name very considerable in the Forum, by Two Years
pleading, he left the City. Being arrived at Athens, he took up his Residence
for Six Months with the Philosopher Antiochus, the wisest and most noble
Assertor of the old Academy: And here under the direction of the greatest
Master, he renewed his Acquaintance with that Part of Learning which had been
the constant Entertainment of his Youth: at the same time performing his
Exercises in Oratory under the Care of Demetrius the Syrian, and eminent
Professor of the Art of Speaking. After this he made a Circuit round all Asia,
with several of the most celebrated Orators and Rhetoricians, who voluntarily
offered him their Company.

But not satisfied with all these Advantages, he sailed to Rhodes, and there
entered himself once more among the Scholars of the famous Molo, whom he had
formerly heard at Rome: One that besides his admirable Talent at pleading and
penning, ha^ a peculiar Happiness in marking and correcting the Default in any
Performance. 'Twas to his Institution that Cicero grat^ fully acknowledges he
owed the retrenching of his juvenile H^^ and unbounded Freedom of Thought,
which did not cons^^ with the just Rules of an exact and severe Method.

Returning to Rome, after Two Years Absence, he appear quite another Man: for
his Body strengthened by Exercise, w^^ come to a tolerable Habit: His way of
speaking seemed (...) have grown cool; and his Voice was rendered much easier
(...) himself, and much sweeter to the Audience. Thus about th^^ One and
Thirtieth Year of his Age, he arrived at that f^^^ Perfection, which had so
long taken up his whole Wishes a^^ Endeavors.

Authors Classici subsequentes in usum Delphini, eodem fe^^ Charactere and
forma jamdudum typis Mandati, Prosta^^ Venales apud Abelem Swall, ad insigne
Monocerotis in Coemeterio D. Pauli, viz.
P. Virgilii Maronis Opera. Interpretatione and notis illustravit Carolus
Ruaeus. 1695. Editio Novissima. P. Terentii Afri Comoediae, cum Interpretatione
and notis Nicolai Cami. Phaedri Augusti Liberti Fabulae, cum interpret. and
notis Petti Danet. Q. Horatii Flacci Poemata. Interpretatione and notis
illustravit Petrus Rodelius. Cornelius Nepos-de Vita Excellentium Imperatorum,
cum Interpret. and notis Nicolai Courtin. C. Julii Caesaris quae Exstant.
Interpretatione and Notis Illustravit Joannes Goduinus Professor Regius, in
usum Delphini. Titus Lucretius Carus de Natura Rerum. Interpretatione and notis
hanc Editionem illustravit Tho. Creech, Oxon. Coll. Omn. Anim. Socius. P.
Ovidii Nasonis Metamorphoseon, Lib. xv. Interpretatione and Notis Illustrati,
una cum Indice omnium Vocabulorum.
SUB PRELO
C. Crispi Sallustii Opera quae extant. D. Crispinus notis and Interpretatione
illustravit. T. Livii Patavini Historiarum quod extat, Interpretatione and
Notis illustrat. and accommodat. ad methodum Editionis in usum Delphini, and
multo correctius and emendatius. In 2 Vol. 8 vo.
A Catalogue of some other Books lately Printed, and Sold by Abel Swall and
Timothy Child, at the Unicorn, at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard.
JAcobi Rohaulti Tractatus Physicus, Latinitate donatus per Th. Bonetum. Cum
Animadversionibus Antonii le Grand. Cui accessit ejusdem Rohaulti de Art
Mechanica Tractatus Mathematicus, E Gallico Sermon Latin factus. Multis
figuris aeneis Illustrat. Octavo.

Justi Lipsii Roma Illustrata, sive Antiquitatum Romanarum Breviarium, and
Georgii Fabricii Veteris Romae cum Nova Collatio. Ex nova Recensione Ant.
Thysii. Cui accesserunt in hac Editione Justi Lipsii Tractatus Peculiares de
Scriptura, Pecunia, Nominibus, Conviviis, Censu, and Anno Veterum Romanorum,
cum figuris aeneis. Octavo.

Novum Testamentum Graece, cum difficilior. Verbor. Resolut. Opera Caroli Hoole.

A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers, containing an Account of the Lives
and Writings of the Primitive Fathers, with a Catalogue and an Abridgment of
all their Works, and Censures Determining the Genuine and Spurious: Also a
Compendious History of the Councils. Written in French by Lewis Ellies du P I
N. Fol. The two first Vol. Containing the sour first Centuries, are already
Printed, and the remaining Volumes will be finished this next. Term, which
compleats the History to the end of the Ninth Century, etc.

Graecae Grammaticae Institutio Compendiaria, or an accura^^ Greek Grammar:
Written by Dr. Wettenhall, now Lord B^^ of Cork and Ross. 8 vo.

Camden's Britannia, newly translated into English, with ve^^ considerable
Additions, and Improvements, particularly an Account of the Seats of the
Nobility, as also of the Coins, Universities, Colleges, Schools and other
public Buildings o^ England. The Maps of every County all new Engraved
according to the last and best Surveys, etc. Published by Edmund Gibson of
Queen's-College in Oxford. Folio.

The Comedies of Terence, viz. Andria, Eunuchus, and Heautontemoreumenos.
Englished; together with his Life, and some Remarks by several Hands. 8 vo.

The Comedies of Plautus, viz. Amphitryon, Epidicus and Rudens, with critical
Remarks, in like manner made English by several Hands. 8 vo.

An Historical Account of the four chief Monarchies or Empires of the World:
Written in Latin by John Sleidan, and newly Translated into English.

Medulla Historiae Anglicanae; A Compendious History of the monarchs of
England, from the time of Julius Caesar, continued to the end of the Reign of
the late K. James H. 8 vo.

The Evangelical History, Or the Life of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
comprehensively, and plainly related, with practical Discourses thereupon.
Adorned with Copper Cuts. 8 vo.

Now in the Press, An Universal Dictonary, explaining all difficult English
Words, Ancient and Modern; as also the Terms used in all Arts and Sciences,
together with their Etymologies, collected from the most esteemed Authors,
Ancient and Modern, and made more accurate and complete than any hitherto
Extant; By several Persons particularly learned in the Sciences they undertake
to speak of. The whole will be digested into Alphabetical Order, and contained
in one entire Volume in Folio.

The Antiquities of Greece; Or an Account of the Religion, Civil Government,
Magistrates, Laws, Customs, Military Discipline, Arms, public Buildings,
Exercises, Sports, etc. of the Ancient Graecians; with a Description of the
City of Athens, etc. 8 vo.

The Lives of the Apostles newly translated out of French.

PART I. The Original, Growth, and Decay of the Roman Commonwealth.
CHAP. I. Of the Building of the CITY.
WHILE we view the Original of States and Kingdoms (the most delightful and
surprising Part of History,) we easily discern, as the first and fairest
Prospect, the Rise of the Jewish and Roman Commonwealths: Of which, as the
former had the Honor always to be esteemed the Favorite of Heaven, and the
peculiar Care of Divine Providence; so the other had very good Pretensions to
style Herself the Darling of Fortune; who seemed to express a more than
ordinary Fondness for this her youngest Daughter, as if she had designed the
Three former Monarchies purely for a Foil to set off this latter. Their own
Historians rarely begin without a Fit of Wonder; and, before they proceed to
delineate the glorious Scene, give themselves the liberty of standing still
some time, to admire at a distance.

For the Founder of the City and Republic, Authors have long since agreed on
Romulus, Son of Rhea Sylvia, and Descendant of Aeneas; from whom his Pedigree
may be thus in short derived: Upon the final Ruin and Destruction of Troy by
the Grecians, Aeneas, with a small number of Followers, had the good fortune to
secure himself by slight. His escape was very much countenanced by the Enemy,
inasmuch as upon all occasions he had erpress'd his Inclinations to a Peace,
and to the restoring of Hel^^ the unhappy cause of all the Mischief. Sailing
thus from Trey^ after a tedious Voyage, and great variety of Adventures, he
a^^riv'd at last at Latium, a part of Italy so called, a latendo, o^^ from
lying bid; being the Place that Saturn had chose for his Retirement, when
expelled the Kingdom of Crete by his rebellio^^ Son Jupiter: Here applying
himself to the King of the Country at that time Latinus, he obtained his only
Daughter, Lavinia, (...) Marriage; and, upon the Death of his Father-in-Law,
was left is possession of the Crown. He removed the Imperial Seat from
Laurentum to Lavinium, a City which he had built himself i^^ Honor of his
Wise: And deceasing soon after, the Right (...) Succession rested in Ascanius;
whether his Son by a former Wife, and the same he brought with him from Troy,
or another of tha^ Name, which he had by Lavinia, Livy leaves undetermined
Ascanius being under Age, the Government was entrusted in the hands of Lavinia:
But, as soon as he was grown up, he left his Mother in possession of Lavinium;
and, removing with part of the Men, laid the Foundation of a New City along the
side of the Mountain Albanus, called from thence Longa Alba. After him, by a
Succession of Eleven Princes, the Kingdom devolved at la^^ to Procas. Procas at
his death left two Sons, Numitor and Amulius; of whom Amulius overreaching his
elder Brother, oblig^^ him to quit his Claim to the Crown, which he thereupon
secur^^ to himself; and to prevent all disturbance that might probably arise to
him or his Posterity, from the elder Family, making away with all the Males, he
constrained Numitor's only Daughter, Rhea Sylvia, to take on her the Habit of a
Vestal, and consequently a Vow of perpetual Virginity. However, the Princess
was soon after found with Child, and delivered of two Boys, Remulus and Remus.
The Tyrant being acquainted with the truth immediately condemned his Niece to
strait Imprisonment, and the Infants to be exposed, or carried and left in a
strange Place, where ^was very improbable they should meet with any relief.
The^ Servant who had the Care of this inhuman Office, left the Children at the
bottom of a Tree, by the Bank of the River Tiber in this sad Condition, they
were casually discovered by Faustul^^ the King's Shepherd; who, being wholly
ignorant of the Plot took the Infants up, and carried them home to his Wife
Laurentia, to be ^urs'd with his own Children Lavy, lib. 1.
This Wife of his had formerly been a common Prostitute, called in Latin Lupa;
which Word signifying likewise a She-Wolf, gave occasion to the Story of their
being nursed by such a Beast; though some take the Word always in a literal
sense, and maintain that they really subsisted some time, by sucking such a
Creature, before they had the good Fortune to be relieved by Faus^ulu^ See
Dempster's Notes to R sinus's Antiquities, lib. 1. cap. 1.
. The Boys, as they grew up, discovering the natural Greatness of their Minds
and Thoughts, addicted themselves to the generous Exercises of Hunting, Racing,
Taking of Robbers, and suchlike; and always expressed a great Desire of
undertaking any Enterprise that appeared hazardous and noble Plutarch in the
Life of R^mulu^
. Now there happening a Quarrel betwixt the Herdsmen of Numitor and Amu^ius,
the former lighting casually on Remus, brought him before their Master to be
examined. Numitor, learning from his own mouth the strange Circumstances of his
Education and Fortune, easily guessed him to be one of his Grand-sons who had
been exposed. He was soon confirmed in this Conjecture, upon the arrival of
Faustulus and Romulus; when the whole Business being laid open, upon
Consultation had, gaining over to their Party a sufficient number of the
disaffected Citizens, they contrived to surprise Amulius, and re-establish
Numitor. This Design was soon after very happily put in execution, the Tyrant
slain, and the old King restored to a full Enjoyment of the Crown Ibid. and
Lavy. lib 1.
. The young Princes had no sooner re-seated their Grandfather in his Throne,
but they began to think of procuring one for themselves. They had higher
Thoughts than to take up with the Reversion of a Kingdom; and were unwilling to
live in Alba, because they could not Govern there: So taking with them their
Foster-father, and what others they could get together, they began the
Foundation of a New City, in the same place where, in their Infancy, they had
been brought up Pluter^h, as before; and lavy, lib. 1.
. The first Walls were scarce finished, when, upon a slight Quarrel, the
occasion of which is variously reported by Historians, the younger Brother had
the misfortune to be slain. Thus the whole Power came into Romulus's hands;
who, carrying on the remainder of the Work, gave the City a Name in allusion to
his own, and has been ever accounted the Founder and Patron of the Roman
Commonwealth.

CHAP. II. Of the Roman Affairs under the Kings.
THE witty Historian Florus in the Preface to his History.
had very good reason to entitle the Reign of the Kings, the Infancy of Rome;
for it is certain, that under them she was hardly able to find her own Legs, and
at the best had but a very feeble motion. The greatest part of Romulus's time
was taken up in making Laws and Regulations for the Commonwealth: Three of his
State-Designs, I mean the Asylum, the Rape of the Sabine Virgins, and his way
of treating those few whom he conquered, as they far exceeded the Politics of
those Times; so they contributed, in an extraordinary degree, to an advancement
of the New Empire. But then Numa's long Reign served only for the establishment
of Priests and Religious Orders; and in those Three and forty Years Plutarch in
the Life of Numa.
, Rome gained not so much as one Foot of Ground. Tullus Hostilius was wholly
employed to convert his Subjects from the pleasing Amusements of Superstition,
to the rougher Institution of Martial Discipline: Yet we find nothing memorable
related of his Conquests; only that after a long and dubious War, the Romans
entirely ruined their old Mother Alba Florus lib. 1. cap. 3.
. After him, Anem Marcius, laying aside all Thoughts of extending the Bounds of
the Empire, applied himself wholly to strengthen and beautify the City Idem,
lib. 1. cap. 4.
; and esteemed the Commodiousness and Magnificence of that, the noblest Design
he could possibly be engaged in. Tarquinius Priscus, though not altogether so
quiet as his Predecessor, yet consulted very little else besides the Dignity of
the Senate, and the Majesty of the Government; for the increase of which, he
appointed the Ornaments and Badges of the several Officers, to distinguish them
from the common People Idem, lib. 1. cap. 5.
. A more peaceful Temper appeared in Servius Tullius, whose principal study was
to have an exact account of the Estates of the Romans; and according to those,
to divide them into Tribes Florus, lib. 1. cap. 6.
, that so they might contribute with Justice and Proportion to the Public
Expenses of the State. Tarquin the Proud, though perhaps more engaged in Wars
than any of his Predecessors See Florus, lib. 1. cap. 7.
, yet had in his Nature such a strange Composition of the most extravagant
Vices, as must necessarily have proved fatal to the growing Tyranny: And had
not the Death of the unfortunate Lucretia, administered to the People an
Opportunity of Liberty; yet a far slighter Matter would have served them for a
specious Reason, to endeavor the assertion of their Rights. However, on this
Accident, all were suddenly transported with such a mixture of Fury and
Compassion, that, under the Conduct of Brutus and Collatinus, to whom the dying
Lady had recommended the Revenge of her injured Honor Idem, lib. 1. cap. 9.
, rushing immediately upon the Tyrant, they expelled him and his whole Family.
A new Form of Government was now resolved on; and because to live under a
divided Power, carried something of Complacency in the Prospect Plutarch, in
the Life of Poplicola.
, they unanimously conferred the Supreme Command on the Two generous Asserters
of their Liberties Ibid. and Florus, lib. 1. cap. 9.
. Thus ended the Royal Administration, after, it had continued about Two
hundred and fifty Years.

Florus, in his Reflections on this First Age of Rome, cannot forbear applauding
the happy Fate of his Country, that it should be blessed, in that weak Age,
with a Succession of Princes so fortunately different in their Aims and
Designs; as if Heaven had purposely adapted them to the several Exigencies of
the State Idem, cap. 8.
. And the famous Machiavel is of the same Opinion Machtavel's Discourses on
Livy, lib. 2. cap. 19.
. But a judicious Author Monsieur St. Euremont's Reflections on the Genius of
the Roman People. cap. 1.
has lately observed, that this difference of Genius in the Kings, was so far
from procuring any Advantage to the Roman People, that their small increase,
under that Government, is referable to no other cause. However, thus far we are
assured, that those seven Princes left behind a Dominion of no larger extent
than that of Parma, or Mantua, at present.

CHAP. III. Of the Roman Affairs, from the beginning of the Consular
Government, to the first Punic War.
THE Tyrant was no sooner expelled, but, as it usually happens, there was great
plotting and designing for his Restoration. Among several other young
Noblemen, Brutus's his two Sons had engaged themselves in the Association: But
the Conspiracy being happily discovered, and the Traitors brought before the
Consuls, in order to their Punishment, Brutus only addressing himself to his
two Sons, and demanding whether they had any Defense to make against the
Indictment: Upon their silence, ordered them immediately to be beheaded: And
staying himself to see the Execution, committed the rest to the Judgment of his
Colleague (...), in vit^ P^^licola
. No Action among the old Romans has made a greater noise than this: 'Twould
be exceeding difficult to determine, whether it proceeded from a Motion of
Heroic Virtue, or the Hardness of a cruel and unnatural Humor; or whether
Ambition had not as great a share in it as either. But though the Flame was so
happily stifled within the City, it soon broke out with greater fury abro^d:
For Tarquin was not only received with all imaginable Kindness and Respect by
the neighboring States, but supplied too with all Necessaries, in order to the
recovery of his Dominions. The most powerful Prince in Italy was at that time
Porsenna, King of Hetruria, or Tuscany; who not content to furnish him with the
same Supplies as the rest, appr^^^'d with a numerous Army, in his behalf, to
the very Walls of Rome Ilem, (...), lib. 1.
. The City was in great hazard of being taken, when an Admiration of the Virtue
and gallant Disposition of the Romans, indue'd the Besieger to a Peace Plut. in
Poplicol.
. The most remarkable Instances of this extraordinary Courage, were Cocles,
Mutius, and C^^lla. C^cles, when the Romans were beaten back in an unfortunate
Sally, and the Enemy made good their Pursuit to the very Bridge, only with the
assistance of two Persons, defended it against their whole Power, 'till his own
Party broke it down behind; and then cast himself in his Armor into the River,
and swam over to the other side Plut. Ibid.
. Mutius, having failed in an Attempt upon Porsenna's Person, and being brought
before the King to be examined, thrust his Right Hand, which had committed the
Mistake, into a Pan of Coals that stood ready for the Sacrifice. Upon which
generous Action, he was dismissed without farther injury. As for Claelia, she,
with other Noble Virgins, had been delivered to the Enemy for Hostages, on
account of a Truce; when obtaining the liberty to bathe themselves in Tiber,
she getting on Horseback before the rest, encouraged them to follow her through
the Water to the Romans; though the Consul generously sent them back to the
Enemy's Camp. Porsenna had no sooner drawn off his Army, but the Sabines and
Latins joined in a Confederacy against Rome: And though they were extremely
weakened by the desertion of Appius Claudius, who went over with Five thousand
Families to the Romans; yet they could not be entirely subdued, 'till they
received a total Overthrow from Valerius Poplicola Ibid.
. But the Aequi and the Volsci, the most obstinate of the Latins, and the
continual Enemies of Rome, carried on the remainder of the War for several
Years, 'till it was happily concluded by Lucius Quinctius, the famous Dictator,
taken from the Plough, in less than fifteen Days time: Upon which, Florus has
this witty Remark, That he made more than ordinary haste to his unfinished Work
Florus, lib. 1. cap. 11.
. But they that made the greatest opposition, were the Inhabitants of Veii, the
Head of Tuscany, a City not inferior to Rome, either in store of Arms, or
multitude of Soldiers: They had contended with the Romans, in a long series of
Battles, for Glory and Empire; but, having been weakened and brought down in
several Encounters, they were obliged to secure themselves within their Walls:
And, after a ten Years Siege, the Town was forced and sacked by Camillus
Plutard, in his Life.
. In this manner were the Romans extending their Conquests, when the Irruption
of the Gauls made a strange alteration in the Affairs of Italy. They were at
this time besieging Clusium, a Tascan City. The Clusians sent to the Romans,
desiring them to interpose by Ambassadors on their behalf. Their Request was
easily granted; and Three of the Fabii, Persons of the highest Rank in the
City, dispatched for this purpose to the Gallick Camp. The Gauls, in respect to
the Name of Rome, received them with all imaginable Civility; but could by no
means be prevailed on to quit the Siege. Whereupon the Ambassadors going into
the Town, and encouraging the Clusians to a Sally, one of them was seen
personally engaging in the Action. This being contrary to the received Law of
Nations, was resented in so high a manner by the Enemy, that breaking up from
before Clusium, the whole Army marched directly toward Rome. About eleven Miles
from the City, they met with the Roman Army, Commanded by the Military
Tribunes, who, engaging without any Order or Discipline, received an entire
Defeat. Upon the arrival of this ill News, the greatest part of the Inhabitants
immediately fled: Those that resolved to stay, fortified themselves in the
Capitol. The Gauls soon appeared at the City-Gates; and destroying all with
Fire and Sword, carried on the Siege of the Capitol with all imaginable Fury:
At last, resolving on a general Assault, they were discovered by the Cackling
of the Geese that were kept for that purpose; and as many as had climbed the
Rampart, were drove down by the valiant Manlius, when Camillus, setting upon
them in the Rear with Twenty thousand Men that he got together about the
Country, gave them a total Overthrow. The greatest part of those that escaped
our of the Field, were cut off in straggling Parties, by the Inhabitants of the
Neighboring Towns and Villages. The City had been so entirely demolished, that
upon the return of the People, they thought of removing to Veii, a City ready
built, and excellently provided of all Things. But being diverted from this
Design, by an Omen, (as they thought) they set to the Work, with such
extraordinary Diligence and Application, that within the compass of a Year, the
whole City was rebuilt. They had scarce gained a breathing-time after their
Troubles, when the united Powers of the Aequi, Volsci, and other Inhabitants of
Latium, at once invaded their Territories. But they were soon over-reached by a
Stratagem of Camillus, and totally routed Plut. in vit. Camil.
. Nor had the Samnites any better Fate, though a People very numerous, and of
great Experience in War. The Contention with them lasted no less than fifty
Years Florus, lib. 1. cap. 16.
, when they were finally subdued by Papirius Cursor Live. lib. 10.
. The Tarentine War that followed, put an end to the entire Conquest of Italy.
Tarentum, a City of great Strength and Beauty, seated on the Adriatic Sea, was
especially remarkable for the Commerce it maintained with most of the
Neighboring Countries, as Epirus, Illyricum, Sicily, etc. Flor. lib. 1. cap.
18.
. Among other Ornaments of their City, they had a spacious Theater for Public
Sports, built hard by the Sea-shoar. They happened to be engaged in the
Celebration of some such Solemnity, when, upon sight of the Roman Fleet, that
casually sailed by their Coasts, imagining them to be Enemies, they immediately
set upon them, and killing the Commander, rifled the greatest part of the
Vessels. Ambassadors were soon dispatched from Rome to demand Satisfaction: But
they met with as ill Reception as the Fleet, being disgracefully sent away
without so much as a Hearing. Upon this, a War was soon commenced between the
States. The Tarentines were increased by an incredible number of Allies from
all Parts: But he that made the greatest appearance in their behalf, was
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, the most experienced General of his Time. Besides the
choicest of his Troops that accompanied him in the Expedition, he brought into
the Field a considerable number of Elephants, a sort of Beasts scarce heard of
'till that time in Italy. In the first Engagement, the Romans were in fair
hopes of a Victory, when the Fortune of the Day was entirely changed, upon the
coming up of the Elephants; who made such a prodigious Destruction in the Roman
Cavalry, that the whole Army was obliged to retire. But the politic General,
having experienced so well the Roman Courage, immediately after the Victory,
sent to offer Conditions for a Peace; but was absolutely refused. In the next
Battle, the Advantage was on the Roman side, who had not now such dismal
Apprehensions of the Elephants, as before. However, the Business came to
another Engagement, when the Elephants, overrunning whole Ranks of their own
Men, occasioned by the Cry of a young one that had been wounded, gave the
Romans an absolute Victory Florus, Ibid.
. Twenty three thousand of the Enemy were killed Eutropius, lib. 2.
, and Pyrrhus finally expelled Italy. In this War the Romans had a fair
Opportunity to subdue the other Parts that remained unconquered, under the
pretext of Allies to the Tarentines. So that at this time, about the 477th.
Year of the Building of the City Ibid.
, they had made themselves the entire Masters of Italy.

CHAP. IV. Of the Roman Affairs, from the beginning of the first Punic War, to
the first Triumvirate.
BUT the Command of the Continent could not satisfy the Roman Courage;
especially while they saw so delicious an Isle as Sicily almost within their
reach: They only waited an occasion to pass the Sea, when Fortune presented as
fair an one as they could wish. The Inhabitants of Messina, a Sicilian City,
made grievous Complaints to the Senate, of the daily Encroachments of the
Carthaginians, a People of vast Wealth and Power, and that had the same Design
on Sicily as the Romans Florus, lib. 2. cap. 2.
. A Fleet was soon Manned out to their Assistance; and in two Years time, no
less than Fifty Cities were brought over Eutrop. lib. 2.
. The entire Conquest of the Island quickly followed; and Sardinia and Corfica
were taken in about the same time by a separate Squadron. And now, under the
Command of Regulus and Manlius, the Consuls, the War was translated into
Africa. Three hundred Forts and Castles were destroyed in their March, and the
victorious Legions encamped under the very Walls of Carthage. The Enemy reduced
to such straits, were obliged to apply themselves to Xantippus, King of the
Lacedaemonians, the greatest Captain of the Age; who immediately marched to
their Assistance with a numerous and well-disciplin'd Army. In the very first
Engagement with the Romans, he entirely defeated their whole Power: Thirty
thousand were killed on the spot, and Fifteen thousand, with the Consul
Regulus, taken Prisoners. But as good Success always encouraged the Romans to
greater Designs; so a contrary Event did but exasperate them the more. The new
Consuls were immediately dispatched with a powerful Navy, and a sufficient
number of Landforces. Several Campaignes were now wasted, without any
considerable Advantage on either side: Or, if the Romans gained any thing by
their Victories, they generally lost as much by Shipwracks; when at last the
whole Power of both States being drawn together on the Sea, the Carthaginians
were finally defeated, with the loss of 125 Ships sunk in the Engagement, 73
taken; 32000 Men killed, and 13000 Prisoners. Upon this, they were compelled to
sue for a Peace; which, after much entreaty, and upon very hard Conditions, was
at last obtained Eutrop. lib. 2.
.

But the Carthaginians had too great Spirits to submit to such terrible Terms
any longer than their Necessities obliged them. In four Years time Florus, lib.
2. c. 6.
they had got together an Army of 150000 Foot, and 20000 Horse Eutrop. lib. 3.
, under the Command of the famous Hannibal; who forcing a Way through the
Pyren^ean Mountain and the Alps, reputed 'till that time impassable, descended
with his vast Army into Italy. In Four successive Battles he defeated the Roman
Forces; in the last of which, at Cannae, 40000 of the latter were killed Ibid.
: And had he not been merely cast away by the Envy and Ill Will of his own
Countrymen, it is more than probable that he must have entirely ruined the
Roman State Cornelius Nepos, in vit. Hannibal.
. But Supplies of Men and Money being sometimes absolutely denied him, and
never coming but very slowly, the Romans had such Opportunities to recruit, as
they little expected from so experienced an Adversary. The wise Management of
Fabius Maximus was the first Revival of the Roman Cause: He knew very well the
Strength of the Enemy; and therefore marched against him, without intending to
hazard a Battle; but to wait constantly upon him, to straiten his Quarters,
intercept his Provisions, and so make the victorious Army pine away with Penury
and Want. With this Design, he always encamped upon the high Hills, where the
Horse could have no access to him. When they marched, he did the same; but at
such a distance, as not to be compelled to an Engagement. By this Policy he so
broke Hannibal's Army, as to make him absolutely despair of getting any thing
in Italy Flutarch, in vit. Fab. Max.
. But the conclusion of the War was owing to the Conduct of Scipio: He had
before reduced all Spain into Subjection; and now, taking the same course as
Hannibal at first had done, he marched with the greatest part of the Roman
Forces into Africa; and carrying all before him to the very Walls of Carthage,
obliged the Enemy to call home their General out of Italy, for the Defense of
the City. Hannibal obeyed; and both Armies coming to an Engagement, after a
long Dispute, wherein the Commanders and Soldiers of both Sides are reported to
have outdone Themselves, the Victory fell to the Romans. Whereupon the Enemy
were obliged once more to su^^ for a Peace; which was again granted them, though
upon much harder Conditions than before.

The Romans, by the happy conclusion of this War, had so highly advanced
themselves in the Opinion of the Neighboring States, that the Athenians, with
the greatest part of Greece, being at this time miserably enslaved by King
Philip of Macedon, unanimously petitioned the Senate for Assistance. A Fleet,
with a sufficient number of Landforces, was presently dispatched to their
Relief; by whose Valor, the Tyrant, after several Defeats, was compelled to
restore all Greece to their ancient Liberties, obliging himself to pay an
annual Tribute to the Conquerours Eutrop. lib. 4.
.

Hannibal, after his late Defeat, had applied himself to Antiochus King of
Syria, who at this time was making great Preparations against the Romans.
Acilius Glabrio was first sent to oppose him, and had the Fortune to give him
several Defeats; when Cornelius Scipio, the Roman Admiral, engaging with the
King's Forces at Sea, under the Command of Hannibal, entirely ruined the whole
Fleet. Which Victory being immediately followed by another as signal at Land,
the effeminate Prince was contented to purchase a Peace at the price of almost
half his Kingdom Florus, lib. 2: cap. 8.
.

The victorious Romans had scarce concluded the Public Rejoicings on account
of the late Success, when the death of King Philip of Macedon presented them
with an occasion of a more glorious Triumph. His Son Perseus, that succeeded,
resolving to break with the Senate, applied himself wholly to raising Forces,
and procuring other Necessaries for a War. Never were greater Appearances in
the Field than on both sides, most of the considerable Princes in the World
being engaged in the Quarrel. But Fortune still declared for the Romans, and
the greatest part of Perseus's prodigious Army was cut off by the Consul
Aemylius, and the King obliged to surrender himself into the hands of the
Conqueror Vell. Paterc. lib. 1.
. Authors that write of the Four Monarchies, here fix the end of the Macedonian
Empire.

But Rome could not think her self secure among all these Conquests, while her
old Rival Carthage was yet standing: So that upon a slight Provocation, the
City, after three Years Siege, was taken, and utterly rased, by the Valor of
Publius Scipio, Grandson, by Adoption, to him that conquered Hannibal Ibid.
.

Not long after, Attalus, King of Pergamus, dying without Issue, left his vast
Territories, containing near all Asia, to the Romans Eutrop. lib. 4.
. And what of Africa remained unconquered, was, for the most part reduced in
the Jugurthan War that immediately followed; Jugurtha himself, after several
Defeats, being taken Prisoner by Marius, and brought in Triumph to Rome Ibid.
.

And now, after the Defeat of the Teutones and Cimbri, that had made an Inroad
into Italy, with several lesser Conquests in Asia and other Parts, the
Mithridatick War, and the Civil War between Marius and Sylla, broke out both in
the same Year Eutrop. lib. 5.
Sylla had been sent General against Mithridates King of Pontus, who had seized
on the greatest part of Asia and Achaia in an hostile manner; when before he
was got out of Italy, Sulpicius, the Tribune of the People, and one of Marius's
Faction, preferred a Law to re-call him, and depute Marius in his room. Upon
this, Sylla, leading back his Army, and overthrowing Marius and Sulpicius in
his way, having settled Affairs at Rome, and banished the Authors of the late
Sedition, returned to meet the foreign Enemy Ibid.
. His first Exploit was the taking of Athens, and ruining the famous Mole in
the Haven Piraeum Vill. Patere. lib. 2.
. Afterward, in two Engagements, he killed and took near 130000 of the Enemy,
and compelled Mithridates to sue for a Truce Eutrop. lib. 5.
. In the mean time, Marius, being called home by the new Consuls, had exercised
all manner of Cruelty at Rome; whereupon, taking the opportunity of the Truce,
Sylla once more marched back toward Italy. Marius was dead before his return
Vell. Paterc. lib. 2.
; but his two Sons, with the Consuls, raised several Armies to oppose him. But
some of the Troops being drawn over to his Party, and the others routed, he
entered the City, and disposed all things at his Pleasure, assuming the Title
and Authority of a perpetual Dictator. But having regulated the State, he laid
down that Office, and died in retirement Aurelius Victor, in vit. Syllae.
.

Mithridates had soon broke the late Truce, and invaded Bithynia and Asia, with
as great sury as ever; when the Roman General Lucullus, routing his vast Armies
by Land and Sea, chased him quite out of Asia; and had infallibly put an happy
conclusion to the War, had not Fortune reserved that Glory for Pompey Vell.
Paterc. ibid.
. He being deputed in the room of Lucullus, after the defeat of the new Forces
of Mithridates, compelled him to fly to his Father-in-Law Tigranes King of
Armenia. Pompey followed with his Army; and struck such a Terror into the
who^^ Kingdom, that Tigranes was constrained in an humble manner to present
himself to the General, and offer his Realm and Fortune to his disposal. At
this time the Catilinian Conspiracy broke out, more famous for the obstinacy
than the number of the Rebels; but this was immediately extinguished by the
timely care of Cicero* and the happy valor of Anthony. The Senate, upon the
News of the extraordinary Success of Pompey, were under some apprel^ension of
his affecting the Supreme Command at his return, and altering the Constitution
of the Government. But when they saw him dismiss his vast Army at Brundusium,
and proceed in the rest of his Journey to the City, with no other Company than
his ordinary Attendants, they received him with all the Expressions of
Complacency and Satisfaction, and honored him with a splendid Triumph Vell.
Paterc. ibid.
.

CHAP. V. Of the Roman Affairs, from the beginning of the first Triumvirate to
the end of the Twelve Caesar's.
THE Three Persons that at this time bore the greatest Sway in the State, were,
Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar. The first, by reason of his prodigious Wealth;
Pompey, for his Power with the Soldiers and Senate, and Caesar, for his
admirable Eloquence, and a peculiar Nobleness of Spirit. When now, taking
advantage of the Consulship of Caesar, they entered into a solemn agreement to
let nothing pass in the Commonwealth without their joint Approbation Sueten.
in Jul. Cas. cap. 19.
. By virtue of this Alliance, they had in a little time procured themselves the
Three best Provinces in the Empire, Crassus Asia, Pompey Spain, and Caesar
Gaul. Pompey, for the better retaining his Authority in the City, chose to
manage his Province by Deputies Paterc. lib. 2. cap. 48.
: The other Two entered on their Governments in Person. But Crassus soon after,
in an Expedition he undertook against the Parthians, had the ill Fortune to
lose the greatest part of his Army, and was himself treacherously murdered
Plutarch in Crasso.
. In the mean time Caesar was performing Miracles in Gaul. No less than 40000
of the Enemy he had killed, and taken more Prisoners: And nine Years together
(which was the whole time of his Government) deserved a Triumph for the Actions
of every Campaigne Paterc. lib. 2.
. The Senate, amazed at the strange Relation of his Victories, were easily
inclined to suspect his Power: So that taking the opportunity when he
petitioned for a second Consulship, they ordered him to disband his Army, and
appear as a private Person at the Election Ibid. cap. 49.
. Caesar endeavored by all means to come to an accommodation: But finding the
Senate violently averse to his Interest, and resolved to hear nothing but what
they first proposed Ibid. cap. cod.
, he was constrained to march toward Italy with his Troops, to terrify or
force them into a compliance. Upon the News of his Approach, the Senate, with
the greatest part of the Nobility, passing over into Greece, he entered the City
without opposition; and, creating himself Consul and Dictator, hasted with his
Army into Spain; where the Troops under Pompey's Deputies were compelled to
submit themselves to his disposal. With this Reinforcement he advanced toward
Macedonia, where the Senate had got together a prodigious Army under the
command of Pompey. In the first Engagement he received a considerable Defeat.
But the whole Power on both sides being drawn up on the Plains of Thessaly,
after a long Dispute the Victory fell to Caesar, with the entire ruin of the
adverse Party. Pompey fled directly toward Egypt, and Caesar with his
victorious Legions immediately followed. Hearing at his Arrival, that Pompey
had been killed by order of King Ptolemy, he laid close Siege to Alexandria,
the capital City; and having made himself absolute Master of the Kingdom,
committed it to the care of Cleopatra, Sister to the late King Suet. in Jul.
Cas. cap. 35.
. Scipio and Juba he soon after overcame in Africa, and Pompey's Two Sons in
Spain Ibid. cap. cod.
. And now, being received at his return with the general Applause of the People
and Senate, and honored with the glorious Titles of Father of his Country, and
Perpetual Dictator, he was designing an Expedition into Parthia; when, after
the Enjoyment of the Supreme Command no more than five Months, he was murdered
in the Senate House. Brutus and Cassius, with most of the other Conspirators,
being his particular Friends, and such as he had obliged in the highest manner
Paterc. lib. 2. cap. 56.
.

A Civil War necessarily followed, in which the Senate, consisting for the most
part of such as had embraced the Faction of Pompey, declared in favor of the
Assassinates, while Mark Anthony the Consul, undertook the Revenge of Caesar.
With this Pretense he exercised all manner of Tyranny in the City, and had no
other design but to secure the chief Command to himself. At last, the Senate
were obliged to declare him an Enemy to the State; and, in pursuance to their
Edict, raised an Army to oppose him under the command of Hirtius and Pansa the
new Consuls, and Octavius, Nephew and Heir to Caesar Paterc. lib. 2. cap. 61.
. In the first Engagement Anthony was defeated; but Hirtius being killed in the
Fight, and Pansa dying immediately after, the sole command of the Army came
into the Hands of Octavius Suet. in August. cap. 11.
. The Senate, before the late Victory, had expressed an extraordinary kindness
for him, and honored him with several Marks of their particular Esteem: But
now, being freed from the danger they apprehended from Anthony, they soon
altered their Measures; and taking little notice of him any longer, decreed the
Two Heads of the late Conspiracy, Brutus and Cassius, the Two Provinces of
Syria and Macedonia, whither they had retired upon commission of the Fact
Horus, lib. 4. cap. 7.
. Octavius was very sensible of their designs, and thereupon was easily induced
to conclude a Peace with Anthony: And soon after entering into an Association
with him and Lepidus, as his Uncle had done with Crassus and Pompey, he
returned to Rome, and was elected Consul when under twenty Years of Age Paterc.
lib. 2. cap. 65.
. And now, by the Power of him and his Two Associates, the old Senate was for
the most part banished; and a Law preferred by his Colleague Pedius, That all
who had been concerned in the Death of Caesar should be proclaimed Enemies to
the Commonwealth, and proceeded against with all Extremity Ibid.
. To put this Order in Execution, Octavius and Anthony advanced with the Forces
under their Command toward Macedoma, where Brutus and Cassius had go together a
numerous Army to oppose them, both Parties meeting near the City Philippi, the
Traitors were defeated, and the Two Commanders died soon after by their own
Hands Flerus, lib. 2. cap. 7.
. And now for Ten Years all Affairs were managed by the Triumviri, when
Lepidus, setting up for himself in Sicily, was contented, upon the arrival of
Octavius, to compound for his Life, with the dishonorable Resignation of his
Share in the Government Paterc. lib. 2. cap. 80.
. The Friendship of Octavius and Anthony, was not of much longer continuance:
For the latter, being for several Enormities declared an Enemy to the State,
was finally routed in a Sea-Engagement at Actium; and flying thence with his
Mistress Cleopatra, killed himself soon after, and left the sole command in the
Hands of Octavius. He, by his Prudence and Moderation, gained such an entire
Interest in the Senate and People, that when he offered to lay down all the
Authority he was invested with above the rest, and restore the Commonwealth to
the ancient Constitution, they unanimously agreed in this Opinion, That their
Liberty was sooner to be parted with than so excellent a Prince. However, to
avoid all Offense, he rejected the very Names he thought might be displeasing,
and above all things, the Quality of a Dictator, which had been so odious in
Sylla and Caesar. By this means he was the Founder of that Government which
continued ever after in Rome. The new Acquisitions to the Empire were in his
time very considerable; Cantabria, Aquitania, Pannonia, Dalmatia, and
Illyricum, being wholly subdued: The Germans were driven beyond the River
Albis, and Two of their Nations, the Suevi and Sicambri, transplanted into Gaul
Sueton. in August. cap. 21.
.

Tiberius, though in Augustus his time, he had given proofs of an extraordinary
Courage in the German War Vid. Paterc. lib. 2 cap. 106, etc.
; yet upon his own Accession to the Crown, is memorable for no Exploit, but the
reducing of Cappadocia into a Roman Province Eutrop. lib. 7.
; and this was owing more to his Cunning than his Valor. And at last, upon his
infamous retirement into the Island Capreae, he grew so strangely negligent of
the Public Affairs, as to send no Lieurenants for the Government of Spain and
Syria for several Years: To let Armenia be overrun by the Parthians; Moesia by
the Dacians; the Sarmatians, and almost all Gaul, by the Germans, to the
extreme Danger, as well as Dishonor, of the Empire Sueton. in Tib. cap. 41.
. Caligula, as he far exceeded his Predecessor in all manner of Debauchery, so,
in relation to Martial Affairs, was much his Inferior. However, he is famous
for a Mock-Expedition that he made against the Germans; when arriving in that
part of the Country opposite to Britain, and receiving into his Protection a
fugitive Prince of the Island, he sent glorious Letters to the Senate, giving
an account of the happy Conquest of the whole Kingdom Suet. in Call g. cap. 44.
. And soon after, making his Soldiers fill their Helmets with Cockle-shells and
Pebbles, which he called, The Spoils of the Ocean Idem. cap. 46
, returned to the City to demand a Triumph Idem, cap. 47.
. And when that Honor was denied him by the Senate, he broke out into such
extravagant Cruelties, that he even compelled them to cut him of for the
security of their own Persons Idem, cap. 49. and 56.
. Nay, he was so fa^ from entertaining any desire of benefitting the Public,
that he often complained of his ill Fortune, because no signal Calamity
happened in his time, and made it his constant wish, That either the utter
destruction of an Army, or some Plague, Famine Earthquake, or other
extraordinary Desolation might contin^^ the Memory of his Reign to succeeding
Ages Idem, c. 31.
.

Cali^^^^ being taken off, the Senate assembled in the Capitol to deba^e about
the extinguishing the Name and Family of the Caesar's, and restoring the
Commonwealth to the old Constitution Idem, c. 60.
. When one of the Soldiers that were ransacking the Palace lighting casually
upon Claudius, Uncle to the late Emperou^ where he had hid himself in a Corner
behind the Hangings pulled him out to the rest of his Gang, and recommended hi^
as the fittest Person in the World to be Emperor. All were strangely pleased
at the Motion; and taking him along with them by force, lodged him among the
Guards Idem. h. Ca^d c. 50.
. The Senate upon the first Information, sent immediately to stop their
Proceedings: But not agreeing among themselves, and hearing the Multitude call
out for one Governor, they were at last constrained to confirm the Election of
the Soldiers; especially since they had pitched upon such an easy Prince as
would be wholly at their command and disposal Aurelius Victer. de Cas^ribus in
Caligula.
. The Conquest of Britain was the most memorable in his time, owing partly to
an Expedition that he made in Person, but chiefly to the Valor of his
Lieutenants, Ostorius Scapula, Aulus Plautius, and Ve^pas^an. The bounds of the
Empire were in his Reign as follows; Mesopotamia in the East, Rhine and
Damebe in the North, Mauritania in the South, and Britain in the West. Aurelius
Victer. de ^^sarib^s in Claud.
.

The Roman Arms cannot be supposed to have made any considerable Progress under
Nero; especially when Suctonius tells us, he neither hoped nor desired the
Enlargement of the Empire Sucton. in Nerone, cap. 18.
. However, Two Countries were in his time reduced into Roman Provinces; the
Kingdom of Pontus, and the Cottian Alps, or that part of the Mountains which
divides Dauphine and Piedmont. Br^tain, and A^menia were once both lost Idem,
cap. 40.
, and not without great difficulty recovered. And indeed his averseness to the
Camp made him far more odious to the Soldiers, than all his other Vices to the
People: So that when the Citizens had the Patience to endure him for Fourteen
Years, the Army under Galba, his Lieutenant in Spain, were constrained to
undertake his removal.

Galba is acknowledged on all hands for the great Reformer of Martial
Discipline; and though before his Accession to the Empire he had been famous for
his Exploits in Germany and other Parts Sucton. in Galb. cap. 8.
; yet the shortness of his Reign hindered him from making any advancements
afterward. His Age and Severity were the only causes of his Ruin: The first of
which rendered him contemptible, and the other odious. And the Remedy he used to
appease the Dissatisfactions, did but ripen them for Revenge. For immediately
upon his adopting Piso, by which he hoped to have pacisied the People, Otho,
who had ever expected that Honor, and was now enraged at his Disappointment
Idem, cap. 17.
, upon Application made to the Soldiers, easily procured the Murder of the old
Prince and his adopted Son; and by that means was himself advanced to the
Imperial Dignity.

About the same time the German Army under Vitellius, having an equal Aversion
to the old Emperor with those at Rome, had sworn Allegiance to their own
Commander. Otho, upon the first notice of their Designs, had sent to proffer
Vitellius an equal share in the Government with himself Suet. in Othon. cap. 8.
. But all Proposals for an Accommodation being refused, and himself compelled,
as it were, to march against the Forces that were sent toward Italy, he had the
good Fortune to defear them in Three small Engagements. But having been worsted
in a greater Fight at Bebriacum, though he had still sufficient strength for
carrying on the War, and expected daily a Reinforcement from several Parts
Ibid. cap. 9.
; yet he could not, by all the Arguments in the World, be prevailed with to
hazard another Battle; but to end the Contention, killed himself with his own
Hands. On this account Historians, though they represent his Life as the most
exact Picture of unmanly Softness; yet they generally confess his Death equal
to the noblest of Antiquity; and the same Author Martial.
that has given him the lasting Title of Mollis Otho, has yet set him in
Competition with the famous Cato, in reference to the last Action of his Life.

It has been observed of Vitellius, that he obtained the Empire by the sole
Valor of his Lieutenants, and lost it purely on his own account. His extreme
Luxury and Cruelty were for this Reason the more detestable, because he had
been advanced to that Dignity, under the notion of the Patron of his Country,
and the Restorer of the Rights and Liberties of the People. Within eight Months
time the Provincial Armies had unanimously agreed on Vespasian Sueton. in
Vitel. cap. 15.
for their Emperor; and the Tyrant, after he had been strangely mangled by the
extreme Fury of the Soldiers and Rabble, was at last dragged into the River
Tiber Id. ibid. cap. 17.
.

The Republic was so far from making any advancement under the disturbances of
the Three last Reigns, that she must necessarily have felt the fatal
Consequences of them, had she not been seasonably relieved by the happy
management of Vespasian. 'Twas an handsome turn of some of his Friends, when, by
order of Caligula, his Bosom had, by way of Punishment, been stuffed with Dirt;
to put this Interpretation on the Accident, that the Commonwealth being
miserably abused, and even trodden under Foot, should hereafter fly to his
Bosom for Protection Sueton. in Vespas. cap. 5.
. And indeed he seems to have made it his whole Care and Design to reform the
Abuses of the City and State, occasioned by the licentiousness of the late
times. Nine Provinces he added to the Empire Eutrop. lib. 7.
, and was so very exact in all circumstances of his Life and Conduct, that one
who has examined them both with all the niceness imaginable, can find nothing
in either that deserves reprehension, except an immoderate desire of Riches Id.
ibid. cap. 16.
. And he covertly excuses him for this, by extolling at the same time h^s
extraordinary Magnificence and Liberality Id. ibid. cap. 17, 18.
.

But perhaps he did not more oblige the World by his own Reign, than by leaving
so admirable a Successor as his Son Titus; the only Prince in the World that
has the Character of never doing an ill Action. He had given sufficient proof
of his Courage in the famous Siege of Jerusalem; and might have met with as
good Success in other parts, had he not been prevented by an untimely death, to
the universal grief of Mankind.

But then Domitian so far degenerated from the Two excellent Examples of his
Father and Brother, as to seem more emulous of copying Nero or Caligula.
However, as to Martial Affairs, he was as happy as most of his Predecessors;
having, in Four Expeditions, subdued the Catti, Daci, and the Sarmatians, and
extinguished a Civil War in the first beginning Sucton. in Demit. cap. 6.
. By this means he had so entirely gained the Affections of the Soldiers, that
when we meet with his nearest Relations, and even his very Wife engaged in his
Murder Id. ibid. cap. 14.
, yet we find the Army so extremely dissatisfied, as to have wanted only a
Leader to revenge his Death Id. ibid. cap. 23.
.

CHAP. VI. Of the Roman Affairs from Domitian to the end of Constantine the
Great.
THE Two following Emperors have been deservedly styled, The Restorers of the
Roman Grandeur; which, by reason of the Viciousness, or Negligence of the
former Princes, had been extremely impaired.

Nerva, though a Person of extraordinary Courage and Virtue, yet did not enjoy
the Empire long enough to be on any other account so memorable, as for
substituting so admirable a Successor in his room as Trajan.

'Twas he, that for the Happiness which attended his Undertakings, and for his
just and regular Administration of the Government, has been set in Competition
even with Romulus himself. 'Twas he that advanced the Bounds of the Empire
farther than all his Predecessors; reducing into Roman Provinces the Five vast
Countries of Dacia, Assyria, Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Arabia Eutrop. lib. 8.
. And yet his prudent management in Peace, has been generally preferred to his
Exploits in War. His Justice, Candor, and Liberality, having gained him such
an universal Esteem and Veneration, that he was even Deified before his Death.

Adrian's Character has generally more of the Scholar than the Soldier: Upon
which account, as much as out of Evny to his Predecessor, he slighted Three of
the Provinces that had been taken in by Trajan, and was contented to fix the
bounds of the Empire at the River Euphrates Eutrop. lib. 8.
. But perhaps he is the first of the Roman Emperors that ever took a Circuit
round his Dominions, as we are assured he did Ib. ibid.
.

Antoninus Plus studied more the defense of the Empire, than the Enlargement of
it. However, his admirable Prudence, and strict Reformation of Manners, rendered
him perhaps as serviceable to the Commonwealth as the greatest Conquerours.

The Two Antonini, Marcus and Lucius, were they that made the first Division of
the Empire. They are both famous for a successful Expedition against the
Parthians: And the former, who was the longest River, is especially remarkable
for his extraordinary Learning, and strict Profession of Stoicism; whence he
has obtained the Name of The Philosopher.

Commodus was as noted for all manner of Extravagancies, as his Father had been
for the contrary Virtues; and after a very short Enjoyment of the Empire, was
murdered by one of his Mistresses Zozimus, Hist. lib. 1.
.

Pertinax too was immediately cut off by the Soldiers, who found him a more
rigid Exactor of Discipline than they had been lately used to. And now claiming
to themselves the Privilege of choosing an Emperor, they fairly exposed the
Dignity to sale Ibid.
.

Didius Julian was the highest Bidder, and was thereupon invested with the
Honor. But, as he only exposed himself to Ridicule by such a mad Project, so
he was in an instant made away with, in hopes of another Bargain. Zozimus makes
him no better than a sort of an Emperor in a Dream Ibid.
.

But the Roman Valor and Discipline were in a great Measure restored by
Severus. Besides a famous Victory over the Parthians, the old Enemies of Rome,
he subdued the greatest part of Pe^sia and Arabia and marching into this
Island, Britain, delivered the poor Natives from the miserable Tyranny of the
Scots and Picts; which an excellent Historian Ae^^us Spartia. in Severe.
calls the greatest Honor of his Reign.

Antoninus Caracalla had as much of a martial Spirit in him as his Father, but
died before he could design any thing memorable, except an Expedition against
the Parthians, which he had just undertaken.

Opilius Macrinus, and his Son Diadumen had made very little noise in the
World, when they were cut off without much disturbance, to make room for
Heliogabalus, Son of the late Emperor.

If he was extremely pernicious to the Empire by his extravagant Debaucheries,
his Successor Alexander Severus was as serviceable to the State in restoring
Justice and Discipline. His noblest Exploit, was an Expedition against the
Persians, in which he overcame their famous King Xerxes Eutrop. lib. 8.
.

Maximin, the first that from a common Soldier aspired to the Empire, was soon
taken off by Puplenus, and he, with his Colleague Balbinus, quickly followed,
leaving the supreme command to Gordian, a Prince of great Valor and Fortune,
and who might probably have extinguished the very Name of the Persians Pompon.
Laetus, in Gordian.
, had he not been treacherously murder^d by Philip, who within a very little
time suffered the like Fortune himself.

Decius in the former part of his Reign had been very successful against the
S^ythians and other barbarous Nations; but was at last killed, together with
his Son, in an unfortunate Engagement Idem, in Decio.
.

But then Gallus not only struck up a shameful League with the Barbarians, but
suffered them to overrun all T^^ace, Thessaly, Macedon, Greece Idem, in Gallo.
, etc.

They were just threarning Italy, when his Successor Aemylian chased them off
with a prodigious Slaughter: And upon his Promotion to the Empire, promis^d the
Senate to recover all the Roman Territories that had been entirely lost, and to
clear those that were overrun Idem, ibid.
: But he was prevented after Three Months Reign, by the common Fate of the
Emperors of that time.

After him Valerian was so unfortunate as to lose the gre^test part of his Army
in an Expedition against the Persians, and to be kept Prisoner himself in that
Country till the time of his Death Idem, in Valeriano.
.

Upon the taking of Valerian by the Persians, the Management of Affairs was
committed to his Son Gallienus; a Prince so extremely negligent and vicious, as
to become the equal Scorn and Contempt of both Sexes Frebell. Pollio in
Tripinia Tyran.
: The looseness of his Government gave occasion to the Usurpation of the Thirty
Tyrants, of whom some indeed truly deserved that Name; others were Persons of
great Courage and Virtue, and very serviceable to the Commonwealth Idem. in
Gall^^^.
. In his time the Almaigns, after they had wasted al^ Gaul, broke into Italy.
Dacia, which had been gained by Trajan was entirely lost; all Greece, Macedon,
Pontus, and Asia, overrun by the Goths. The Germans too had proceeded as far
as Spain, and taken the famous City Ta^raco, now Tarragona in Cattalonia
E^trep. lib. 9.
.

This desperate state of Affairs was in some measure redressed by the happy
Conduct of Claudius, who, in less than two Years time, routed near Three
hundred thousand Barbarians, and put an entire end to the Gothic War: Nor were
his other Accomplishments inferior to his Valor; an elegant Historian
Trebell. Pollio in Claud^^.
having sound in him the Virtue of Trajan, the Piety of Antoninus, and the
Moderation of Augustus.

Quintilius was in all respects comparable to his Brother; whom he succeeded
not on account of his Relation, but his Merits Ibid.
. But reigning only seventeen Days, it is impossible he could do any thing more
than raise an Expectation in the World.

If any of the Barbarians were left within the Bounds of the Empire by
Claudius, Aurelian entirely chased them out. In one single War, he is reported
to have killed a thousand of the Sarmatians with his own Hands F^avius Vopisc.
in Anreli^^^.
: But his noblest Exploit was, the conquering the famous Zenobia, Queen of the
East (as she styled herself) and the taking her capital City Palmyra. At his
return to Rome, there was scarce any Nation in the World out of which he had
not a sufficient number of Captives to grace his Triumph: The most considerable
were the Indians, Arabians, Goths, Franks, Suevians, Saracens, Vandals, and
Germans Ibid.
.

Tacitus was contented to show his Moderation and Justice, in the quiet
Management of the Empire, without any hostile Design. Or had he expressed any
such Inclinations, his short Reign must necessarily have hindered their effect.

Probus, to the wise Government of his Predecessor, added the Valor and
Conduct of a good Commander: 'Twas he that obliged the barbarous Nations to
quit all their footing in Gaul, Illyricum, and several Provinces of the Empire;
insomuch, that the very Parthians sent him flattering Letters, confessing the
dismal Apprehensions they entertained of his Designs against their Country, and
beseeching him to favor them with a Peace E^avius Vopise. in Probo.
.

There was scarce any Enemy left to his Successor Carus, except the Persians;
against whom he accordingly undertook an Expedition: But after two or three
successful Engagements, died with the Stroke of a Thunderbolt Idem, in Caro.
.

His two Sons, Carinus and Numerian, were of so opposite a Genius, that one is
generally represented as the worst, the other as the best, of Men. Numerian was
soon treacherously murdered by Aper; who, together with the other Emperor
Carinus, in a very little time, gave way to the happy Fortune of Dioclesian,
the most successful of the latter Emperors; so famous for his prodigious
Exploits in Egypt, Persia, and Armenia, that a Roman Author Pomponius Latus in
vita ejus.
has not stuck to compare him with Jupiter, as he does his Son Maximian with
Hercules.

Constantius Clorus, and Galerius, were happier than most of their
Predecessors, by dying, as they had for the most part lived, in Peace.

Nor are Severus and Maximinian on any account very remarkable, except for
leaving so admirable a Successor as the famous CONSTANTINE; who ridding himself
of his Two Competitors, Licinius and Maxentius, advanced the Empire to its
ancient Grandeur. His happy Wars, and wise Administration in Peace, have gained
him the Surname of The GREAT, an Honor unknown to former Emperors: Yet in
this respect he is justly reputed unfortunate, That by removing the Imperial
Seat from Rome to Constantinople, he gave occasion to the utter Ruin of Italy.

CHAP. VII. Of the Roman Affairs from Constantine the Great, to the taking of
Rome by Odoacer, and the Ruin of the Western Empire.
THOUGH the Three Sons of Constantine at first divided the Empire into Three
distinct Principalities; yet it was afterward reunited under the longest
Survivor, Constantius. The Wars between him and Magnentius, as they proved
fatal to the Tyrant; so were they extremely prejudicial to the whole State;
which a^ this time was involved in such unhappy Difficulties, as to be very
unable to bear so excessive a Loss of Men, no less than 54000 being killed on
both sides Pompon. Laetus.
. And perhaps this was the chief reason of the ill success, which constantly
attended that Emperor, in the Eastern Wars: For the Persians were all along
his Superiors; and when at last a Peace was concluded, the Advantage of the
Conditions laid on their side.

Julian, as he took effectual care for the security of the other Bounds of the
Empire; so his Designs against the most formidable Enemies, the Persians, had
all appearance of Success; but that he lost his Life before they could be fully
put in execution.

Jovian was no sooner elected Emperor, but being under some apprehension of a
Rival in the West, he immediately struck up a most dishonorable Peace with the
Persians, at the Price of the famous City Nisibis, and all Mesopotamia. For
which base Action, as he does not fail of an Invective from every Historian; so
particularly Ammianus Marcellinus Lib. 25.
and Zozimus, have taken the pains to show, that he was the first Roman
Governor who resigned up the least part of their Dominions upon any account.

Valentinian the First, has generally the Character of an excellent Prince:
But he seems to have been more studious of obliging his Subjects, by an easy
and quiet Government, than desirous of acting any thing against the encroaching
Enemies.

Gratian too, though a Prince of great Courage and Experience in War, was able to
do no more than to settle the single Province of Gaul: But he is extremely
applauded by Historians, for taking such extraordinary care in the business of
a Successor: For being very sensible how every Day produced worse Effects in
the Empire; and that the State, if not at the last Gasp, yet was very nigh,
beyond all hopes of recovery, he made it his whole study to sind out a Person
that should, in all Respects, be capacitated for the noble Work of the
Deliverance of his Country. The Man he pitched upon was Theodosius, a Native of
Spain; who, being now invested with the Command of the East, upon the death of
Gratian, remained sole Emperor. And, indeed, in a great measure he answered
the Expectation of the World, proving the most resolute Defender of the Empire
in its declining Age. But for his Colleague Valentinian the Second he was cut
off, without having done any thing that deserves our Notice.

Under Honorius, things returned to their former desperate state, the barbarous
Nations getting ground on all sides, and making every day some diminution in
the Empire; 'till at last, Alaric, King of the Goths, wasting all Italy,
proceeded to Rome it self; and being contented to set a few Buildings on fire,
and rifle the Treasuries, retired with his Army Paul. Diacon. and Pompon, Lat.
: So that this is rather a Disgrace, than a Destruction of the City. And Nero
is supposed to have done more Mischief when he set it on fire in jest, than it
now suffered from the barbarous Conqueror.

Valentinian the Third, at his first Accession to the Empire, gave great hopes
of his proving the Author of a happy Revolution Pompon. Lat.
; and he was very fortunate in the War against the famous Attila the Hun: But
his Imprudence in putting to death his best Commander Aetius, hastened very much
the ruin of the Roman Cause, the barbarous Nations now carrying all before
them, without any considerable opposition.

By this time, the State was given over as desperate; and what Princes followed
'till the taking of the City by Odoacer, were only a company of miserable,
short-lived Tyrants, remarkable for nothing but the Meanness of their
Extraction, and the Poorness of their Government; so that Historians generally
pass them over in silence, or at most with the bare mention of their Names. The
best account of them we can meet with, is as follows: Maximus, who in order to
his own Promotion, had procured the Murder o^ Valentinian, soon after compelled
his Widow Eudoxia to accep^ of him as a Husband; when the Empress, entertaining
a morta^ Hatred for him on many accounts, sent to Genseric, a famous King of
the Vandals, and a Confederate of the late Emperor's, desiring his assistance
for the Deliverance of herself and the City, from the Usurpation of the Tyrant.
Genseric easily obeyed; and landing with a prodigious Army in Italy, entered
Rome without any opposition; where, contrary to his Oath and Promise, he seized
on all the Wealth, and carried it, with several thousands of the Inhabitants,
into Africa Paul. Diaco^. and Evagrius Hist. Eccles lib. 2 cap. 7.
.

Avitus, the General in Gaul, was the next that took upon him the Name of
Emperor, which he resigned within eight Months ^d. Ibid.
.

Majorianus succeeded; and after three Years, left the Honor to Severus, or
Severian; who had the Happiness, after four Years Reign, to die a natural Death
Paul. Diacon. lib. 16.
.

After him, Anthemius was elected Emperor, who lost his Life and Dignity, in a
Rebellion of his Son-in-Law Ricimer Ibid.
. And then Olybrius was sent from Constantinople too with the same Authority;
but died within seven Months Ibid.
.

Liarius, or Glycerius, who had been elected in his room by the Soldiers, was
immediately almost deposed by Nepos; and he himself quickly after by Orestes
J^^^andes de Regn Success.
, who made his Son Augustus, or Augustulus, Emperor. And now Odoacer, King of
the Heruli, with an innumerable multitude of the barbarous Nations, ravaging
all Italy, approached to Rome; and entering the City without any resistance, and
deposing Augustulus, fecur'd the Imperial Dignity to himself. And though he was
forced afterward to give place to Theodoric the Goth, yet the Romans had never
after the least Command in Italy.

map of Ancient Rome ROMA ANTIQUA
1. T. Iouis Capitolinus 2. T. Vestae 3. T. Pacis 4. T. Romae 5. T. Faustinae
6. T. Saturni 7. T. Iouis Statoris 8. Ar. S^^^ri Boarij 9. Se^^^^ ^n^^i S^u^ri
10. Insula Tiberina: o^im Iouis I^caonij 11. T. Fortunae Virilis 12. P.
Portumni 13. Al^ta Sudans 14. Arcus Domi^iani 15. Arcus Gordiani 16. A^marci ^t
Very 17. There Ala^^^^ 18. Th Ne^^^^^ 19. Tori^ at T. (...) 20. Curia Ho^^^ 21.
Basilica. Al^^^ 22. Basil. A^^^^^ 23. Pons Ia^^^^^ 24. Pons Pal^^^ 25. Basil.
Aug^^^ 26. T. N^rt. (...) 27. Basil Al. S^^^ 28. Pal. August.




Part 2.
Book I. Of the City.
Chap. 1. Of the Pomoerium, and of the Form and Bigness of the City, according
to the Seven Hills.
BEFORE we come to please our selves with a particular View of the City, we
must, by all means, take notice of the Pomoerium, for the Singularity to which
it owed its Original. Livy defines the Pomoerium, in general, to be that space
of Ground both within and without the Walls; which the Augurs, at the first
Building of Cities, solem^ly consecrated, and on which no Edifices were
suffered to be raised Livy, lib. 1.
. But the account which Plutarch gives us of this matter, in reference to Rome
it self, is sufficient to satisfy our Curiosity; and is delivered by him to
this purpose: Romulus having sent for some of the Tuscans, to instruct him in
the Ceremonies to be observed in laying the Foundations of his New City, the
Work was begun in this manner:

First, They dug a Trench, and threw into it the First Fruits of all Things,
either good by Custom, or necessary by Nature; and every Man taking a small
Turff of Earth of the Country from whence he came, they all cast them in
promiscuously together. Making this Trench their Center, they described the
City in a Cird^ round it: Then the Founder sitted to a Plough a brazen
Plough^share; and yoaking together a Bull and a Cow, drew a de^^ Line, or
Furrow, round the Bounds; those that followed after, ta^king care that all the
Clods fell inwards toward the City. The^^ built the Wall upon this Line, which
they called Pomoerium, fro^^ Pon^ Moenia Plutatch. in Romul.
.

It Is remarkable, that the same Ceremony with which the Foundations of their
Cities were at first laid, they used too in destroying and rasing Places taken
from the Enemy; which we fin^ was begun by the Chief Commander's turning up
some of th^^ Wall with a Plough Dempster Paralipom. to Rosin. lib. 1. cap. 3.
.

As to the Form and Bigness of the City we must follow th^^ common Direction of
the Seven Hills, whence came the Phras^ of Vrbs Septicollis, and the like, so
frequent with the Poets.

Of these, Mons Palatinus has ever had the Preference; whether so called from
the People Palantes, or Palatini, or from the Bleating and Strolling of Cattle,
in Latin, Balare and Palare; (...) from Pales, the Pastoral Goddess; or from
the Burying-place (...) Pallas, we find disputed, and undetermined among their
Authors 'Twas in this Place that Romulus laid the Foundations of the Cin^^ in a
quadrangular Form; and here the same King and Tull^^ Hostilius kept their
Courts; as did afterward Augustus, and a^^ the succeeding Emperors; on which
account, the Word Palatium came to signify a Royal Seat R^sin. Antiq. lib. 1.
cap. 4.
.

This Hill to the East has Mons Coelius, to the South Mons Avertinus, to the
West Mons Capitolinus, to the North the Forum Fabricii Roma, cap. 3,
.

In compass Twelve hundred Paces Marlian. Topograph. Antiq^. Roma, lib. 1. cap.
1.
.

Mons Tarpeius took its Name from Tarpeia, a Roman Virgin, who betrayed the
City to the Sabines, in this Place Plutarch in Remul.
. It was called too Mons Saturni, and Saturnius, in Honor of Saturn, who is
reported to have lived here in his Retirement, and was ever reputed the Tutelar
Deity of this Part of the City. It had afterward the Denomination of
Capitolinus, from the Head of a Man casually found here in digging for the
Foundations of the famous Temple of Jupiter Live. lib. 1. cap. 55.
, called Capitolium, for the same reason. This Hill was added to the City by
Titus Tatius, King of the Sabines, when having been first overcome in the Field
by Romulus, he and his Subjects were permitted to incorporate with the Romans
Dionys^^^^
.

It has to the East, Mons Palatinus, and the Forum; to the South, the Tiber; to
the West, the level Part of the City; to the North, Collis Quirinalis Fabricii
Roma, Cap. 3.
.

In compass seven Stadia, or Furlongs Marlian, lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

Collis Quirinalis, was so called either from the Temple of Quirinus, another
Name of Romulus; or, more probably from the Curetes, a People that removed
hither with Tatius from Cures, a Sabine City Sext. Pomp. Festus.
. It afterward changed its Name to Caballus, Mons Caballi, and Caballinus,
from the two Marble Horses, with each a Servant to hold him by the Bridle,
which are set up here. They are still standing; and if the Inscription on the
Pilasters be true, were the Work of Phidias and Praxiteles Fabricii Roma, cap.
3.
. This Hill was added to the City by Numa Dionys Halicarn. lib. 2.
.

To the East it has Mons Esquilinus, and Mons Viminalis; to the South, the
Forums of Caesar and Nerva; to the West, the level Part of the City; to the
North, Collis Hortulorum, and the Campus Martius Fabricis Roma, cap. 3.
.

In compass almost three Miles Marlian. lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

Mons Coelius owes its Name to Coelius, or Coeles, a famous Tuscan General, who
pitched his Tents here, when he came to the assistance of Romulus against the
Sabines Varro de Ling. Lat. Lib. 4.
Livy Lib. 1. cap. 30.
and Dionysius Lib. 3.
attribute the taking of it in, to Tullus Hostilius; but Strabo Geograph. lib.
5.
to Ancus Martius. The other Names by which it was sometimes known, were
Querculanus, or Quercetulanus, and Augustus: The first occasioned by the
abundance of Oaks growing there; the other imposed by the Emperor Tiberius,
when he had raised new Buildings upon it, after a Fire Tacit. Ann. 4. Suet. in
Tib. cap. 48.
.

One part of this Hill was called Coeliolus, and Minor Coelius Fabricii Roma,
cap. 3.
.

To the East it has the City-Walls; to the South, Mons Aventinus; to the West,
Mons Palatinus; to the North, Mons Esquilinus Ibid.
.

In compass about two Miles and a half Marlian. lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

Mons Esquilinus was anciently called Cispius, and Oppius Fabricii Roma, cap. 3.
; the Name of Esquilinus was varied, for the easier pronounciation from
Exquilinus, a Corruption of Excubinus, ab excubiis, from the Watch that Romulus
kept here Vid. Propert. lib. 2. Eleg. 8.
. It was taken in by Servius Tullius Live. lib. 1. cap. 44.
, who had here his Royal Seat Ibid.
. Varro will have the Esquiliae to be properly Two Mountains De Ling. Latin.
lib. 4.
; which Opinion has been since approved of by a curious Observer Marlian. lib.
1. cap. 1.
.

To the East it has the City Walls; to the South the Via Labicana; to the West
the Valley lying between Mons Coelius and Mons Palatinus; to the North Collis
Viminalis Fabricii Roma, cap. 3.
.

In Compass about four Miles Marlian. lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

Mons Viminalis derives its Name from the Vimina.
Osiers that grow there in great Plenty. This Hill was taken in by Servius
Tullius Dionys. lib. 4.
.

To the East it has the Campus Esquilinus; and to the South part of the Suburra
and the Forum; to the West Mons Quirinalis; to the North, the Vallis Quirinalis
Fabricii Roma, cap. 3.
.

In Compass Two Miles and an half Marlian. lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

The Name of Mons Aventinus has given great Cause of Dispute among the
Critics; some deriving the Word from Aventinus an Alban King Varro de Ling.
Lat. lib. 4.
; some from the River Avens Ibid.
; and others Ab avibus, from the Birds which used to fly hither in great Flocks
from the Tiber Ibid.
. It was called too Murcius, from Murcia, the Goddess of Sleep, who had here a
Sacellum, or little Temple Sext. Pomp. Festus.
; Collis Dianae, from the Temple of Diana Martial.
; and Remonius from Remus, who would have had the City begun in this place, and
was here buried Plutarch in Romal.
. A. Gellius affirms Lib. 13. cap. 14.
, that this Hill being all along reputed Sacred, was never enclosed within the
Bounds of the City 'till the time of Claudius. But Eutropius Lib. 1.
expressly attributes the taking of it in to Ancus Maritius; and an old Epigram
inserted by Caspinian in his Comment on Cassiodorus, confirms the same.

To the East it has the City Walls; to the South the Campus Figulinus; to the
West the Tiber; to the North Mons Palatinus Fabricii Roma, cap. 3.
.

In Circuit eighteen Stadia, or Two Miles and a quarter Marlian. lib. 1. cap* 1.
.

Besides these Seven principal Hills, Three other of inferior note were taken
in in later times.

Collis Hortulorum, or Hortorum, had its Name from the famous Gardens of
Sallust adjoining to it Rosin. lib. 1. cap. 11.
. It was afterward called Pincius, from the Pincii, a Noble Family who had
here their Seat Ibid.
. The Emperor Aurelian first enclosed it within the City Walls Ibid.
.

To the East and South it has the plainest part of Mons Quirinalis; to the West
the Vallis Martia; to the North the Walls of the City Fabricii Roma, cap. 3.
.

In Compass about Eighteen Stadia Marlian lib 1. c^p. 1.
.

Janiculum, or Janicularis, was so called, either from an old Town of the same
Name, said to have been built by Janus: Or, because Janus dwelt and was buried
here Rosin. lib. 1. cap. 11.
: Or, because 'twas a sort of Janua.
Gate to the Romans, whence they issued out upon the Tuscans Festus.
. The Sparkling Sands have at present given it the Name of Mons aureus, and by
corruption Montorius Fabricii Roma. cap. 3.
. We may make Two Observations about this Hill from one Epigram of Martial;
That it is the fittest place to take ones Standing for a full Prospect of the
City; and that it is less inhabited than the other Parts, by reason of the
grossness of the Air Marlial Epig. lib. 4. Ep. 64.
. It is still famous for the Sepulchers of Numa, and Statius the Poet Fabricii
Romans lib 1. cap. 3.
.

To the East and South it has the Tiber; to the West the Fields; to the North
the Vatican Ibid.
.

In circuit (as much of it as stands within the City Walls) Five Stadia
Marlian. lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

Mons Vaticanus owes its Name to the Answers of the Vates or Prophets, that
used to be given here; or from the God Vaticanus or Vagitanus (...)
. It seems not to have been enclosed within the Walls 'till the time of
Aurelian.

This Hill was formerly famous for the Sepulcher of Scipio Africanus; some
Remains of which are still to be seen Warcup's Hist. of Italy, Book 2.
. But it is more celebrated at present on the account of St. Peter's Church,
the Pope's Palace, and the noblest Library in the World.

To the East it has the Campus Vatioanus, and the River; to the South the
Janiculum; to the West the Campus Figulinus, or Potters Field; to the North the
Prata Quintia Fabricii Roma, cap. 3.
.

It lies in the shape of a Bow drawn up very high; the unequal Part stretching
almost a Mile Marlian. lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

As to the extent of the whole City, the greatest we meet with in History, was
in the Reign of Valerian, who enlarged the Walls to such a Degree as to
surround the space of Fifty Miles Vop^s^^ in A^r^^tano.
.

The number of Inhabitants in its flourishing State, Lipsius computes at Four
Millions De Magnitud. Roman.
.

At present the compass of the City is not above Thirteen Miles Fabricii Roma,
cap. 2.
.

CHAP. II. Of the Division of the City into Tribes and Regions: And of the
Gates and Bridges.
ROMULUS divided his little City into Three Tribes; and Servius Tullius added a
fourth; which division continued 'till the time of Augustus. 'Twas he first
appointed the Fourteen Regions or Wards: An Account of which, with the number
of Temples, Baths, etc. in every Region, may be thus taken from the accurate
Panvinius.

REGION I. PORTA CAPENA.
Streets 9. Luci 3. Temples 4. Aedes 6. Public Baths 6. Arches 4. Barns 14.
Mills 12. Great Houses 121.
The whole Compass 13223 Feet.

REGION II. COELIMONTIVM.
Streets 12. Luci 2. Temples 5. The Public Baths of the City. Private Baths
So. The Great Shambles. Barns 23. Mills 23. Great Houses 133.
The Compass 13200 Feet.

REGION III. ISIS and SERAPIS.
Streets 8. Temples 2. The Amphitheatre of Vespasian. The Baths of Titus,
Trajan, and Philip. Barns 29, or 19. Mills 23. Great Houses 160.
The Compass 12450 Feet.

REGION IV. VIA SACRA, or TEMPLVM PACIS.
Streets 8. Temples 10. The Colossus of the Sun 120 Foot high. The Arches of
Titus, Severus, and Constantine. Private Baths 75. Barns 18. Mills 24. Great
Houses 138.
The Compass 14000; or as some say, only 8000 Feet.

REGION V. ESQVILINA.
Streets 15. Luci 8. Temples 6. Aedes 5. Private Baths 75. Barns 23. Mills 22.
Great Houses 180.
The Compass 15950 Feet.

REGION VI. ACTA SEMITA.
Streets 12 or 13. Temples 15. Portico's 2. Circi 2. Fora 2. Private Baths 75.
Barns 19. Mills 23. Great Houses 155.
The Compass 15600 Feet.

REGION VII. VIA LATA.
Streets 40. Temples 4. Private Baths 75. Arches 3. Mills 17. Barns 25. Great
Houses 120.
The Compass 23700 Feet.

REGION VIII. FORVM ROMANVM.
Streets 12. Temples 21. Private Baths 66. Aedes 10. Portico's 9. Arches 4.
Fora 7. Curiae 4. Basilicae 7. Columns 6. Barns 18. Mills 30. Great Houses 150.
The Compass 14867 Feet.

REGION IX. CIRCVS FLAMINIVS.
Streets 30. Temples 8. Aedes 20. Portico's 12. Circi 2. Theaters 4. Basilicae
3. Curiae 2. Thermae 5. Arches 2. Columns 2. Mills 32. Barns 32. Great Houses
189.
The Compass 30560 Feet.

REGION X. PALATIVM.
Streets 7. Temples 10. Aedes 9. Theater 1. Curiae 4. Private Baths 15. Mills
12. Barns 16. Great Houses 109.
The Compass 11600 Feet.

REGION XI. CIRCVS MAXIMUS.
Streets 8. Aedes 22. Private Baths 15. Barns 16. Mills 12. Great Houses 189.
The Compass 11600 Feet.

REGION XII. PISCINA PVBLICA.
Streets 12. Aedes 2. Private Baths 68. Barns 28. Mills 25. Great Houses 128.
The Compass 12000 Feet.

REGION XIII. AVENTINVS.
Streets 17. Luci 6. Temples 6. Private Baths 74. Barns 36. Mills 30. Great
Houses 155.
The Compass 16300 Feet.

REGION XIV. TRANSTIBERINA.
Streets 23. Aedes 6. Private Baths 136. Barns 22. Mills 32. Great Houses 150.
The Compass 33409 Feet.
As to the Gates, Romulus built only Three, or (as some will have it) Four at
most. But as Buildings were enlarged, the Gates were accordingly multiplied; so
that Pliny tells us there were Thirty four in his time.

The most remarkable were,

Porta Flumentana, so called, because if stood near the River.

Porta Flamin^a, owing its Name to the Flaminian Way, which begins there.

Porta Carmentalis, built by Romulus, and so called from Carmenta, the
Prophetess, Mother of Evander.

Porta Naevia, which Varro derives a nemoribus, from the Woods which formerly
stood near it.

Porta Saliana, deriving its Name from the Salt which the Sabines used to bring
in at that Gate from the Sea, to supply the City.

Porta Capena; called so from Capena, an old City of Italy, to which the way
laid through this Gate. It is sometimes called Appia, from Appius the Censor;
and Triumphalis, from the Triumphs in which the Procession commonly passed
under here; and Fontinalis, from the Aquaeducts which were raised over it:
Whence Juvenal calls it, Madida Capena; and Martial, Capena grandi Porta quae
pluit gutta.

The Tiber was passed over by Eight Bridges; the Names of which are thus set
down by Marlian; Milvius, Aelius, Vaticanus, Janiculensis, Cestius, Fabricius,
Palatinus, and Sublicius.

CHAP. III. Of the Places of Worship; particularly of the Temples and Luci.
BEFORE we proceed to take a view of the most remarkable places set apart for
the Celebration of Divine Service. it may be proper to make a short Observation
about the general Names under which we meet with them in Authors.

Templum (then) was a place which had not been only dedicated to some Deity,
but withal formally consecrated by the Augurs.

Aedes Sacr^, were such as wanted that Consecration; which if they afterward
received, they changed their Names to Temples.

Delubrum, according to Servius, was a place that under one Roof comprehended
several Deities.

Aelicula is only a diminutive, and signifies no more than a little Aedes.

Sacellum may be derived the same way from Aedes Sacra. Festus tells us, it is a
place sacred to the Gods, without a Roof.

'Twere endless to reckon up but the bare Names of all the Temples we meet with
in Authors. The most celebrated on all accounts were, the Capitel and the
Pantheon.

CAPITOLIUM. Templ: PANTHEON vulgo Rotunda.



The Capitol, or Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus was the effect of a Vow made by
Tarquinius Priscus in the Sabine War Live. lib. 1.
. But he had scarce laid the Foundations before his death. His Nephew, Tarquin
the Proud, finished it with the Spoils taken from the neighboring Nations Ibid.
. But upon the expulsion of the Kings, the Consecration was performed by
Horatius the Consul Plutarch in Poplicol.
. The Structure stood on a high Ridge, taking in Four Acres of Ground. The
Front was adorned with Three Rows of of Pillars, the other sides with Two
Dionys. Halicar.
. The Ascent from the Ground was by an hundred Steps Tacitus.
. The prodigious Gifts and Ornaments, with which it was at several times
endowed, almost exceed belief. Suetonius In August. cap. 30.
tells us, that Augustus gave at one time Two thousand pound weight of Gold:
and in Jewels and precious Stones, to the value of Five hundred Sesterces. Livy
and Pliny Live. lib. 10, 35, 38. Plmy, lib. 33, etc.
surprise us with Accounts of the brazen Thresholds, the noble Pillars that
Sylla removed hither from Athens out of the Temple of Jupiter Olympius; the
gilded Roof, the gilded Shields, and those of solid Silver; the huge Vessels of
Silver, holding Three Measures; the Golden Chariot, etc. This Temple was first
consumed by sire in the Marian War, and then rebuilt by Sylla; who dying before
the Dedication, left that Honor to Quintus Catulus. This too was demolished in
the Vitellian Sedition. Vespasian undertook a Third, which was burnt down about
the time of his death. Domitian raised the last and most glorious of all; in
which the very Gilding amounted to Twelve thousand Talents Plutarch in
Poplicola.
. On which Account Plutarch Ibid.
has observed of that Emperor, that he was like Midas, desirous of turning
every thing into Gold. There are very little remains of it at present; yet
enough to make a Christian Church Fabric. Roma, cap. 9.
.

The Pantheon was built by Marcus Agrippa, Son-in-Law to Augustus Caesar; and
dedicated either to Jupiter Vltor, or to Mars and Venus, or more probably, to
all the Gods in general, as the very Name (quasi (...)) implies. The Structure,
according to Fabricius Ibid.
is an Hundred and forty Foot high, and about the same breadth. But a later
Author has increased the number of Feet to an Hundred fifty eight. The Roof is
curiously vaulted, void places being left here and there for the greater
strength. The Rafters were Pieces of Brass of Forty Foot in length. There are
no Windows in the whole AEdifice, only a round Hole at the top of the Roof,
which serves very well for the admission of the Light. Diametrically under, is
cut a curious Gutter to receive the Rain. The Walls on the inside are either
solid Marble, or incrusted Marlian. Topog. Romans Antiq. lib. 6. cap. 6.
. The front on the outside was covered with brazen Plates gilt, the top with
silver Plates, which are now changed to Lead Ibid. and Fabric. Romans cap. 9.
. The Gates were Brass, of extraordinary Work and Bigness Marlian. ibid.


The Temple is still standing with little alteration, besides the Joss of the
old Ornaments, being converted into a Christian Church by Pope Boniface III.
(or, as Polydore Virgil Lib. 6. cap. 8.
has it, by Boniface IV.) Dedicated to St. Mary, and all Saints, though the
general Name be St. Mary de Rotonda Fabric. cap. 9.
. The most remarkable difference is, that whereas heretofore they ascended by
twelve Steps, they now go down as many to the Entrance Ibid.
.

The Ceremony of the Consecration of Temples (a piece of Superstition very well
worth our notice) we cannot better apprehend. than by the following account
which Tacitus gives us of that Solemnity, in reference to the Capitol, when
repaired by Vespasian: Though perhaps the chief Rites were celebrated upon the
entire raising of the Structure, this being probably intended only for the
hallowing the Floor. Vndecimo Kalendas Julias Hist. lib. 4.
, etc.

Upon the 21st. of June, being a very clear Day, the whole Plott of Ground
designed for the Temple, was bound about with Fillers and Garlands. Such of the
Soldiers as had lucky Names, entered first with Boughs in their Hands, taken
from those Trees which the Gods more especially delighted in. Next came the
Vestal Virgins, with Boys and Girls whose Fathers and Mothers were living, and
sprinkled the Place with Brookwater, River-water, and Spring Water. Then
Helvidius Priscus the Praetor, ( Plautus Elian, one of the Chief Priests, going
before him) after he had performed the solemn Sacrifice of a Swine, a Sheep,
and a Bullock, for the Purgation of the Floor, and laid the Entrails upon a
green Turf, humbly besought Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, and the other Deities,
Protectors of the Empire, that they would be pleased to prosper their present
Undertaking, and accomplish, by their Divine Assistance, what Human Piety had
thus begun. Having concluded his Prayer, he put his Hand to the Fillets, to
which the Ropes, with a great Stone fastened in them, had been tied for this
occasion; when immediately the whole Company of Priests, Senators, Knights,
with the greatest part of the common People, laying hold together on the Rope,
with all Expressions of Joy, drew the Stone into the Trench designed for the
Foundation, throwing in Wedges of Gold, Silver, and other Metals, which had
never endured the Fire.

Some curious Persons have observed this Similitude between the Shape of these
old Temples, and our modern Churches: That they had one Apartment more holy
than the rest, which they termed Cella, answering to our Chancel or Choire:
That the Portico's in the sides, were in all respects like to our Isles; and
that our Navis, or Body of the Church, is an imitation of their Basilica
Polletus Hist. Roman. Flori lib. 1. cap. 3.
.

There are two other Temples particularly worth our notice; not so much for the
Magnificence of the Structure, as for the Customs that depend upon them, and
the remarkable Use to which they were put. These are the Temples of Saturn and
Janus.

The first was famous upon account of serving for the Public Treasury: The
reason of which some fancy to have been, because Saturn first taught the
Italians to coin Money; or, as Plutarch conjectures, because in the golden Age
under Saturn, all Persons were honest and sincere, and the Names of Fraud and
Covetousness unknown in the World Plutarch in Problem.
. But perhaps there might be no more in it, than that this Temple was one of the
strongest Places in the City, and so the fittest for that use. Here were
preserved all the Public Registers and Records, among which were the Libri
Elephantini, or great Ivory Tables, containing a List of all the Tribes, and
the Schemes of the Public Accounts.

The other was a square Piece of Building (some say of entire Brass) so large
as to contain a Statue of Janus five foot high; with brazen Gates of each side,
which used always to be kept open in War, and shut in time of Peace Vid.
Marhan. Topog. Romans Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 8.
.

But the Romans were so continually engaged in Quarrels, that we find the last
Custom but seldom put in practice.

First, all the long Reign of Numa. Secondly, A. V. C. 519. upon the conclusion
of the first Punic War. Thirdly, by Augustus, A. V. C. 725. and twice more by
the same Emperor, A. V. C. 729. And again about the time of our Savior's
Birth. Then by Nero, A. V. C. 811. Afterward by Vespasian, A. V. C. 824. And
lastly, by Constantius, when, upon Magnentius's death, he was left sole
Possessor of the Empire A. V. C. 1105 Vid Casanbon. Not. ad Sueton. August.
cap. 22.
.

Of this custom, Virgil gives us a noble Description: ^unt geminae Belli
portae, sic nomine dicunt,
Relligione sacrae, and saevi formidine Martis:
Centum aerei clandunt vectes, aeternaque ferri
Robora; nec custos absistit limine Janus.
Has ubi certa cedet patribus sententia pugnae;
Ipse, Qu^cinali trabea cinctuque Gabino
Insignis, reserat stridentia limina Consul.
Ipse voeat pugnas Virg. AEn. 7.
.
Sacred to Mars two stately Gates appear,
Made awful by the Dread of Arms and War:
An hundred brazen Bolrs from impious Power,
And everlasting Bars the Dome secure,
And warchful Janus guards his Temple's Door.
Here, when the Fathers have ordained to try
The chance of Ba^tel by their six'd Decree;
The Consul, rich in his Gabinian Gown,
And Regal Pall, leads the Procession on;
The sounding Hinges gravely turns about,
Rouzeth the imprisoned God, and lets the Furies out.


The Superstition of consecrating Groves and Woods to the Honor of the
Deities, was a practice very usual with the Ancients: For, not to speak of
those mentioned in the Holy Scripture, Pliny assures us, That Trees in old time
served for the Temples of the Gods. Tacitus reports this custom of the old
Germans; Q. Curtius of the Indians, and almost all Writers of the old Druids.
The Romans too were great Admirers of this way of Worship, and therefore had
their Luci in most parts of the City, generally dedicated to some particular
Deity.

The most probable reason that can be given for this practice, is taken from
the common Opinion, That Fear was the main Principle of Devotion among the
ignorant Heathens. And therefore such darksom and lonely Seats, putting them
into a sudden Horror and Dread, made them fancy that there must necessarily
something of Divinity inhabit here, which could produce in them such an Awe and
Reverence at their Entrance.

THEATRUM CORNELII BALBI GADITANI.


AMPHITHEATRUM CLAUDII.


CHAP. IV. Of the Theaters, Amphitheatres, Circo's, Naumachiae, Odea, Stadia,
and Xysti, and of the Campus Martius.
Theaters, so called from the Greek, (...), to see, owe their Original to
Bacchus Polydor. Virg. de Rer. invent. lib. 3. cap. 13.
. They were usual in several parts of Greece; and at last, after the same
manner as other Institutions, were borrowed thence by the Romans: That the
Theater and Amphitheatre, were two different sorts of Aedifices, was never
questioned; the former being built in the shape of a Semicircle; the other
generally Oval, so as to make the same Figure as if two Theaters should be
joined together Ibid.
. Yet the same place is often called by both these Names in several Authors.
They seem too to have been designed for quite different Ends; the Theaters for
Stage Plays, the Amphitheatres for the greater Shows of Gladiators, wild
Beasts, etc. The parts of the Theater and Amphitheatre, best worth our
Observation, by reason of their frequent use in Classicks, are as follows:

Scena was a Partition reaching quite cross the Theater, being either
Versatilis, or Duclilis, either to turn round, or to draw up, for the
presenting a new prospect to the Spectators, as Se^cius has observed In Georg.
3.
.

Prescenium was the space of ground just before the Scene, where the Pulpitum
stood, into which the Actors came from behind the Scenes to perform Rosin. lib.
5. cap. 4.
.

The middle part, or Area, of the Amphitheatre, was called

The middle part, or Area, of the Amphitheatre, was called Cavea, because 'twas
considerably lower than the other parts; whence perhaps the Name of Pit in our
Play Houses was borrowed: And Arena, because it used to be strown with Sand, to
hinder the Performers from slipping. Lipsius has taken notice, that the whole
Amphitheatre was often called by both these Names Laps. in Amphitheat.
: And the Veronese Hill called the Theater, which remains almost entire in that
City, the Arena Warcup's History of Italy.
.

There was a threefold Distinction of the Seats, according to the ordinary
division of the people into Senators, Knights, and Commons; the first Range was
called Orchestra; the second, Equestria; and the other, Popularia Casalius de
Urb. Romans and Imp. splendore, lib. 2. cap. 5.
.

Theaters in the first Ages of the Commonwealth, were only temporary, and
composed of Wood, which sometimes tumbled down with a great Destruction, as Dio
Lib. 37.
and Pliny Lib. 36. cap. 15.
speak of one particularly. Of these temporary Theaters, the most celebrated
was that of M. Scaurus, mentioned by Pliny Ibid.
; the Scenes of which was divided into three Partitions one above another; the
first consisting of 120 Pillars of Marble; the next of the like number of
Pillars, curiously wrought in Glass: The top of all had still the same number
of Pillars adorned with gilded Tablets. Between the Pillars were set 3000
Statues and Images of Brass. The Cavea would hold 80000 Men. The Structure
which Curio afterward raised at the Funeral of his Father, though inferior to
the former in Magnificence, yet was no less remarkable upon account of the
admirable Artifice and Contrivance. He built two spacious Theaters of Wood, so
ordered with Hinges and other Necessaries, as to be able to turn round with
very little trouble. These he set at first back to back, for the Celebration of
the Stage Plays, and suchlike Diversions, to prevent the Disorder that might
otherwise arise by the coufusion of the Scenes. Toward the latter end of the
Day, pulling down the Scenes, and joining the two Fronts of the Theaters, he
composed an exact Amphitheatre, in which he again obliged the People with a
Show of Gladiators Ibid.
.

Pamper the Great was the first that undertook the raising a fixed Theater,
which he built very nobly with square Stone; on which account, Tacitus Ann. 14.
tells us he was severely reprehended for introducing a Custom so different
from that of their Forefathers, who were contented to see the like
Persormances, in Seats built only for the present occasion, and in ancient
times standing only on the Ground. To this purpose, I cannot omit an ingenious
Reflection of Ovid, upon the Luxury of the Age he lived in, by comparing the
honest Simplicity of the old Romans, with the Vanity and Extravagance of the
modern in this particular: Tunc neque marmoreo pendebant vela Theatro,
Nec fuerant liquido pulpita rubra croco.
Illic quas tulerant, memorata Palatia, frondes
Simpliciter positae, Scena sine art fuit.
In gradibus sedit populus de cespite factis,
Qualibet hirsutas fronde tegente comas Ovid. de Art Amandi.
.
No Pillars then of Egypt's costly Stone,
No Purple Sails hung waving in the Sun,
No Flowers about the scented Seats were thrown.
But Sylvan Bowers and shady Palaces,
Brought by themselves, secured them from the Rays.
Thus guarded and refreshed with humble Green,
Pondring they gazed upon the artless Scene:
Their Seats of homely Turf the Crowd would rear,
And cover with green Boughs their more disordered Hair.


Juvenal intimates that this good old Custom remained still uncorrupted in
several Parts of Italy.

-- ipsa dierum
Festorum herboso colitur si quando Theatro
Majestas, tandemque redit ad pulpita notum
Exodium, cum personae pallentis hiatum
In gremio matris formidat rusticus infans.
Aequales habitus illuc, similemque videbis
Orchestram and populum -- Juv. Sat. 3.
.
On Theaters of Turf in homely state,
Old Plays they act, old Feasts they celebrate;
The same rude Song returns upon the Crowd,
And by Tradition is for Wit allowed.
The Mimick yearly gives the same Delights,
And in the Mother's Arms the clownish Infant frights.
Their Habits (undistinguished by Degree)
Are plain, alike; the same Simplicity
Both on the Stage, and in the Pit you see M^. Dry^en.
.
Some Remains of this Theater of Pompey, are still to be seen at Rome, as also
of those other of Marcellus, Statilius Taurus, T^berius, and Titus the second
being almost entire Fabric. Romans cap. 12.
.

The Circo's were places set apart for the celebration of several sorts of
Games, which we will speak of hereafter. They were generally oblong, or almost
in the shape of a Bow Marlian. Topog. R^m. Ant. lib. 4. cap. 10.
, having a Wall quite round Pelydor. Virg. de Rer. invent. lib. 2. cap. 14.
, with Ranges of Seats for the convenience of the Spectators. At the entrance
of the Circus stood the Carceres, or Lists, whence they started; and just by
them, one of the Metae, or Marks; the other standing at the farther end, to
conclude the Race.

There were several of these Circi in Rome, as those of Flaminius, Nero,
Caracalla, and Severus: But the most remarkable, as the very Name imports, was
the Circus Maximus, first built by Tarqu^^^us Priscus Livy and Dionys. Halic.
. The length of it was four Stadia, or Furlongs, the breadth the like number of
Acres; with a Trench of ten foot deep, and as many broad, to receive the Water;
and Seats enough for a Hundred and fifty thousand Men Dionys lib. 3.
. It was extremely beautified and adorned by succeeding Princes, particularly
by Julius Caesar, Augustus, Caligula, Domitian, Trajan, and Heliogabalus; and
enlarged to such a prodigious extent, as to be able to contain in their proper
Seats, Two hundred and sixty thousand Spectators Plin. lib. 36.
.

The Naumachiae, or Places for the Shows of Sea-Engagements, are nowhere
particularly described; but we may suppose them to be very little different
from the Circo's and Amphitheatres, since those sort of Shows for which they
were designed, were often exhibited in the forementioned places Marlian.
Topog. Romans Ant. lib. 4. cap. 13.
.

Odeum was a public Edifice, much after the manner of a Theater Fabric. Romans
cap. 12.
, where the Musicians and Actors privately exercised before their appearance on
the Stage Rosin. lib. 5. cap. 4.
. Plutarch has described one of these Odeum's at Athens, whence to be sure the
Romans took the hint of theirs in the following Words: For the contrivance of
it, on the inside it was full of Seats and Ranges of Pillars; and on the
outside, the Roof or Covering of it, was made from one point at top, with a
great many Bendings, all shelving downward, in imitation of the King of Persia
's Pavillion In Peri^^e.
.

The Stadia were places in the form of Circo's, for the Running of Men and
Horses Fabric. Romans cap. 12.
. A very noble one Suetonius In Domitian.
tells us was built by Domitian.

The Xysti were places built after the fashion of the Portico's, for the
Wrestlers to exercise in Fabric. Romans cap. 12.
.

CIRCI ET QUINQUE LUDICRORUM CIRCENSIUM. Deformatio ex Onuphrio Panvinio.


NAVMACHIAE ID. EST NAVALIS. PUGNAE. Descriptio ex Onuphr. Panvinio.


The Campus Martius, famous on so many accounts, was a large plain Field, lying
near the Tiber, whence we find it sometimes under the Name of Tiberinus. It was
called Martius, because it had been consecrated by the old Romans to the God
Mars.

Besides the pleasant Situation, and other natural Ornaments, the continual
Sports and Exercises performed here, made it one of the most diverting Sights
near the City. For,

Here the young Noblemen practiced all manner of Feats of Activity; learned the
use of all sorts of Arms and Weapons. Here the Races, either with Chariots or
single Horses, were undertaken. Besides this, 'twas nobly adorned with the
Statues of famous Men, and with Arches, Columns, and Portico's, and other
magnificent Structures. Here stood the Villa Publica, or Palace for the
Reception and Entertainment of Ambassadors from foreign States, who were not
allowed to enter the City. Several of the public Comitia were held in this
Field; and for that purpose were the Septa, or Ovilia, built, an Apartment
enclosed with Rails, where the Tribes or Centuries, went in one by one to give
their Votes. Cicero, in one of his Epistles to Atticus, intimates a noble
Design he had to make the Septa of Marble, and to cover them with a high Roof,
with the addition of a stately Portico, or Piazza, all round. But we hear no
more of this Project, and therefore may reasonably suppose he was disappointed
by the Civil Wars which broke out presently after.

CHAP. V. Of the Curiae, Senacula, Basilicae, Fora, and Comitium.
THE Roman Curia (as it signifies a public Aedifice) was of two sorts, Divine
and Civil: In the former, the Priests and religious Orders met for the
Regulation of the Rites and Ceremonies belonging to the Worship of the Gods: In
the other, the Senate used to assemble, to consult about the public Concerns
of the Commonwealth Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. c. 16.
. The Senate could not meet in such a Curia, unless it had been solemnly
consecrated by the Augurs A Gell. lib. 14. c. 7.
, and made of the same nature as a Temple. Sometimes (at least) the Curiae were
no distinct Building, but only a Room or Hall in some public place; as
particularly Livy Lib. 1.
and Pliny Lib. --
speak of a Curia in the Comitium, though that it self were no entire Structure.
The most celebrated Curiae were,

Curia Hostilia, built by Tullus Hostilius, as Livy Lib. 1.
informs us. And,

Curia Pompeii, where the Senate assembled for the effecting the Death of
Julius Caesar Sueton. in Jul. Caes. c ^o.
.

Senaculum is sometimes the same as Curia Marlian. Topog. Ant. Romans lib. 3. c.
27.
: To be sure it could be no other than a Meeting Place for the Senate, the same
as the Grecians called (...). Sext. Pomp. Festus In vece Senaculum.
tells us of three Senacula; two within the City-Walls for ordinary
Consultations; and one without the limits of the City, where the Senate
assembled to give Audience to those Ambassadors of foreign States, whom they
were unwilling to Honor with an admission into the City.

Lampridius In vit. l^^. ^ai.
informs us, that the Emperor Heliogabalus built a Senaculum purposely for the
use of the Women, where, upon high Days, a Council of grave Matrons were to
keep Court.

The Basilicae were very spacious and beautiful Aedifices, designed not only
for the Senate to sit in, but for the Judges too in the decision of all sorts
of Causes, and for the Counselors to receive Clients. The Bankers too had one
part of it allotted for their Residence Rosin. Ant. lib. 9. cap. 7.
. Vossius In vo^e Basilica.
has observed, that these Basilicae were exactly in the shape of our Churches,
oblong almost like a Ship; which was the reason that upon the ruin of many of
them, Christian Churches were several times raised on the old Foundations. And
very often a whole Basilica converted to such a pious use. And hence perhaps
all our great Domo's or Cathedrals, are still called Basilicae.

The Roman Forums were public Buildings, about three times as long as they
were broad. All the compass of the Forum was surrounded with arched Portico's,
only some passages being left for places of entrance. They generally contrived
to have the most stately Aedifices all round them, as Temples, Theaters,
Basilicae, etc. Lips. de Mag. Romans
.

They were of two sorts; Fora Civilia, and Fora Venalia: The first were
designed for the Ornament of the City, and for the use of public Courts of
justice; the others were intended for no other end but the Necessities and
Convenience of the Inhabitants, and were no doubt equivalent to our Markets. I
believe Lipsius, in the description that has been given above, means only the
former. Of these there were Five very considerable in Rome:

Forum Romanum, built by Romulus, and adorned with Portico's on all sides by
Tarquinius Priscus. It was called Forum Romanum, or simply Forum, by way of
eminence, on account of its Antiquity, and of the most frequent use of it in
public Affairs. Martial Ep^g. lib. 2.
and Statius Sylvar lib. 1. car. 1.
for the same reason give it the Name of Forum Latium; Ovid the same Fast. 4.
, and Forum Magnum Fast 3;
and Herodian In vit. M. Antonin.
-- Forum vetus.

Statius the Poet Sylv. lib. 1. car. 1.
has given an accurate description of the Forum, in his Poem upon the Statue
of Domitian on Horseback, set up here by that Emperor.

Forum Julium built by Julius Caesar, with the Spoils taken in the Gallick War.
The very Area, Suetonius In Jul. Caes. cap. 26.
tells us, cost 100000 Sesterces; and Dio Dio. lib --
affirms it to have much exceeded the Forum Romanum.

Forum Augusti, built by Augustus Caesar, and reckoned by Pliny among the
Wonders of the City. The most remarkable Curiosity was the Statues in the two
Portico's, on each side of the main Building. In one, all the Latin Kings,
beginning with Aeneas; in the other, all the Kings of Rome, beginning with
Romulus, and most of the eminent Persons in the Commonwealth, and himself among
the rest; with an Inscription upon the Pedestal of every Statue, expressing the
chief Actions and Exploits of the Person it represented Lips. de Magnitud. Romans
.

This Forum, as Spartian In vit. Hadrian.
informs us, was restored by the Emperor Hadrian.

Forum Nervae, begun by Domitian, as Suetonius In Domit. cap 5.
relates; but finished and named by the Emperor Nerva. In this Forum,
Alexander Severus set up the Statues of all the Emperors that had been
Canonized Spartian in Severo.
, in imitation of the Contrivance of Augustus, mentioned but now. This Forum
was called Transitorium, because it lay very convenient for a passage to the
other three; and Palladium, from the Statue of Minerva, the Tutelar Deity of
Augustus Lips. in Magn. Romans
; upon which account perhaps Fabricius Roma, cap. 7.
attributes the Name of Palladium to the Forum of that Emperor.

There Is scarce any thing remaining of this Forum, except an old decayed Arch,
which the People by a strange Corruption, instead of Nerva's Arch, call Noah's
Ark Marlian. lib. 3. cap. 14.
.

But the most celebrated for the admirable Structure and Contrivance, was the
Forum Trajani, built by the Emperor Trajan, with the foreign Spoils he had
took in the Wars. The Covering of this Aedifice was all Brass, the Portico's
exceedingly beautiful and magnificent, with Pillars of more than ordinary
height, and Chapiters of excessive bigness Idem, lib. 2. cap. 13.
.

Ammianus Marcellinus, in the description of Constantius his triumphal Entrance
into Rome, when he has brought him with no ordinary admiration by the Baths,
the Pantheon, the Capitol, and other noble Structures, as soon as ever he gives
him a sight of this Forum of Trajan, he puts him into an ecstasie, and cannot
forbear making an Harangue upon the matter Ammian. Marcelin. Hist. lib. 16.
. We meet in the same place with a very smart Repartee which Constantius
received at this time from Ormisdas, a Persian Prince. The Emperor, as he
strangely admired every thing belonging to this noble Pile; so he had a
particular Fancy for the Statue of Trajan's Horse, which stood on the top of
the Building, and expressed his Desire of doing as much for his own Beast:
Pray, Sir, (says the Prince) before you talk of getting such a Horse, will you
be pleased to build such a Stable to put him in Ibid.
.

The chief Fora Venalia, or Markets, were, Boarium, for Oxen and Beef. Suarium,
for Swine. Pistorium, for Bread. Cupedinarium, for Dainties. Holitorium, for
Roots, Sallers, and suchlike.


The Comitium was only a part of the Forum Romanum, which served sometimes for
the Celebration of the Comitia, which will be described hereafter.

In this part of the Forum stood the Rostra, being a Suggestum, or sort of
Pulpit adorned with the Beaks of Ships, taken in a Sea Fight from the
Inhabitants of Antium in Italy, as Livy informs us Lib. 8.
. In this the Causes were pleaded, the Orations made, and the Funeral
Panegyricks spoke by Persons at the Death of their Relations; which pious
Action they termed Defuncti pro rostris Laudatio.

Hard by was fixed the Puteal, of which we have several, and very different
accounts from the Critics; but none more probable than the Opinion of the
ingenious Monsieur Dacier Dacier, Not on Horace, Sat. lib. 2. Sat. 6. verse. 35.
which he delivers to this purpose.

The Romans, whenever a Thunderbolt fell upon a place without a Roof, took
care, out of Superstition, to have a sort of Cover built over it, which they
properly call Puteal. This had the Name of Puteal Libonis, and Scribonium
Puteal, because Scribonius Libo, erected it by order of the Senate. The
Praetor's Tribunal standing just by, is often signified in Authors by the same
Expression.

CHAP. VI. Of the Portico's, Arches, Columns, and Trophies.
IN Accounts of the eminent Buildings of the City, the Portico's have ever had
an honorable place. They were Structures of curious Work and extraordinary
Beauty annexed to public Edifices, Sacred or Civil, as well for Ornament as
use. They generally took their Names either from the Temples that they stood
near, as Porticus Concordiae, Quirini, Herculis, etc. or, from the Authors, as
Porticus Pompeia, Octavia, Livia, etc. Or, from the nature and form of the
Building, as Porticus curva, stadiata, porphyretica. Or, from the Shops that
were kept in them, or Margaritaria, and Argentaria: Or, from the remarkable
painting in them, as Porticus Isidis, Europae, etc. Or else from the places to
which they joined, as Porticus Amphitheatri, Porticus Circi, etc. Fabricii
Roma, cap 13.
.

These Portico's were sometimes put to very serious use, serving for the
Assemblies of the Senate on several accounts. Sometimes the jewellers, and such
as dealt in the most precious Wares, took up here their Standing to expose
their Goods to sale. But the general use that they were put to, was the
pleasure of walking or riding in them; in the shade in summer, and in winter in
the dry; like the present Piazza's in Italy. Velleius Paterculus Lib. (...).
4.^.
, when he deplores the extreme corruption of Manners that had crept into Ro^e
upon the happy conclusion of the Carthaginian War, mentions particularly the
vanity of the Noblemen, in endeavoring to outshine one another in the
magnificence of their Portico's, as a great instance of their extravagant
Luxury.

And Juvenal in his Seventh Satyr complains: Balnea Sexcentis, and pluris
Porticus, in qua
Gestatur Dominus quoties pluit: Anne serenum
Expectet, spargatve, luto jumenta recenti?
Hic potius, namque hic mund.e nitet ungula mulae.
On sumptuous Baths the Rich their Wealth bestow,
Or some expensive, airy Portico;
Where safe from Showers they may be born in State;
And, free from Tempests, for fair Weather wait:
Or rather not expect the clearing Sun,
Through thick and thin their Equipage must run:
Or staying, it is not for their Servant's sake,
But that their Mules no prejudice may take.
Mr. Charles Dryden.

Arches were public Buildings, designed for the reward and encouragement of
noble Enterprises, erected generally to the Honor of such eminent Persons as
had either won a Victory of extraordinary consequence abroad, or had rescued
the Commonwealth at home from any considerable danger. At first they were plain
and rude Structures, by no means remarkable for Beauty or State. But in later
times no Expenses were thought too great for the rendering them in the highest
manner splendid and magnificent: No thing being more usual than to have the
greatest Actions of the Heroes they stood to Honor curiously expressed, or the
whole Procession of the Triumph cut out on the sides. The Arches built by
Romulus were only of Brick; that of Camillus of plain square Stone; but then
those of Caesar, Dr^s^^, Titus, Trajan, Gordian, etc. were all entirely Marble
Fabricii Roma. cap. 14.
.

As to their Figure, they were at first semicircular, whence probably they took
their Names. Afterward they were built apiece, with a spacious arched
Gate in the middle, and little ones on each side. Upon the vaulted part of the
middle Gate, hung little winged Images, representing Victory, with Crowns in
their Hands, which when they were let down, they put upon the Conqueror's Head
as he passed under in Triumph Fabricii Roma, cap. 14.
.

The Columns or Pillars were none of the meanest Beauties of the City. They
were at last converted to the same design as the Arches, for the honorable
memorial of some noble Victory or Exploit, after they had been a long time in
use for the chief Ornaments of the Sepulchers of great Men; as may be gathered
from Homer, Iliad 16. where Juno, when she is foretelling the death of Sarpedon.
And speaking at last of carrying him into his own Country to be buried, has
these Words: (...),
(...).
There shall his Brothers and sad Friends receive
The breathless Corpse, and bear it to the Grave.
A Pillar shall be reared, a Tomb be laid,
The noblest Honor that rewards the dead.


The Pillars of the Emperors Trajan and Antoninus, have been extremely admired
for their Beauty and curious Work; and therefore deserve a particular
description.

The former was set up in the middle of Trajan's Forum, being composed of solid
Stone, but so curiously cemented, as to seem one entire natural Stone. The
height was 144 Foot according to Eutropius Hist. lib. 8.
; though Marlian Lib. 3. cap. 13.
seems to make them but 128: Yet they are easily reconciled, if we suppose one
of them to have begun the Measure from the Pillar it self, and the other from
the Basis. It is ascended on the inside by 185 winding Stairs, and has Forty
little Windows for the admission of the Light. The whole Pillar is incrusted
with Marble; in which are expressed all the noble Actions of the Emperor, and
particularly the Dacian War. One may see all over the several Figures of Forts,
Bulwarks, Bridges, Ships, etc. and all manner of Arms, as Shields, Helmets,
Targets, Swords, Spears, Daggers, Belts, etc. together with the several Offices
and Employments of the Soldiers. Some digging Trenches, some measuring out a
place for the Tents, and others making a Triumphal Procession Fabricius, cap. 7.
. But the noblest Ornament of this Pillar was the Statue of Trajan on the top,
of a Gigantick bigness; being no less than Twenty Foot high. He was represented
in a Coat of Armor proper to the General, holding in his Left Hand a Scepter,
in his Right a hollow Globe of Gold, in which his own Ashes were reposited
after his Death Casalius, pars 1. cap. 11.
.

The Column of Antoninus was raised in imitation of this, which it exceeded
only in one respect, that 'twas 176 Foot high Marlian, lib. 6. cap. 13.
: For the Work was much inferior to the former, as being undertaken in the
declining Age of the Empire. The ascent on the inside was by 106 Stairs, and
the Windows in the sides 56. The Sculpture and other Ornaments were of the same
Nature as those of the first: And on the top stood a Colossus of the Emperor
naked, as appears from some of his Coins Ibid.
.

Both these Columns are still standing at Rome; the former most entire. But
Pope Sixtus the First, instead of the Two Statues of the Emperors, set up St.
Peter's on the Column of Trajan, and St. Paul's on that of Antoninus Casal.
par. 1. cap. 11.
.

Among the Columns we must not pass by the Miliarium au^^um, a gilded Pillar in
the Forum, on which all the Highways of Italy met, and were concluded Marlian.
lib. 3. cap. 18.
. From this they counted their Miles, at the end of every Mile setting up a
Stone; whence came the Phrase of Primus ab Vrbe lapis, and the the like.

Nor the Columna Bellica, thus described by Ovid.

Prospicit a tergo summum brevis area circum,
Est ibi non parvae parva columna notae:
Hine solet hasta manu belli praenuncia mitti
In regem and gentem, cum placet arma capi Ovid, Fast. 6.
.
Behind the Circus on the level Ground
Stands a small Pillar, for its use renowned:
Hence it is our Herald throws the fatal Spear,
Denotes the Quarrel, and begins the War.
The design of the Trophies is too well known to need any explication: The
shape of them cannot be better understood than by the following Description of
the Poet.

Ingentem quercum decisis undique ramis
Constituit tumulo: fulgentiaque induit arma,
Mezenti ducis exuvias; tibi magne trophaeum
Bellipotens: aptat rorantes sanguine cristas,
Telaque trunca viri, and bis sex thoraca petitum
Perfossumque locis: clypeumque ex aere sinistrae
Subligat, atque ensem collo suspendit eburnum Virg Aen^id. 11.
.
And next he lopped an Oak's great Branches round,
The Trunk he fastened in a rising Gronnd:
And here he fixed the shining Armor on,
The mighty Spoil from proud Mezentius won.
Above the Crest was placed, that dropped with Blood,
A grateful Trophy to the warlike God;
His shattered Spears stuck round: The Corslet too,
Pierced in Twelve places hung deformed below.
While the Left Side his massy Target bears,
The Neck the glittering Blade he brandished in the Wars.
Of those Trophies which Marius raised after the Cimbrie War, still remaining
at Rome, we have this account in Frabricius: They are Two Trunks of Marble hung
round with Spoils: One of them is covered with a scaly Corslet, with Shields
and other Military Ornaments: Just before it is set a young Man in the posture
of a Captive with his Hands tied behind him, and all round are winged Images of
Victory. The other is set out with the common Military Garb, having a Shield of
an unequal round, and Two Helmets, one open and adorned with Crests, the other
close without Crests. On the same Trophy is the Shape of a Soldiers Coat, with
several other designs, which by reason of the decay of the Marble, are very
difficult to be discovered Fabricius, cap. 14.
.

CHAP. VII. Of the Bagnio's, Aquaeducts, Cloacae, and Public Ways.
THERE cannot be a greater instance of the Magnificence, or rather Luxury of
the Romans, than their noble Bagnio's. Ammianus Marcellinus observes Ammian
M^^^^ lib 16.
, that they were built in modum Provinciarum, as large as Provinces: But the
great Valesius H^^a ad Locum.
judges the Word Provinciarum to be a Corruption of Piscinarum. And though this
Emendation does in some measure extenuate one part of Vanity which has been so
often alleged against them, from the Authority of that Passage of the
Historian; yet the prodigious Accounts that we have of their Ornaments and
Furniture, will bring them perhaps under a Censure no less favorable than the
former. Seneca, speaking of the Luxury of his Countrymen in this respect,
complains, That they were arrived to such a pitch of niceness and delicacy, as
to scorn to set their Feet on any thing but precious Stones Fpist. 86.
. And Pliny wishes good old Fabricius were but alive to see the degeneracy of
his Posterity, when the very Women must have their Seats in the Baths of solid
Silver Lib. 33. cap. 12.
. But a description from a Poet, may perhaps be more diverting; and this
Statius has obliged us with in his Poem upon the Baths of Claudius Etruscus,
Steward to the Emperor Claudius.

Nilibi plebeium: nusquam Temesaea videbis
Era, sed Argento felix propellitur unda,
Argentoque cadit, labrisque nitentibus instat
Dell^ias mirata suas, and abire recusat.
Nothing there is vulgar; no Temesean Brass
In all the glittering Structure claims a place.
From Silver Pipes the happy Waters flow,
In Silver Cisterns are received below.
See where with noble Pride the doubtful Stream
Stands fixed in wonder on the shining Brim!
Surveys its Riches, and admires its State;
Loath to be ravished from the glorious Seat.
The most remarkable Bagnio's were those of the Emperors Dioclesian and
Antoninus Caracalla; great part of which are standing at this time, and with
the vast high Arches, the beautiful and stately Pillars, the extraordinary
Plenty of foreign Marble, the curious vaulting of the Roofs, the prodigious
number of spacious Apartments, and a Thousand other Ornaments and Conveniences,
are as pleasing a Sight to a Traveller as any other Antiquities in Rome.

The Aquaeducts were, without question, some of the noblest Designs of the old
Romans. Sextus Julius Frontinus a Roman Author, and a Person of Consular
Dignity, who has compiled a whole Treatise on this Subject, affirms them to be
the clearest Token of the Grandeur of the Empire. The first invention of them
is attributed to Appius Claudius, A. V. C. 441, who brought Water into the City
by a Chanel of Eleven Miles in length. But this was very inconsiderable to
those that were afterward carried on by the Emperors and other Persons;
several of which were cut through the Mountains, and all other Impediments for
above Forty Miles together; and of such an height, that a Man on Horseback, as
Procopius informs us, might ride through them without the least difficulty
Pr^copius, de bell. Goth. lib. 1.
. But this is meant only of the constant course of the Chanel; for the Vaults
and Arches, were in some places 109 Foot high Sext. Jul. Frontin.
. Procopius Debell. Goth. lib. 1.
makes the Aquaeducts but Fourteen: P. Victor Descript. Vrb. Region.
has enlarged the number to Twenty: In the Names of them the Waters only were
mentioned; as Aqua Claudia, Aqua Appia, etc.

The noble Poet Rutilius thus touches on the Aquaeducts, in his ingenious
Itinerary.

Quid loquar aerio pendentes fornice rivos
Qua vix imbriferas tolleret Iris aquas?
Nos potius dicas crevisse in sydera montes,
Tale Giganteum Graecia laudat opus Rutil. Itinerar. lib. 1.
.
What, should I sing how lofty Waters flow
From airy Vault, and leave the Rain below,
While conquered Iris yields with her unequal Bow?
Bold Typhon here had spared his pains as well,
And scaled Jove's Walls from any single Hill.
But that which Pliny calls opus omnium maximum, were the Cloacae, or common
Gutters for the conveyance of Dirt and Filth. And because no Authority can be
better than his, we may venture to borrow the whole account of them from the
same place. Cloacae opus omnium maximum, etc.

The Cloacae, the greatest of all the Works, he contrived by undermining and
cutting through the Seven Hills upon which Rome is seated, making the City hang,
as it were, between Heaven and Earth, and capable of being sailed under, M.
Agrippa in his Aedileship, made no less than Seven Streams meet together
underground in one main Channel, with such a rapid Current, as to carry all
before them that they met with in their passage. Sometimes, when they are
violently swelled with immoderate Rains, they beat with excessive Fury against
the Paving at the bottom, and on the sides. Sometimes in a Flood the Tiber
Waters oppose them in their Course; and then the Two Streams encounter with all
the Fury imaginable; and yet the Works preserve their old strength, without any
sensible damage. Sometimes huge pieces of Stone and Timber, or such like
Materials, are carried down the Chanel, and yet the Fabric receives no
Detriment. Sometimes the Ruins of whole Buildings destroyed by Fire or other
Casualties press heavily upon the Frame. Sometimes terrible Earthquakes shake
the very Foundations, and yet they still continue impregnable almost 800 Years
since they were first laid by Tarquinius P^m. lib. 36. cap. 15.
.

Very little inferior to the Works already mentioned, were the Public Ways,
built with extraordinary charge, to a great distance from the City on all
sides. They were generally paved with Flint; though sometimes, and especially
without the City, with Pebbles and Gravel. The most noble in all respects, was
the Via Appia, taking its Name from the Author Appius, the same that invented
the Cloacae. This was carried to such a vast length, that Procopius De bell.
Goth. lib. 1.
reckons it a very good Five Days Journey to reach the end: And Lipsius De
Magn. Romans
computes it at 350 Miles. An account of as much of this way as lies between
Rome and Naples, the reverend Dr. Burnet, has obliged us with in his Letters
Letter 4th.
: He tells us, it is Twelve Foot broad; all made of huge Stones, most of them
Blue; and they are generally a Foot and a half large of all sides. And
presently after, admiring the extraordinary strength of the Work, he says,
That though it has lasted above 1800 Years, yet in most places it is for several
Miles together as entire as when it was first made. And as to the Via Flaminia,
the next Causey of note, the same Author observes, That though it be not indeed
so entire as the former, yet there is enough left to raise a just Idea of the
Roman Greatness.

I must desire leave to conclude this Subject with the ingenious Epigram of
Janus Vitalis, an Italian Poet.

Quid Romam in media quaeris novus advena Roma,
Et Romae in Roma nil reperis media?
Aspice murorum moles, praeruptaque saxa,
Obrutaque horrenti vasta Theatra situ:
Haec sunt Roma: Viden' velut ipsa cadavera tantae
Vrbis adhuc spirent imperiosa minas?
Vicit ut haec mundum, nisa est se vincere; vicit,
A se non victum ne quid in orb foret.
Hunc victa in Roma victrix Roma illa sepulta est,
Atque eadem victrix victaque Roma fuit.
Albula Romani restat nunc nominis index,
Qui quoque nunc rapidis fertur in aequor aquis.
Disee hinc quid possit fortuna; immota labascunt,
Et quae perpetuo sunt agitata manent.
Within Rome's Walls, vain Stranger, art thou come
To seek for Rome, and find'st no Rome in Rome?
See here the craggy Walls, the Towers defaced,
And Piles that frighten more than once they pleased:
See the vast Theaters, a shapeless load,
And Sights more Tragic than they ever showed:
This, this is Rome: Her haughty Carcass spread,
Still awes in ruin, and commands when dead.
The Subject World first took from her their Fate;
And when she only stood unconquered yet,
Her self she last subdued to make the Work complete.
Ibid,
But ah! so dear the fatal Triumph cost,
That conquering Rome is the conquered lost.
Yet rolling Tiber still maintains his Stream,
Swelled with the Glories of the Roman Name.
Strange Power of Fate! unshaken Moles must wast
While things that ever move, for ever last.
PART II.
BOOK II. Of the Religion of the Romans.
CHAP. I. Of the Religion and Morality of the Romans in general.
THAT Religion is absolutely necessary for the establishing of Civil
Government, is a truth so far from being denied by any sort of Persons, that we
meet with too many who are unwilling to allow any other design in Sacred
Institutions. As to the Romans, it has been universally agreed, That Virtue
and Fortune were engaged in a sort of noble Contention for the Advancement of
the Grandeur and Happiness of that People. And a very great Judge has
concluded the latter to be only a consequence of the other. For Religion, says
he Machiavel's Discourse on Livy, lib. 1, cap. 11.
, produced good Laws; good Laws good Fortune; and good Fortune a good End in
whatever they undertook. And perhaps he has not strained the Panegyric too
high, when he tells us, That for several Ages together, never was the Fear of
God more eminently conspicuous than in that Republic Ibid.
. 'Twas this consideration which made the great St. Austin observe De Civitate
Dei, lib. 4. cap. 15.
, That God would not give Heaven to the Romans because they were Heathens; but
he gave them the Empire of the World because they were Virtuous. And indeed in
their more general Virtues their Practice inclined rather to the excess than
the defect: Thus were they d^vout to Superstition, valiant to a contempt of
Life, and an incesiderate courting of danger: Frugal and Temperate in the f^^^
Ages, to a voluntary abstinence from agreeable Pleasures a^^ Convenience:
Constant several times, to the occasion of the own ruin, and rather rigorous
than just. A tedious account (...) the Decii, Regulus, Fabricius, Curious
Scaevola, etc. would (...) needless even to a Schoolboy, who is seldom
unfurnished w^^^ a stock of Relations.

But we must by no means omit a most noble saying of C^^^cero to this purpose
in his Oration about the Answer of the Aruspices: Quam volumus licet, Patres
Conscripti, Nos amemus (...) men nec numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec
calliditate Pa^^ nec artibus Graecos; nec denique hoc ipso hujus Gentis and
Terrae ^^mestico nativoque sensu Italos ipsos and Latinos; sed Pietate ac
Re^gione, atque hac una sapientia quod Deorum Immortalium Numi^^ omnia regi
gubernarique perspeximus, omnes Gentes Nationes^^ superavimus.

But 'twill naturally be objected, That whatever H^^rangues we make upon the
Justice, Temperance, and other ^^^lebrated Virtues of the old Romans, they at
last degenerat^^^ into the most luxurious and extravagant People in the World.
E^very Page of their own Satyrist, is a very good Argument s^^ this Opinion;
besides the numerous Complaints of their Historians and other Writers. Now though
Lipsius has undertaken (...) bring them off clear from all such Imputations;
yet, I think, (...) must be forced to allow, that they did indeed debase the
nob^^ and generous Spirit of their Ancestors; and this Corruption w^^ without
doubt, the only cause of the declension and fir^^ ruin of the Empire. But as we
are not to give over t^^ cause of Virtue on account of the debauchery of later
times, (...) we have little reason to exalt the eminent Qualities of the oli^^
Romans to so high a pitch as some imagine. There Is no nece^sity of making a
Hero of every Consul, or fansying every o^^ who was eminently serviceable to
the Republic to have been (...) Person of consummated Virtue. So that, when we
meet i^ Roman Authors such extravagant Encomiums of their Ancestor^ we may
conclude that what Horace has observed in reference t^ Poetry, will hold
altogether as well in this Case: The generality of People being so strangely
transported with the love an^ admiration of Antiquity, that nothing was more
usual than (...) meet with such a Person as he describes.

Qui redit ad Fastos, and virtutem aestimat annis,
Miraturque nihil nisi quod Libitina sacravit.
That when he would try a Man's pretense to Fame,
Runs to his Chronicle to find his Name:
Thinks Virtue better for its Age, like Wine;
And only likes what death has made Divine.
For we may often observe, that their very Panegyricks upon the honest People
of the first Ages of the Commonwealth, represent them rather as a sort of rude
unpolished Mortals, than as Persons eminent for any noble Endowments.

So Juvenal, Sat. 14.

-- Saturabat glebula talis
Patrem ipsum turbamque casae; qua foeta jacebat
Vxor, and infantes ludebant quatuor, unus
Vernula, tres domini: Sed magnis fratribus horum
A scrobe vel sulco redeuntibus altera caena
Amplior, and grandes fumabant pultibus ollae.
-- This little Spot of Earth, well tilled,
A numerous Family with Plenty filled.
The good old Man and thrifty Housewife spent
Their Days in Peace, and fatten'd with content;
Enjoyed the Dregs of Life, and lived to see
A long, descending, healthful Progeny.
The Men were falshion'd in a larger Mould;
The Women fit for labor, Big and Bold.
Gygantick Hinds, as soon as Work was done,
To their huge Pots of boiling Pulse would run,
Fell to with eager joy on homely Food,
And their large Veins beat strong with wholesome Blood.
Mr. John Dryden Jun. But the account which Persius gives us of Titus Quintius,
the old Country Dictator, has something more of ridiculous in it.

Vnde Remus, sulcoque terens Dentalia Quinti,
Quem trepida ante boves Dictatorem induit uxor;
Et tua aratra domum Li^^^r tulit Pers. Sat. 1.
--
Where Romulus was bred, and Quintius born,
Whose shining Plow-share was in Furrows worn,
Met by his trembling Wife returning home,
And rustically toy'd as Chief of Rome.
She wiped the Sweat from the Dictator's Brow;
And over his back his Robe did rudely throw;
The Lictors bore in State their Lord's Triumphant Plough.
Mr. Dryden, We must therefore allow every Age its proper Character and
Commendation; and conclude with the ingenious Mr. St. Euremont, That the
excellent Citizens lived among the ancient Romans, and the most accomplished
Generals among the latter Reflect. upon the Genius of the Romans Peop. cap. 4.
.

CHAP. II. Of the Luperci, Lupercalia, etc. Of the Potitii and Pinarii; and of
the Arval Brothers.
THE Places of Worship having been already described, the chief Subjects that
still remain relating to Religion, are the Priests, the Sacrifices, and the
Festivals: For it would be very needless and impertineut to enter into a
Disquisition about the Deities, a matter that, having its very Foundation in
Fiction, is involved in so many endless Stories, and yet has employed several
Pens to explain it.

Luperci.] The most ancient Order of the Priests were the Luperci, sacred to
Pan the God of the Country, and particularly of Shepherds. They had their Name
from the Deity they attended on, called in Greek (...); probably from (...)* a
Wolf, in Latin Lupus; because the chief Employment of Pan, was the driving away
such Beasts from the Sheep that he protected. Lupercalia.
The Lupercalia, as Plutarch observes, appears to have been a Feast of
Purification, being solemnized on the Dies Nefasti, or Non-Court-days of the
Month February, which derives its Name from Febru^ to purify: And the very Day
of the Celebration was anciently called Februaca Plutarch in Romal.
.

The Ceremony was very singular and strange.

In the first place, there was a Sacrifice killed of Goats and a Dog: Then Two
Children, Noblemens Sons* being brought thither, some of the Luperci stained
their Foreheads with the bloody Knife, while others wiped it off with Lo^ks of
Wool dipped in Milk: The Boys must always laugh after their Foreheads have
been wiped: This done, having cut the Goats Skins into Thongs, they run about
the Streets all naked but their middle, and lash all that they meet in their
Procession. The young Women never take any care to avoid the Strokes, but
rather offer themselves of their own accord, fansying them to be great Helpers
of Conception and Delivery Ibid.
. They run naked, because Pan is always painted so. They sacrificed a Goat,
because the same Deity was supposed to have Goat's Feet; which gave occasion to
his common Epithet of Capripes. As for the Dog that we meet with in the
Sacrifice, 'twas added as a necessary Companion of a Shepherd, and because of
the natural Antipathy between them and Wolves.

Some have fansied with Plutarch, that these Lupercalia were instituted in
Honor of the Wolf that preserved Romulus and Remus. Others carry their
Original much higher, and tell us, that they were brought into Italy by
Evander, before the time of Aeneas.

There were Two Companies of the Luperci, the Fabiani and Quinctiliani; one for
Romulus, the other for Remus: They took their Names from Fabius and
Quinctilius, two of their Masters of Chief Priests Sext. Pem. Festus and Ovid.
East.
. Dion Cassius tells us, that a third sort of Priests, designed for the
Celebration of the Lupercalia, were instituted by the Senate to the Honor of
Julius Caesar Lib. 44.
.

Suetonius In August. cap. 31.
reckons the Lupercalia among the ancient Rites and Ceremonies restored by
Augustus: And Onuph. Panvinius assures us they continued in Rome 'till the time
of the Emperor Anastasius.

2. Potitii and Pinarii.] The Potitii and Pinarii were of equal Antiquity with
the former. They owe their Institution to the same Author, upon the following
account.

After the killing of Cacus, a Giant that had stole some of Hercules his Cattle
away, the Booty that he brought through Italy from Spain; the Shepherds and
ignorant People of the Country, gathering in great Flocks about the Stranger,
at last brought him before Evander. The King, after Examination, finding him to
be in all respects the same Person that his Mother, the Prophetess Carmenta,
had told him should come into Italy, and be afterward a God, immediately
erected an Altar to his Honor, and offered for a Sacrifice a young Bullock
that had never bore the Yoke; ordaining, that the same Ceremony should be
repeated in a solemn manner every Year. The performance of these Rites he
committed to the care of the Potitii and Pinarii, two of the noblest Families,
and of best repute in those parts. There goes a Story, that the Pinarii
happening to come too late to the Sacrifice, so as to lose their share in the
Entrails, they were, by way of punishment, debarred from ever tasting them for
the future: And hence some derive their Name from (...), hunger. But this I
take to be but a trifling Fancy; for we may as well derive Potitii from Potiri,
because they enjoyed the Entrails, as Pinarii from (...), because they wanted
them.

We meet with something very remarkable of the Potitii in Livy Lib. G.
, and Valerius Maximus Lib. 1. cap. 1.
.

That when, upon application made to Appius Claudius the Censor, they got leave
to have their Hereditary Ministry discharged by Servants, in the Compass of one
Year the whole Family was entirely extinct, though no less than Thirty of them
were lusty young Men. And Appius Claudius lost his Eyes as a Judgment for his
part in the Offense.

Acca Laurentia, Romulus his Nurse, had a custom once a Year to make a solemn
Sacrifice for a Blessing upon the Fields: Her Twelve Sons assisting her always
in the Solemnity. At last she had the ill Fortune to lose one of her Sons; when
Romulus, to show his Gratitude and Respect, offered himself to fill up the
number in his Room, and gave the Company the Name of Fratres Arvales. This
Order was in great repute at Rome; they held the Dignity always for their
Lives, and never lost it upon account of imprisonment, banishment or any other
Accident Plin. lib. 17. cap. 2.
. They wore on their Heads, at the time of the Solemnity, Crowns made of Ears
of Corn, upon a Tradition that Laurentia at first presented Romulus with such
an one Pompon. La^u^ de Sa^^delus
. Some will have it, that it was their Business to take care of the Boundaries,
and the divisions of Lands, and to decide all Controversies that might happen
about them. Others make a different Order, instituted for that purpose, and
called Sodales Arvales, on the same account as the Fratres Arvales.

CHAP. III. Of the Augurs, Auguries, etc.
THE invention of Soothsaying is generally attributed to the Chaldeans; from
them the Art passed to the Grecians; the Grecians delivered it to the Tuscans,
and they to the Latins and the Romans. The Name of the Augurs is derived by
some, ab avium gestu; by others, ab avium garritu: Either from the Motion and
Actions, or from the Chirping and Chattering of Birds. Romulus was himself an
extraordinary Proficient in this Art Plutarch in Romans
, and therefore as he divided his City into Three Tribes, so he constituted
Three Augurs, One for every Tribe. There was a fourth added some time after,
probably by Servius Tullius, who increased the Tribes to that number. These
Four being all chosen out of the Patricii or Nobility; in the Year of the City
454 the Tribunes of the People, with much difficulty procured an Order, that
Five Persons, to be elected out of the Commons, should be added to the College
Livy, lib. 10.
. Afterward Sylla the Dictator, A. V. C. 671. made the number up Fifteen
Florus Epitom. Live. lib. 89.
. The eldest of these had the command of the rest, and was honored with the
Title of Magister Collegii Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 19.
.

Their business was to interpret Dreams, Oracles, Prodigies, etc. And to tell
whether any Action should be fortunate or prejudicial to any particular
Persons, or to the whole Commonwealth. Upon this account they very often
occasioned the displacing of Magistrates, the deferring of Public Assemblies,
etc. when ever the Omens proved unlucky.

There are Five sorts of Auguries mentioned in Authors.

1. From the Appearances in Heaven, as Thunder, Lightning, Comets, and other
Meteors. As suppose of Thunder, Whether it came from the Right or the Left,
(the Left in this and all other Observations being reputed Fortunate, the Right
the contrary:) Whether the number of Strokes were even or odd, etc. Only the
Master of the College could take this sort of Augury Alex ab Alex. lib. 5. cap.
19.
.

2. From Birds; whence they had the Name of Auspices, of avis and conspicio.
Some Birds furnished them with Observations from their chattering or singing,
others from their flying. The former they called Oscines, the latter Praepetes.
Of the first sort were Crows, Pies, Owls, etc. Of the other, Eagles, Vultures,
Buzzards, and the like.

For the taking of both these sort of Auguries, the Observer stood upon a Tower
with his Head covered in a Gown peculiar to his Office, called ^^^na, and
turning his Face toward the East, marked out the Heavens into Four Templa, or
Quarters, with his Lituus, a short straight Rod, only a little turning in at
one end: This done, he staid waiting for the Omen; which never signified any
thing, unless confirmed by another of the same sort.

3. From Chickens kept in a Coop or Pen for this purpose. The manner of
divining from them was as follows: Betimes in the Morning the Augur that was to
make the Observation, called from hence Pullarius, (though perhaps the Keeper of
the Chickens had rather that Name,) in the first place commanding a general
Silence, ordered the Pen to be opened, and threw down a handful of Crumbs or
Corn. If the Chickens did not immediately run fluttering to the Meat; if they
scattered it with their Wings; if they went by without taking notice of it, or
if they flew away, the Omen was reckoned unfortunate, and to portend nothing
but danger or mischance: But if they leaped presently out of the Pen and fell
to so greedily as to let some of their Meat drop out of their Mouths upon the
Pavement, there was all the assurance in the World of Happiness and Success
Idem, lib. 1. cap ^9.
. This Augury was called Tripudium, quasi Terri-pavium, from striking the
Earth: The old Word pavire signifying as much as Ferire. We meet with Tripudium
Sollistimum, and Tripudium Sonivium in Festus, both derived from the Crumbs
falling to the Ground.

4. From Beasts. These, as Rofinus reckons them up, were Wolves, Foxes, Goats,
Heifers, Asses, Rams, Hares, Weesels, and Mice. The general Observations about
them were, Whether they appeared in a strange place, or crossed the way; or,
whether they run to the Right or the Left, etc.

5. The last sort of Divination was from what they called Dirce, or unusual
Accidents to any Person or Place: As Sneezing, Stumbling, seeing Apparitions,
hearing strange Voices, the falling of Salt upon the Table, the spilling of
Wine upon ones Clothes, the meeting a Wolf, a Fox, a Hare, a Bitch with Puppy,
etc.

We may observe, that though any Augur might take an Observation, yet the judging
of the Omen was left to the decision of the whole College Alex. ab Alex. lib.
1. cap. 29.
.

Cicero has sufficiently exposed these Auguries, especially that about the
Chickens, in his second Book of Divination.

CHAP. IV. Of the Haruspices and Pontifices.
THE Haruspices had this Name ab aris aspiciendis, from looking upon the
Altars; as ab extis inspiciendis, they were called Extispices: They owe their
Original to Romulus, who borrowed the Institution from the Tuscans. The Tuscans
received it, as the general Tradition goes, from a Boy that they plough'd up
casually out of the Ground, who obliged them with a discovery of all the
Mysteries belonging to this Art Cicero de Divinat. lib. 2.
. At first only the Natives of Tuscany exercised this Office at Rome; and
therefore the Senate made an Order, That Twelve of the Sons of the principal
Noblity should be sent into that Country to be instructed in the Rites and
Ceremonies of their Religion, of which this Secret was a chief part Idem, de
Divinat. lib. 1.
. The business of the Haruspices was to look upon the Beasts offered in
Sacrifice, and by them to divine the success of any Enterprise. They took their
Observations from Four Appearances.

1. From the Beasts before they were cut up. 2. From the Entrails of those
Beasts after they were cut up. 3. From the Flame that used to rise when they
were burning. 4. From the Flower or Bran, from the Frankincense, Wine and Water
that they used in the Sacrifice.
In the Beasts, before they were cut up, they took notice, Whether they were
forced to be dragged to the Altar; Whether they got loose out of the Leader's
Hands; Whether they escaped the the stroke, or bounded up, and roared very loud
when they received it; Whether they died with a great deal of difficulty; all
which, with several other Omens, were counted unfortunate: Or whether, on the
other side, they followed the Leader without Compulsion; received the Blow
without struggling and resistance; Whether they died easily, and sent out a
great quantity of Blood, which gave the like assurance of a prosperous event.

In the Beast, when cut up, they observed the color of the parts, and whether
any were wanting. A double Liver was counted highly unfortunate: A little, or a
lean Heart was always unlucky: If the Heart was wholly missing, nothing could
be thought more fatal and dreadful; as it happened in Two Oxen together,
offered by Julius Caesar a little before his Murder; if the Entrails fell out
of the Priests Hands; if they were daubed more than ordinary with Blood; if
they were of a pale livid color, they portended sudden danger and ruin.

As to the Flame of the Sacrifice, it furnished them with a good Omen if it
gathered up violently, and presently consumed the Sacrifice: If it was clear,
pure, and transparent, without any mixture of Smoke, and not discolored with
red, pale, or black; if it was quiet and calm, not sparkling or crackling, but
run up directly in the shape of a Pyramid. On the contrary it always portended
Misfortunes, if at first it required much pains to light it; if it did not burn
upright, but rolled into Circles, and left void spaces between them; if it did
not presently catch hold on the whole Sacrifice, but crept up by degrees, from
one part to another; if it happened to be spread about by the Wind, or to be
put out by sudden Rain, or to leave any part unconsum'd.

In the Meal Frankincense, Wine and Water, they were to observe, whether they
had their due quantity, their proper taste, color, and smell, etc.

There were several lesser Signs which supplied them with Conjectures too
insignificant to be here mentioned.

Most of these ill Omens are hinted at by Virgil. Georg. 3. v. 486.

Saepe in honor Deum medio stans ^osiia ad aram,
Lanea dum nivea circumdatur insula vitta,
Inter cunctantes cecidit moribunda ministros.
Aut si quam ferro mactaverat ante Sacerdos:
Inde neque impositis ardent altaria fibris,
Nec responsa potest consultus reddere vates:
Ac vix suppositi tinguntur Sanguine cultri,
Summaque jejuna sanie infuscatur arena.
The Victim Ox that was for Altars pressed,
Trimmed with white Ribbons, and with Garlands dressed,
Sunk of himself without the Gods command,
Preventing the slow Sacrificer's Hand:
Or, by the Holy Butcher if he fell,
The inspected Entrails could no Fate foretell:
Nor laid on Altars, did pure Flames arise,
But clouds of smouldring Smoke forbad the Sacrifice.
Scarcely the Knife was redden'd with his Gore,
Or the black Poison stained the sandy Floor.
Mr. Dryden. There are but Two Accounts of the Derivation of the Name of the
Pontifices, and both very uncertain; either from Pons and facere; because they
first built the Sublician Bridge in Rome, and had the care of its repair; or
from Posse and facere; where facere must be interpreted to signify the same as
Offerre and Sacrificare. The first of these is the most received Opinion; and
yet Plutarch himself has called it absurd In Numa.
. At the first Institution of them by Numa, the number was confined to Four,
who were constantly chose out of the Nobility, 'till the Year of the City 454,
when Five more were ordered to be added out of the Commons, at the same times
as the Augurs received the like Addition. And as the Augurs had a College, so
the Pontifices too were settled in such a Body. And as Sylla afterward added
Seven Augurs, so he added as many Pontifices to the College: The first Eight
bearing the Name of Pontifices Majores, the other of Minores.

The Office of the Pontifices, was to give Judgment in all Causes relating to
Religion; to enquire into the Lives and Manners of the Inferior Priests, and
to punish them if they saw occasion; to prescribe Rules for Public Worship; to
regulate the Feasts, Sacrifices, and all other Sacred Institutions. Tully, in
his Oration to them for his House, tells them, That the Honor and safety of
the Commonwealth, the Liberty of the People, the Houses and Fortunes of the
Citizens, and the very Gods themselves were all entrusted to their care, and
depended wholly on their Wisdom and Management.

The Master of Superintendent of the Pontifices was one of the most honorable
Officers in the Commonwealth. Num^, when he instituted the Order, invested
himself first with this Dignity, as Plutarch informs us; though Livy attributes
it to another Person of the same Name. Festus his definition of this great
Priest is, Judex atque Arbiter rerum humanarum Divinarumque The Judge and
Arbitrator of Divine and Humane Affairs. Upon this account all the Emperors,
after the Example of Julius Caesar and Augustus, either actually took upon them
the Office, or at least used the Name. And even the Christian Emperors for
some time, retained this in the ordinary enumeration of their Titles; 'till the
time of Gratian, who (as we learn from Zozimus Histor. lib. 4.
absolutely refused it.

Polydore Virgil De rerum Invent. lib. 14. cap. 14.
does not question but this was an infallible Omen of the Authority which the
Bishop of Rome enjoys to this Day, under the same Name of Pontifex Maximus.

CHAP. V. Of the Flamines, Rex Sacrorum, Salii, and Feciales.
THE Name of the Flamines is not much clearer than the former. Plutarch makes
it a corruption of Pilamines from Pil^us, a sort of Cap proper to the Order.
V^rro, Fesius and Servius will have it a contraction of Filamines, from Filum;
and tell us, that finding their Caps too heavy and troublesome, they took up a
lighter sort of wear, only binding a parcel of Thread about their Heads. Others
derive the Word from Flamma, or Flamm^um, a sort of Turban, which they make
them to have worn; though this generally signifies a Woman's Veil. R^sinus
declares for the second of these Opinions. Polydore Virgil has given his
Judgment in favor of the third De (...) C^^. 14.
.

Numa at first discharged several Offices of Religion himself, and designed
that all his Successors should do the like: But because he thought the greatest
part of them would partake more of Romulus his Genius than his own; and being
engaged in Warlike Enterprises, might incapacitate themselves for this
Function, he instituted these Flamines to take care of the same Services, as by
right belonged to the Kings Livy. lib. 1.
.

The only Three constituted at first, were Flamen Dialis, Martialis, and
Quirinalis. The first was Sacred to Jupiter; and a Person of the highest
Authority in the Commonwealth: He was obliged to observe several superstitious
Restraints, as well as honored with several eminent Privileges beyond other
Officers; which are reckoned up at large by Gellius N^ct. Ats. lib. 10. cap. 15.
. The same Author tells us, That the Wife of this Flamen had the Name of
Flaminica, and was entrusted with the care of several Ceremonies peculiar to
her place.

The other Two were of less, yet of very eminent Authority; ordained to inspect
the Rites of Mars and Romulus. All Three where chose out of the Nobility.
Several Priests of the same Order, though of inferior Power and Dignity, were
added in later times; the whole number being generally computed at Fifteen. Yet
Fenestella (or the Author under his Name) assures us from Varro, That the old
Romans had a particular Flamen for every Deity they worshipped De Sacerdotus
cap. 5.
.

Though the Flamen Dialis discharged several Religious Duties that properly
belonged to the Kings; yet we meet with another Officer of greater Authority,
who seems to have been purely designed for that Employment: And this was the
Rex Sacrificulus, or Sacrorum. Dionysius gives us the Original of this
Institution as follows: Because the Kings had in a great many respects been
very serviceable to the State, the Establishers of the Commonwealth thought it
very proper to keep always the Name of King in the City. Upon this account they
ordered the Augurs and Pontifices to choose out a fit Person, who should engage
never to have the least hand in Civil Affairs, but devote himself wholly to the
care of the public Worship and Ceremonies of Religion, with the Title of Rex
Sacrorum Antiq. lib. 5.
. And Livy informs us, That the Office of Rex Sacrorum was therefore made
inferior to that of Pontifex Maximus, for fear that the Name of King, which had
been formerly so odious to the People, might, for all this restraint, be still
in some measure prejudicial to their Liberty Livy, lib. 2.
.

Salii.] The Original of the Salii may be thus gathered from Plutarch. In the
Eighth Year of Numa's Reign a terrible Pestilence, spreading it self over
Italy, among other places miserably infested Rome. The Citizens were almost
grown desperate, when they were comforted on a sudden by the report of a braze^
Target, which (they say) fell into Numa's Hands from Heaven. The King was
assured by the Conference he maintain^ with the Nymph Egeria and the Muses,
that the Target was sent from the Gods for the cure and safety of the City; and
this was soon verified by the miraculous ceasing of the Sickness. They advised
him too to make Eleven other Targets, so like in their Dimensions and Form to
the Original, that in case there should be a design of stealing it away, the
true might not be distinguished or known from those which were counterfeited;
by which means it would be more difficult to defeat the Counsels of Fate, in
which it had been determined, That, while this was preserved, the City should
prove happy and victorious. This difficult Work one Veturius Mamurius very
luckily performed, and made Eleven others that Numa himself could not know from
the first. They were worked into an oval Form, with several Folds or Pleats
closing one over another. They exactly fitted the Elbow by their Figure; and
were thence called Ancylia, from (...), which signifies a crooked shape; or
from the Cubit, that part of the Arm between the Wrist and the Elbow, upon
which they carried the Ancylia Plutarch. in Number.
. For the keeping of these, Numa instituted an Order of Priests, called Salii,
a Saliendo, from leaping or dancing. They lived all in a Body, and composed a
College, consisting of the same number of Men as the Bucklers they preserved.
The Three Seniors governed the rest; of whom the first had the Name of Praesul;
the second of Fates; and the other of Magister Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 26.
. In the Month of March was their great Feast, when they carried their Sacred
Charge about the City. At this Procession they were habited in a short Scarlet
Cassock, having round them a broad Belt clasped with Brass Buckles. On their
Head they wore a sort of Copper Helmet. In this manner they went on with a
nimble Motion, keeping just measures with their Feet, and demonstrating great
Strength and Agility, by the various and handsome turns of their Body Plutarch.
in Number.
. They sung all along a set of old Verses called the Carmen Saliare; the first
Form of which was composed by Numa. They were sacred to Mars, (the Ancylia or
Targets being parts of Armor) who from them took the Name of Salisubsulus: And
therefore upon account of the extraordinary noise and shaking that they made in
their Dances, Catullus, to si^gnifie a strong Bridge, has used the Phrase,

In quo vel Salisubsuli Sacra fiunto Catull. Carm. 17.
. Though the Month of March (dedicated to that God) was the proper time for
carrying the Ancylia about; yet if at any time a just and lawful War had been
proclaimed by Order of the Senate, against any State or People, the Salii were
in a solemn manner, to move the Ancylia, as if by that means they renz'd Mars
from his Seat, and sent him out to the assistance of their Arms Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 1. cap. 26.
.

Tullus Hostilius afterward increased the College with Twelve more Salii, in
pursuance of a Vow he made in a Battle with the Sabines. And therefore for
distinction's sake, the Twelve first were generally called Salii Palatini, from
the Palatine Mountain, whence they begun their Procession; the others Salii
Collini or Agonenses, from the Quirinal Hill, sometimes called Mons Agonalis;
where they had a Chapel on one of the highest Eminences of the Mountain Dionys.
Halic. lib. 3
.

Alexander ab Alexandro has observed, that the Entertainments of these Priests
upon their solemn Festivals, were exceeding costly and magnificent, with all
the variety of Music, Garlands, Perfumes, etc. Gen l. ter. lib. 1. cap. 26.
. And therefore Horace uses dapes Saliares Lib. 1. Od. 37.
for delicate Meats, as he does Pontificum coenae Lib. 1. Od. 14.
for great Regalio's.

Feciales.] The Feciales Varro derives from Fides, because they had the care of
the public Faith in Leagues and Contracts. Others bring the Word a Foedere
faciendo on the same account. Their Original in Italy was very ancient.
Dionysius Halicarn. finds them among the Aborigines, under the Name of (...),
libaminum latores: And Virgil intimates as much in several places. Numa first
instituted the Order at Rome Dionys. Livy.
consisting of Twenty Persons Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 3.
, chose out of the eminentest Families in the City, and settled in a College.
It Is probable he ranked them among the Officers of Religion, to procure them
the more Deference and Authority, and to make their Persons more Sacred in the
Commonwealth.

Their Office was to be the Arbitrators of all Controvers^^ relating to War and
Peace; nor was it lawful on any acco^^^ to take up Arms 'till they had declared
all Means and Expedie^^ rejected that might tend to an Accommodation. In case
the Republic had suffered any Injury from a Foreign State, they dispat^ed
these Feciales, who were properly Heralds, to demand satisfaction; who, if they
could procure no restitution or just retur^ calling the Gods to witness against
the People and Country, im^^diately denounced War; otherwise they confirmed the
Allian^^ that had been formerly made, or engaged in a new one Plutarch in Number.
. B^ the Ceremonies used upon both these occasions will fall more properly
under another Head. It Is enough to observe here, th^^ both the Affairs were
managed by these Officers, with the consent of the Senate and People.

As to the Pater Patratus, it is not easy to determine wheth^^ he was a
constant Officer, and the chief of them Feciales; o^ whether he was not a
Temporary Minister, elected upon account of making a Peace or denouncing War,
which were both done by him. Rosinus makes him the constant Governor, o^
Master of the Feciales Lib. 3. cap. 21.
. Fenestella, (or the Author under his Name) a distinst Officer altogether De
Sacerdot. Romans cap. 6.
. Pomponius Laetus Di Sacerdot. Romans cap. 6.
* and Polydore Virgil De Invent. Rev. lib. 4. cap. 14.
tell us, That he was only chose by one (...) the Feciales, out of their one
Body, upon such occasions as we mentioned but now. The latter opinion may be
defended by the Authority of Livy, who, in order to the Treaty with the Albam
before the tripple Combat of the Horatii and Curiatii, makes one of the
Feciales choose a Pater Patratus to perform that Ceremony Lib. 1. cap. 24.
. The Person to be entrusted with this Office must have been one who had a
Father and a Son both alive; and therefore Pater Patratus is no more than a
perfecter sort of Father, as they imagined him to be, whose own Father was
still living after he himself had been a Father for some time. Perhaps too they
might fancy him to be the sit Judge in Affairs of such Consequence, who
could see as well behind as before him Plutarch in Quaestion. Roman.
.

CHAP. VI. Of the Vestals.
THE Institution of the Vestal Virgins is generally attributed to Numa; though we
meet with the Sacred Fire long before, and even in the time of Aeneas. But
perhaps Numa was the first who settled the Order and built a Temple to the
Goddess in Rome Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2. verse ^97.
. Their Office was to attend upon the Rites of Vesta, the chief part Plutarch
and Dionysius.
being the preservation of the Holy Fire, which Numa, fansying Fire to be the
first Principle of all things, committed to their charge. Ovid tells us, That
they understood nothing else but Fire by Vesta her self.

Nec tu aliud Vestam quam vivam intellige flammam Fast. 6. ver. 291.
. Tho sometimes he makes her the same as the Earth,

-- Tellus Vestaque numen idem est Fast. 6. ver. 460.
. Polydore Virgil reconciles the Two Names by observing, that Fire, or the
natural heat by which all things are produced, is enclosed in the Earth De
Invent. Ber. lib. 4. cap. 14.
.

They were obliged to keep this Fire with all the care in the World; and if it
happened to go out, 'twas thought Impiety to light it at any common Flame, but
they made use of the pure and unpolluted Rays of the Sun Plutarch in Number.
. Every Year on the first of March, whether it had gone out or no, they always
lighted it anew Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 12. M^erc^. Se^urn^^. lib. 1. cap.
12.
. There were other Relics and Holy Things under their Care, of which we have
very uncertain Accounts; particularly the famous Palladium brought from Troy by
Aeneas; for Ulysses and Diomedes stole only a counterfeit one, a Copy of the
other, which was kept with less care.

Dionysius and Plutarch assure us that Numa constituted o^^^ Four Virgins for
this Service; and that the same number ^^main'd ever after. And therefore a
great Antiquary is cetainly mistaken when he makes the number increased (...)
Twenty Alex. ab Alex. ibid.
.

They were admitted into this Society between the Years (...) Six and Ten; and
were not properly said to be elected or created, but Captae, taken; the
Pontifex Miximus taking her that (...) liked by the Hand, and leading her, as
it were by force, from her Parents A. Gell. lib. 1. cap 12.
.

The chief Rules prescribed them by their Founder, were (...) vow the strictest
Chastity for the space of Thirty Years. The first Ten they were only Novices,
obliged to learn the Ceremonies, and perfect themselves in the Duties of their
Religion. The next Ten Years they actually discharged the Sacerdotal Function;
and spent the remaining Ten in teaching and instructing others. After this Term
was completed, they had liberty to leave the Order, and chose any condition of
life that best suited with their Inclinations: Though this was counted unlucky,
and therefore seldom put in practice. Upon Commission of any lesser Faults,
they were punished as the Pontife^ Miximus (who had the care of them) thought
fit. But if they broke their Vow of Virginity they were constantly burned alive
in a place without the City-Walls, allotted for that peculiar use Plutarch in
Number.
, and thence called Campus Sceleratus, as Festus informs us.

But this severe Condition was recompensed with several Privileges and
Prerogatives. Whenever they went abroad they had the Fasces carried before them
Ibib.
, a Consul, or the Praeter being obliged to give them the way Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 5. cap. 12.
. And if in their walk they casually lighted upon a Malefactor leading to
execution, they had the favor to deliver him from the Hands of Justice,
provided they made Oath that their meeting was purely accidental, without any
Contract or Design Plutarch. in Number.
.

CHAP. VII. Of the Duumviri, Decemviri, and Quindecemviri, the Keepers of the
Sibylline Writings; and of the Corybantes, or Priests of Cybele; the Epulones,
and Sodales Titii.
THE first of these Orders, famous only on account of the Relics they
preserved, owe their Original to this occasion. A strange old Woman came once
to Tarquinius Superbus with Nine Books; which, she said, were the Oracles of
the Sibyls, and proffered to sell them. But the King making some scruple about
the price, she went away, and burnt Three of them; and returning with the Six,
asked the same Sum as before. Tarquin only laughed at the Humor: Upon which
the old Woman left him once more; and after she had burnt Three others, came
again with them that were left, but still kept to her old Terms. The King begun
now to wonder at her obstinacy, and thinking there might be something more than
ordinary in the Business, sent for the Augurs to consult what was to be done.
They, when their Divinations were performed, soon acquainted him what a piece
of Impiety he had been guilty of, by refusing a Treasure sent to him from
Heaven, and commanded him to give whatever she demanded for the Books that
remained. The Woman received her Money, and delivered the Writings; and only
charging them by all means to keep them Sacred, immediately vanished. Two of
the Nobility were presently after chose to be the Keepers of these Oracles,
which were laid up with all imaginable care in the Capitol, in a Chest under
Ground. They could not be consulted without a special Order of the Senate,
which was never granted, unless upon the receiving some notable defeat, upon
the rising of any considerable Mutiny, or Sedition in the State, or upon some
other extraordinary occasion Dionys. Antiq lib. 4.
; several of which we meet with in Livy Particularly Lib. 3. cap. 10. Lib. 5.
cap. 13. Lib. 7. cap. 28. Lib. 4. cap. 21.
.

The number of Priests, in this, as in most other Orders, was several times
altered. The Duumviri cont^nu'd 'till about the Year of the City 388 when the
Tribunes of the People preferred a Law, They had the common Name of Duumviri
(Decen^viri, or Quindecemviri) Sacris faciundis.
that there should be Ten Men elelected for this Service, part out of the
Nobility, and part out of the Commons. We meet with the Decemviri all along
from hence 'till about the time of Sylla the Dictator, when the Quindecemviri
occur: Which addition of Five Persons may with very good reason, be attributed
to him, who increased so many of the other Orders. 'Twere needless to give any
farther account of the Sibyls, than that they are generally agreed to have been
Ten in number; for which we have the Authority of Varro; though some make them
Nine, some Four, some Three, and some only One Vid. Dempster ad Ro^^n. lib. 3.
cap. 24.
. They all lived in different Ages and Countries, were all Prophetesses; and,
if we believe the common Opinion, foretold the coming of our Savior. As to the
Writing, Dempster tells us, 'twas in Linen Ibid.
. But one would think the common Phrase of Folia Sibyllae used by Virgil,
Horace, and other credible Authors, should argue, that they wrote their
Prophecies in Leaves of Trees; especially if we consider the great Antiquity
which is generally allowed them, and are assured at the same time by Pliny Lib
33. cap. 11.
, that this was the oldest way of writing.

Solinus acquaints us, That these Books, which Tarquin bought, were burnt in
the Conflagration of the Capitol, the Year before Sylla's Dictatorship Puyb.
hist. cap. 8.
. Yet there were others of their inspired Writing, or at least Copies or
Extracts of them, gathered up in Greece and other parts, upon a special search
made by Order of the Senate; which were kept with the same Superstition as the
former, 'till about the time of Theodosius the Great, when the greatest part of
the Senate having embraced the Christian Faith, such Vanities begun to grow out
of fashion; 'till at last Stilicho burnt them all under Honorius: For which he
is so severely censured by the noble Poet Rutilius in his ingenious Itinerary.

Nec tantum Geticis grassatus proditor armis,
Aute Sibyllinae fata cremavit Opis.
Odimus Althaeam consumpti funere torris;
Nysaeum crimen flere putantur aves. Vide Dionys. Antiq. lib. 4.

At Stilicho aeterni fatalia pignora libri,
Et plenas voluit praecipitare colus.
Nor only Roman Arms the Wretch betrayed
To barbarous Foes; before that cursed Deed,
He burnt the Writings of the sacred Maid.
We hate Althaea for the fatal Brand;
When Nysus fell, the weeping Birds complained:
More cruel he than the revengeful Fair;
Whose impious Hands into the Flames have thrown
The heavenly Pledges of the Roman Crown,
Unrav'lling all the Doom that careful Fate had spun.
Among all the Religious Orders, as we meet with none oftener in Authors; so
there were none of such an extravagant Constitution as the Priests of Cybele.
We find them under the different Names of Curetes, Corybantes, Galli, and Idaei
Dactyli; but can get scarce one tolerable Etymology of either. As for Cybele
herself, she is generally taken for the Earth, and is the same with Rhea, Ops,
Berecynthia, the Idaean Mother; the Mother of the Gods, and the Great Goddess.
She was invited and received into Rome, from Pesinus in Galatia, with great
solemnity, upon Advice of the Sibylline Oracles La^ lib. 29. cap. 14.
.

But to return to her Priests: We find little of any certainty about them, only
that they were all Eunuchs, and by Nation Phrygians; and that in their solemn
Processions they danced in Armor, making a confused noise with Timbrels,
Pipes, and Cymbals, howling all the while as if they were mad, and cuting
themselves as they went along. One would little think that this was the Goddess
who required such a sacred Silence in her Mysteries, as Virgil Aeneid. 3.
would persuade us she did. And the best we could suppose at the sight of this
Bawling Retinue, is, that they were going to settle a Swarm of Bees; for which
Service the same Poet recommends the use of the Cymbals of Cybele Georg. 4.
.

But we cannot have a better Relation of the original, and the manner of their
strange Solemnity, than what Lucretius has given us in his Second Book:

Hanc variae gentes antiquo more Sacrorum
Idaeam vocitant Matrem, Phrygiasque catervas
Dant Comites, quia primum ex illis finibus edunt
Per terrarum Orbem fruges coepisse creari.
Gallos attribuunt, quia numen qui violarint
Matris, and ingrati genitoribus inventi sunt,
Significare volunt indignos esse putandos
Vivam progeniem qui in oras luminis edant.
Tympana tenta tonant palmis and cymbala circum
Concava, raucisonoque minantur cornua cantu,
Et Phrygio stimulat numero cava tibia mentes;
Telaque praeportant violenti signa furoris,
Ingratos animos, atque impia pectora volgi
Conterrere metu quae possiut numine divae.
Hic armata manus (Curetas nomine Graii
Quos memorant Phrygios) inter se forte catervis
Ludunt, in numerumque exsultant sanguine fleti:
Terrisicas capitum quatientes numine cristas.
Dictaeos referunt Curetas: qui Jovis illum
Vagitum in Creta quondum occultasse feruntur,
Cum pueri circum puerum pernice chorea
Armati in numerum pulsarent aeribus era,
Ne Saturnus eum malis mandaret adeptus,
Aeternumque daret matri sub pectore vulnus.
Concerning her fond Superstition, frames
A thousand odd Conceits, a thousand Names,
And gives her a large Train of Phrygian Dames:
Because in Phrygia Corn at first took birth,
And thence 'twas scattered over the other Earth.
They Eunuch all her Priests; from whence it is shown
That they deserve no Children of their own,
Who or abuse their Sires, or disrespect,
Or treat their Mothers with a cold Neglect;
Their Mothers whom they should adore --
Amidst her Pomp fierce Drums and Cymbals beat,
And the hoarse Horns with rattling Notes do threat.
The Pipe with Phrygian Aires disturbs their Souls,
'Till reason overthrown mad Passion rules.
They carry Arms, those dreadful Signs of War,
To raise in the impious Rout religious Fear.
Here some in Arms dance round among the Crowd,
Look dreadful gay in their own sparkling Blood,
Their Crests still shaking with a dreadful Nod.
These represent those armed Priests who strove
To drown the tender Cries of Infant- Jove:
By dancing quick they made a greater sound,
And beat their Armor as they danced around,
Lest Saturn should have found, and eat the Boy,
And Ops for ever mourned her prattling Joy Mr. C^^^ch
.
But we must not omit a more Comical, though a shorter, account that we have of
them in Juvenal:

-- Matrisque Deum chorus intrat, and ingens
Semivir obscaeno facies reverenda minori,
Mollia qui rupta secuit genitalia testa,
Jampridem cui rauca cohors, cui tympana cedunt
Plebeia -- Sat. 6.
.
And Cybele's Priests, and Eunuch at their Head,
About the Streets a mad Procession led;
The venerable Guelding, large and high,
O'er-looks the Herd of his inferior Fry:
His awkward Clergymen about him prance,
And beat their Timbrels to their mystic Dance [* Mr. Dryden.
.
The Epulones at their first creation, Livy Lib. 53.
assures us were only Three: Soon after, they were increased to Seven; whence
they are commonly called Septemviri Epulonum; and some report that Julius
Caesar, by adding Three more, changed them to a Decemvirate. They had their
Name from a Custom which obtained among the Romans, to pacify the Gods, by
making a sumptuous Feast in their Temples, to which they did, as it were,
invite the Deities themselves. These Regalio's they called Epula, or
Lectisternia; the care of which belonged to the Epulones.

The Sodales Titii are nowhere mentioned by Dionysius or Livy: They seem to
have been a Society of Religious Officers, concerned in some par^s of
Divination.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Roman Sacrifices.
THE Word Sacrificium more properly signifies the Thing offered, than the
action of Offering. The two common Words to express the former, were Victima
and Hostia; which though they are very often confounded, yet by the first Word
are properly meant the greater sort of Sacrifices, by the other the less.

Though every Deity had some peculiar Rites and Institutions, and consequently
different sorts of Sacrifices, in which the greatest part of the public
Worship then consisted; yet there were some standing Rules and Ceremonies to be
observed in all.

The Priest (and sometimes the Person that gave the Victim) went before in a
white Garment free from all Spots and Figures: For Cicero tells us, that White
is the most acceptable Colourt the Gods; I suppose because it seems to denote
Purity and Innocence.

The Beast to be sacrificed, if 'twas of the larger sort, used to be marked on
the Horns with Gold; if of the lesser sort, it was crowned with the Leaves of
that Tree which the Deity was thought most to delight in, for whom the
Sacrifice was designed. And besides these, they wore the Infula and Vittae, a
sort of white Fillets about their Head.

Before the Procession, went a public Crier, proclaiming H^age to the People,
to give them notice that they should forbear Working, and attend at the
Solemnity. The Pipers and Harpers too were the Forerunners of the Show; and
what time they could spare from their Instruments, was spent in assisting the
Crier to admonish the People. The Sacrifice being brought to the Altar, the
Priest took hold of the Altar with one Hand, and ushered in the Solemnity with
a Prayer to all the Gods; mentioning Janus and Vesta always first and last, as
if through them they had access to the rest. During the Prayer, some public
Officer was to command the strictest silence, for which the common expression
was, Favete linguis, a Phrase used by Horace Lib. 3. Od. 1.
, Juvenal Sat. 12.
, ANTIQUORUM SACRIFICANDIRITUS ex Onuph. Panvinio
Tibullus Lib. 2. Eleg. 1.
, etc. And the Piper played all the while, to hinder the hearing of any unlucky
Noise. After his Prayer, the Priest began the Sacrifice with what they called
Immolatio (though by Synecdoche, the Word is often taken for the whole Act of
Sacrificing) the throwing some sort of Corn and Frankincense, together with the
Mola, i.e. Bran or Meal mixed with Salt, upon the Head of the Beast. In the
next place be sprinkled Wine between the Horns; a Custom very often taken
notice of by the Poets: So Virgil:

Ipsa tenens dextra pateram pulcherrima Dido
Candentis vaccae media inter cornua fundit Ae^eid. 4. v. 60.
.
Over the white Heifer's Horns, the beauteous Queen
Holds the rich Plate, and pours the Wine between.
And Ovid more expressly:

Rode caper vitem, tamen hinc, cum stabis ad aras,
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit Fast. 1.
.
Go, wanton Goat, about the Vineyard browze
On the young Shoots, and stop the rising Juice;
You Will leave enough to pour between your Horns,
When for your sake the hallowed Altar burns.
But before he poured the Wine on the Beast, he put the Plate to his own Mouth,
and just touched it with his Lips, giving it to those that stood near him to do
the like. This they termed Libatio.

In the next place he plucked off some of the roughest Hairs growing between
the Horns of the Beast, and threw them into the Fire, at the prima Libamina.

Et summas capiens media inter cornua setas
Ignibus imponit sacris, libamina prima Ae^eid. 6. v. 246.
.
The bristling Hairs that on the Forehead grew,
As the first Offering on the Fire she threw.
And now turning himself to the East, he only made a sort of crooked Line with
his Knife from the Forehead to the Tail; and then delivered the Beast to the
public Servants to kill. We find these inferior Officers under the several
Names of Popae, Agones, Cultrarii, and Victimarii: Their Business, besides the
killing of the Beast, was to take off his Skin, to bowel him, and to wash the
whole Body. Then the Aruspex his Duty came in place, to search the Entrails for
good or bad Omens. When this was over, the Priests had nothing else to do, but
to lay what Parts they thought fittest for the Gods upon the Altars, and to go
and regale themselves upon the rest. See Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17.

CHAP. IX. Of the Roman Year.
WE meet with three accounts in use at several times among the Romans; which
owe their Original to Romulus, Numa, and Julius Caesar. Romulus divided his
Year into Ten Months, which Plutarch would persuade us had no certain or equal
Term, but consisted some of Twenty Days, some of Thirty five, and some of more
Plut. in Numa.
. But he is generally allowed to have settled the number of Days with a great
deal more equality, allotting to March, May, Quintilis, and October, One and
thirty Days: To April, June, Sextilis, November, and December, Thirty; making
up in all Three hundred and four Days Ma^^h. S^^^rn. lib. i. cap. 12. Censorm.
de die Natali, cap. 20. etc.
:

Scilicet arma magis quam sydera, Romule, noras! Scaliger indeed is very angry
that People should think the Romans had ever any other account than by Twelve
Months Li^ Emendat. Temper. lib. 2.
: But it is probable that the Testimonies of Varro, Macrobius, Censorinus, Ovid,
etc. will overruled the bare Words of Licinius Macer, and the counterfeit
Fenestella, which are all he produces. As to the Names of Romulus's Months,
the first to be sure was consecrated to Mars, the Father of the State. The next
too may be setch'd from Venus, the other Guardian and Parent of the Romans, if
we admit of the allusion between the Word Aprilis, and (...), her Name in
Greek: Though it is generally derived from Aperio, to open, because this is the
chief part of the Spring in which the Buds and Flowers open and disclose
themselves Plut. in Number. Macrobius Sat. lib. 1. cap. 12.
. May he named so from Maia the Mother of Mercury, according to Plutarch In Number.
; though Macrobius makes the Maia, to whom May was dedicated, the same as Rhea,
Ops, or the Earth, and different from Mercury's Mother Sat. lib 1. cap. 12.
. Ovid brings it a Senibus, i. c. a Majoribus Fast. 1. v. 4 1.
. June either comes from Juventus, because this is the youthful and gay part of
the Year Plut. in Number.
; or else it is a contraction of Junonius, and dedicated to the Goddess Juno
Macrob. ubi supra.
. The other Months he denominated as they stood in order: So Quintilis is no
more than the Fifth Month, Sextilis than the Sixth; and so on: But these two
afterward changed their Names to July and August, in honor of Julius Caesar
and his Successor Augustus. Nero had afterward called April, Nerone^s Suet in
Ner. cap 55.
. Plutarch tells us, that Domitian too, in imitation of them, gave the Two
Months, immediately following, the Names of Germanicus and Domitianus; but he
being slain, they recovered their old Denominations Plut. in Number.
.

Numa was a little better acquainted with the Celestial Motions than his
Predecessor; and therefore undertaking to reform the Calendar, in the first
place he added the Two Months of January and February; the first of which he
dedicated to the God Janus; the other took its Name from Februo, to purify,
because the Feasts of Purification were celebrated in that Month Ibid.
. To compose these Two Months, he put Fifty Days to the old Three hundred and
four, to make them answer the Course of the Moon; and then took Six more from
the Six Months that had even Days, adding One odd day more than he ought to
have done, merely ought of Superstition, and to make the number fortunate.
However, he could get but Eight and twenty Days for February; and therefore
that Month was always counted unlucky Censorin. de die Natali, cap. 20.
. Besides this, he observed the difference between the Solar and the Lunar
Course to be Eleven Days; and to remedy the inequality, he doubled those Days;
and after every two Years, added an interstitial Month to follow February,
which Plutarch calls in one place Mercidinus In Number.
, and in another Mercidonius In Jul. Cas.
. But the care of this Intercalation being left to the Priests, they clapped
in, or left out, the Month whenever they pleased, as they fansied lucky, or
unlucky; and so made such mad work, that the Festivals and solemn Days for
Sacrifice were removed by little and little, 'till at last they came to be kept
at a Season quite contrary to what they had been formerly In Jul. C^^.
.

Julius Caesar was the first that undertook to remedy this disorder; and to
this purpose he called in the best Philosophers and Mathematicians of his time,
to settle the point. In order to bringing matters right, he was forced to make
one confused Year of Fifteen Months, and Four hundred forty five Days; but to
preserve a due Regulation for the future, he quite took away the Intercalary
Month; and adding Ten Days to Numa's Three hundred fifty five, equaled them to
the Course of the Sun, except Six odd Hours. The Ten Days he distributed among
those Seven Months that had before but Nine and twenty; and as for the Six
Hours, he ordered them to be let alone 'till they made up a whole Day; and to
every Fourth Year he put in the same place where the Month used to be inserted
before Censirin, cap. 20.
; and that was just Five Days before the end of February, or next before the
Sixth of the Calends of March. For this reason, the supernumerary Day had the
Name of Dies bissextus; and thence the Leap-Year came to be called Annus
Bessextilis.

But the Priests, who had been the Authors of the old Confusion, committed as
great a Blunder in the New Computation, by interposing the Leap-Day at the
Beginning of every Fourth Year, instead of the End; 'till Augustus Caesar
brought it into the Right Course again Macro^. Sat. lib. 1. cap 1^. Sueton in
A^gust. cap. 31.
, in which it has continued ever since, and is followed by a great part of
Eu^ope at this day.

Yet because there wanted Eleven Minutes in the Six odd Hours of Julius's Year,
the Aequinoxes and S^^^^ices losing something continually, were found, about
the Year 1582. to have run back Ten whole Days: For which reason, Pope Gregory
at that time undertook a New Reformation of the Calendar, entering off Ten Days
to bring them to their proper places. This Account they call the Gregorian, or
New Style, which is ob^erv'd too in many parts of Europe.

CHAP. X. The Distinction of the Roman Days.
WHEN Numa divided the Year into Twelve Months, he made a distinction too in
the Days, ranking them in these three Orders: Dies Festi, Profesti, and
Intercisi.

The first sort was consecrated to the Gods.

The second allotted for the Civil Business of Men.

The third divided between sacred and ordinary Employments.

The Dies festi were set apart for the Celebration of these Four Solemnities:
Sacrificia, Epulae, Ludi, and Feriae.

Sacrificia, were no more than public Sacrifices to the Gods.

Epulae, were a sort of Banquets celebrated to the Honor of the Deities.

Ludi, were public Sports instituted with the same Design.

Feriae, were either public or private.

The Public were of four sorts: Stativae, Conceptivae, Imperativae, and
Nundinae.

Feriae Stativae, were public Feasts kept by the whole City, according to the
set time marked in the Calendar for their Observation.

Feriae Conceptivae, were such as the Magistrates, or Priests, appointed
annually to be celebrated upon what Days they pleased.

Feriae Imperativae, were such as the Consuls, Praetors, or Dictators,
instituted by virtue of their own Authority, and commanded to be observed upon
solemn Occasions, as the gaining of a Victory, and the like.

Nundinae, were Days set apart for the concourse of the People out of the
Country and neighboring Towns, to expose their Commodities to sale, the same
as our greater Markets or Fairs. They had the Name of Nundinae, because they
were kept every Ninth Day, as Ovid informs us Fast. 1. v. 54.
.

Feriae privatae, were Holydays observed by particular Persons or Families upon
several Accounts; as Birth-days, Funerals, and the like.

Thus much for the Dies Festi.

The Profesti, were Fasti, Comitiales, Comperen dini, Stati, and Praeliares.

Dies Fasti, were the same as our Court-days; upon which it was lawful for the
Praetor to sit in Judgment, and consequently Fari tria verba, to say the Three
solemn Words, Do, Dico, Addico, I give Laws, declare Right, and adjudge Losses.
All other Days, (except the intercisi) were called Nefasti; because 'twas not
lawful to say those Three Words upon them. But we may observe from a Phrase of
Horace Lib. 2. Od. 13.
, that Dies nefastus signifies an unlucky Day, as well as a Non-Court-day.

Dies Comitiales, were such Days as the Comitia, or public Assemblies of the
People were held upon: Or, as Ovid styles them:

-- Quo populum jus est includere septis Fast. 1. verse. 53.
. Days when the People are shut up to vote.

Dies Comperendini, were Days when Persons that had been su'd might give Bail.

Dies Stati, were Days appointed for the decision of any Cause between a Roman
and a Foreigner.

Dies Praeliares, were such Days as they thought it lawful to engage in any
Action of Hostility upon.

If we make a Division of the Roman Days into Fortuna^^ and Unfortunate; Dies
Postriduani, or the next Day after the Kalends, Nones, or Ides, were always
reckoned of the latter sort; and therefore had the Name of dies atri.

A. Gellius gives us the reason of this Observation from Verrius Flaccus,
because they had taken notice for several Ages, that those Days had proved
unlucky to the State in the loss of Battles, Towns, and other Casualties No^t.
Atti^. lib. 5. cap 17.
.

He tells us in the same place, That the Day before the fourth of the Kalends,
Nones, or Ides, was always reckoned unfortunate; but he does not know for what
reason, unless that he finds the great overthrow at Gannae to have happened on
such a Day.

CHAP. XI. Of the Kalends, Nones, and Ides.
THE way that the Romans used to reckon the Days of their Months was by the
Kalends, Nones, and Ides. Romulus begun his Months always upon the first day of
the new Moon, and was followed in this by the Authors of the other accounts to
avoid the altering of the immovable Feasts. Therefore every new Moon one of
the inferior Priests used to assemble the People in the Capitol, and call over
as many Days as there were between that and the Nones: And so from the old Word
Calo, or the Greek (...), to call, the first of these Days had the Name of
Kalendae. But we must remember, that this custom of calling the Days continued
no longer than the Year of the City 450, when C. Flavius the Curule Aedile,
ordered the Fasti, or Calendar, to be set up in public Places, that every Body
might know the difference of times, and the return of the Festivals Livy. lib.
5. cap. 46.
.

The Nones were so called because they reckoned Nine Days from them to the Ides.

The Ides were generally about the middle of the Month, and then we may derive
the Word from iduare, an obsolete Verb, signifying to divide.

The Kalends were always fixed to the first day of every Month; but the Nones
and the Ides in Four Months were on different Days than in the other Eight. For
March, May, July, and October had Six Nones a-piece, the other only Four.
Therefore in the first the Nones were the 7th, and the Ides the 15th; in the
last, the Nones the 5th, and the Ides the 13th.

In reckoning these they always went backwards. Thus January 1. was the first
of the Kalends of January: December 31. Pride. Kal. Jan. December 30. the third
Kal. Jan. and so on to the 13th; and that was Idus Decembris; then the 12.
Pride. Iduum December. the 11th, 3 Iduum December. and so to the fifth Day, and that
was Nonae December. And then again the 4th Pride. Nonarum December. the third 3 Non.
December. the second 4 Non. December. and the first Kalendae December.

We must observe, that when we meet with Kalendas, Nonas, or Idus in the
Accusative Case, the Preposition ante is always understood: As tertio Kalendas,
Idus or Nonas, is the same as tertio die ante Kal. Non. or Idus.

CHAP. XII. The most Remarkable Festivals of the Romans as they stand in the
Calendar.
THE Kalends, or the first day of January was noted for the entering of the
Magistrates on their Office; and for the wishing of good Fortune, and sending
Presents to one another among Friends Ovid. Fast. 1. v. 71, etc.
.

February the 15th, or the 15th of the Kalends of March, was the Feast of the
Lupercalia, when the Luperci made their wild Procession Ovid. Fast. 2. v. 267,
etc.
, which has been described before. February the 11th, or the 9th of the Kalends
of March, was the Feralia, or Feast in honor of the Ghosts; when People
carried some little sort of Offering to the Graves of their deceased Friends.
Ovid gives us so handsome an account of it, that we must not pass him by.

Est honor and tumulis, animas placare paternas Ibid. v 5.^. etc.
,
Parvaque in exstructas munera far pyras.
Parva petunt manes: pietas pro divite grata est
Munere, non avidos Styx habet ima Deos.
Tegula porrectis satis est velata coronis,
Et sparsae fruges, parvaque mica salis.
Tombs have their Honors too: Our Parents crave
Some slender Present to adorn their Grave.
Slender the Present which the Ghosts we owe;
Those Powers observe not what we give, but how;
No greedy Souls disturb the happy Seats below.
They only ask a Tile with Garlands crowned,
And Fruit and Salt to scatter on the Ground.
The Day after the Feralia was the Charistia or Festival of Love, when all the
Relations in every Family met together and had a Feast.

The Kalends of March was the Matronalia, a Feast kept by the Roman Matrons to
the Honor of Mars; to whom they thought themselves obliged for the Happiness
of bearing of good Children; a Favor which he first conferred on his own
Mistress, Rhea Ovid. Fast. 3. v. 233.
.

On the same Day began the solemn Feast of the Salii, and their Procession with
the Ancylia, which have been spoken of before.

The Ides of March was the Feast of Anna Perenna; in Honor either of the
Sister of Dido, who fled into Italy to Aeneas; or of one Anna, an old
Gentlewoman, that, in a great Dearth at Rome, for some time furnished the
common People with Corn out of her own Store. The Celebration of this Day
consisted in drinking and Feasting largely among Friends. The common People met
for this purpose in the Fields near the Tiber, and, building themselves Booths
and Arbours, kept the Day with all manner of Sports and Jollity; wishing one
another to live as many Years as they drunk Cups Ibid. v. 5^3, etc.
.

The same Day was by a Decree of Senate ordered to be called Parricidium from
the Murder of Julius Caesar which happened on it Su^ton. in Jul. cap. 88.
. Appian, in his Second Book, tells us of a very different Law that Dolobella
the Consul would have preferred upon this occasion; and that was, to have the
Day called ever after Natalis Vrbis (the Birthday of the City;) as if their
Liberty had revived upon the Death of Caesar.

March the 19th, or the 14th of the Kalends of April, begun the Quinquatrus, or
Quinquatria, the Feast of Minerva, continuing Five Days. 'Twas during this
Solemnity, that the Boys and Girls used to pray to the Goddess for Wisdom and
Learning, of which she had the Patronage: To which Custom Juvevenal alludes.

Eloquium and famam Demosthenis aut Ciceronis
Incipit optare, and totis Quinquatribus optat Sat. 10.
.
To rival Tully or Demosthenes,
Begins to wish in the Quinquatrian Days,
And wishes all the Feast --
April the 19th, or the 13th of the Kalends of May was the Cerealia, or Feast
of Ceres, in which Solemnity the chief Actors were the Women. No person that
mourned was allowed to bear a part in this Service; and therefore it is very
remarkable, that upon the defeat at Cannae there was such an universal Grief in
the City, that the Anniversary Feast of Ceres was forced to be omitted Livy,
lib. 22.
.

April the 21st, or the 11th of the Kalends of May was the Palilia, or Feast of
Pales, Goddess of Shepherds. This is sometimes called Parilia a pariendo,
because Prayers were now made for the fruitfulness of the Sheep. Ovid tells us
a very tedious course of Superstition that the Shepherds run through upon this
Day. They always contrived to have a great Feast at Night; and when most of
them were pretty merry, they concluded all with dancing over the Fires that
they made in the Field with heaps of Stubble Ovid. Fast. 4. v. 721, etc.
.

The same Day was called Vrbis natalis, being the Day on which the City was
built Ibid. v. 806.
.

April the 25th, or the 7th of the Kalends of May was the Robigalia, or Feast
of the Goddess Robigo, or the God Robigus, who took care to keep off the Mildew
and Blasting from the Corn and Fruit Ibid. v. 901.
.

April 29th, or the 5th of the Kalends of May was the Floralia, or Feast of
Flora, Goddess of Flowers Ibid. v. 943.
, when the public Sports were celebrated that will be hereafter described.

In the remaining part of the Year we meet with no Festival of extraordinary
note, except the Poplifugium and the Saturnalia.

The Original of the famous Nonae Caprotinae, or Poplifugium, is doubly related
by Plutarch, according to the Two common Opinions. First, because Romulus
disappeared on that Day, when an Assembly being held in the Palus Capreae, or
Goatsmarch, on a sudden happened a most wonderful Tempest, accompanied with
terrible Thunder, and other unusual Disorders in the Air. The common People
fled all away to secure themselves; but after the Tempest was over could never
find their King Plutarch in Romulus.
.

Or else from Caprificus a wild Fig Tree, because in the Gallic War, a Roman
Virgin, who was Prisoner in the Enemies Camp, taking the opportunity when she
saw them one night in a disorder, got up into a wild Fig Tree, and holding out
a lighted Torch toward the City, gave the Romans a Signal to fall on; which
they did with such good Success as to gain a considerable Victory Plutarch in
Romul. and in Camill.
.

The Original of the Saturnalia, as to the time, is unknown, Macrobius assuring
us, that it was celebrated in Italy long before the building of Rome Macrob.
Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 7.
. The Story of Saturn, in whose Honor it was kept, every Body is acquainted
with. As to the manner of the Solemnity, besides the Sacrifices and other parts
of public Worship, there were several lesser Observations worth our notice. As
the Liberty now allowed to Servants to be free and merry with their Masters, so
often alluded to in Authors. It Is probable this was done in Memory of the
Liberty enjoyed in the Golden Age under Saturn, before the Names of Servant or
Master were known to the World. Besides this, they sent Presents to one another
among Friends: No War was to be proclaimed, and no Offender executed: The
Schools kept a Vacation, and nothing but Mirth and Freedom was to be met with
in the City. They kept at first only one Day, the 14th of the Kalends of
January: But the number was afterward increased to Three, Four, Five, and some
say Seven Days Lipsiu^ Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 3.
.

PART II.
BOOK III. Of the Civil Government of the Romans.
CHAP. I. Of the general Divisions of the People.
ROMULUS, as soon as his City was tolerably well filled with Inhabitants, made
a distinction of the People according to Honor and Quality; giving the better
sort the Name of Patres, or Patricii, and the rest the common Title of Plebeti.
To bind the Two Degrees more firmly together, he recommended to the Patricians
some of the Plebeians to protect and countenance; the former being styled
Patroni, and the others Clientes. The Patrons were always their Clients
Counselors in litigious Cases, their Advocates in Judgments; in short, their
Advisers and Overseers in all Affairs whatever. On the other side, the Clients
faithfully served their Patrons, not only paying them all imaginable respect
and deference, but, if occasion required, assisting them with Money toward the
defraying of any extraordinary Charges. But afterward, when the State grew
rich and great, though all other good Offices continued between them, yet 'twas
thought a dishonorable thing for the better Sort to take any Money of their
Inferiors Vide Dionys. lib. 2. Live. lib. 1. Plutarch in Romulo.
.

The Division of the People into the three distinct Orders of Senators,
Knights, and Commons, took its rise about the time of Tarquin's expulsion. The
Senators were such Persons as had been promoted to sit in the Supreme Council
of State, either out of the Nobility or Commons. The Knights were such Persons
as were allowed a Gold-Ring and a Horse at the Public Charge. The Commons were
all the rest of the People, besides these Two Orders, including not only the
inferior Populacy, but such of the Nobility too as had not yet been elected
Senators, and such of the Gentry as had not a complete Knight's Estate: For
Persons were admitted into the two higher Ranks according to their Fortunes;
one that was worth Eight hundred Sestertia, was capable of being chose Senator;
one that had Four hundred, might be taken into the Equestrian Order. Augustus
afterward altered the Senatorian State to Twelve thousand Sesterces; but the
Equestrian continued the same.

When we find in Livy, Cicero, and other Authors, the Optimates and Populares
opposed as two contrary Parties; we must understand by the former such Persons
of what Rank soever, who stood up for the Grandeur and Majesty of the State. By
the latter, any Persons, of what Order soever, who were continually mutining
against the Government, complaining of Encroachments, loss of Liberty, and
Privileges; and endeavoring to bring all things to a Level.

There Is another common Division of the People into Nobiles, Novi, and
Ignobiles, taken from the right of using Pictures, or Statues; an Honor only
allowed to such whose Ancestors or themselves had bore some Curule Office; that
is, had been Curule Aedile, Censor, Praetor, or Consul. He that had the
Pictures, or Statues, of his Ancestors, was termed Nobilis; he that had only
his own, Novus; he that had neither, Ignobilis. So that Jus imaginis was much
the same thing among them, as the Right of Bearing a Coat of Arms among us: And
their Novus Homo is equivalent to our upstart Gentleman.

Such Persons as were free of the City, are generally distinguished into
Ingenui, Liberti, and Libertini. The Ingenui were such as had been born free,
and of Parents that had been always free. The Libertini were the Children of
such as had been made free. Liberti, such as had been actually made free
themselves.

The two common Ways of conferring Freedom, were by Testament, and by
Manumission. A Slave was said to be free by Testament, when his Master, in
consideration of his faithful Service, had left him free in his last Will: Of
which Custom, we meet with abundance of Examples in every Historian.

The Ceremony of Manumission was thus performed: The Slave was brought before
the Consul, and in aftertimes before the Praetor, by his Master, who laying
his Hand upon his Servant's Head, said to the Praetor, Hunc hominem liberum
esse volo; and with that, let him go out of his Hand, which they termed e^m^inu
emittere. Then the Praetor laying a Rod upon his Head, called Vindicta, said,
Dico eum liberum esse more Quiritum. After this, the Lictor taking the Rod out
of the Praetor's Hand, struck the Servant several Blows on the Head, Face, and
Back; and nothing now remained but Pileo donari, to receive a Cap in token of
Liberty, to have his Name entered in the Common Roll of Freemen, with the
reason of his obtaining that Favor.

CHAP. II. Of the SENATE.
THE Chief Council of State, and, as it were, the Body of Magistrates, was the
Senate; which as it has been generally reckoned the Foundation and Support of
the Roman Greatness; so it was one of the earliest Constitutions in the
Republic: For Romulus first chose out a Hundred Persons of the best Repute for
Birth, Wisdom, and Integrity of Manners, to assist him in the Management of
Affairs; with the Name of Senators, or Patres, from their Age and Gravity; a
Title as Honorable, and yet as little subject to Envy, as could possibly have
been pitched upon. After the admission of the Sabines into Rome, an equal
number of that Nation were joined to the former Hundred Dionys. lib. 2.
. And Tarq^inius Priscus, upon his first Accession to the Crown, to ingratiate
himself with the Commons, ordered another Hundred to be selected out of that
Body, for an addition to the Senate Idem, lib. 3.
, which before had been ever filled with Persons of the higher Ranks. Sylla the
Dictator made them up above Four hundred; Julius Caesar Nine hundred; and in
the time of the Second Triumvirate, there were above a Thousand, no distinction
being made with respect to Merit or Quality. But this Disorder was afterward
rectified by Augustus, and a Reformation made in the Senate, according to the
old Constitution Sueton. in August. cap. 35.
.

The right of naming Senators belonged at first to the Kings; afterward the
Consuls chose, and referred them to the People for their Approbation: But at
last the Censors engrossed the whole Privilege of conferring this Honor. He
that stood first in the Censor's Roll, had the Honorable Title of Princeps
Senatus Vid. A. G^ll lib. 3. cap. 18.
, which he kept during Life: Yet the Chief Magistrates, as the Consuls,
Dictator, etc. were always his Superiors in the House.

Besides the Estate of Eight hundred, or after Augustus of Twelve hundred
Sestertia, no Person was capable of this Dignity, but one that had already born
some Magistracy in the Commonwealth. And that there was a certain Age (even in
later times) required, is plain from the frequent use of Aetas Senatoria in
Authors. Dio Cassius positively limits it to Five and twenty Lib. 5^.
, which was the soonest time any one could have discharged the Quaestorship,
the first Office of any considerable Note: Yet we meet with very many Persons
promoted to this Order, without any consideration had to their Years; as it
usually happened in all other Honors whatever.

As to the general Title of Patres Conscripti given them in Authors, it was
taken up as a mark of Distinction, proper to those Senators who were added to
Romulus's Hundred, either by Tarquinius Priscus, or by the People upon the
establishment of the Commonwealth: But in aftertimes, all the Number were
promiscuously styled Patres, and Patres Conscripti.

We may take a farther View of the Senators, considered all together as a
Council or Body.

The Magistrates who had the Power of assembling the Senators, were only the
Dictator, the Consuls, the Praetors, the Tribunes of the Commons, and the
Interrex. Yet upon extraordinary accounts the same Privilege was allowed to the
Tribuni Militum, invested with Consulary Power, and to the Decemviri, created
for the regulating the Laws: And to other Magistrates chosen upon some unusual
occasion. In the first times of the State, they were called together by a
Public Crier; but when the City grew larger, an Edict was published to command
their Meeting P. Man^^. de Senate. Romans
.

The Places where they assembled were only such as had been formally
consecrated by the Augurs, and most commonly within the City; only they made
use of the Temple of Bellona without the Walls, for the giving Audience to
foreign Ambassadors, and to such Provincial Magistrates as were to be heard in
open Senate, before they entered the City; as when they petitioned for a
Triumph, and the like cases. Pliny too has a very remarkable Observation, that
whenever the Augurs reported that an Ox had spoke, which we often meet with
among the ancient Prodigies, the Senate were presently to sit sub Dio, or in
the open Air Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 45.
.

As for the time of their Sitting, we must have recourse to the common
distinction of Senatus legitimus, and Senatus indictus. The former was when the
Senate met of course, upon such Days as the Laws or Custom obliged them to.
These were the Kalends, Nones, and Ides in every Month, 'till the time of
Augustus, who confined them to the Kalends and Ides. In the Months of September
and October, by an Order of the same Emperor, no Obligation was laid upon the
Senators to appear, only so many of them as were required by Law, to compose a
fit number for the Management of any Business; and therefore all that time they
took their Fortunes by Lot, as Suetonius informs us In Octav. cap. 35.
. We may observe from the same Author, that the Ides of March (called
Parricidium, from the Murder of Julius Caesar which happened on it) was
particularly excepted; and a Decree passed, That the Senate should never meet
on that Day for the future Idem in Jul. Cas. cap. 88.
.

Senatus indictus, was a Senate called for the dispatch of any Business upon
any other Day, except the Dies Comitiales, when the Senators were obliged to be
present at the Comitia.

As soon as the Senate was set, the Consul, or other supreme Magistrate, in the
first place, performed some Divine Service, and then proposed the Business to
the House: Both which Actions they called refer ad Senatum P. Manut. de
Senate. Romans
.

When he had opened the Cause, he went round in order (beginning with the
Princeps Senatus, or the Designed Consuls) and asked every body's Opinion; upon
which, all that pleased, stood up, and gave their Judgment upon the Point.

It Is very remarkable, that when any Senator was asked his Opinion, he had the
privilege of Speaking as long as he pleased, as well about other Concerns as
about the Matter in hand: And therefore when any particular Member had a Design
to hinder the passing of any Decree, 'twas a common practice to protract his
Speech, 'till 'twas too late to make any determination in the House.

When as many as thought fit had given their Judgments at large, the supreme
Magistrate made a short Report of their several Opinions; and then in order to
passing the Decree, ordered the Senators to divide, one Party to one side of
the House, and the opposite to the other. The number being now told, the major
part determined the Case; and a Senatus-consultum was accordingly wrote by the
public Notaries at the feet of the Chief Magistrate, being subscribed by the
principal Members that promoted it.

But in Cases of little Concern, or such as required expedition, the formality
of asking Opinions, and debating the Business, was laid aside, and a Decree
passed upon the bare Division of the House, and the counting of the Numbers on
both Sides. This was called Senatus-consultum per discessionem factum; the
former simply Senatus-consultum P. Manu^, de Sen.
.

Julius Capitolinus speaks of a sort of Senatus-consulta, not described by any
other Author; which he calls Senatus-consulta tacita; and tells us they were
made in reference to Affairs of great Secrecy, without the admittance of the
very Public Servants; but all the Business was done by the Senators
themselves, after the passing of an Oath of Secrecy, 'till their Design should
be effected Jul. Capitolin. in Gordian.
.

There were several things that might hinder the passing of a Decree in Senate;
as in case of an intercessio, or interposing. This was commonly put in practice
by the Tribunes of the Commons, who reckoned it their Privilege: But it might
be done too, by any Magistrate of equal Authority with him that proposed the
Business to the House: Or else when the Number required by Law for the passing
of any Bill was not present: For that there was such a fixed Number, is very
evident, though nothing of certainty can be determined any farther about it.

In both these cases, the Opinion of the major Part of the Senators was not
called Senatus-consultum, but Authoritas Senatus; their Judgment, not their
Command; and signified little, unless it was afterward ratified, and turned
into a Senatus-consultum, as usually happened P. Manut. de Sen.
.

Besides these two Impediments, a Decree of Senate could not pass after
Sunset, but was deferred 'till another Meeting.

All along, 'till the Year of the City 304. the written Decrees were in the
custody of the Consul, who might dispose of them as he thought proper, and
either suppress or preserve them: But then a Law passed, that they should be
carried always for the future to the Aediles Plebis, to be laid up in the
Temple of Ceres Livy, lib. 3.
: Yet we find, that afterward they were for the most part preserved in the
Public Treasury Vide Ciceron. Philipp. 5. Sueton. in August. Tacitum, Annal. 3.
.

It may be farther observed, that besides the proper Senators any Magistrate
might come into the House during their Honor; and they who had born any Curule
Office, after its expiration. But then none of those who came into the House
purely upon account of their Magistracy, were allowed the Privilege of giving
their Judgments upon any matter, or being numbered among the Persons who had
Votes. Yet they tacitly expressed their Mind, by going over to those Senators
whose Opinions they embraced; and upon this account they had the Name of
Senatores Pedarii.

There was an old Custom too in the Commonwealth, That the Sons of Senators
might come into the House, and hear the Proceedings. This, after it had been
abrogated by a Law, and long disused, was at last revived by Augustus; who in
order to bringing the young Noblemen the sooner to the Management of Affairs,
ordered that any Senator's Son, at the time of his putting on the Toga Virilis,
should have the Privilege of using the Latus Clavus, and of coming into the
Senate Sueton, in August. cap. 38.
.

CHAP. III. Of the general Divisions of the Magistrates; and of the Candidates
for Offices.
NOT to speak of the different Forms of Government which obtained among the
Romans, or to decide the case of Preeminency between them, we may in the next
place take a short view of the Chief Magistrates under them all. Of these we
meet with many general Divisions; as in respect of Time, Magistratus ordinarii,
and extraordinarii; with reference to the Persons, Patricii Plebeii, and Mixti;
from their Quality, Majores, and Minores; from their manner of appearing in
Public, Curules, and Non Curules; and lastly, from the place of their
Residence, Vrbani, and Provinciales Lipsius de Magistrate. cap. 2.
. If we'd pitch upon the clearest and the most compendious Method, we must rank
them according to the last Distinction, and describe in order the most
remarkable of the Civil Offices at home and abroad. But it will be expected,
that we first give some account of the Persons that stood Candidates for these
Honors. They borrowed the Name of Candidati from the Toga Candida, in which
they were habited at the time of their appearing for a Place. They wore this
loose Gown open and ungirted, without any close Garment under; which some
interpret as done with design to avoid any suspicion the People might have of
Bribery and Corruption: But Plutarch In Cori^lan.
thinks it was either to promote their Interest the better, by suing in such an
humble Habit: Or else that such as had received Wounds in the Service of their
Country, might the more easily demonstrate those Tokens of their Courage and
Fidelity; a very powerful way of moving the Affections of the People. But he
disallows the Reason abovementioned, because this Custom prevailed in Rome
many Ages before Gifts and Presents had any influence on the Public Suffrages;
a Mischief to which he attributes, in a great measure, the ruin of the
Commonwealth.

They declared their Pretensions generally about a Year before the Election;
all which time was spent in gaining and securing of Friends. For this purpose,
they used all the Arts of Popularity, making their Circuits round the City very
often; whence the Phrase, Ambire Magistratum, had its rise. In their Walks,
they took the meanest Persons by the Hand; and not only used the more Familiar
terms of Father, Brother, Friend, and the like, but called them too by their
own proper Names. In this Service they had usually a Nomenclator, or Monitor,
to assist them, who whispered every body's Name in their Ears. For though
Plutarch tells us of a Law which forbad any Candidate to make use of a
Prompter; yet at the same time he observes, that Cato* the Younger was the only
Person who conformed to it, discharging the whole Business by the help of his
own Memory Plus. in cato ^^^c^s.
.

Such Persons as openly favored their Designs, have been distinguished by the
Names of Salutatores, Deductores, and Sectatores (...) lib. 7. cap. 8.
. The first sort only paid their Complements to them at their Lodgings in the
Morning; and then took their Leave. The second waited upon them from thence, as
far as to the Forum. The last composed their Retinue through the whole Circuit.
Pliny has obliged us with a farther remark, That not only the Persons who stood
for an Office, but sometimes too the most considerable Men of their Party went
about in the same formal manner, to beg Voices in their behalf: And therefore
when he would let us know his great Diligence in promoting the Interest of one of
his Friends, he makes use of the same Phrases, which are commonly applied to
the Candidates themselves; as, Ambire Demos, Prondere amicos, Circumire
stationes Pli^. (...) cap 9.
, etc.

The Proceedings in the Elections will fall more properly under the account of
the Assemblies where they were managed.

CHAP. IV. Of the Consuls.
THE Consular Office began upon the expulsion of the Tarquins in the Year of
the City 244. There are several Derivations given of the Word; that of Cicero a
Consulendo Cicero de leg. lib. 3.
is generally followed. Their Power was at first the same as that of the Kings,
only restrained by Plurality of Persons, and shortness of time: Therefore Tully
calls it Regi^m Imperium Ibid.
, and Regia Potestas Idem de Petitions Consulatus.
. In War they commanded in chief over Citizens and Associates; nor were they
less absolute in Peace, having the Government of the Senate it self, which they
assembled or dismissed at their Pleasure. And though their Authority was very
much impaired, first by the Tribunes of the People, and afterward upon the
Establishment of the Empire; yet they were still employed in consulting the
Senate, administering Justice, managing public Games, and the like; and had the
Honor to characterize the Year by their own Names.

At the first institution this Honor was confined to the Nobility; but in the
Year of the City 387, the Commons obtained the Privilege of having one of their
own Body always an Associate in this Office. Sometimes indeed the Populacy were
so powerful as to have both Consuls chose out of their Order; but, generally
speaking, one was a Nobleman, and the other a Commoner.

No Person was allowed to sue for this Office, unless he was present at the
Election, and in a private Station; which gave occasion to the Civil Wars
between Pompey and Caesar; as has been already observed. The common Age
required in the Candidates was Forty two Years. This Cicero himself acquaints
us with, if we allow a little scope to his way of speaking, when he says, that
Alexander the Great, dying in his Thirty third Year, came Ten Years short of
the Consular Age Vid. Ciceron. Philip. 5.
. But sometimes the People dispensed with this Law, and the Emperors took very
little notice of the Restraint.

The time of the Consuls Government before Julius Caesar, was always a complete
Year: But he brought up a Custom of substituting Consuls at any time for a
Month or more, according as he pleased. Yet the Consuls, who were admitted the
first of January, denominated the Year, and had the Title of Ordinarii; the
others being styled Suffecti Vide Dio. lib. 43. Sueton. in Julio, cap. 76, etc.
.

The chief Ornaments and Badges of their Authority were the White Robe edged
with Purple, called Praetexta; which in after times they changed for the Toga
Palmata, or Picta, which before had been proper only to such Persons as had
been honored with a Triumph: And the Twelve Lictors, who went before one of
them one Month, and the other the next, carrying the Fasces and the Securis.
The latter of which, though Valerius Poplicola took away from the Fasces, yet it
was soon after added again.

Their Authority was equal; only in some lesser matters he had the Precedence,
according to the Valerian Law, who was oldest; and he, according to the Julian
Law, who had most Children.

CHAP. V. Of the Dictator and his Master of the Horse.
THE Office of Dictator was of very early Original: For the Latins entering on
a Confederacy against Rome to support Tarquin's Cause after his Expulsion, the
Senate were under great apprehensions of danger, by reason of the difficulty
they found in procuring Levies to oppose them. For the poorer Commons, who had
been forced to run themselves into debt with the Patricians, absolutely refused
to list themselves, unless an Order of Senate might pass for a general
Remission. Now the Power of Life and Death being lately taken from the Consuls
by the Valerian Law, and liberty given for an Appeal from them to the People,
they could not compel any body to take up Arms. Upon this account they found it
necessary to create a Magistrate, who for Six Months should rule with absolute
Authority even above the Laws themselves. The first Person pitched upon for
this Honor was Titus Largius Flavus, about A. V. C. 253, or 255. Dionys.
Antiq. lib. 5. Livy. lib 2.
.

This supreme Officer was called Dictator, either because he was Dictus, named
of the Consul; or else, from Dictating and Commanding what should be done Ibid.
. Though we sometimes meet with the naming of a Dictator upon a smaller Account,
as the holding the Comitia for the Election of Consuls, the Celebration of
Public Games, and the like; yet the true and proper Dictator was he who had
been invested with this Honor upon the occasion of dangerous War, Sedition, or
any such Emergency as required a sudden and absolute Command Lips. de
Magistrate. cap. 17.
. And therefore he was not chose with the usual Formalities, but only named in
the Night, viva voce, by the Consul Livy, lib. 4.
, and confirmed by the Divination from Birds Cicero de Leg. lib. 3.
. The time assigned for the disration of the Office was never lengthned, except
out of mere necessity: And as for the perpetual Dictatorships of Sylia and
Julius Caesar, they are confessed to have been notorious Violations of the Laws
of their Country. There were Two other Confinements which the Dictator was
obliged to observe. First; he was never to stir out of Italy, for fear he
should take advantage of the distance of the place, to attempt any thing
against the common Liberty Div. Hist. lib. 36.
. Besides this, he was always to march on foot; only upon account of a tedious
or sudden Expedition. he formally asked leave of the People to ride Plutarch.
in Fab. Max.
. But setting aside these Restraints, his Power was most absolute. He might
proclaim War, levy Forces, lead them out, or disband them without any
cousultation had with the Senate: He could punish as he pleased; and from his
Judgment lay no Appeal Dienys. Antiq. lib. 8.
; at least not till in later times. To make the Authority of his Charge more
awful, he had always Twenty four bundles of Rods, and as many Axes carried
before him in Public, if we will believe Plutarch In Fab. Max.
and Polybius Hist. lib 3.
: Though Livy attributes the first rise of this custom to Sylla Epitom. lib. 89.
. Nor was he only invested with the joint Authority of both the Consuls;
(whence the Grecians called him (...), or Double Consul); but during his
Administration, all other Magistrates ceased, except the Tribunes; and left the
whole Government entrusted in his Hands Pint. in Fab. Max.
.

This Office had the repute to be the only Safeguard of the Commonwealth in
times of danger Four hundred Years together: 'Till Sylla and Caesar having
converted it into a Tyranny, and rendered the very Name odious: Upon the murder
of the last, a Decree passed in Senate to forbid the use of it upon any account
whatever for the future Dio, lib. 44. Appian lib. 3.
.

The first thing the Dictator did, was to choose a Magister Eguitum, or Master
of the Horse, who was to be his Lieutenant General in the Army, but could act
nothing without his express Order. Yet in the War with Hannibal, when the slow
Proceedings of Fabius Maximus created a Suspicion in the Commons, they voted,
that Minutius, his Master of the House, should have an equal Authority with
Fabius himself, and be, as it were, another Dictator Plutarch. in Fab. Max.
Polybius, lib. 3.
. The like was afterward practiced in the same War upon the Defeat at Cannae,
when the Dictator, M. Junius, being with the Army, Fabius Buteo was chose a
second Dictator at Rome, to create new Senators for the supplying of their
places, who had been killed in the Battle: Though as soon as ever the Ceremony
was over, he immediately laid down his Command, and acted as a private Person
Plutarch, ibid.
.

CHAP. VI. Of the Praetors.
THE Original of this Office, instituted in the Year of the City 389. is owing
to two occasions: Partly because the Consuls being very often wholly taken up
with foreign Wars, found the want of some Person to administer Justice in the
City; and partly because the Nobility, having lost their appropriation of the
Consulship, were ambitious of procuring to themselves some new Honor in its
room Vide Live. lib. 7. circa princip.
. At the first only one was created, taking his Name a praeeundo; and for the
same reason most of the old Latins called their Commanders Praetores: And the
Consuls are supposed to have used that Title at their first institution. A. V.
C. 501 another Praetor was added; and then one of them applied himself wholly
to the preserving of Justice among the Citizens, with the Name of Praetor
Vrbanus, while the other appointed Judges in all Matters relating to
Foreigners. But upon the taking in of Sicily and Sardinia, A. V. C. 520. two
more Praetors were created to assist the Consuls in the Government of the
Provinces; and as many more upon the entire conquest of Spain, A. V. C. 551.
Sylla increased the number to Eight; Julius Caesar first to Ten, and then to
Sixteen; the second Triumviri, after an extravagant manner, to Sixty four.

After this, sometimes we meet with Twelve Praetors, sometimes Sixteen or
Eighteen; but in the Declension of the Empire, they fell as low again as Three.

When the number of the Praetors was thus increased, and the Quaestiones, or
Enquiries into Crimes, made perpetual, and not committed to Officers chose upon
such occasions, the Praetor Vrbanus (and, as Lipsius thinks, the Praetor
Peregrinus) undertook the Cognizance of private Causes, and the other Praetors
of Crimes. The latter therefore were sometimes called Quaesitores, quia
quaerebant de crimine; the first barely jus dicebat. Here we must observe the
difference between jus dicere and judicare; the former relates to the Praetor,
and signifies no more than the allowing an Action, and granting Judges for
determining the Controversy; the other is the proper Office of the Judices
allowed by the Praetor, and denotes the actual hearing and deciding of a Cause
P. Manut. de legibus, p. 826.
.

CHAP. VII. Of the Censors.
THE Census, or Survey of the Roman Citizens and their Estates (from Censco, to
rate, or value) was introduced by Servius Tullius, the sixth King, but without
the Assignment of any particular Officer to manage it: And therefore he took
the trouble upon himself, and made it a part of the Regal Duty. Upon the
expulsion of the Tarquins, the Business fell to the Consuls, and continued in
their care, 'till their Dominions grew so large as to give them no leisure for
its performance. Upon this account it was wholly omitted seventeen years
together, 'till A. V. C. 311. when they found the necessity of a New Magistrate
for that Employment, and thereupon created Two Censors: Their Office was to
continue five Years, because every fifth Year the General Survey of the People
used to be performed: But when they grew to be the most considerable Persons in
the State, for fear they should abuse their Authority, A. V. C. 420. a Law
passed, by which their Place was confined to a Year and a half; and therefore
for the future, though they were elected every five Years, yet they continued
to hold the Honor no longer than the time prefixed by that Law.

After the second Punick War, they were always created out of such Persons as
had been Consuls, though it sometimes happened otherwise before. Their Station
was reckoned more Honorable than the Consulship, though their Authority, in
Matters of State, was not so considerable. And the Badges of the Two Offices
were the same, only that the Censors were not allowed the Lictors to walk
before them, as the Consuls had.

Lipsius divides the Duty of the Censors into two Heads; the Survey of the
People, and the Censure of Manners. As to the former, they took an exact
account of the Estates and Goods of every Person, and accordingly divided the
People into their proper Classes and Centuries. Besides this, they took care of
the Public Taxes, and made Laws in reference to them. They were Inspectors of
the Public Buildings and Ways, and defrayed the Charges of such Sacrifices as
were made upon the Public account.

With respect to the latter part of their Office, they had the power to punish
an Immorality in any Person, of what Order soever. Sonatu ejicere.
The Senators they might expel the House, which was done by omitting such a
Person when they called over the Names. The Knights they punished by taking
away the Horse allowed them at the Public Charge. Equum adimere. Tribunum
movere. Aerarium facore.
The Commons they might either disable to give their Votes in in the
Assemblies, or set a Fine upon them to be paid to the Treasury. And sometimes
when a Senator, or Knight, had been guilty of any notorious Irregularity, he
suffered two of these Punishments, or all three at once.

The greatest part of the Censor's public Business was performed in the Campus
Martius every fifth Year; when, after the Survey of the People, and Inquisition
into their Manners, the Censors made a solemn Lustration, or expiatory
Sacrifice, in the name of all the People. The Sacrifice consisted of a Sow, a
Sheep, and a Bull, whence it took the Name of Suovetaurilia. The Ceremony of
performing it they called Lustrum condere; and upon this account the space of
Five Years came to be signified by the word Lustrum.

It Is very remarkable, that if one of the Censor's died, no body was
substituted in his room 'till the next Lustrum, and his Partner was obliged to
quit his Office; because the Death of a Censor happened just before the sacking
of Rome by the Gauls, and was ever after accounted highly ominous and
unfortunate Vide Live. lib. 4, 5, 6, 9. Plut. Probl. 50.
.

This Office continued no longer than to the time of the Emperors, who
performed the same Duty at their Pleasure. Decius the Emperor entered on a
Design to restore the Honor to a particular Magistrate as heretofore, but
without any success Vide Trebell. Poll. in Decio.
.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Quaestors.
THE Original of the Quaestors, ( a quaerendo, from getting in the Revenues of
the State) Dionysius Lib. 8.
and Livy Lib. 3.
place about A. V. C. 269. Plutarch indeed, with some small difference, referrs
the Institution to the time of Valerius Poplicola, when he allotted the Temple
of Saturn for the Treasury (to which use it always served afterward,) and
granted the People the liberty of choosing two young Men for the Treasurers
Pl^t. in Poplicol.
. This was all the Number at the beginning: but afterward, two others were
created, A. V. C. 332. to take care of the Payment of the Armies abroad, of the
selling Plunder and Booty, etc. For which purpose, they generally accompanied
the Consuls in their Expeditions; and upon this account were distinguished from
the other Quaestors, by the Name of Peregrini, and gave them occasion to assume
the Title of Vrbani. This Number continued 'till the entire Conquest of Italy;
and then it was again doubled, A. V. C. 439. The four that were now added, had
their Residence with the Proconsuls, and Propraetors in the Provinces, where
they employed themselves in regulating the Taxes and Customs due from thence to
the State. Sylla the Dictator, as Tacitus informs us Annal. lib. 1.
, created twenty Quaestors to fill up the Senate; and Dio Lib. 43.
mentions the creating of forty by Julius Caesar upon the same Design.

The chief Offices of the Quaestors were the receiving and disbursing Money;
the selling of Booty; the receiving, lodging, and carrying out Ambassadors, and
the keeping of the Decrees of Senate appointed them by Augustus Dio, lib. 54.
, which before had been under the care of the Aediles and Tribunes.

From hence came the two Offices of Quaestor Principis, or Augusti, called
sometimes Candidatus Principis, described by Brissonius Select. Antiquitat.
lib. 1. cap. 16.
; and Quaestor Palatii, instituted by Constantine the Great; answering in most
respects to the Place of the Lord Chancellor at present.

The Quaestorship was the first Office any Person could bear in the
Commonwealth, and might be undertook at the Age of Twenty four or Twenty five
Years.

CHAP. IX. Of the Tribunes of the People.
THIS Office owes its Original to a Quarrel between the Nobility and Commons,
about A. V. C. 260. when the latter making a Defection, could not be reduced
into Order, 'till they had obtained the Privilege of choosing some Magistrates
out of their own Body, for the defense of their Liberties, and to interpose in
all Grievances and Impositions offered by their Superiors Vide Dionys. lib. 6.
Live. lib. 2, etc.
. At first only two were elected; but three more were quickly added; and about
A. V. C. 297. the Number was made up ten, which continued ever after.

Their Authority was extraordinary; for though at first they pretended only to
be a sort of Protectors of the Commons, and Redressers of Public Grievances,
yet afterward they usurped the Power of doing almost whatever they pleased,
having the whole Populacy to back and secure them: And therefore they assembled
the People, preferred Laws, made Decrees, and executed them upon the
Magistrates themselves; and sometimes commanded the very Consuls to be carried
to Prison: And were, without question, the Authors of far greater Animosities
between the Nobles and Commons, than they were at first created to appease.

That which gained them the greatest security, was their repute of being
Sacrosancti, which they confirmed by a Law: So that 'twas reckoned the highest
Act of Impiety to offer them the least Injury, or so much as to interrupt them
when they were speaking.

Their interposing in Matters determined by the Senate, or other Magistrates,
was called Intercessio, and was performed by standing up, and pronouncing only
one word VETO.

As for the Ensigns of their Office, they had no Praetexta, Lictors, nor Curule
Chair; and only a sort of a Beadle, whom they called Viator went before them.

Sylla the Dictator was the first who dared put a stop to the Encroachments of
the Tribunes; but they soon recovered their old Power again, 'till the time of
the Emperors, who left them very little but the Name and Shadow of
Magistrates: This they effected as by several means, so particularly by
obliging the People to conferr the same Power and Authority on themselves;
whence they were said to be Tribunitia potestate donati.

CHAP. X. Of the Aediles.
THE Commons had no sooner prevailed with the Senate to confirm the Office of
Tribunes, but they obtained farther the Privilege to choose yearly, out of their
own Body, Two more Officers to assist those Magistrates in the discharge of
some particular Services Vide Dionys. lib. 6.
, the chief of which was the care of Public Aedifices, whence they borrowed
their Name. Rosinus, for distinction's sake, calls them Aediles Plebis. Besides
the Duty mentioned above, they had several other Employments of lesser note; as
to attend on the Tribunes of the People, and to judge some inferior Causes by
their Deputation, to rectify the Weights and Measures, prohibit unlawful
Games, and the like.

A. V. C. 389. two more Aediles were elected out of the Nobility, to inspect
the Public Games Live. lib. 6 and 7.
. They were called Aediles Curules, because they had the Honor of using the
Sella Curulis; the Name of which is generally derived a curru Vide Agell. lib.
3. cap. 18.
, because they sat upon them as they rode in their Chariots; but Lipsius
fancies they owe their Name as well as their Invention to the Curetes, a People
of the Sabines.

The Curille Aediles, besides their proper Office, were to take care of the
Building, and repair of Temples, Theaters, Baths, and other noble Structures;
and were appointed Judges in all Cases relating to the felling or exchanging of
Estates.

Julius Caesar, A. V. C. 710. added two more Aediles out of the Nobility, with
the Title of Aediles Cereales, from Ceres, because their Business was to
inspect the Public Stores of Corn and other Provisions; to supervise all the
Commodities exposed in the Markets, and to punish Delinquents in all Matters
concerning Buying and Selling Vide Di^^ lib. 43. and Pompen. lib. 2. F. de
Orig. juris.
.

CHAP. XI. Of the Decemviri.
ABout the Year of Rome 291. the People thinking themselves highly wronged,
that though they had freed themselves from the Government of the Kings, yet still
the whole Decision of Equity and Justice should lie in the Breast of the
Supreme Magistrates, without any written Statute to direct them; propounded to
the Senate by their Tribunes, that standing Laws might be made which the City
should use for ever. The Business hung in suspense several Years; at last it
was concluded to send Ambassadors to Athens, and other Grecian Cities, to make
Collections out of the best of their Constitutions, for the Service of their
Country in the new Design. Upon the return of the Commissioners, the Tribunes
claiming the Promise of the Senate to allow them a new Magistracy for the
putting the Project in execution, it was agreed, That Ten Men out of the chief
Senators should be elected: That their Power should be equal to that of the
Kings, or Consuls, for a whole Year: And, That in the mean time, all other
Offices should cease. The Decemviri having now taken the Government upon them,
agreed that only one of them should at one time enjoy the Fasces and other
Consular Ornaments; should assemble the Senate, confirm Decrees, and act in all
respects as Supreme Magistrate. To this Honor they were to succeed by turns
'till the Year was out; and the rest were obliged to differ very little in
their Habits from private Persons, to give the People the less suspicion of
Tyranny and absolute Government.

At length having made a Model out of such Laws as had been brought from
Greece, and the Customs of their own Country, they exposed it to the publicl^
View in Ten Tables, liberty being given for any Person to make Exceptions. Upon
the general Approbation of the Citizens, a Decree passed for the ratification
of the New Laws, which was performed in the presence of the Priests and Augurs,
in a most solemn and religious manner.

The War being expired, a farther continuance of this Office was voted
necessary, because something seemed yet to be wanting for the perfecting of the
Design. The Decemviri, who had procured themselves the Honor in the New
Election, quickly abused their Authority; and under pretense of reforming the
Commonwealth, showed themselves the greatest Violators of Justice and Honesty.
Two more Tables indeed they added to the First, and so seemed to have answered
the Intent of their Institution: Yet they not only kept their Office the
remaining part of that Year, but usurped it again the next, without any regard
to the Approbation of the Senate or People. And though there was some stir made
in the City for putting a stop to their Tyranny; yet they maintained their
absolute Power, 'till an Action of their chief Leader Appius gave a final Ruin
to their Authority (...) For he falling desperately in love with Virginia, the
Daughter of a Plebeian, and prosecuting his Passion by such unlawful means, as
to cause the killing of her by her own Father (the Story of which is told at
large by Livy) gave an occasion to a Mutiny in the Army, and a general Dislike
to the whole City; so that 'twas agreed in the Senate, to let the same Form of
Government return, which was in force at the Creation of the Decemviri Vide
Live. lib. 3. Dionys. lib. 8.
.

CHAP. XII. Tribuni Militum Consulari potestate.
UPON the conclusion of the Decemvirate, the first Consuls that were elected,
appearing highly inclined to favor the Commons, gave them such an opportunity
of getting an head in the State, that within three years afterward, they had
the Confidence to petition for the Priv^^ege of being made capable of the
Consulship, which had been hitherto denied them. The stiffest of the Patricians
violently opposed this Request, as a fair means to ruin their Honor and
Authority, and to bring all Persons, of whatever Quality, upon the same level.
But a War casually breaking out at the same time in the Confederate Countries,
which the Romans were obliged to assist, the Consuls, by reason of the
Dissentions upon this account in the City, could not with all their Diligence
procure any Levies to be made, because the Tribunes of the Commons opposed all
their Orders, and would let no Soldiers be listed, 'till their Petition had
been canvass'd in the Senate. In this exigency the Fathers were called
together; and after the Business had been a long time debated with great Heat
and Tumult, at last pitched upon this Expedient: That Three Magistrates should
be elected out of each Order, who being invested with the whole Consular Power,
at the end of the Year it should be in the liberty of the Senate and People to
have that Office, or Consuls for the following Year.

Both Parties readily embraced this Proposal, and accordingly proceeded to an
Election; where, though the whole design of this Stir, had been purely to
increase the Honor of the Commons, yet when the matter came to be put to the
Vote, they chose none of that Order to the new Magistracy, but conferred the
Honor on Three of the most eminent Patricians, with the Title of Tribuni
Militum Consulari potestate, about A. V. C. 310.

The first Tribunes having held their Dignity no longer than seventy Days, were
obliged to quit it, by reason that the Augurs had discovered some Flaw in their
Election; and so the Government returned to its former course, the Supreme
Command resting in the hands of the Consuls Live. lib. 4. Dionys. lib. 11.
. Afterward they were some Years chose, and some Years passed by, having rose
from Three to Six, and afterward to Eight, and the Plebeians being admitted to
a share in the Honor, 'till about A. V. C. 388. they were entirely laid aside.

CHAP. XIII. Civil Offices of less Note, or of less frequent Occurrence in
Authors; and of the Public Servants.
THERE are several Officers behind, who deserve little more than to be named,
either by reason of their low Station in the Commonwealth, or because they are
very seldom mentioned in our ordinary Classicks. Among these, we may take
notice of those that follow.

Interrex, the Supreme Magistrate, who governed between the Death of one King,
and the Election of another. This Office was took by turns by the Senators,
continuing in the hands of every Man five Days Dionys. lib. 2. Livy, lib. 1.
, or, if we believe Plutarch In Numb.
, only twelve Hours at a time. We sometimes meet with an Interrex under the
Consular Government, created to hold Assemblies, when the ordinary Magistrates
were either absent, or disabled to act by reason of their undue Election.

Tribunus, or Praefectus Celerum, the Captain of Romulus's Lifeguard, which
consisted of Three hundred of the stoutest young Men, and of the best Families
in the City, under the Name of Celeres, or Light Horse.

Praefectus Vrbis, a sort of Mayor of the City, created by Augustus, at the
Advice of his Favorite Maecenas, upon whom at first he conferred the new
Honor Dio. lib. 52. T^^uus, Annal. lib. 4, 3.
. He was to precede all other City-Magistrates, having power to receive Appeals
from the inferior Courts, and to decide almost all Causes within the Limits of
Rome, or an hundred Miles round. Before this, there was sometimes a Praefectus
Vrbis created, when the Kings, or greater Officers, were absent from the City,
to administer Justice in their room Ibid.
.

Praefectus Aerarii, an Officer chose out of such Persons as had discharged the
Office of Praetors, by Augustus, to supervise and regulate the Public Fund,
which he raised for the maintenance of the Army Dio. lib 53.
. This project was revived by several of his Successors.

Praefectus Praetorio, created by the same Emperor, to Command the Praetorian
Cohorts, or his Lifeguard, who borrowed their Name from the Praetorium, or
General's Tent, all Commanders in Chief being anciently styled Praetores. His
Office answered exactly to that of the Magister Equitum under the old
Dictators; only his Authority was of greater extent, being generally the
highest Person in Favor with the Army: And therefore when the Soldiers once
came to make their own Emperors, the common Man they pitched upon was the
Praefectus Praetorio.

Praefectus Frumenti, and Praefectus Vigilum, both owing their Institution to
the same Augustus. The first was to inspect and regulate the distribution of
Corn, which used to be often made among the common People. The other commanded
in Chief all the Soldiers appointed for a constant Watch to the City, being a
Cohort to every two Regions. His Business was to take cognizance of Thieves,
Incendiaries, idle Vagrants, and the like; and had the Power to punish all
petty Misdemeanors, which were thought too trivial to come under the care of
the Praefectus Vrbis.

In many of these inferior Magistracies, several Persons were joined in
Commission together; and then they took their Name from the number of Men that
composed them. Of this sort we meet with the

Triumviri, or Tresviri Capitales, the Keepers of the Public Gaol; they had
the Power to punish Malefactors, like our Masters of the Houses of Correction,
for which Service they kept eight Lictors under them; as may be gathered from
Plautus:

Quid faciam nunc si Tresviri me in carcerem compegerint?
Inde cras e promptuaria cella depromar ad flagrum.
Ita quasi incudem me miserum octo homines validi caedent In Amphytr.
.
Triumviri Nocturni, mentioned by Livy Lib. 9.
and Tacitus Annal. lib. 5.
, instituted for the prevention of Fires in the Night.

Triumviri Monetales, the Masters of the Mint: Sometimes their Name was wrote
Triumviri A. A. Ae. F. F. standing for Auro, Argento, Aere Flando, Feriendo.

Quatuorviri viarum curandarum; Persons deputed by the Censor to supervise the
Public Ways.

Centum viri, and Decemviri litibus judicandis: The first were a Body of Men
chose, Three out of every Tribe, for the judging of such Matters as the
Praetors committed to their Decision; which are reckoned up by Cicero in his
First Book de Oratore. The Decemviri seem to have been the principal Members of
the Centumvirate, and to have presided under the Praetor in the Judicia
Centumviralia. These were some of the first Steps to Preferment, for Persons of
Parts and Industry; as was also the Vigintiviratus, mentioned by Cicero,
Tacitus, and Dio, which perhaps was no more than a select part of the
Centumviri.

There are other Officers of as little note behind, who had no fixed Authority,
but were constituted upon some particular occasions: Such as the

Duumviri perduellionis, sive Capitales; Officers created for the judging of
Traitors. They were first introduced by Tullus Hostilius; continued, as often
as Necessity required, under the rest of the Kings, and sometimes under the
Consular Government, at its first Institution. But after they had been laid
down many Years as unnecessary, Cicero, in the latter times of the
Commonwealth, complains of their revival by Labienus, Tribune of the Commons
Cicero, Orat. pro C. Ra^^rio Perduellionis Reo.
.

Quaestores, or Quaesitores, Parricidii, vel rerum capitalium; Magistrates
chose by the People to give Judgment in capital Causes, after the Consuls were
denied that Privilege, and before the Quaestiones were made perpetual.

The Public Servants of the Magistrates had the common Name of Apparitores,
from the Word Appareo, because they always stood ready to execute their Masters
Orders. Of these, the most remarkable were the

Scribae, a sort of Public Notaries, who took an account of all the
Proceedings in the Courts: In some measure too they answered to our Attorneys,
inasmuch as they drew up the Papers and Writings which were produced before the
Judges, Notarius and Actuarius signifying much the same Office.

Accensi and Praecones, the Public Criers, who were to call Witnesses, signify
the Adjournment of the Court, and the like. The former had the Name from
Accieo, and the other from Praecieo. The Praecones seem to have had more
Business assigned them than the Accensi; as, the proclaiming Things in the
Streets; the assisting at Public Sales, to declare how much every one bids;
whereas the Accensi more nearly attended on the Magistrates.

Lictores, the Sergeants, or Beadles, who carried the Fasces before the Supreme
Magistrates, as the Interreges, Dictators, Consuls and Praetors. Besides this,
they were the public Executioners in Scourging and Beheading.

The Viatores were little different from the former, only that they went before
the Officers of less Dignity, and particularly before the Tribunes of the
Commons.

We must not forget the Carnifex, or Common Hangman, whose Business lay only in
Crucifixions. Cicero has a very good Observation of him, That by reason of the
odiousness of his Office, he was particularly forbid by the Laws to have his
Dwelling House within the City Cicero pro Rainrio.
.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Provincial Magistrates; and first of the Proconsuls.
THE Chief of the Provincial Officers were the Proconsuls. Whether the Word
ought to be wrote Proconsul, and declin^d, or Proconsule, and undeclin'd,

Grammatici certant, and adhuc sub judice lis est. We may divide these
Magistrates into four sorts:

First, Such as being Consuls, had their Office prolonged beyond the time
prefixed by Law. Secondly, Such as were invested with this Honor, either for
the Government of the Provinces, or the Command in War, who before were only in
a private Station. Thirdly, Such as immediately upon the expiration of their
Consulship, went Proconsuls into the Provinces in the time of the Commonwealth.
Fourthly, Such Governors as in the times of the Empire were sent into those
Provinces which fell to the share of the People.
Proconsuls of the two former sorts we meet with very rarely, only Livy gives
us an example of each Livy, lib. 8. lib. 26.
.

The third kind more properly enjoyed the Name and Dignity, and therefore
deserve to be described at large, with reference to their Creation,
Administration, and Return from their Command.

They were not elected by the People; but when at the Comitia Centuriata new
Consuls were designed for the following Year; one of the present Consuls
proposed to the Senate, what Provinces they would declare Consular, and what
Praetorian, to be divided among the designed Consuls and Praetors. According to
their determination, the designed Consuls presently agreed what Provinces to
enter upon at the expiration of their Office in the City, the Business being
generally decided by casting Lots.

Afterward, in the time of their Consulship, they formally got leave of the
People to undertake the Military Command, which could not be otherwise
obtained. Besides this, they procured a Decree of Senate, to determine the
extent of their Provinces, the number of their Forces, the Pay that should be
allowed them, with all other Necessaries for their Journey and Settlement.

By the passing of this Decree, they were said Ornari Provincia; and Cicero
uses in the same sense Ornari Apparitoribus, Scribis, etc. who made a part of
the Proconsul's Attendants.

Nothing now remained, but at the end of the Year to set forward for their New
Government. But we must observe, that though the Senate had given them leave to
depart, yet the Tribunes of the Commons had power to stop their Journey; and
therefore because Crassus went Proconsul into Parthia, contrary to the express
Order of the Tribune; he was generally believed to have lost the Roman Army,
and his own Life, as a Judgment on him for despising the Authority of that
Officer, whom they always counted Sacrosanctus.

At their first entrance on their Province, they spent some time in conference
with their immediate Predecessor, to be informed in the state of Things, though
their Administration began the very Day of their arrival.

Their Authority, both Civil and Military, was very extraordinary. The Winter
they generally spent in the execution of the first, and the Summer in the
discharge of the latter.

They decided Cases of Equity and Justice, either privately in their
Praetorium, or Palace; where they received Petitioners, heard Complaints,
granted Writs under their Seal, and the like; or else publicly in the
Common Hall, with the usual Ceremonies and Formalities observed in Courts of
Judicature, the Processes being in all respects the same as those at Rome.

Besides this, by virtue of their Edicts, they had the Power of ordering all
things relating to the Tributes, Taxes, Contributions, and Provisions of Corn
and Money, and whatever else belonged to the Chief Administration of Affairs.

Their return from the Command was very remarkable: They either met their
Successor at his arrival, and immediately deliliver'd into his hands the Charge
of the Army, being obliged to leave the Province in Thirty Days; or else they
came away beforehand, and left a Deputy in their room to perform the Solemnity
of a Resignation, having first made up their Accounts, and left them in writing
in the two chief Cities of their several Provinces.

Upon their arrival at Rome, if they had no Thoughts of a Triumph, they
presently dimiss'd their Train, and entered the City as private Persons. If they
aspired to this Honor, they still retained the Fasces, and other Proconsular
Ornaments, and gave the Senate (assembled for this purpose in the Temple of
Bellona) a relation of the^r Actions and Exploits, and petitioned for a Trimph.
But in both Cases they were obliged to give in their Accounts into the Public
Treasury within Thirty Days.

Though the Proconsuls ordered Matters as they pleased during their Honor; yet
at their return, a very strict account was made into the whole course of their
Government; and upon the discovery of any ill dealing, 'twas usual to prefer
Bills against them, and bring them to a formal Trial. The Crimes most commonly
objected against them were crimen peculatus, relating to their ill use of the
Public Money, and the deficiency of their Accounts: Majestatis, of Treachery
and Perfidiousness against the Commonwealth; or Repetundarum, of Oppression or
Extortion exercised upon the Inhabitants of the Provinces, whom, as their
Allies and Confederates, the Romans were obliged to Patronize and defend.

Augustus, when, at the desire of the Senate and People, he assumed the sole
Government of the Empire, among other Constitutions at the beginning of his
Reign, divided the Provinces into two parts, one of which he gave wholly over
to the People, and reserved the other for himself. After which time, only the
Governors sent into the First Division bore the Name of Proconsuls; though
they were denied the whole Military Power, and so fell short of the old
Proconsuls.

To these four sorts of Proconsuls, we may add two more from Alexander of
Naples:

First, Such as the Senate created Proconsuls without a Province, purely for
the Command of the Army, and the Care of the Military Discipline: And,
secondly, such designed Consuls as entered on their Proconsular Office, before
they were admitted to the Consulship.

CHAP. XV. Of the Provincial Praetors and Propraetors; of the Legati,
Quaestors, and Proquaestors.
IN the first times of the Commonwealth, the Provinces were governed by
Praetors; and as the Dominions of the State were enlarged, the Number of those
Magistrates was accordingly increased; yet even in those times, if they
continued in the Command of the Province, beyond the time prefixed for the
continuance of their Praetorship, they took upon them the Names of Propraetors,
though they still kept the same Authority as before.

About A. V. C. 604. the designed Praetors began to divide the Praetorian, or
lesser Provinces, by Lot, in the same manner as the Consuls did the Consular;
and when at the end of the Year they repaired to their respective Governments,
assumed the Title of Propraetors. As their creation was the same as that of the
Proconsuls; so their entrance upon their Office, and the whole course of their
Administration, was exactly answerable to theirs; only that they were allowed
but Six Lictors, with an equal Number of Fasces, whereas the Proconsuls had
Twelve of each.

Now though before the time of Augustus the Propraetors, by reason of their
presiding over the Provinces of lesser Note and Importance, were always
reckoned inferior to the Proconsuls; yet upon his division of the Provinces,
the Governors of those which fell to his share bearing the Name of
Propraetors, got the Preference of the Proconsuls, in respect of Power and
Authority, being invested with the Military Command, and continuing in their
Office as long as the Emperor pleased.

The chief Assistants of the Proconsuls, and the Propraetors, were the Legati
and the Provincial Quaestors. The former, being different in number, according
to the Quality of the Governor whom they accompanied, served for the judging
of inferior Causes, and the management of all smaller Concerns, remitting
every thing of moment to the Care of the Governor, or President.

Besides the Legati, there went with every Proconsul, or Propraetor, one or
more Quaestors, whose whole Business was concerned in managing the Public
Accounts, taking care of the Supplies of Money, Corn, and other Necessaries and
Conveniences for the maintenance of the Roman Army.

We seldom meet with Proquaestors in Authors, they being only such as performed
the Office of Quaestor in the Provinces, without the deputation of the Senate,
which was requisite to the Constitution of the proper Quaestors. This happened
either when a Quaestor died in his Office, or went to Rome without being
succeeded by another Quaestor: For in both these cases, the Governor of the
Province appointed another in his room, to discharge the same Duties under the
Name of Proquaestor.

Of the like nature with these Quaestors were the Procuratores Caesaris, often
mentioned by Tacitus and Suetonius; Officers sent by the Emperors into every
Province, to receive and regulate the Public Revenue, and to dispose of it at
the Emperor's Command.

Such a Magistrate was Pontius Pilate in Judaea; and though the judging of
extreme Causes did not properly belong to his Office; yet because the Jews were
always looked upon as a rebellious Nation, and apt to revolt upon the least
occasion; and because the President of Syria was forced to attend on other
parts of his Province; therefore for the better keeping the Jews in order, the
Procurator of Judaea was invested with all the Authority proper to the
Proconsul, even with the Power of Life and Death, as the Learned Bishop Pearson
observes Bishop Pearson on the Creed. Art. 4.
.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Comitia.
THE Comitia, according to Sigonius's Definition, were General Assemblies of
the People lawfully called by some Magistrate, for the enjoyment or prohibition
of any thing by their Votes Sigon. de Antiq Jure Civ. Romanorum, lib. 1. cap.
17.
.

The proper Comitia were of three sorts; Curiata, Genturiata, and Tributa; with
reference to the Three grand Divisions of the City and People into Curiae,
Centuries, and Tribes: For by Comitia Calata, which we sometimes meet with in
Authors, in elder times were meant all the Comitia in general, the Word Calata,
from (...), or Calo, being their common Epithet; though 'twas at last
restrained to two sorts of Assemblies, those for the creation of Priests, and
those for the inspection and regulation of last Wills and Testaments A. Gell.
lib. 15. cap. 27.
.

The Comitia Curiata owe their Original to the Division which Romulus made of
the People into Thirty Curiae, Ten being contained under every Tribe. They
answered, in most respects, to the Parishes in our Cities, being not only
separated by proper Bounds and Limits, but distinguished too by their different
Places set apart for the celebration of Divine Service, which was performed by
particular Priests (one to every Curia) with the Name of Curiones.

Before the Institution of the Comitia Centuriata, all the grand Concerns of
the State were transacted in the Assembly of the Curia's; as, the Election of
Kings, and other Chief Officers, the making and abrogating of Laws, and the
adjudging of capital Causes. After the expulsion of the Kings, when the Commons
had obtained the Privilege to have Tribunes and Aediles, they elected them for
some time at these Assemblies: But that Ceremony being at length transferred to
the Comitia Tributa, the Curiae were never convened to give their Votes, except
now and then upon account of making some particular Laws, relating to
Adoptions, Wills, and Testaments, or the Creation of Officers for an
Expedition; or for the Electing of some of the Priests, as the Flamines, and
the Curio maximus, or Superintendant of the Curiones, who themselves were chose
by every particular Curia.

The Power of Calling these Assemblies belonged at first only to the Kings; but
upon the establishment of the Democracy, the same Privilege was allowed to most
of the Chief Magistrates, and sometimes to the Pontifices.

The Person who had the liberty of Voting here were such Roman Citizens as
belonged to the Curiae; or such as actually lived in the City, and conformed to
the Customs and Rites of their proper Curia; all those being excluded who dwelt
without the Bounds of the City, retaining the Ceremonies of their own Country,
though they had been Honored with the Jus Civitatis, or admitted free Citizens
of Rome Sigon. de Antiq. jure Provinc. lib. 3. cap. 1.
.

The place where the Curiae met was the Comitium, a part of the Forum described
before See Part II. Book 1. cap. 5.
.

No set time was allotted for the holding of these or any of the other Comitia,
but only as Business required.

The People being met together, and confirmed by the report of good Omens from
the Augurs (which was necessary in all the Assemblies) the Rogatio, or Business
to be proposed to them, was publicly read. After this (if none of the
Magistrates interposed) upon the Order of him that presided in the Comitia, the
People divided into their proper Curia's, and consulted of the matter; and then
the Curia's being called out, as it happened by Lot, gave their Votes, Man by
Man, in ancient times viva voce, and afterward by Tablets; Tabellae.
the most Votes in every Curia going for the Voice of the whole Curia, and the
most Curiae for the general Consent of the People ^^si^. lib. 7 cap. 7.
.

The Comitia Centuriata were instituted by Servius Tullius; who obliging every
one to give a true account of what they were worth, according to those
Accounts, divided the People into six Ranks, or Classes, which he subdivided
into 193 Centuries. The first Classis containing the Equites and richest
Citizens, consisted of Ninety eight Centuries. The second, taking in the
Tradesmen and Mechanics, made up Two and twenty Centuries. The third, the
same number. The fourth, Twenty. The fifth, Thirty. And the last, filled up
with the poorer sort, had but one Century See Dionys lib. 4.
.

Persons of the First Rank, by reason of their Pre-eminence, had the Name of
Classici; whence came the Phrase of Classici Authors, for the most approved
Writers. All others, of what Classis soever, were said to be infra classem A.
Gell. lib. 7. chap. 13.
.

The Assembly of the People by Centuries was held for the electing of Consuls,
Censors, and Praetors; as also for the judging of Persons accused of what they
called Crimen Perduellionis, or Actions by which the Party had showed himself
an Enemy to the State; and for the confirmation of all such Laws as were
proposed by the Chief Magistrates, and which had the Privilege of calling these
Assemblies.

The Place appointed for their Meeting was the Campus Martius; because in the
primitive Times of the Commonwealth, when they were under continual
Apprehensions of Enemies, the People, to prevent any sudden assault, when armed
in martial order to hold these Assemblies; and were for that reason forbid by
the Laws to meet in the City, because an Army was upon no account to be
martial'd within the Walls; Yet in later Ages, 'twas thought sufficient to
place a Body of Soldiers as a Guard in the Janiculum, where an Imperial
Standard was erected, the taking down of which denoted the conclusion of the
Comitia.

Though the time of these Comitia for other Matters was undetermined; yet the
Magistrates, after the Year of the City 601. when they began to enter on their
Place, the Kalends of January were constantly designed, about the end of July,
and the beginning of August.

All the time between their Election and Confirmation, they continued as
private Persons, that inquisition might be made into the Election, and the
other Candidates might have time to enter Objections, if they met with any
suspicion of foul dealing. Yet at the Election of the Censors, this Custom did
not hold; but as soon as they were pronounced elected, they were immediately
invested with the Honor Livy, lib. 40.


By the institution of these Comitia, Servius Tullius secretly conveyed the
whole Power from the Commons: For the Centuries of the first and richest Class
being called out first, who were Three more in number than all the rest put
together, if they all agreed, as generally they did, the Business was already
decided, and the other Classes were needless and insignificant. However, the
Three last scarce ever came to Vote Dionys. lib. 4.
.

The Commons, in the time of the Free State, to rectify this Disadvantage,
obtained, that before they proceeded to Voting any Matter at these Comitia,
that Century should give their Suffrages first upon whom it fell by Lot, with
the Name of Centuris Prerogativa, the rest being to follow according to the
Order of their Classis. After the constituting of the Five and thirty Tribes,
into which the Classes and their Centuries were divided, in the first place the
Tribes cast Lots which should be the Prerogative-Tribe; and then the Centuries
of that Tribe, for the Honor of being the Prerogative-Century. All the other
Tribes and Centuries had the appellation of Jure vocatae, because they were
called out according to their proper places.

The Prerogative-Century being chose by lot, the Chief Magistrate sitting in a
Tabernaculum.
Tent in the middle of the Campus Martius, ordered that Century to come out and
give their Voices; upon which, they presently separated from the rest of the
Multitude, and came into an enclosed Apartment, which they termed Septa, or
Ovilia, passing over the Pontes, or narrow Boards, laid there for the occasion;
on which account de Ponte dejici is to be denied the privilege of Voting.

At the hither end of the Pontes stood the Diribitores (a sort of
Underofficers, called so from dividing or martialling the People) and
delivered to every Man, in the election of Magistrates, as many Tablets as
there appeared Candidates, Tabellae.
one of whose Names was wrote upon every Tablet.

A fit number of great Chests were set ready in the Septa, and every body threw
in which Tablet he pleased.

By the Chests were placed some of the public Servants, who taking out the
Tablets of every Century, for every Tablet made a Prick, or a Point, in another
Table which they kept by them. Thus the Business being decided by most Points,
gave occasion to the Phrase of Omne tulit punctum (a), and the like.

The same method was observed in the judiciary Processes at these Comitia, and
in the Confirmation of Laws; except that in both these cases only two Tablets
were offered to every Person, on one of which was wrote V. R. and on the other
A. in capital Letters; the two first standing for uti rogas, or, be it as you
desire, relating to the Magistrate who proposed the Question; and the last for
antiquo, or, I forbid it.

It Is remarkable, that though in the Election of Magistrates, and in the
Ratification of Laws, the Votes of that Century whose Tablets were equally
divided, signified nothing; yet in Trials of Life and Death, if the Tablets pro
and con were the same in number, the Person was actually acquitted Dionys. lib.
7.
.

The division of the People into Tribes, was an invention of Romulus, after he
had admitted the Sabines into Rome; and though he constituted at that time only
Three, yet as the State increased in Power, and the City in number of
Inhabitants, they rose by degrees to Five and Thirty. The distinction of Tribus
Vrbanae, and Rusticae, was at first taken up for a difference between those
People who inhabited the City, and those who dwelt in other parts: But at last
the Country-Tribes being esteemed the most Honorable, engrossed the whole
number except Four.

The first Assembly of the Tribes we meet with, is about the Year of Rome 263.
convened by Sp. Picinius, Tribune of the Commons, upon account of the Trial of
Coriolanus. Soon after, the Tribunes of the Commons were ordered to be elected
here; and at last, all the inferior Magistrates, and the Collegiate Priests.
The same Comitia served for the enacting of Laws relating to War and Peace, and
all others proposed by the Tribunes and Plebeian Officers; though they had not
properly the Name of Leges, but Plebiscita. They were generally convened by the
Tribunes of the Commons; but the same Privilege was allowed to all the
Magistrates. Hor. de Art Poet:


They were confined to no place, and therefore sometimes we find them held in
the Comitium, sometimes in the Campus Martius, and now and then in the Capitol.

The Proceedings were, in most respects, answerable to those already described
in the account of the other Comitia, and therefore need not be insisted on;
only we may farther observe of the Comitia in general, that when any Candidate
was found to have most Tablets for a Magistracy, he was declared to be
designed, or elected, by the President of the Assembly; and this they termed
renunciari Consul, Praetor, or the like: And that the last sort of the Comitia
only could be held without the Consent and Approbation of the Senate, which was
necessary to the convening of the other two Dionys. lib. 9.
.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Roman Judgments; and first of Private Judgments.
A Judgment, according to Aristotle's definition, is no more than (...), the
decision of Right and Wrong.

The whole subject of the Roman Judgments is admirably explained by Sigonius,
in his Three Books de Judiciis, from whom the following Account is for the most
part extracted.

Judgments, or Determinations of a proper Judge, were made either by a
competent number of select Judges, or by the whole People in a General Assembly.

Judgments made by one or more select Judges, may be divided into public and
private; the first relating to Controversies, the second to Crimes.

The former will be sufficiently described, if we consider the Matter, or
Subject, of these Judgments, the Persons concerned in them, and the manner of
proceeding.

The matter of private Judgments takes in all sort of Causes that can happen
between Man and Man; which being so vastly extended, and belonging more
immediately to the Civil Law, need not here be insisted on.

The Persons concerned were the Parties, the Assistants, and the Judges.

The Parties were the Actor and Reus, the Plaintiff and Defendant.

The Assistants were the Procuratores, and the Advocati, of whom, though they are
often confounded, yet the first were properly such Lawyers as assisted the
Plaintiff in proving, or the Defendant in clearing himself from the matter of
Fact: The other, who were likewise called Patroni, were to defend their Clients
Cause in matters of Law Zouch, Element. Jurisprud. p. 5. Sect. 3.
.

Both these were selected out of the ablest Lawyers, and had their Names entered
in the Matriculation-Book of the Forum. This was one Condition requisite to
give them the liberty of Pleading; the other was the being retained by one
Party, or the receiving a Fee, which they termed Mandatum Ibid.
.

The Judges, besides the Praetor, or supreme Magistrate, who presided in the
Court, and allowed and confirmed them, were of three sorts. Arbitri,
Recuperatores, and Centumviri litibus judicandis.

Arbitri, whom they called simply judices, were appointed to determine in some
private Causes of no great Consequence, and of very easy decision.

Recuperatores were assigned to decide the Controversies about receiving or
recovering things which had been lost or taken away.

But the usual Judges in private Causes, were the Centumviri; three of which
were taken out of every Tribe, so that their number was five more than their
Name imported. It Is probable that the Arbitri and Recuperatores were assigned
out of this Body by the Praetor.

The manner of carrying on the private Suits was of this nature. The difference
failing to be made up between Friends, the injured Person proceeded in jus reum
vocare, to summon or cite the offending Party to the Court; who was obliged
immediately to go with him, or else to give Bond for his appearance; according
to the common Maxim, In jus vocatus aut eat aut satisdet.

Both Parties being met before the Praetor, or other supreme Magistrate
presiding in the Court, the Plaintiff proposed the Action to the Defendant, in
which he designed to sue him: This they termed Edere actionem, being performed
commonly by writing it in a Tablet, and offering it to the Defendant, that he
might see whether he had best compound or stand the Suit.

In the next place came the postulatio actionis, or the Plaintiff's desiring
leave of the Praetor to prosecute the Defendant in such an Action: This being
granted, the Plaintiff, vadabatur reum, obliged him to give Sureties for his
appearance on such a Day in the Court; and this was all that was done in
public before the prefixed Day for the Trial.

In the mean time the difference used very often to be made up, either
Transactionc, or Pacto, by letting the Cause fall as dubious and uncertain; or
by composition for so much damage, to be ascertained by an equal number of
Friends.

On the Day appointed for the hearing, the Praetor ordered the several Bills to
be read, and the Parties to be summoned by an Accensus or Beadle. Upon the
default of either Party, the Defaulter lost his Cause. The appearing of both
they termed se stitisse; and then the Plaintiff proceeded litem sive actionem
intendere, to prefer the Suit; which was performed in a set Form of Words,
varying according to the difference of the Actions. After this the Plaintiff
desired Judgment of the Praetor; that is, to be allowed a Judex or Arbiter, or
else the Recuperatores or Centumviri, for the hearing and deciding the
business; but none of these could be desired, unless both Parties agreed. The
Praetor, when he assigned them their Judges, at the same time defined the
number of Witnesses, to hinder the protracting of the Suit; and then the
Parties proceeded to give caution, that the Judgment, whatever it was, should
stand and be performed on both sides. The Judges always took a solemn Oath to
be impartial; and the Parties swore they did not go to Law with a design to
abuse one another: This they called Juramentum calumniae. Then began the
Disceptatio causae, or disputing the Case, managed by the Lawyers on both
sides, with the assistance of Witnesses, Writings, and the like; the use of
which is so admirably taught in their Books of Oratory.

In giving Sentence, the major part of the Judges was required to overthrow the
Defendant. If the number was equally divided, the Defendant was actually
cleared; and if half condemned him in one Sum to be paid, and half in another,
the least Sum always stood good Z^uch, Element. p. 5. Sect. 10.
.

The consequence of the Sentence was either in integrum restitutio, addictio,
judicium calumniae, or judicium falsi.

The first was, when upon Petition of the Party who was overthrown, the Praetor
gave him leave to have the Suit come on again, and allow him another full
hearing.

Addictio was, when the Party who had been cast in such a Sum, unless he gave
Surety to pay it in a little time, was brought by the Plaintiff before the
Praetor, who delivered him into his disposal, to be committed to Prison, or
otherwise secured, 'till satisfaction were made.

Judicium Calumniae, was an Action brought against the Plaintiff for false
Accusation.

Judicium falsi, was an Action which laid against the Judges for Corruption and
unjust Proceedings.

CHAP. XVII. Of Public Judgments.
FOR the knowledge of Public Judgments, we may take notice of the Crimes, of
the Punishments, of the Quaesitors and Judges, of the method of proceeding, and
of the consequences of the Trial.

The Crimes, or the matter of the Public Judgments, were such Actions as
tended either mediately or immediately, to the prejudice of the State, and were
forbid by the Laws. As if any Person had derogated from the Honor and Majesty
of the Commonwealth; had imbezzel'd or put to ill uses the public Money, or
any Treasure consecrated to Religion; or had corrupted the Peoples Votes in an
Election; or had extorted Contributions from the Allies; or received Money in
any Judgment; or had used any violent Compulsion to a Member of the
Commonwealth: These they termed Crimina Majestatis, peculatus, ambitus,
repetundarum, and vis publicae: Or if any Person had killed another with a
Weapon, or effected the same with Poison; or laid violent Hands on his Parents;
or had forged a Will; or counterfeited the public Coin; or had corrupted
another Man's Wife; or had bought, bound, or concealed a Servant without the
knowledge of his Master: Whence these Crimes took the Names, inter sicarios,
veneficii, parricidii, falsi, adulterii, plagii.

Besides these, any private Cause, by virtue of a new Law, might be made of
public Cognizance.

As to the Punishments, they may be allowed a Chapter by themselves hereafter.

The Inquisition of Criminal Matters belonged at first to the Kings, and, after
the abrogation of that Government, for some time to the Consuls: But being
taken from them by the Valerian Law, it was conferred, as Occasions happened,
upon Officers deputed by the People, with the Title of Quaesitores Parricidii.
But about the Year of the City 604. this power was made perpetual, and
appropriated to the Praetors, by virtue of an Order of the People at their
annual Election; the Inquisition of such and such Crimes being committed to
such and such Praetors: Yet upon extraordinary Occasions the People could
appoint other Quaesitores, if they thought convenient.

Next to the Quaesitor, was the Judex quaestionis; who, though he is sometimes
confounded with the Praetor, yet was properly a Person of Note, deputed by the
Praetor to manage the Trial, of which he himself performed only the main
business.

After him were the Judices selecti, who were summoned by the Praetor to give
their Verdict in Criminal Matters, in the same manner as our Juries. They were
chose every Year to a set number desin'd by the Laws, which by reason of the
preferring of new Laws, often varied.

As to the method of the Proceedings, the first Action, which they termed in
jus vocatio, was much the same in public as in private Causes: But then, as
the Postulatio of the Plaintiff consisted in desiring leave of the Praetor to
enter a Suit against the Desendant; so here the Accuser desired permission to
enter the Name of the Offender, with the Crime which he objected to him: This
they called Nomiras delatio; being performed first viva in a set Form of Words,
according to the nature of the Crime, and then offered to the Praetor, being
wrote in a Tablet; if approved by the Praetor, the accused Party's Name was
entered in the Roll of Criminals; both Persons having taken the Oath of Calum^^
already spoken of.

At the entrance of the Name, the Praetor appointed a set Day for the Trial:
And from that time the accused Person changed his Habit, going in Black 'till
the Trial was over, and using in his Dress and Carriage all Tokens of Sorrow
and Concern.

Upon the appointed Day, the Court being met, and both Parties appearing, the
first thing that was done, was the sortitio judicum, or impannelling the Jury;
performed commonly by the Judex Quaestionis, who took by Lot such a number out
of the Body of the Judices selecti, as the particular Law on which the
Accusation was founded, had determined; Liberty being given to both Parties to
reject (or, as we call it, to challenge) any that they pleased, the Praetor or
Judex Quaestionis substituting others in their Places.

The Jury being thus chose was cited by the public Servants of the Court; and
when the proper number appeared, they were sworn, and then took their places in
the Subsellia, and heard the Trial.

In this we may reckon four Parts, Accusatio, Defensio, Laudatie, and Latio
sententiae.

Accusatio is desin'd, perpetua^oratio ad crimina inferenda atque augenda
artificiose composita, A continued Oration artificially composed for the making
out and heightning the Crimes alleged: For it did not only consist in giving a
plain Narration of the matter of Fact, and confirming it by Witnesses and other
Evidences; but in bringing of other Arguments too, drawn from the nature of the
thing, from the Character of the accused Person, and his former course of Life,
from the circumstances of the Fact, and several other Topics, which the
Orators teach us to enlarge upon: Nor was the Accuser limited in respect of
time, being allowed commonly as many Days as he pleased, to make good his
Charge.

Defensio belonged to the Lawyers or Advocates retained by the accused Party,
who in like manner were allowed to speak as many Days as they pleased, toward
the clearing of their Client. The three common Methods they took, were Facti
negatio, negatio nominis facti, or probatio jure factum: either plainly to deny
the matter of Fact, and endeavor to evince the contrary; or else to
acknowledge the Fact, and yet to deny that it fell under the nature of the
Crime objected: Or, lastly, to prove the Fact lawful.

The first way of Defense was generally used when the Person stood indicted of
what they called crimen repetundarum, and crimen ambitus; the next in the
crimen Majestatis, and the last in cases of Murder.

Cicero has given us an excellent Example in every kind. Of the first in his
Orations for Fonteius, Flaccus, Muraena, and Plancius: Of the second in that
for Cornelius; and of the third in his admirable defense of Milo.

Laudatio was a custom like that in our Trials, of bringing in Persons of
credit to give their Testimony of the accused Person's good Behavior, and
integrity of Life. The least number of these Laudatores used to be Ten.

In the latio sententiae, or pronouncing Sentence, they proceeded thus: After
the Orators on both sides had said all they designed, the Crier gave notice of
it accordingly; and then the Praetor sent out the Jury to consult, (mittebat
judices in consilium) delivering to every one Three Tablets covered with Wax,
one of Absolution, another of Condemnation, and a third of Ampliation, or
Adjournment of the Trial; the first being marked with A; the second with C; the
other with N, L. or non liquet.

In the place where the Jury withdrew was set a proper number of Urns, or
Boxes, into which they threw what Tablet they pleased; the accused Person
prostrating himself all this while at their Feet, to move their Compassion.

The Tablets being drawn, and the greatest number known, the Praetor pronounced
Sentence accordingly. The Form of Condemnation was usually videntur fecisse, or
non jure videtur fecisse: Of Absolution, non videtur fecisse: Of Ampliation,
amplius cognoscendum. Sometimes he mentioned the Punishment, and sometimes left
it out, as being determined by the Law, on which the Indictment was grounded.

The consequences of the Trial in criminal Matters may be reduced to these four
Heads, Aestimatio litis, Animadversio, Judicium calumniae, and Judicium
praevaricationis.

Aestimatio litis; or the rating of the Damages, was in use only in Cases of
Bribery, and abuse of the public Money.

Animadversio, was no more than the putting the Sentence in execution, which
was left to the care of the Praetor.

But in case the Party was absolved, there lay two Actions against the Accuser;
one of Calumny, the common Punishment of which was frontis inustio, burning in
the Forehead: And the other of Prevarication, when the Accuser, instead of
urging the Crime home, seemed rather to hide or extenuate the Guilt: Hence the
Civilians define a Prevaricator, to be one that betrays his Cause to the
Adversary, and turns on the Criminal's side when be ought to prosecute.

CHAP. XIX. Judgments of the whole People.
THE People were sometimes the Judges both in private and public Causes; though
of the first we have only one Example in Livy Lib. 3.
; the other we frequently meet with in Authors.

These Judgments were made first at the Comitia Curiata, and afterward at the
Centuriata, and Tributa; the Proceedings in all which Assemblies have been
already shown: What we may further observe is this: When any Magistrate
designed to impeach a Person of a Crime before the whole People, he ascended
the Rostra, and calling the People together by a Crier, signified to them, That
upon such a Day he intended to accuse such a Person of such a Crime: This they
termed reo diem dicere: The suspected Party was obliged immediately to give
Sureties for his Appearance on the Day prefixed, and in default of Bail was
commanded to Prison.

On the appointed Day the Magistrate again ascended the Rostra, and cited the
Party by the Crier; who, unless some other Magistrate of equal Authority
interposed, or a sufficient Excuse was offered, was obliged to appear, or might
be punished at the Pleasure of the Magistrate who accused him. If he appeared,
the Accuser began his Charge, and carried it on every other Day for six Days
together; at the end of the Indictment, mentioning the particular Punishment
specified in the Law for such an Offense: This intimation they termed
anquisitio. The same was immediately after expressed in Writing, and then took
the Name of Rogatio, in respect of the People who were to be asked or consulted
about it; and Irrogatio in respect of the Criminal, as it imported the Mulct or
Punishment assigned him by the Accuser. This Rogatio was publicly exposed
three Nundinae, or Market-days together, for the information of the People. On
the third Market Day the Accuser again ascended the Rostra; and, the People
being called together, undertook the fourth turn of his Charge, and having
concluded, gave the other Party leave to enter upon his Defense, either in his
own Person, or by his Advocates.

At the same time as the Accuser finished his fourth Charge, he gave notice
what Day he would have the Comitia meet to receive the Bill, the Comitia Tributa to
consider of Mulcts, and the Centuriata for Capital Punishments.

But in the mean time there were several ways by which the accused Party might
be relieved,; as first, if the Tribunes of the Commons interposed in his
behalf; or if he excused himself by voluntary Exile, Sickness, or upon account
of providing for a Funeral; or if he prevailed with the Accuser to relinquish
his Charge, and let the Cause fall; or if upon the Day appointed for the
Comitia, the Augurs discovered any ill Omens; and so forbad the Assembly.

If none of these happened, the Comitia met, and proceeded, as has been already
described; and as for the Animadversio, or putting the Sentence in execution,
this was performed in the same manner as in the Praetorian Judgments.

The Forms of Judgments which have been thus described, must be supposed to
have prevailed chiefly in the time of the free State: For as the Kings before,
so the Emperors afterward were themselves Judges in what Causes, and after
what manner they pleased; as Suetonius particularly informs us of almost all
the Twelve Caesar's. 'Twas this gave occasion to the rise of the Mandatores and
Delatores, a sort of Wretches to be met with in every part of History. The
business of the former was to mark down such Persons as upon Inquisition they
pretended to have found guilty of any Misdemeanour; and the latter were
employed in accusing and prosecuting them upon the other's Order. This
mischievous Tribe, as they were countenanced and rewarded by ill Princes, so
were they extremely detested by the good Emperors. Titus prosecuted all that
could be found upon the most diligent search, with Death or perpetual
Banishment Sueton. in Tit. cap. 8.
: And Pliny reckons it among the greatest Praises of Trajan, that he had
cleared the City from the perjured Race of Informers Plin. in Panegyric.
.

CHAP. XX. Of the Roman Punishments.
THE accurate Sigonius has divided the Punishments into eight sorts, Damnum,
Vincula, Verbera, Talio, Ignominia, Exilium, Servitus, Mors.

Damnum was a pecuniary Mulct or Fine set upon the Offender, according to the
quality of the Crime.

Vincula signifies the guilty Person's being condemned to Imprisonment and
Fetters; of which they had many sorts, as Manicae, Pedicae, Nervi, Boiae, and
the like. The public Prison in Rome was built by Ancus Martius, hard by the
Forum Livy, lib. 1.
: To which a new part was added by Servius Tullius, called thence Tullianum:
Sallust describes the Tullianum as an Apartment underground In Bello Catilinar.
, into which they put the most notorious Criminals. The higher part, raised by
Ancus Martius, has commonly the Name of the R^bur; from the Oaken Planks which
composed it. For the keeping of the Prison, besides the Triumviri, was
appointed a sort of Jailer, whom Valerius Maximus calls Custos caceris Lib. 5.
, and Pliny Commentariensis Lib. 7. cap. 38.
.

Verbera, or Stripes, were inflicted either with Rods [Virgae] or with Battoons
[Fustes:] The first commonly preceded capital Punishments, properly so called:
The other was most in use in the Camp, and belonged to the Military Discipline.

Talio was a Punishment by which the guilty Person suffered exactly after the
same manner as he had offended; as in Cases of maiming, and the like. Yet
Agellius informs us, that the Criminal was allowed the liberty of compounding
with the Person he had injured; so that he needed not suffer the Talio unless
he voluntarily chose it Vide Agell. lib. 11. cap. 1.
.

Ignominia was no more than a public Shame which the offending Person
underwent, either by virtue of the Praetor's Edict, or more commonly by Order
of the Censor: This Punishment, besides the Scandal, took away from the Party
on whom 'twas inflicted the Privilege of bearing any Office, and almost all
other Liberties of a Roman Citizen.

Exilium was not a Punishment immediately, but by consequence; for the Phrase
used in the Sentence and Laws was Aquae and ignis interdictio, the forbidding
the use of Water and Fire, which being necessary for Life, the condemned Person
was obliged to leave his Country. Yet in the times of the later Emperors, we
find it to have been a positive Punishment, as appears from the Civil Law.
Relegatio may be reckoned under this Head, though it were something different
from the former; this being the sending a Criminal to such a Place, or for such
a Time, or perhaps for ever, by which the Party was not deprived of the
Privilege of a Citizen of Rome, as he was in the first sort of Banishment,
which they properly called Exilium. Suetonius speaks of a new sort of
Relegatio, invented by the Emperor Claudius; by which he ordered suspected
Persons not to stir three Miles from the City Suet. in Claud. cap. 23.
. Besides this Relegatio they had two other kinds of Banishment, which they
termed Deportatio and Proscriptio; though nothing is more common than to have
them confounded in most Authors. Deportatio, or Transportation differed in
these Respects from Relegatio; that whereas the Relegati were condemned either
to change their Country for a set time or for for ever, and lost neither their
Estate and Goods, nor the Privilege of Citizens: On the contrary the Deportati
were banished always for ever, and lost both their Estates and Privileges,
being counted dead in the Law Cal^^n. (...) J^r^d^c. in voc. Dep^rtati and
Relega^.
As for the Proscripti they are defined by the Lawyers to be such Persons whose
Names were fixed up in Tablets at the Forum, to the end that they might be
brought to Justice; a Reward being proposed to those that took them, and a
Punishment to those that concealed them Ibid in voce Proscripti.
. Sylla was the first Inventor of this Practice, and gave himself the greatest
Example of it that we meet with, proscribing 2000 Knights and Senators at once
Fl^ru^, lib. 3. ^ap. ^1.
. It Is plain, that this was not a positive Banishment, but a forcing Persons to
make use of that security; so that we may fansy it of like nature with our
Outlawry.

Servitus was a Punishment, by which the Criminal's Person as well as Goods was
publicly exposed to sale by Auction: This rarely happened to the Citizens, but
was an usual way of treating Captives taken in War, and therefore will be
described hereafter.

Under the Head of Capital Punishments the Romans reckoned extreme Bunishment,
because those who underwent that Sentence were in a civil Sense dead. Mors.
But because this Punishment has been already described, we are only now to
take notice of such as reached the Offenders Life.

The chief of these were, Percussio securi, Strangulatio, Praecipitatio de
robore, Dejectio e rupe Tarpeia, in crucem actio, and Projectio in profluentem.

The first was the same as beheading with us.

The second was performed in the Prison, as it is now in Turkey.

The third and fourth were a throwing the Criminal headlong, either from that
part of the Prison called Robur; or from the highest part of the Tarpeian
Mountain.

The fifth Punishment, namely Crucifixion, was seldom inflicted on any but
Slaves, or the meanest of the Commons; yet we find some Examples of a different
Practice; and Suetonius particularly relates of the Emperor Galba, that having
condemned a Roman Citizen to suffer this Punishment for poisoning his Ward, the
Gentleman, as he was carrying to Execution, made a grievous complaint, that a
Citizen of Rome should undergo such a servile Death; alleging the Laws to the
contrary: The Emperor hearing his Plea, promised to alleviate the shame of his
Sentence, and ordered a Cross much larger and more neat than ordinary to be
erected, and to be washed over with White Paint, that the Gentleman who stood
so much on his Quality might have the Honor to be hanged in State Sueton. in
Galba, cap 9.
.

The Cross and the Furca are commonly taken for the same thing in Authors;
though, properly speaking, there was a great difference between them. The Furca
is divided by Lipsius into Ignominiosa and Poenalis. The former Plutarch
describes to be that piece of Wood which supports the Thill of a Wagon: He
adds, that 'twas one of the greatest Penances for a Servant who had offended,
to take this upon his Shoulders, and carry it about the Neighborhood; for
whoever was seen with this infamous Burden, had no longer any Credit or Trust
among those who knew it, but was called Furciser by way of Ignominy and
Reproach Vide Plutarch. in Coriolane.
. Furca poenalis was a piece of Wood, much of the same shape as the former,
which was fastened about the convicted Person's Neck, he being generally either
scourged to death under it; or lifted up by it upon the Cross. Lipsius makes it
the same with the Patibulum, and fancies that for all the Name, it might not be
a forked piece of Timber, but rather a straight Beam, to which the Criminal's
Arms being stretched out, were tied; and which, being holsted up at the place
of Execution, served for the transverse part of the Cross.

Projectio in profluentem was a Punishment proper to the Crime of Parricide;
(or the Murder of any near Relation.) The Person convicted of this unnatural
Guilt was immediately hooded, as unworthy of the common Light: In the next
place he was whipped with Rods, and then sowed up in a Sack and thrown into the
Sea; or, in Inland Countries, into the next Lake or River. Afterward, for an
Addition to the Punishment, a Serpent used to be put into the Sack with the
Criminal; and by degrees, in later times, an Ape, a Dog, and a Cock. The Sack
which held the Malefactor, was termed Culeus; and hence the Punishment it self
is often signified by the same Name. The reason of the addition of the living
Creatures is thought to have been, that the condemned Persons might be
tormented with such troublesome Company, and that their Carcasses might want
both burial and rest. Juvenal expressly alludes to this Custom in his eighth
Satyr.

Libera si dentur populo suffragia, quis tam
Perditus, ut dubitet Senecam praeferre Neroni,
Cujus supplicio non debuit una parari
Simia, non Serpens unus, non culeus unus?
Had we the freedom to express our Mind,
There Is not a Wretch so much to Vice inclined,
But will own Seneca did far excel
His Pupil, by whose Tyranny he fell,
To expiate whose complicated Guilt
With some proportion to the Blood he spilt,
Rome should more Serpents, Apes, and Sacks provide
Than one, for the Compendious Parricide.
[Mr. Stepney. The same Poet in another place intimates, that this Sack was
made of Leather Sat, 1^. verse. 155.
.

Tully in his Defense of Sextus Roscius, who stood arraigned for Parricide, has
given an admirable account of this Punishment with the Reasons on which it was
grounded, particularly that the Malefactor was thrown into the Sea sowed up in
a Sack, for fear he should pollute that Element, which was reckoned the common
Purifier of all things.

Besides the Punishments mentioned by Sigonius, who seems to consider the Roman
People as in a free State, we meet with abundance of others, either invented or
revived in the times of the Emperors, and especially in later Ages: Among these
we may take notice of three as the most considerable, Ad Ludos, ad Metalla, ad
Bestias.

The Lawyers divide Ludus, when they take it for a Punishment, into Venatorius
and Gladiatorius Calvin. Lexicon. Juridie.
. By the former the convicted Persons (commonly Slaves) were obliged to engage
with the wild Beasts in the Amphitheatre; by the latter they were to perform
the part of Gladiators, and satisfy Justice by killing one another.

Ad Metalla, or a condemning to work in the Mines, Suidas would have to be
invented by Tarquinius Superbus In voce (...).
. Whatever reason he had for his Assertion, it is certain we rarely find it
mentioned 'till the times of the later Emperors; and particularly in the
Histories of the Persecutions of the Christians, who were usually sent in great
numbers to this laborious and slavish Employment, with the Name of Metallici.

The throwing of Persons to wild Beasts was never put in execution but upon the
vilest and most despicable Malefactors in Crimes of the highest nature. This
too was the common Doom of the Primitive Christians; and it is to the accounts
of their Suffetings we are beholden for the knowledge of it. It may be
observed, that the Phrase, ad Bestias dari, signifies as well such Criminals as
were condemned to fight with the Beasts, as those who were delivered to them to
be devoured Ca'vin, in vo^ ad Bestias dar^.
: And the former of these were properly termed Bestiarii Ibid. in Bestiarii.
.

There Is still one Punishment behind worth our Observation, and which seems to
have been proper to Incendiaries, and that was the wrapping up the Criminal in
a sort of Coat, daubed over with Pitch, and then setting it on fire. Thus when
Nero had burnt Rome to satisfy his curiosity with the Prospect, he contrived
to lay the Odium on the Christians, as a sort of Men generally detested; and
seizing on all he could discover, ordered them to be lighted up in this manner,
and to serve for Tapers in the dark; which was a much more cruel Jest than the
former that occasioned it. Juvenal alludes to this Custom in his eighth Satyr.

Ausi quod liceat tu^ica pumre mol^st^.
To recompense whose barbarous Intent
Pitched Shirts would prove a legal Punishment.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Roman Laws in general.
IN the beginning of the Roman State, we are assured all things were managed by
the sole Authority of the King, without any certain Standard of Justice and
Equity. But when the City grew tolerably populous, and was divided by Romulus
into Thirty Curiae, he began to prefer Laws at the Assembly of those Curiae,
which were confirmed, and universally received. The like practice was followed
by Numa, and several other Kings; all whose Constitutions being collected into
one Body, by Sextus Papirius, who lived in the time of Tarquin the Proud, took
from him the Name of Jus Papirianum.

But all these were abrogated soon after the expulsion of the Royal Family, and
the judicial Proceedings for many Years together, depended only on Custom, and
the Judgment of the Court. At last, to redress this Inconvenience,
Commissioners were sent into Greece, to make a Collection of the best Laws for
the Service of their Country; and, at their return, the Decemviri were created
to regulate the Business, who reduced them into Twelve Tables, as has been
already shown. The excellency of which Institution, as it is sufficiently set
forth by most Authors, so is it especially beholden to the high Encomium of
Cicero, when he declares it as his positive Judgment and Opinion, That the Laws
of the Twelve Tables are justly to be preferred to whole Libraries of the
Philosophers Cicero de Oratore, lib. 1.
.

They were divided into three Parts, of which the first related to the Concerns
of Religion; the second to the Right of the Public; and the last to private
Persons.

These Laws being established, it necessarily followed, that there should be
Disputations and Controversies in the Courts, since the Interpretation was to
be founded on the Authority of the Learned. This Interpretation they called Jus
Civil, though at present we understand by that Phrase the whole System of the
Roman Laws.

Besides, out of all these Laws, the Learned Men of that Time composed a Scheme
of Forms and Cases, by which the Processes in the Courts were directed. These
were termed Actiones Legis.

We may add to these the Laws preferred at the Public Assemblies of the
People; and the Plebiscita, made without the Authority of the Senate, at the
Comitia Tributa, which were allowed to be of equal force with other
Constitutions, though they were not honored with the Title of Leges.

And then the Senatus-consulta, and Edicts of the Supreme Magistrates,
particularly of the Praeters, made up two more sorts of Laws, the last of which
they called Jus ^onorarium.

And, lastly, when the Government was entrusted in the hands of a single
Person, whatever he ordained had the Authority of a Law, with the Name of
Principalis Constitutio.

Most of these daily increasing, gave so much scope to the Lawyers for the
compiling of Reports and other Labors, that in the Reign of Justinian, there
were extant Two thousand distinct Volumes on this Subject. The Body of the Law
being thus grown unweildy, and rendered almost useless by its excessive Bulk,
that excellent Emperor entered on a design to bring it into just dimensions;
which was happily accomplished in the constituting those Four Tomes of the
Civil Law which are now extant, and have contributed in a great measure, to the
regulating of all the States in Christendom: So that the old Fancy of the
Romans, about the eternity of their Command, is not so ridiculous as at first
sight it appears, since by their admirable Sanctions, they are still like to
Govern for ever.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Laws in particular; and first of those relating to Religion.
AS for the Laws of the Twelve Tables, and other more ancient Institutions, as
it would require no ordinary Stock of Criticism barely to explain their Words;
so is the Knowledge of them almost useless, since they are so seldom mentioned
by the Classicks. Those which we generally meet with, are such as were
preferred by some particular Magistrate from whom they took their Names; these,
by reason of their frequent Occurrence in the best Writers, deserve a short
explication, according to the common Heads laid down by those Authors who have
hitherto managed this Subject; beginning with such as concerned the Public
Worship, and the Ceremonies of Religion.

Sulpitia Sempronia Lex, the Authors P. Sulpitius Saverrio, and P. Sempronius
Sophus, in their Consulship, A. 449. ordaining, That no Person should
consecrate any Temple, or Altar, without the Order of the Senate, and the major
part of the Tribunes Livy, lib. 9.
.

Papiria Lex, the Author L. Papirius, Tribune of the Commons; commanding, that
no Person should have the liberty of consecrating any Aedifice, Place, or
Thing, without the leave of the Commons Cicero in Orat. pro Domo sua.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sulla, defining the Expenses of Funerals
P^ut. in Sylla.
.

Sextia Licinia Lex, the Authors L. Sextius and Licinius, Tribunes of the
Commons, A. 385. commanding, That instead of the Duumviri sacris faciundis, a
Decemvirate should be created, part out of the Patricians, and part out of the
Commons Livy. lib. 6.
.

Ogulnia Lex, the Authors Q. and Cn. Ogulnii, Tribunes of the Commons, A. 453.
commanding, That whereas there were then but Four Pontifices, and Four Augurs,
Five more should be added out of the Commons to each Order Livy. lib. 10.
.

Manlia Lex, the Author P. Manlius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 557. enacted for
the creation of the Tresviri Epulones, an old Institution of Numa's Cic. de
Orat. lib. 3.
.

Clodia Lex, the Author P. Clodius in his Tribuneship, A. 695. divesting the
Priest of Cybele (or the Great Mother, who came from Pessinum) of his Office,
and conferring it on Brotigarus a Gallo-Graecian Idem Orat. pro Sest. and de
Harusp. Respons.
.

Papia Lex, ordering the manner of choosing the Vestal Virgins A Gellius.
, as had been already described.

The Punishment of those holy Recluses is grounded on the Laws of Numa.

Licinia Lex, preferred by C. Licinius Crassus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 608.
for the transferring the Right of choosing Priests, from the College to the
People Cic. de Amicitia
; but it did not pass Ibid.
.

Domitia Lex, the Author Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
650. actually transferring the said Right to the People Suet. in Ner. Patercul.
lib. 2. Cic. Agrar. 2.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sulla, Dictator and Consul with Q.
Metellus, A. 677. abrogating the former Law of Domitius, and restoring the
Privilege there mentioned to the Commons Asconius in Divinationem.
.

Atia Lex, the Author T. Atius Labienus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 690.
repealing the Cornelian Law, and restoring the Domitian Dio, lib. 37.
.

Antonia Lex, the Author M. Antony in his Consulship with Julius Caesar, A.
709. abrogating the Atian Law, and restoring the Cornelian Dio, lib. 44.
. Paulus Manutius has conjectured from several Reasons, that this Law of Antony
was afterward repealed, and the Right of choosing Priests entrusted in the
hands of the People.

To this Head is commonly referred the Law about the exemption from Military
Service, or de Vacatione, in which there was a very remarkable Clause: Nisi
bellum Gallum exoriatur: Unless in case of a Gallick Insurrection. In which
case no Persons, not the Priests themselves, were excused; the Romans
apprehending more danger from the Gauls than from any other Nation, because
they had once taken their City Plut. in Marcell. Cic. pro Fonteio and Philipp.
8.
.

As also the Three Laws about the Shows.

Licinia Lex, the Author P. Licinius Varus, City- Praetor, A. 545. settling the
Day for the celebration of the Ludi Apollinares, which before was uncertain
Livy, lib. 27. Alex. Neopolitan. etc.
.

Roscia Lex Theatralis, the Author L. Roscius Otho, Tribune of the Commons, A.
685. ordaining, That none should sit in the First fourteen Seats of the
Theater, unless they were worth Four hundred Sestertiums, which was then
reckoned the Census Equestris Cic. Philipp. 2. Ascon. in Cornelian. Juven. Sat.
3. and 14. Horat. Epod. 4. Epist. 1.
.

Augustus Caesar, after several of the Equestrian Families had impaired their
Estates in the Civil Wars, interpreted this Law so as to take in all those
whose Ancestors ever had possessed the Sum there specified.

CHAP. XXIII. Laws relating to the Right and Privilege of the Roman Citizens.
VALERIA Lex de Provocatione, the Author P.Valerius Poplicola, sole Consul upon
the death of his Colleague Brutus, A. 243. giving liberty to appeal from any
Magistrate to the People, and ordering that no Magistrate should punish a Roman
Citizen in case of such an Appeal Livy, lib. 9. Plut. in P^Plicel. etc.
.

Valeria Horatia Lex, the Authors L. Valerius and M. Horatius, Consuls A. 304.
reviving the former Law, which had been of no force under the Decemvirate Livy,
lib. 3.
.

Valeria Lex tertia, the Author M. Valerius Corvinus, in his Consulship with Q.
Apuleius Pansa, A. 453. no more than a confirmation of the first Valerian Law
Livy, lib. 10.
.

Porcia Lex, the Author M. Porcius, Tribune of the Commons in the same Year as
the former; commanding, That no Magistrate should execute, or punish with Rods,
a Citizen of Rome; but upon the Sentence of Condemnation, should give him
permission to go into exile Lavy, lib. 10. C^c. pro Ralirio. Salust. in
Catilmar. Sueten. in Ner. etc.
.

Semproniae Leges, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus, Tribune of the Commons,
A. 630. commanding, That no capital Judgment should be made upon a Citizen,
without the Authority of the People, and making several other Regulations in
this Affair Cic. pro Rabirio, pro Domo sua, pro Cluentio, etc.


Papia Lex de Peregrinis, the Author C. Papius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 688.
commanding, That all Strangers should be expelled Rome Cic. pro Balbo.
.

Junia Lex, the Author M. Junius Pennus, a confirmation of the former Law, and
a forbidding, That any Strangers should be allowed the Privilege of Citizens
Cic. Offic. lib. 3.
.

Servilia Lex, the Author C. Servilius Glaucia, ordaining, That if any Latin
accused a Roman Senator, so that he was convicted, the Accuser should be
honored with the Privilege of a Citizen of Rome Ascon. in Orat. pro Scauro.
Cic. pro Balbo.
.

Licinia Mutia Lex, the Authors L. Licinius Crassus, and Q. Mutius Scaevola, in
their Consulship, A. 658. ordering all the Inhabitants of Italy to be enrolled
in the List of Citizens in their own proper Cities Cic. de Offic. lib. 3. and
pro Balbo.
.

Livia Lex de Sociis: In the Year of the City 662. M. Livins Drusus proposed a
Law to make all the Italians free Denizons of Rome; but before it came to be
voted, he was found murdered in his House, the Author unknown Flor. lib. 3.
cap. 17. Cic. de Lag. lib. 3.
.

Varia Lex: Upon the death of Drusus, the Knights prevailed with his Colleague
Q. Varius Hybrida, to bring in a Bill for the prosecuting of all such Persons
as should be discovered to have assisted the Italian People in their Petition
for the Privilege of the City Cic. in Bruto. Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 6.
.

Julia Lex de Civitate: The next Year, upon the Revolt of several States in
Italy (which they called the Social War) L. Julius Caesar, the Consul, made a
Law, That all those People who had continued firm to the Roman Interest, should
have the Privilege of Citizens Cic. pro Balbo.
: And in the Year 664. upon the conclusion of that War, all the Italian People
were admitted into the Roll of Free Denizons, and divided into Eight new Tribes
Appian. lib. 1.
.

Sylvani and Carbonis Lex, the Authors Sylvanus and Carbo, Tribunes of the
Commons, in the Year 664. ordaining, That any Persons who had been admitted
Free Denizons of any of the Confederate Cities, and had a Dwelling in Italy at
the time of the making this Law, and had carried in their Names to the Praetor
in Sixty Days time, should have the Privilege of Citizens of Rome Cic. pro.
Archia.
.

Sulpitia Lex, the Author P. Sulpitius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 665.
ordaining, That the New Citizens, who composed the Eight Tribes, should be
divided among the Thirty five Old Tribes, as a greater Honor Plut. in Sylla.
Epit. Live. 77.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sulla, A. 670. a confirmation of the
former Law, to please the Italian Confederates Epit. Live. 86.
.

Cornelia Lex de Municipiis, the Author the same Sulla, in h^s Dictatorship,
taking away the Privileges formerly granted to the Corporate Towns, from as
many as had assisted Marius, Cinna, Sulpicius, or any of the contrary Faction
Cic. pro Domo sua.
.

Gellia Cornelia Lex, the Authors L. Gellius Poplicola, and Cn. Cornelius
Lentulus, A. 681. ordaining, That all those Persons whom Pompey, by his own
Authority, had honored with the Privilege of the City, should actually keep
that Liberty Cic. pro Balbo.
.

CHAP. XXIV. Laws concerning Meetings and Assemblies.
AELIA Lex, ordaining, That in all Assemblies of the People, the Augurs should
make Observations from the Heavens; and, That the Magistrate should have the
Power of declaring against the Proceedings; and of interposing in the decision
of any Matter.

Fusia Lex, ordaining, That upon some certain Days, though they were Fasti, it
should be unlawful to transact any thing in a Meeting of the People.

The Authors, of these Two Laws are unknown; but P. Manutius conjectures, that
the first is owing to Q. Aelius Paetus, Consul with M. Junius Pennus, A. 586.
The other to P. Furius, or Fusius, Consul with S. Attilius S^rranus, A. 617.
The Laws themselve occurr frequently in Writers.

Clodia Lex, the Author P. Clodius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 695. containing
an abrogation of the greatest part of the Two former Laws, and ordering, That
no Observations should be made from the Heavens upon the Days of the Comitia;
and, That on any of the Dies Fasti, Laws might be enacted in a Public Assembly
As^^. in P^s^manars.
.

Curia Lex, the Author M. Curious Dentatus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 454.
ordaining, That no Comitia should be convened for the Election of Magistrates,
without the Approbation of the Senate: Vt ante Comitia Magistratuum Patres
anctores fierent Cic. de clarie Oratoribu^.
.

Claudia Lex, the Author M. Claudius Marcellus, Consul with Serve. Sulpitius
Rufus, A. 702. ordering, That at the Comitia for the Election of Magistrates,
no account should be taken of the absent Suet. in Julio.
.

Gabinia Lex, the Author A. Gabinius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 614.
commanding, That in the Comitia for the Election of Magistrates, the People
should not give their Suffrages viva voce, but by Tablets, for the greater
freedom and impartiality of the Proceedings Cic. de Amicit. and pro Plancio,
and de Leg. lib. 3.
.

Cassia Lex, enacted about two Years after, commanding, That in the Courts of
Justice, and in the Comitia Tributa, the Votes should be given in a free
manner; that is, by Tablers Cic. in Lalio.
.

Papiria Lex, the Author C. Papirius Carbo, Tribune of the Commons, A. 621.
ordaining, That in the Comitia about the passing or rejecting of Laws, the
Suffrages should be given by Tablets Cic. de Leg. lib. 3.
.

Coelia Lex, the Author Coelius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 635 ordaining, That
in the Judicial Proceedings before the People, in Cases of Treason (which has
been excepted by the Cassian Law) the Votes should be given by Tablets Id. Ibid.
.

Sempronia Lex, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus, in the same Year as the
former; ordering, That the Centuries should be chose out by Lot to give their
Votes, and not according to the order of the Classes Salust. in Orat. 2. ad
Casarem.
.

Maria Lex, the Author C. Marius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 634. ordering the
Bridges, or long Planks, on which the People stood in the Comitia to give their
Voices, to be made narrower, that no other Persons might stand there to hinder
the Proceedings by Appeals or other Disturbances Cic. de Leg. lib. 3. Plut. in
Mario.
.

Sempronia Lex, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
565. ordaining, That the Latin Confederates should have the Privilege of giving
their Suffrages, as well as the Roman Citizens Cic. saepissime.
.

Manilia Lex, the Author C. Manilius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 687. ordering,
That the Libertini should have the Privilege of Voting in all the Tribes Cic.
pro Leg. Manilia.
.

Gabinia Lex, a confirmation of an old Law of the Twelve Tablets, making it a
capital Offense for any Person to convene a clandestine Assembly Salust. in
Catilinar.
.

CHAP. XXV. Laws relating to the Senate.
CASSIA Lex, the Author L. Cassius Longinus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 649.
ordaining, That no Person, who had been condemned or deprived of his Office by
the People, should have the Privilege of coming into the Senate (...) in
Cornelian.
.

Claudia Lex, the Author Q. Claudius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 535.
commanding, That no Senator, or Father of a Senator, should possess a sailing
Vessel of above Three hundred Amphorae; this was thought big enough for the
bringing over Fruits, and other Necessaries; and as for Gain, procured by
Trading in Merchandise, they thought it unworthy the Dignity of that Order Cic.
Verrin. 7.
.

Sulpitia Lex, the Author Servius Sulpitius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 665.
requiring, That no Senator should owe above Two thousand Drachmae Pl^^. in
Sylla.
.

Sentia Lex, the Author (probably) C. Sentius, Consul with Q. Lucretius, A.
734. in the time of Augastus; ordering, That in the room of such Noblemen ^as
were wanting in the Senate, others should be substituted Tacit. An. 2.
.

Gabinia Lex, the Author A. Gabinius, Tribume of the Commons A. 685. ordaining,
That the Senate should be convened, from the Kalends of February, to the
Kalends of March, every day, for the giving Audience to foreign Ministers Cic.
Epit^^^^ (...) Prair. lib. 2. Fp. 12.
.

Pupia Lex, ordaining, That the Senate should not be convened from the
Eighteenth of the Kalends of February, to the K^lends of the same Month; and
that before the Embassies were either accepted or rejected, the Senate should
be held on no other account Cic. lib. 1. epist. 4, ad Leutul. lib. 2. ep. 2. ad
Q^^^^ (...). etc.
.

Tullia Lex, the Author M. Tullius Cicero, Consul with M. Anthony, A. 690.
ordaining, That inch Persons to whom the Senate had allowed the Favor of a
libera Legatio, should hold that Honor no longer than a Year. Libera Legatio
was a Privilege that the Senators often obtained for the going into any
Province, or Country, where they had some private Business, in the Quality of
Lieutenants; though with no Command, but only that the Dignity of their titular
Office might have an influence on the Management of their private Concerns Cic.
de Leg. lib. 3.
.

CHAP. XXVI. Laws relating to the Magistrates.
LEX Villia Annalis, or Annaria, the Author L. Villius (for whom we sometimes
find L. Julius, or Lucius Tullius) Tribune of the Commons, A. 574. defining the
proper Age requisite for bearing of all the Magistracies Live. lib. 40.
. Livy, who relates the making of this Law, does not insist on the particular
Ages; and Learned Men are much divided about that point. Lipsius states the
difference after this manner: The Age proper to sue for the Quaest^rship, he
makes Twenty five Years; for the Aediles and T^^^unes, Twenty seven, or Twenty
eight; Thirty for the Praetor, and Forty two for the Consuls:

G^n^^^^^ Lex, the Author L. Genutius, Tribune of the Commons (...). 411.
commanding, That no Person should bear the same Mag^s^racy within Ten Years
distance, nor should be invested with Two Offices in one Year Idem, lib. 7.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author Cornelius Sylla the Dictator, A. 673. a repetition
and confirmation of the former Law Appian. lib. 1. de Bell. Civil.
.

Semp^onia Lex, the Author C. Semprenius Gracchus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
630. ordaining. That no Person who had been lawfully deprived of his
Magistracy. should be capable of bearing an Office again. This was abrogated
afterward by the Author Plut. in Gracchis.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, Dictator; ordaining, That such
Persons as had embraced his Party in the la^^ Troubles, should have the
Privilege of bearing Honors before they were capable by Age; and that the
Children of those w^^^ had been proscribed, should lose the Power of standing
for any Office Plin. lib. 7. Quintil. lib. 11. cap. 1. Cic. in Pism.
.

Hirtia Lex, the Author A. Hirtius; ordaining, That noned Pompey's Party should
be admitted to any Dignity Cic. Philipp. 13.
.

Sextia Licinia Lex, the Authors C. Licinius, and L. Sextius, Tribunes of the
Commons, A. 386. ordaining, That one of the Consuls should be chose out of the
Body of the Commons Live. lib. 6.
.

Genutia Lex, the Author L. Genutius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 411. making it
lawful that both Consuls might be taken out of the Commons I^em, lib. 7.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, Dictator, A. 673. ordaining, That
the Praetors should always use the same method in judicial Processes. For the
Praetors used, upon the entrance on their Office, to put up an Edict to show
what way they designed to proceed in all Causes during their Year: These
Edicts, which before commonly varied, were by this Law ordered to be always the
same, for the preserving a constant and regular course of Justice Cic. Philipp.
2.
.

Marcia Lex, the Author Marcius Censorinus, forbidding any Person to bear the
Censorship twice P^ut. in Coriolan.
.

Clodia Lex, the Author P. Clodius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 695. ordering,
That the Censors should put no mark of Infamy on any Person in their general
Surveys, unless the Person had been accused and condemned by both the Censors;
whereas before, they used to punish Persons, by omitting their Names in the
Surveys, and by other means, whether they were accused or no: And what one
Censor did, unless the other actually interposed, was of equal force, as if
both had joined in the Action Cic. in P^son. pro Milon. pro Sextic, etc.
.

Caecilia Lex, the Author Q. Caecilius Metellus Pius Scipio, Consul with Pompey
the Great, A. 701. restoring their ancient Dignity and Power to the Censors
which had been retrenched by the former Law Dio, lib. 40.
.

Antonia Lex, the Author M. Antony, a Member of the Triumvirate; ordaining,
That for the future, no Proposal should be ever made for the creation of a
Diclator; and that no Person should ever accept of that Office, upon pain of
incurring a capital Penalty Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. 3.
.

Titia Lex, the Author P. Titius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 710. ordaining,
That a Triumvirate of Magistrates, invested with Consular Power, should be
settled for Five Years, for the regulating the Commonwealth; and that the
Honor should be conferred on Octavius, Lepidus, and Antony Hor. Epit. Live.
lib. 120.
.

Valeria Lex, the Author P. Valerius Poplicola, sole Consul, A. 243. ordaining,
That the Public Treasure should be laid up in the Temple of Saturn, and that
two Quaestors should be created to supervise it Live. lib. 2. Plut. in Poplicol.
.

Junia Sacrata Lex, the Author L. Junius Brutus, the first Tribune of the
Commons, A. 260. ordaining, That the Persons of the Tribunes should be sacred:
That an Appeal might be made to them for the Determinations of the Consuls:
And, That none of the Senators should be capable of that Office Dionys. lib. 6.


Atinia Lex, the Author Atinius, Tribune of the Commons; ordaining, That any
Tribune of the Commons should have the Privilege of a Senator; and as such,
take his Place in the House A. Gell. lib. 14. cap. ult.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornel. Sylla, Dictator, A. 673. taking away from
the Tribunes the Power of making Laws, and of interposing, of holding
Assemblies and receiving Appeals, and making all that had born that Office,
incapable of any other Dignity in the Commonwealth Cic. de Leg. lib. 3. Casar.
Comm. de Bell. Gall. 1. Flor. Plut. etc.
.

Aurelia Lex, the Author C. Aurelius Cotta, Consul with L. Octavius, A. 678. an
abrogation of some part of the former Law, allowing the Tribunes to hold their
other Offices afterward Patercul. lib. 2. Ascon. in Cornel. in Verr.
.

Pompeia Lex, the Author Pompey the Great, Consul with M. Crassus, A. 683.
restoring their full Power and Authority to the Tribunes, which had been taken
from them by the Cornelian Law Plut. in Pomp. Ascon. Verr. 1, and 2. Casar. de
Bell. Civ. lib. 1.
.

CHAP. XXVII. Laws relating to Public Constitutions, Laws, a^^ Privileges.
HORTENSIA Lex, the Author Q. Hortensius, Dicta^^, A. ^467. ordaining, That
whatever was enacted by the Commons, should be observed by the whole Roman
People; whereas the Nobility had been formerly exempted from pay^^ Obedience to
the Decrees of the Populacy Flor. Epit. Live. lib. 11.
.

Caecilia Didia Lex, the Authors Q. Caecilius Metellus, and T. D^dius, Consuls,
A. 655. for the regulating the Proceedings (...) enacting Laws; ordaining, That
in one Bill (una rogatione) b^^ one single Matter should be proposed to the
People, lest, wh^^ they gave their Suffrage in one word, they should be forced
to assent to a whole Bill, if they liked the greatest part of it; though they
disliked the rest; or throw out a Bill for several Clauses which they did not
approve of, though perhaps they would have been willing to pass some part of it.
Requiring also, That before any Law was preferred at the Comitia, it should be
exposed to the public View Three Market-days (tribus nundinis) beforehand A.
Gell. lib. 115. cap. 27. Cic. Philipp. 5. Pro Domo. ad Attic. Epist. 9. lib. 2.
.

P. Manutius makes the Caecilian and Didian two distinct Laws; the first part
composing the former, and the other the latter.

Junia Licinia Lex, the Authors D. Junius Silanus, and L. Licinius Muraena,
Consuls, A. 991. ordaining, That such as did no: observe the former Law,
relating to the promulging new Proposals for Three Nundinae, should incurr a
greater Penalty than the said Law enjoined Cic. Philipp. 5. Alt. ad Epist. 9.
lib. 2. Epist. 15. lib. 4.
.

Licinia Aebutia Lex, the Authors Licinius and Aebutius, Tribunes of the
Commons; ordaining, That when any Law was preferred relating to any Charge or
Power, not only the Person who brought in the Bill, but likewise his Colleagues
in any Office which he already enjoyed, and all his Relations, should be
incapable of being invested with the said Charge or Power Cic. in Orat. 2.
Contra Rull. and in Orat pro Domo sua.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author C. Cornelius, Tribune of the Com^ons, A. 686.
ordaining, That no Person should, by the Votes of the Senate, be exempted from
any Law (as used to be allowed upon extraordinary Occasions) unless Two hundred
Senators were present in the House; and that no Person thus excused by ^he
Senate, should hinder the Bill of his Exemption from being carried afterward
to the Commons for their Approba^ion Asion. in Cornel.
.

Ampia Labiena Lex, the Authors T. Ampius and T. Labie^^us, Tribunes of the
Commons, A. 693, conferring an Honorable Privilege on Pomper the Great, that
at the Circensian Games, he should wear a golden Crown, and be habited in all
the Triumphal Robes; and that at the Stage Plays he should have the Biberty of
wearing the Praetexta, and a golden Crown Vell. Paterc. lib. 2.
.

CHAP. XXVIII. Laws relating to the Provinces, and the Governors of them.
SEMPRONIA Lex, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
630. ordaining, That before the annual Comitia for choosing Consuls, the Senate
should, at their Pleasure, determine the particular Consular Provinces, which
the new Consuls, when designed, should divide by Lot. As also, That whereas
heretofore the Tribunes had been allowed the Privilege of interposing against a
Decree of Senate, they should be deprived of that Liberty for the future Cic,
pro Domo sua, in Vatin. de Provinciis Consul. Salust. in Bell Jugurth.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, Dictator, A. 673. ordaining, That
whoever was sent with any Command into a Province, should hold that Command
'till he returned to Rome; whereas heretofore, their Office was to continue no
longer than a set time; upon the expiration of which, if no Successor was sent
in their room, they were put to the trouble and inconvenience of getting a new
Commission from the Senate.

'Twas a Clause in this Law, That every Governor of a Province, when another
was sent to succeed him, should have thirty Days allowed him in order to his
removal Cicero, Epist. 9. ad Lentul. and lib. 3. ad Attic. Epist. 6.
.

Julia Lex prima, the Author C. Julius Caesar, Consul with M. Calpurnius
Bibulus, A. 691. comprised in several Heads, as that Achaia, Thessaly, and all
Greece, should be entirely free; and that no Roman Magistrate should sit as
Judge in those Provinces Cicero pro Domo, in Pisonem, and de Provinc. Consul.
: That the Towns and Villages through which the Roman Magistrates passed toward
the Provinces, should be obliged to supply them and their Retinue with Hay and
other Conveniences on the Road Cicero in Pisonem.
: That the Governors, when their Office was expired, should leave a Scheme of
their Accounts in two Cities of their Provinces, and at their arrival at Rome
should deliver a Copy of the said Accounts in at the public Treasury Ibid.
: That the Governors of Provinces should upon no account accept of a Golden
Coronet, unless a Triumph had been decreed them by the Senate Ibid.
: That no chief Commander should go beyond the Bounds of his Province, or enter
on any other Dominions, or lead the Army out, or engage in any War without the
express Order of the Senate or People Ibid. and pro P^sl^um.
.

Julia Lex Secunda, the Author the same Julius Caesar in his Dictatorship,
ordaining, that no Praetorian Province should be held above a Year, and no
Consular Province more than two Years Cicero, Philipp. 3.
.

Clodia Lex, the Author P. Clodius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 695. ordaining,
that all Syria, Babylon, and Persia, should be committed to Gabinius the
Consul; and Macedon, Achaia, Thessaly, Greece, and Boeotia, to his Colleague
Piso, with the Proconsular Power; and that a Sum should be paid them out of the
Treasury to defray the Charges of their March thither with an Army Cicero pro
Domo, and pro Sextio.
.

Vatinia Lex, the Author P. Vatinius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 694.
ordaining, that the Command of all Gallia Cisalpina, and Illyricum should be
conferred on Caesar for five Years together without a Decree of Senate, and
without the Formality of casting Lots: That the particular Persons mentioned in
the Bill should go with him in the Quality of Legati, without the Deputation of
the Senate: That the Army to be sent with him should be paid out of the
Treasury; and that he should transplant a Colony into the Town of Novocomum in
Gallia Cicero in Va^ia^um and pro Balbo. Sueton. in J^lio, Salust. in Jugurth.
.

Clodia Lex de Cypro, the Author P. Clodius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 695.
ordaining that the Island Cyprus should be reduced into a Roman Province: That
Ptolemy King of Cyprus should be publicly exposed to Sale, habited in all his
Regal Ornaments, and his Goods in like manner sold by Auction: That M. Cato
should be sent with the Praetorian Power into Cyprus to take care of the
selling the King's Effects, and conveying the Money to Rome Cicero pro Domo,
pro Sextio, de Provin. Consular.
.

Trebonia Lex, the Author L. Trebonius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 698.
decreeing the chief Command in Gallia to Caesar, five Years longer than had
been ordered by the Vatinian Law; and so depriving the Senate of the Power of
recalling him, and substituting another General in his room Cicero lib. 8, 9,
10. Epist. ad Attic. Florus, Epit. Live. lib. 105.
.

Titia Lex, barely mentioned by Cicero In Orat. pro Murana.
, and not explained by Manutius or Rosinus. The Purport of it seems to have
been, That the Provincial Quaestors should take their Places by Lot, in the
same manner as the Consuls and Praetors; as may be gathered from the Scope of
the Passage in which we find it.

CHAP. XXIX. Leges Agrariae, or Laws relating to the Division of Lands among
the People.
CASSIVS Lex, the Author Sp. Cassius Viscellinus, Consul with Proculus
Virginius, A. 267. ordaining, that the Land taken from the Hernici, should be
divided half among the Latins, and half among the Roman Commons Live. lib. 2.
Valor. Mex. lib. 9. cap 8.
. This Law did not hold.

Licinia Lex, the Author C. Licinius Stolo, Tribune of the Commons, A. 377.
ordaining that no Person should possess above five hundred Acres of Land; or
keep more than an hundred Head of great, or five hundred Head of small Cattle
Live. lib. 6. Appian, Agellius, Pliny, Pa^ercul. Plutarch. etc.
.

Flaminia Lex, the Author C. Flaminius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 525.
ordaining that Picenum a part of Gallia, whence the Senones had been expelled,
should be divided among the Roman Soldiers Cicero in Cat. Maj.
.

Sempronia Lex Prima, the Author T. Sempronius Gracchus, Tribune of the
Commons, A. 620. confirming the Licinian Law, and requiring all Persons who
held more Land than that Law allowed, immediately to resign it into the Common,
to be divided among the poorer Citizens, constituting three Officers to take
care of the business Cicero pro Sextio Plutarch. etc.
.

This Law being levelled directly against the Interest of the richer Men of the
City, who had by degrees contrived to engross almost all the Land to
themselves, after great Heats and Tumults, at last cost the Author his Life.

Sempronia Lex altera, preferred by the same Person upon the death of King
Attalus, who left the Roman State his Heir: It ordained, that all the ready
Money found in that King's Treasure should be bestowed on the poorer Citizens,
to supply them with Instruments and other Conveniences required for
Agriculture: And that the King's Lands should be farmed at an annual Rent by
the Censors; which Rent should be divided among the People Cicero Verr. 5.
Plutarch. etc.
.

Thoria Lex, the Author Sp. Thorius, Tribune of the Commons, ordaining, that no
Person should pay any Rent to the People of the Lands which he possessed; and
regulating the business about feeding Cattle Cicero de Orat. lib. 2. and in
Bruto.
. Two large Fragments of this Law, which was of a great length, are copied from
two old brazen Tables by Sigonius De Antiq. Jure Ital. lib. 2.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla Dictator and Consul with Q.
Metellus, A. 673. ordaining, that the Lands of proscribed Persons should be
common. This is chiefly to be understood of the Lands in Tuscany about
Volaterrae and Fesulae, which Sylla divided among his Soldiers Cicero in
Rullum, pro Roscio, Salust in Catilin.
.

Servilia Lex, the Author P. Servilius Rullus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 690.
in the Consulship of Cicero and Antony, containing many Particulars about
selling several Houses, Fields, etc. that belonged to the Public, for the
purchasing Land in other parts of Italy; about creating ten Men to be
Supervisors of the Business, and abundance of other Heads; several of which are
repeated by Cicero in his three Orations extant against this Law, by which he
hindered it from passing.

Flavia Lex, the Author L. Flavius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 693. about
dividing a sufficient quantity of Land among Pompey's Soldiers, and the Commons
Cicero ad Attic. lib. 1.
.

Julia Lex, the Author Julius Caesar, Consul with Bibulus, A. 691, ordaining,
that all the Land in Campania, which used formerly to be farmed at a set Rent
of the State, should be divided among the Commons: As also that all Members of
Senate should swear to confirm this Law, and to defend it against all Opposers.
Cicero calls this Lex Campana Velleius Patero. lib. 2. Plutarch in P^mp. Caes.
and Cat. Uticens. Ad Attic. lib. 2. Epist. 18.
.

Mamilia Lex, the Author C. Mamilius, Tribune of the Commons, in the time of
the Jugurthan War; ordaining, that in the Bounds of the Lands there should be
left five or six Foot of Ground, which no Person should convert to his private
use, and that Commissioners should be appointed to regulate this Affair Cicero,
lib. 1. de Leg.
. From this Law de Limitibus the Author took the Surname of Limentanus, as he
is called by Salust In Bell. Jugurth.
.

CHAP. XXX. Laws relating to Corn.
SEMPRONIA Lex, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus (not T. Sempronius Gracchus,
as Rosinus has it) ordaining, that a certain quantity of Corn should be
distributed every Month among the Commons, so much to every Man; for which they
were only to pay the small consideration of a Semissis and a Triens Fler. Epit.
Lav. lib. 60. V^l. Pat. lib. 2, (...).
.

Terentia Cassia Lex, the Authors M. Terentius Varro Lucullus, and C. Cassius,
Consuls, A. 680. ordaining, that the same set price should be given for all
Corn bought up in the Province, to hinder the Exactions of the Quasters (...)
in Verrin 5.
.

Clodia Lex, the Author P. Clodius, Tri^^^e of the C^mm^ns. A. 695. ordaining,
that those quantities of Corn which were formerly sold to the poor People at
six Asses and a Triens the Bushel, should be distributed among them gratis
Cicero pro Sextio, in Pison. etc.
.

Hierenica Lex, the Author Hiero Tyrant of Sicily, regulating the Affair
between the Farmers and the Decumani (or Gatherers of the Corn-Tax, which
because it consisted of a tenth part they called Decumae) ordaining the
quantity of Corn, the Price, and the time of receiving it; which for the
Justice of it the Romans still continued in force, after they had possessed
themselves of that Island Cicero in Verr. 4.
.

CHAP. XXXI. Laws for the regulating of Expenses.
ORCHIA Lex, the Author C. Orchius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 566. defining
the number of Guests which were allowed to be present at any Entertainment
Macreb. Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 14.
.

Fannia Lex, the Author C. Fannius Consul, A. 588. ordaining, that upon the
higher Festivals no Person should expend more than an hundred Asses in a Day;
on ten other Days in every Month thirty Asses, and at all other times ten Ibid.
and Agell. lib. 2. cap. 24.
.

Didia Lex, enacted about eighteen Years after the former, ordaining, that the
Laws for regulating Expenses should reach all the Italians as well as the
Inhabitants of Rome; and that not only the Masters of extravagant Treats, but
the Guests too, should incurr a Penalty for their Offense Ibid.
.

Lex Licinia, the Author P. Licinius Crassus the Rich, agreeing in most
particulars with the Fanman Law; and farther prescribing, that on the Kalends,
Nones, and Nundinae, thirty Asses should be the most that was spent at any
Table; and that on ordinary Days, which were not particularly excepted, Caro
arida opponitur salsamento. Casaubon adAgell. Notae MSS.
there should be spent only three pound of dry Flesh, and one pound of Salt
Meat, but allowing as much as every Body pleased of any Fruits of the Ground
Ibid. and Agell. lib. 2. cap. 24.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, enacted, not so much for the
retrenching of extravagant Treats, as for the imposing a lower price on
Provisions Agell. lib. 2. cap. 24.
.

Aemilia Lex, the Author M. Aemilius Lepidus, Consul about A. 675, respecting
the particular sorts of Meats in use at that time, and stating the just
quantities allowable of every kind Ibid.
.

Antia Lex, the Author one Antius Restio, a farther Essay toward the
suppression of Luxury, the particulars of which we are not acquainted with. But
Macrobius gives us this remarkable Story of the Author, that finding his
Constitution to be of very little force, by reason of the great head that
Prodigality and Extravagance had gained in the City, he never afterward supped
abroad as long as he lived, for fear he should be forced to be a Witness of the
Contempt of his own Injunction, without being in a condition to punish it
Macrob. and Agell.
.

Julia Lex, preferred in the time of Augustus, allowing two hundred Sestertii
for Provisions on the dies Profesti, three hundred on the common Festivals in
the Calendar, and a thousand at Marriage-Feasts, and such extraordinary
Entertainments Agell.
.

Agellius farther adds, that he finds in an old Author an Edict either of
Augustus or Tiberius, he is uncertain which, raising the allowance according to
the difference of the Festivals, from three hundred to two thousand Sestertii
Ibid.
.

Hither may be referred the Lex Oppia, the Author C. Oppius, Tribune of the
Commons, A. 540. in the heat of the second Punick War, ordaining, that no Woman
should have above half an Ounce of Gold, wear a party-colored Garment, or be
carried in a Chariot in any City, Town, or to any place within a Miles
distance, unless upon the account of celebrating some sacred Solemnity Livy,
lib. 34. Tac. Ann. 3.
.

CHAP. XXXII. Laws relating to Martial Affairs.
SACRATA Lex Militaris, the Author (probably) M. Valerius Corvus, Dictator A.
411. ordaining, that no Soldiers Name, which had been entered in the Muster-Roll
should be struck out, unless by the Party's consent: And that no Person who had
been Military Tribune, should execute the Office of Ductor Ordinum Live. lib. 7.
.

Sempronia Lex, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
630. ordaining, that the Soldiers should receive their Cloths gratis at the
public Charge, without any diminution of their ordinary Pay: And that none
should be obliged to serve in the Army who was not full seventeen Years old
Plutarch in C. Gra^ch.
.

Maria Porcia Lex, the Authors L. Marius and M. Porcius Cato, Tribunes of the
Commons, A. 691. ordaining that a Penalty should be inflicted on such
Commanders as wrote falsely to the Senate about the number of the slain on the
Enemies side, and of their own Party: And that they should be obliged when they
first entered the City to take a solemn Oath before the Quaestors, that the
number which they returned was true, according to the est Computation Val^r
Max. lib. 2. cap. 8.
.

Sulpicia Lex, the Author P. Sulpicius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 665.
ordaining, that the chief Command in the Mithridatick War, which was then
enjoyed by L. Sylla, should be taken from him and conferred on C. Marius Vell.
Patere. lib. 2. Florus Epit. 77. Plutarch. in Sylla and Marto, etc.
.

Gabinia Lex, the Author A. Gabinius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 685.
ordaining, that a Commission should be granted to Cn. Pompey for the management
of the War against the Pirates for three Years, with this particular Clause,
That upon all the Sea on this side Hercules his Pillars, and in the Maritime
Provinces as far as 400 Stadia from the Sea, he should be empowered to command
Kings, Governors, and States to supply him with all Necessaries in the
Expedition Asconius in Cornelian. Vell. Paterc. lib. 2. Plutarch in Pomp.
Cicero de Lege Manilia and post Reditum in Senate.
.

Manilia Lex, the Author C. Manilius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 687.
ordaining, that all the Forces of Lucullus, and the Provinces under his
Government should be given to Pompey; together with Bithynia, which was under
the command of Glabrio: And that he should forthwith make War upon Mithridates,
retaining still the same Naval Forces, and the Sovereignty of the Seas, as
before Cicero de Lege Manilia. Plutarch in Pomp. E^rus Epitom. 100.
.

CHAP. XXXIII. De Tutelis, or Laws concerning Wardships.
ATILIA Lex, the Author and time unknown, prescribing, that the Praetor, and
the major part of the Tribunes, should appoint Guardians to all such Minors, to
whom none had been otherwise assigned Livy, lib. 39.
.

The Emperor Claudius seems to have abrogated this Law, when, as Suetonius
informs us, he ordered, that the assignment of Guardians should be in the power
of the Consuls Sucton. in Claud. cap. 23.
.

Laetoria Lex, ordaining, that such Persons as were distracted, or prodigally
squandered away their Estates, should be committed to the care of some proper
Persons for the security of themselves and their Possessions: And that whoever
was convicted of defrauding any in those Circumstances, should be guilty of a
high Misdemeanour Cicero de Offic. lib. 3. de Not. D^or. lib. 3.


CHAP. XXXIV. Laws concerning Wills, Heirs, and Legacies.
FVRIA Lex, the Author C. Furius, Tribune of the Commons, ordaining, that no
Person should give, by way of Legacy, above a thousand Asses, unless to the
Relations of the Master who manumiz'd him, and to some other Parties there
excepted Cicero pto B^lbo.
.

Voconia Lex, the Author Q. Voconius Saxa, Tribune of the Commons, A. 584,
ordaining, that no Woman should be left Heiress to an Estate: And that no
Census should, by his Will, give above fourth part of what he was worth to a
Woman. This seems to have been enacted to prevent the decay and extinction of
Noble Families Cicero Verr. 3. de Senect. de Finib.
.

By the Word Census is meant any rich Person, who was rated high in the
Censor's Books.

CHAP. XXXV. Laws concerning Money, Usury, etc.
SEMPRONIA Lex, the Author M. Sempronius Tribune of the Commons, A. 560.
ordaining, that in lending Money to the Allies of Rome and the Latins, the
Tenor of the Roman Laws should be still observed, as well as among the
Citizens L^v. lib. 35. C^^^^ de Offic. 2,
.

^^^eria Lex, the Author Valerius Flaccus, Consui with L. Cor^elius Cinna,
ordaining, to oblige the poorer part of the City, that all Creditors should
discharge their Debtors upon the receipt of a fourth part for the whole Sum.
This Law, as most unreasonable, is censured by Paterculus Lib. 2. cap. 23.
.

Gabinia Lex, the Author Aul. Gabinius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 685.
ordaining, that no Action should be granted for the recovery of any Money taken
up, versura facta, i. e. first borrowed upon a small Use, and then lent out
again upon a greater; which Practice was highly unreasonable Cicero ad Attic.
lib. 5. Epist. ult. lib. 6. Epist. 2.
.

Claudia Lex, the Author Claudius Caesar, commanding that no Usurer should lend
Money to any Person in his Nonage to be paid after the death of his Parents
Tacitus Annal. 11.
.

Vespasian added a great strength to this Law, when he ordained, That those
Usurers who lent Money to any filius familiae, or Son under his Father's
Tuition, should have no right ever to claim it again, not even after the death
of his Parents Sueton in Vespas. cap. 11.
.

CHAP. XXXVI. Laws concerning the Judges.
SEMPRONIA Lex, the Author C. Sempronius Gracchus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
630. ordaining, that the Right of Judging, which had been assigned to the
Senatorian Order by Romulus, should be transferred from them to the Equites
As^o^nus in Divinat. Tacit. Ann. 12. V^ll. Patere. l. 2.
.

Servilia Lex, the Author Q. Servilius Caepio, Consul with C. Atilius Serranus,
A. 647. abrogating in part the former Law, and commanding, that the Privilege
there mentioned should be divided between both Orders of Knights and Senators
Cicero de Art. Rhet. lib. 2. de Oratore, in Bruto, in Orat. pto Scauro.
.

Plutarch and Florus make C. Sempronius Gracchus to have appointed 300
Senators, and 600 Equites for the management of Judgments; but this seems
rather to belong to the Servilian Law, if not totally a mistake Cicero de Orat.
3. Floras, Epit. 71.
. This Law was soon after repealed.

Livia Lex, the Author M. Livius Drusus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 662.
ordaining, that the judiciary Power should be seated in the Hands of an equal
number of Senators and Knights As^^nius in C^radian.
.

But this, among other Constitutions of that Author, were abrogated the very
same Year, under pretense of being made inauspiciously:

Plautia Lex, the Author M. Plautius Silvanus, Tribune of the Commons, A. 664.
ordaining, that every Tribe should choose out of their own Body fifteen Persons
to serve as Judges every Year; by this means making the Honor common to all
three Orders, according as the Votes carried it in every Tribe Cicero pro
Cernel. and ad A^t. 4.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, Dictator, A. 673. taking away the
Right of Judging entirely from the Knights, and restoring it fully to the
Senators Florus Epitom. 89. Ascan. in Divinat.
.

Aurelia Lex, the Author L. Aurelius Cotta, Praetor, A. 653. ordaining, that
the Senatorian and Equestrian Orders, together with the Tribuni Aerarii, should
share the judicial Power between them Cicero in Ve^^nis. Vell. lib. 2.
.

Pompeia Lex, the Author Pompey the Great, Consul with Crass^^, A. 698.
ordaining, that the Judges should be chosen otherwise than formerly out of the
richest in every Century; yet, notwithstanding, should be confined to the
Persons mentioned in the Aurelian Law Cicero in Pisenem.
.

Julia Lex, the Author Julius Caesar, confirming the foresaid Privilege to the
Senators and Knights, but excluding the Tribuni Aerarii Suet. in Julia, cap. 41.
.

Rosinus sets this Law before that of Pompey; but it is very plain 'twas not
made 'till afterward.

Antonia Lex, the Author M. Antony, Consul with Julius Caesar, A. 709.
ordaining, that a third Decury of Judges should be added to the two former, to
be chose out of the Centurions C^^ero, in Philipp. 1. and 5.
.

CHAP. XXXVII. Laws relating to Judgments.
POMPEIA Lex, the Author Pompey the Great, sole Consul, A. 701. forbidding the
use of the Landatores in Trials Plutarch. in Pomp. and in Catone Vticens.
Valor. Max. lib. 6. cap. 2.
.

Memmia Lex, ordaining, that no Person's Name should be received into the Roll
of Criminals who was absent upon the Public Account Cicero in Vatin. Val. Max.
lib. 3. cap. 7.
.

Remmia Lex, ordaining, that Persons convicted of Calumny should be stigmatized
Cicero pro Sext. Roscio.
.

Both these Laws sometimes go under the Name of Memmiae, and sometimes of
Remmiae; the distinction here observed is owing to P. Manutius.

Cincia Lex, the Author M. Cincius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 549. forbidding
any Person to accept of a Gift upon account of judging a Cause. This is
commonly called Lex Muneralis Livy, lib. 34. T^^it. Ann. 14. Cicero ad Attic.
lib. 1. de Oratore 2. de Senect.
.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Laws relating to Crimes.
THE Crimes or Actions that tended to the prejudice of the State, have been
already reckoned up, and briefly explained. The Laws on this Subject are very
numerous, and, by reason of their great usefulness, have been preserved at
large in the Labors of the Civilians, with the particular Heads of which they
consisted. It will be sufficient to the present design, to mention such as are
hinted at in the ordinary Classicks, and to speak of those only in general.

De Majestate. Gabinia Lex, already described among the Laws relating to
Assemblies.

Appuleia Lex, the Author L. Appuleius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 652. It
seems to have been enacted for the restraint of public Force and Sedition in
the City Cicero de Orat. lib. 2.
. Sigonius thinks that 'twas this Law which made the Question de Majestate
perpetual.

Varia Lex, the Author L. Varius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 662. ordaining,
that all such Persons should be brought to a public Trial, who had any way
encouraged or assisted the Confederates in their late War against Rome Cicero
pro Scanro, pro Comel. Tus^ulan. 2. in Bruto. Valor. Max. lib. 8. cap. 6.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, Dictator A. 670. making it
Treason to lead an Army out of a Province, or to engage in a War without
special Orders; to endeavor the ingratiating one's self so with the Army as to
make them ready to serve his particular Interest; or to spare, or ransom a
Commander of the Enemy when taken Prisoner; or to pardon the Captains of
Robbers and Pirates; or for a Roman Citizen to reside without Orders at a
Foreign Court; and assigning the Punishment of aqua and igni interdictio to all
that should be convicted of any of these Crimes Cicero in Pison. pro Cluent.
etc.
.

Julia Lex, the Author Julius Caesar, either in his first Consulship, or after
the Pharsalian Victory, ordaining the Punishment mentioned in Sylla's Law, to
be inflicted on all that were found guilty de Majestate; whereas Sylla intended
it only for the Particulars which he there specifies Cicero Philipp. 1.
.

Antonio Lex, the Author Mark Antony, allowing those who were condemned de
Majestate, an Appeal to the People; which before was only allowed in the Crime
which they called Perduellio, one part of the Crimen Majestatis, of the most
heinous nature; which the Lawyers define, Hostili animo adversus rempublicam
esse. This Law was repealed by Augustus P. M^nut. lib. de legibus.
.

De Adulterio, and Pudicitia. Julia Lex, the Author Augustus Caesar, as
Suetonius insorms us In Aug. cap. 34.
Juvenal mentions this Law in his second Satyr, and seems to intimate, that it
was afterward confirmed, and put in full force by the Emperor Domitian; the
rigor of it is there very handsomely expressed.

-- Leges revocabat amaras Juv. Sat. 2. ver. 30.

Omnibus, at que ipsis Veneri Martique timendas.
Scatinia Lex, the Author C. Scatinius Aricinus, Tribune of the Commons; though
some think it was called Lex Scantinia from one Scantinius, Tribune of the
Commons; against whom it was put in execution. It was particularly levelled
against the Keepers of Catamites, and against such as prostituted themselves
for Mignions Quintilian, lib. 4. cap. 2. lib. 7. cap. 4. Cicero Philipp. 3.
Juvenal, etc.
. The Penalty enjoined by the Author was only pecuniary; but Augustus Caesar
made it afterward Capital Justinian, Instit. lib. 4.
.

Cornelia Lex inter sicarios, and veneficii. The Author Cornelius Sylla,
Dictator: It was directed against such as killed another Person with Weapons or
Poison, or fired Houses, or took away any Person's Life by a false Accusation;
with several other Heads.

It was a Clause in this Law, That the Person who stood accused of the Crimes
therein mentioned, might have his liberty of letting the Jury give their
Verdict clain vel palam, by Voices, or by Tablets Cicero pro Cinent.
.

De Parricidis. The old Law which prescribed the odd sort of Punishment proper
to this Crime, was restored and confirmed by Pompey the Great, with the Title
of Lex Pompeia Justinian. Instit. lib. 4. and alii.
.

Cornelia Lex falsi. Sylla the Dictator, as he appointed a proper Praetor to
make Inquisition into what they called Crimen falsi, so he enacted this Law as
the Rule and Standard in such Judgments Cicero de Not. Deor. lib. 3. Sueton. in
Aug. cap. 33.
It takes in all Forgers, Concealers, Interliners, etc. of Wills;
Counterfeiters of Writs and Edicts; false Accusers, and Corrupters of the Jury;
together with those that any ways debased the Public Coin, by shaving or
filing the Gold, or adulterating the Silver, or publishing any new pieces of
Tin, Lead, etc. And making those incur the same Penalty (which was aqua and
igni interdictio) who voluntarily connived at the Offenders in these
Particulars.

Leges de vi. Plautia, or Plotia Lex, the Author P. Plautius. Tribune of the
Commons, A. 675. against those that attempted any force against the State or
Senate; or used any violence to the Magistrates; or appeared armed in public
upon any ill design; or forcibly expelled any Person from his lawful
Possession. The Punishment assigned to the Convicted was aqua and igni
interdictio Sucton. in Juli^, cap. 5. D^o. lib. 39. Cicero pro Sextio, pro
M^lone.
.

Clodia Lex, the Author P. Clodius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 695. ordaining,
that all those should be brought to their Trial who had executed any Citizen of
Rome, without the Judgment of the People, and the Formality of a Trial Vell.
Patero. lib. 2. Cicero ad An^^. lib. 3. D^o lib. 38.
.

The Author being a mortal Enemy of Cicero's, levelled this Law particularly
against him; who in the time of the Catilinarian Conspiracy, for the greater
secrecy and security, having taken several of the chiefest Parties concerned,
immediately sent them to execution. Clodius having highly ingratiated himself
with the People by several popular Laws, easily got this Act to pass; and so
obliged Cicero to go into Exile.

Pompeia Lex, the Author Pompey the Great, in his third Consulship. A. 701. It
was directed especially against the Authors of the late Riot, upon the Account
of Clodius and Milo; in which one of the Curiae had been set on sire, and the
Palace of Lepidus the Interrex, assaulted by force. This Law introduced a much
shorter form of Judgment than had been formorly used, ordaining, that the first
three Days in every Trial should be spent in hearing and examining Witnesses,
and then allowing only one Day for the two Parties to make their formal
Accusation and Desence; the first being confined to two Hours, and the other to
three. Hence the Author of the Dialogue concerning famous Orators, attributed
to Quintilian, or Tacitus, observes, That Pompey was the first that deprived
Eloquence of its old Liberty, and confined it to bounds and limits Vide Ascon.
in Milonian. Cicero de Fioib. 4. Caesor de B^ll. Civ. lib. 3, etc.
.

Leges de Ambitu. Fabia Lex, prescribing the number of Sectatores, allowed to
any Candidate Cio. pro Muraena.
. This did not pass.

Acilia Calpurnia Lex, the Authors M. Acilius Glabrio, and C. Calpurnius Piso,
Consuls, A. 686. ordaining, That besides the Fine imposed, no Person convicted
of this Crime should bear an Office, or come into the Senate Cic. pro Muraena,
pro Cornel. etc.
.

Tullia Lex, the Author M. Tullius Cicero, Consul with C. Antonius, A. 690.
ordaining, That no Person, for two Years before he su'd for an Office, should
exhibit a Show of Gladiators to the People, unless the care of such a Solemnity
had been left to him by Will: That Senators convicted of the crimen ambitus,
should suffer aqua and igni interdictio for ten Years; and that the Commons
should incurr a severer Penalty than had been enjoined by the Calpurnian Law
Cic. in Varm. pro Sexito, pro Muraena, L^^, lib 37.
.

Ausidia Lex, the Author Ausidius, Tribune of the Commons, A. 692. more severe
than that of Tully; having this remarkable Clause, That if any Candidate
promised Money to the Tribunes and did not pay it, he should be excused; but in
case he actually gave it, should be obliged to pay to every Tribe a yearly Fine
of 3000 Sestertii Cic. ad Attic. lib. 1. epist. 11.
.

Lex Licinia de Sodalitiis, the Author M. Licinius Crassus, Consul with Cn.
Pompey, A. 698. appointing a greater Penalty than formerly to Offenders of this
kind Cic. pro Plan^to.
. By Sodalitia, they understood an unlawful making of Parties at Elections;
which was intercepted as a sort of Violence offered to the Freedom of the
People. It Is strange, that this sense of the Word should have escaped Cooper
and ^i^tl^ton.

Asconius seems to imply, that the Sodalitia and Ambitus were two different
Crimes, when he tells us, That Milo was arraigned on those two accounts, at two
several times, and not before the same Quaesitor In Argument. ^^^^^an^^.
.

Pompeia Lex, the Author Pompey the Great, sole Consul, A. 701. by this it was
enacted, That whoever, having been convicted of a Crime of this nature, should
afterward impeach two others of the same Crime, so that one of them was
condemned, should himself, upon that score, be pardoned. The short Form of
Judgment, mentioned in Pompeia Lex de vi, was ordered too by this Law In
Arument. Milonianae.
.

Julius Caesar quite ruined the Freedom and fair Proceedings in Elections, when
he divided the Right of choosing Magistrates between himself and the People, or
rather disposed of all Offices at his Pleasure Sueton. in Julio, cap. 41.
Hence Lucan: -- Nam quo melius Pharsalicus annus Lib. 5. verse. 391.

Consule notus erit? fingit solennia campus,
Et non admissae dirimit suffragia Plebis;
Decantatque Tribus, and vana versat in Vrna.
Nec coelum servare licet; tonat Augure surdo;
Et laetae jurantur aves bubone sinistro.
From what brave Consul could the Year receive
A surer Mark than Death and Wars shall leave?
Assemblies are a Jest; and when they meet,
The gaping Crowd is bubbled with a Cheat.
The Lots are shook, and sorted Tribes advance;
But Caesar, not blind Fortune, rules the Chance.
Nor impious Rome Heaven's sacred Signs obeys,
While Jove still Thunders as the Augurs please:
And when Left-Owls some dire Disaster bode,
The staring Miscreants, at their Masters Nod,
Look to the Right, and swear the Omen's good.


But Augustus restored the old Privileges to the Comitia, and restrained
unlawful courses used in the canvasing at Elections, by several Penalties
Sutton. in August. cap. 40.
; publishing for this purpose the Lex Julia de Ambitu, mentioned in the
Pandects.

Legis de Pecuniis repetundis. Calpurnia Lex, the Author L. Calpurnius Piso
Frugi, A. 604. ordaining a certain Praetor for the inquisition of this Crime,
and laying a great Penalty on Offenders Cicero in Bruto, de Offic. lib. 2.
crat. 3. in Verrem.
.

Caecilia Lex, mentioned by Valerius Maximus Lib. 6. cap. 9. Sect. 10.
. Sigonius believes this Law to be the very same with the former, and that
either the two Tribunes, Caecilius and Calpurnius, joined in the making of it;
and so it came to be called either Calpurnia, or Caecilia, at pleasure; or that
in this place we ought to read Calpurnia, instead of Caecilia.

Junia Lex, the Author, probably, M. Junius Pennus, Tribune of the Commons, A.
627. ordaining, That besides the litis aestimatio, or rating of the damages the
Person convicted of this Crime, should suffer Banishment Cic. in Verren^, and
pro Balbo. Vell. Paterc. lib. 2.
.

Servilia Lex, the Author C. Servilius Glaucia, Praetor, A. 653. several
Fragments of which are collected from Authors, and transcribed from brazen
Tablets by Sigonius Cic. pro Posthum. pro Balbo in Verrem. Sigon. de Judiciis,
lib. 2. c. 27.
.

Acilia Lex, the Author M. Acilius Glabrio; in which was this remarkable
clause: That the convicted Person should be allowed neither ampliatio, nor
comperindinatio; neither a new Hearing at a set time prefixed by the Praetor,
nor an Adjournment of the Trial, 'till the third Day after the first appearing
of the Parties in the Court Cic. in Verrem. Ascon. in easdem.
.

Cornelia Lex, the Author L. Cornelius Sylla, Dictator; ordaining, That besides
the litis aestimatio, the Person convicted of this Crime, should be interdicted
the Use of Fire and Water Cic. pro Cluentio; in Verrem. Ascon. Paedian. in
Verrinas.
.

Julia Lex, the Author C. Julius Caesar; this kept its Authority through the
whole Series of the Emperors, and is still celebrated in the Pandects. A great
part of it was levelled against the Misdemeanors of Provincial Governors;
many of which, according to this Law, are alleged against Piso, who had been
Proconsul in Macedonia, by Cicero, in his 37th. Oration.

CHAP. XXXIX. Miscellany Laws not spoken of under the general Heads.
CLODIA Lex de Collegiis, the Author P. Clodius, Tribune of the Commons, A.
695. ordaining, That the Collegia, or Companies of Artificers instituted by
Numa, which had in a great measure been laid down, should be all revived, and
observed as formerly, with the addition of several new Companies Cic. pro
Sexit^o; in Pison. pro Domo. Ascon. in Cornel.
.

Caecilia Lex de jure Italiae, and tributis tollendis; the Author Q. Caecilius
Metellus Nepos, Praetor, A. 693. ordaining, That the Tax called Praetoria,
should be taken off from all the Italian States Dio, lib. 37. Cic. in Epist ad
Attic.
.

Portoria, according to Sigonius's explication, were a sort of Toll paid always
at the carrying of any exportable Goods to the Haven; whence the Collectors of
it were called Portitores.

Lex Julia de maritandis ordinibus. The Romans, consulting the Grandeur of
their Republic, had always a particular Honor for a married state; and
nothing was more usual than for the Censors to impose a Fine upon old
Batchelours. Dionysius Halicarnassus Lib. 9.
mentions an old Constitution, by which all Persons of full Age were obliged to
marry: But the first Law of which we have any certainty, was this of Augustus
Caesar, preferred A. 736. It did not pass before it had received several
Amendments, being at first rejected for its extreme severity. This is the
subject of Propertius's Seventh Elegy of the Third Book:

Ga^^sa est certe sublatam Cynthia legem, etc. My Cynthia laughed to see the
Bill thrown out, etc. Horace calls it Lex Marita In Carmine Seculati.
.

A. 762. this Law being improved and enlarged, was preferred in a new Bill by
Papius and Poppaeus, the Consuls at that time, whence it is sometimes called
Papia Poppaea Lex, and generally Julia Papia.

A great part of the general Heads are collected by Lipsius, in his Excursions
on Tacitus Exchrs. ad Tacit. Ann. lib. 3. Liter. C. Vid. Sueton, is^ Octavio,
cap. 34.
; among which, the most remarkable are those which contain the Sanctions of
Rewards and Punishments.

As to the first of these, it was hereby ordained, That all the Magistrates
should take Precedence according to their number of Children; or a married Man
before a Batchelour: That in Elections, those Candidates should be preferred
who had the most numerous Offspring: And that any Person might stand sooner
than ordinary for an Office, if he had as many Children as he wanted Years, to
be capable of bearing such a Dignity Plin, Epist. lib. 7.
: That whoever in the City. had Three Children, in the other Parts of Italy
Four, and in the Provinces Five (or, as some say, Seven) should be excused from
all troublesome Offices in the place where he lived. Hence came the famous jus
trium liberorum, so frequently met with in Pliny, Martial, etc. by which the
Emperors often obliged such Persons with this Privilege to whom Nature had
denied it.

Of the Penalties incurred by such as in spite of this Law lived a single
Life, the chief was, That unmarried Persons should be incapable of receiving
any Legacy or Inheritance by Will, unless from their near Relations; and such
as were married, and yet had no Children, above half an Estate. Hence Plutarch
has a severe Reflection on the covetous Humor of the Age: That several of the
Romans did not marry for the sake of raising Heirs e^ their own Fortunes; but
that they themselves might, upon this account, be capable of inheriting the
Estates of other Men Plat. (...).
.

And Juvenal alludes to the same custom: Jam Pater es; dederam quod famae
opponere possis Sat 9. verse. 86.
;
Jura Parentis habes: propter me scriberis Haeres;
Legatum omne capis, nec non and dulce caducums
Now by my Toil, thou gain'st a Father's Fame;
No more shall pointing Crowds attest thy Shame,
Thine is the Privilege our Laws afford
To him that stands a Father on record:
In Misers Wills you stand unquestioned now,
And reap the Harvest which you could not sow.


Claudia Lex de scribarum negotiatione. This Law is barely mentioned by
Suetonius In Domit. cap. 9.
; and seems a part of the Lex Claudia, or Clodia, about the Trading of the
Senators, already explained. It appears therefore, that not only the Senators,
but the Scribes too, or at least those Scribes who assisted the Quaestors, were
forbid to make use of a Vessel of above Three hundred Amphorae: We may
reasonably suppose, that this Prohibition was not laid upon them in respect of
their Order and Degree, which were not by any means eminent; but rather upon
account of their particular Place, or Office; because it looked very improper,
that Persons who were concerned in the Public Accounts, should, at the same
time, by dealing in Traffic and Merchandise, endeavor rather the filling
their own Coffers, than improving the Revenues of the State Vid. Torrent. in
Not. ad ^bcum.
.

Mamilia Lex; this Law, as well as the former, depends upon a single Authority,
being just named by Salust In Bell. Jugurthin.
and not explained by Manulius, or Rosinus. It seems to have been to this
purpose, that since Affairs had been very often ill managed by the Nobility,
those Persons, whose Ancestors had bore no Magistracy in the State, such as
they called Homines novi, should, for the future, be allowed the Privilege of
holding Public Offices Vid. Rivium, in Not. ad locum.
.

Atinia Lex de furtis, ordaining, That no Prescription should secure the
possession of stolen Goods; but that the proper Owner should have an eternal
Right to them Cie. Verr. ^. Agell. lib. 17. cap. 7.
.

PART II.
BOOK IV. The Roman Art of WAR.
CHAP. I. The Levies of the Roman Foot.
AT the same time of the Year as the Consuls were declared Elect, or Designed,
they chose the Military Tribunes, Fourteen out of the Body of the Equites, who
had served in the Army five Years; and Ten out of the Commohalty, such as had
made Ten Campagnes. The former they called Tribuni Juniores; the latter
Seniores.

The Consuls having agreed on a Levy (as in the time of the Commonwealth they
usually did every Year) they issued out an Edict, commanding all Persons who
had reached the Military Age (about Seventeen Years, to appear (commonly) in
the Capitol, or in the Area before the Capitol, as the most sacred and august
Place, on such a Day. The People being come together, and the Consuls, who
presided in the Assembly, having taken their Seat, in the first place the Four
and twenty Tribunes were dispos^d of, according to the number of Legions they
designed to make up, which was generally Four. The Junior Tribunes were
a^sign'd; Four to the first Legion; Three to the second; Four to the third;
and, Three to the last. The Senior Tribunes, Two to the first Legion and the
third; Three to the second and the last. After this, every Tribe being called
out by Lot, was ordered to divide into their proper Centuries; out of each
Century were the Soldiers cited by Name, with respect had to their Estate and
Class; for which purpose, there were Tables ready at hand, in which the Name,
Age, and Wealth of every Person was exactly described.

Four Men, as much alike in all circumstances as could be pitched upon, being
presented out of the Century, first the Tribunes of the first Legion chose one;
then the Tribunes of the second another; the Tribunes of the third Legion a
third Man; and the remaining Person fell to the Tribunes of the fourth. Then
Four more were drawn out; and now the Right of Choosing first belonged to the
Tribunes of the second Legion; in the next, Four to the Tribunes of the third
Legion; then to the Tribunes of the sourth Legion; and so round, those Tribunes
choosing last the next time, who chose first the time before; the most equal and
regular method imaginable.

Cicero has remarked a superstitious Custom observed in these Proceedings: That
the first Soldiers pitched upon, should, for the Omen's sake, be such as had
fortunate Names; as, Salvius, Valerius, and the like Cie. de Divinat. lib. 1.
.

There were many legal Excuses which might keep Persons from the List; as, in
case they were Fifty Years old, for then they could not be obliged to serve; or
if they enjoyed any civil or sacred Office, which they could not conveniently
relinquish; or if they had already made Twenty Campagnes, which was the time
required for every Foot-soldier; or if upon account of extraordinary Merit,
they had been by Public Authority released from the trouble of serving for
such a time; or if they were maimed in any Part, and so ought not to be
admitted into the Legions; as Suetonius tells us of a Father, who cut off the
Thumbs of his two Sons, on purpose to keep them out of the Army Sueton. August.
cap. 24.
: And Valerius Maximus gives us a relation of the like nature Val. Max. lib. 6.
cap. 3.


Otherwise they were necessitated to submit; and in case of a resusal, were
usually punished either with Imprisonment, Fine, or Stripes, according to the
Lenity or Severity of the Consul. And therefore it seems strange, that
Machiavel should particularly commend the Roman Discipline upon account of
forcing no one to the Wars, when we have, in all parts of History, such large
intimations of a contrary practice. Nay* we read too of the Conquisitores, or
Impress-Masters, who were commissioned upon some occasions to go about, and
compel Men to the Service of the State.

Valerius Maximus Lib. 6. cap. 3.
gives us one Example of changing this Custom of taking out every particular
Soldier by the Tribunes, for that of choosing them by Lot: And Appianus
Alexandrinus In Iberic.
acquaints us. That in the Spanish War manag^d by Lucullus, upon complaint to
the Senate of several unjust Practices in the Levies, the Fathers thought fit
to choose all the Soldiers by Lot. Yet the same Author assures us, that within
five Years time, the old Custom returned of making the Levies in the manner
already described.

However, upon any extraordinary occasion of immediate Service, they omitted
the common Formalities, and without much distinction, listed such as they met
with, and led them out on an Expedition. These they termed Milites subitarii.

CHAP. II. Levy and Review of the Cavalry.
ROMULUS, having established the Senate, chose Three hundred of the stoutest
Young Men out of the most Noble Families to serve on Horseback: But after the
institution of the Census by Servius Tullius, all those Persons had the Honor
of being admitted into the Order of the Equites, who were worth Four hundred
Sestertia; yet no Man was thus enrolled by the Kings, or Consuls, or afterward
by the Censors, unless besides the Estate required, no exception could be taken
against his Person or Morals. If these were unquestionable, his Name was entered
among the Knights, and a Horse and Ring given him at the Public Charge, he
being obliged to appear for the future on Horseback, as often as the State
should have occasion for his Service.

So that there being always a sufficient number of Equites in the City, there
needed only a Review in order to fit them for Service Learned Men have very
little agreement in this point; yet we may venture to take notice of three
several sorts of Reviews, Probatic, Transvectio, and what they termed properly
Recensie; though they are usually confounded, and seldom understood.

The Probatio we may conceive to have been a diligent Search into the Lives and
Manners of the Equites, and a strict Observation of their Plight of Body, Arms,
Horse, etc. This is supposed to have been commonly made once a Year.

Transvectio Lipsius makes the same as Probatio; but he is certainly mistaken,
since all the Hints we meet with concerning it in Authors, argue it to have
been rather a pompous Ceremony and Procession, than an Examination. Dionvsius
describes it in the following manner: The Sacrifice being finished, all those
who are allowed Horses at the expense of the State, ride along in Order, as if
returning from a Battle, being habited in the Togae Palmatae, or the Trabeae,
and crowned with Wreaths of Olive. The Procession begins at the Temple of Mars,
without the Walls, and is carried on through all the eminent parts of the City,
particularly through the Forum, and the Temple of Castor and Pollux. The number
sometimes reachets to Five thousand, every Man bearing the Gifts and Ornaments
received is as a Reward of his Valor, from the General. A most glorious Sig^t,
and worthy of the Roman Grandeur D^^ys. Halic. lib. 6.


This Solemnity was instituted to the Honor of Castor and (...), who, in the
Battle with the Latins, about the Year of the City 257. appeared in the Field
personally assisting the R^^^^us; and presently after the Fight, were seen at
Rome (just by the Fountain where their Temple was afterward built) upon Horses
all foaming with whire frothy Sweat, as if they had rode Post to bring Tidings
of the Victory Plut. in Coriolan.
.

The proper Re^^sio was the Account taken by the Censors every Lusirum, when
all the People, as well as the Equites, were to appear at the General Survey:
So that it was only a more solemn and accurate sort of Probation, with the
addition of enrolling new Names, cancelling old ones, and other Circumstances
of that nature.

Besides all this, 'twas an usual Custom for the Equites, when they had served
out their legal time in the Wars, to lead their Horse solemnly into the Forum,
to the Seat of the Two Censors; and there having given an account of the
Commanders under whom they had served, as also of the Time, Places, and
Actions, relating to their Service, they were discharged every Man with Honor
or Disgrace, according as he deserved. For this account we are beholden to
Plutarch, who gives a particular Relation how this Ceremony was performed with
an usual Applause by Pompey the Great.

It might be brought as a very good Argument of the obscurity and confusion of
these Matters, that of two very Learned Men; one makes this Equi redditio the
same as the Probatio Herman. Hugo de Militia Equestri, lib. 2. cap. 5.
; the other the same as the Transvectio Sigon. Annot. ad Live. lib. 9. cap. 46.
.

-- Non nostrum tantas componere lites. The Emperors often took a review of the
Cavalry; and Augustus particularly restored the old custom of the Transvectio,
which had before been discontinu'd for some time.

CHAP. III. The Military Oath, and the Levies of the Confederates.
THE Levies being finished, the Tribunes of every Legion chose out one whom
they thought the fittest Person, and gave him a solemn Oath at large; the
substance of which was, That he should oblige himself to obey the Commanders in
all things, to the utmost of his Power; be ready to attend whenever they
ordered his appearance; and never to leave the Army but by their consent. After
he had ended, the whole Legion, passing one by one, every Man, in short, swore
to the same effect, crying, as he went by, Idem in me.

This, and some other Oaths, were so essential to the Military State, that
Juvenal uses the Word Sacramenta, for Milites, or Militia; Sat. 16.

Praemia nune alia, atque alia emolumenta notemus
Sacramentorum --
As to the raising the Confederate Troops, Polybius informs us, That at the
same time as the Levies were made in Rome, the Consuls gave notice to the
Cities of the Allies in Italy, intimating the number of Forces they should have
occasion to borrow of them, together with the Time and Place when and where
they would have them make their Rendezvous. The States accordingly convened
their Men, and, choosing out their desired Number, gave them an Oath, and
assigned them a Commander in Chief, and a Play Master General. We may observe,
that in the time of Polybius, all Italy was indeed subject to the Romans; yet
no State or People in it had been reduced into the form of a Province,
retaining, for the generality, their old Governors and Laws, and being termed
Secii, or Confederates.

But, after all, the Italians were not only divided into separate Provinces,
but afterward honored with the jus Civitatis; the Name of Soci^ ceased, all
the Natives of Italy being accounted Romans; and therefore instead of the
social Troops, the Auxilia were afterward procured, which are carefully to be
distinguished from the former. They were sent by foreign States and Princes, at
the desire of the Roman Senate, or Generals, and were allowed a set Pay from
the Republic; whereas the Socii received no consideration for their Service,
but a Distribution of Corn.

CHAP. IV. Of the Evocati.
THE most eminent Degree of Soldiers, were the Evocati, taken as well out of
Allies as Citizens, out of Horse as Foot; not by Force, but at the Request and
Entreaty of the Consuls, or other Officers; for which purpose, Letters were
commonly dispatched to every particular Man whom they designed thus to invite
into their Service. These were old experienced Soldiers, and generally such as
had served out their legal Time, or had received particular Marks of Favor, as
a Reward of their Valor; on which accounts they were styled Emeriti, and
Beneficiarii. Searce any War was undertaken, but a great number of these were
invited into the Army; and therefore they had the Honor to be reckoned almost
equal with the Centurions. In the Field they usually guarded the chief
Standard, being excused from all the Military Drudgery, of standing on the
Watch, laboring in the Works, and other servile Employments.

The Emperor Galba gave the same Name of Evocati, to a select Band of young
Gentlemen of the Equestrian Rank, whom he kept as a Guard to his Palace Su^ton.
in Galb. cap. 10.
.

CHAP. V. The several kinds of the Roman Foot; and their Division into
Manipuli, Cohorts, and Legions.
THE whole Roman Infantry was divided into Four sorts, Velites, Hastati,
Principes, and Triarii.

The Velites were commonly some of the Tyro's, or young Soldiers, of mean
Condition, and lightly Armed. They had their Name a volando, or a velocitate,
from their Swiftness and Expedition. They seem not to have been divided into
any distinct Bodies, or Companies, but to have hovered in loose Order before
the Army.

The Hastati were so called, because they used in ancient times to fight with
Spears, which were afterward laid aside as incommodious: These were taken out
of the next in Age to the Velites.

The Principes were generally Men of middle Age, and of greatest Vigor: It Is
probable, that before the Institution of the Hastati, they used to begin the
Fight, whence they borrowed their Name.

The Triarii were commonly Veterans, or hardy old Soldiers, of long Experience,
and approved Valor. They had their Name from their Position, being Marshaled
in the Third Place, as the main Strength and Hopes of their Party. They are
sometimes called Pilarii, from their Weapons the Pila.

Every one of these grand Divisions, except the Velites, composed Thirty
Manipuli, or Companies: Every Manipulus made Two Centuries, or Ordines.

Three Manipuli, One of the Hastati, another of the Principes, and a Third of
the Triarii, composed a Cohort. Among these, one was filled with some of the
choicest Soldiers and Officers, obtaining the Honorable Title of Prima Cohors.
We meet too with the Praetoria Cohors, instituted by Scipio Numantinus;
selected for the most part out of the Evocati, or Reformade's, and obliged only
to attend on the Praetor, or General: And this gave original to the
Praetoriani, the Lifeguard of the Emperors.

Ten Cohorts made up a Legion: The exact number of Foot in such a Battalion,
Romulus fixed at Three thousand; though Plutarch assures us, That after the
reception of the Sabines into Rome, he increased it to Six thousand. The common
number afterward, in the first times of the Free State, was Four thousand. In
the War with Hannibal, it arose to Five thousand. After this, It Is probable
they sunk to about Four thousand, or Four thousand two hundred, again, which
was the number in the time of Polybius.

In the Age of Julius Caesar, we don't find any Legions exceeding the Polybian
number of Men; and he himself expressly speaks of Two Legions, that did not make
above Seven thousand between them Commentar. lib. 5.^
.

The number of Legions kept in Pay together, was different, according to the
various Times and Occasions. During the Free State, Four Legions were commonly
fitted up every Year, and divided between the Two Consuls: Yet in cases of
necessity, we sometimes meet with no less than Sixteen or Eighteen in Livy.

Augustus maintained a Standing Army of Twenty three, or (as some will have it)
of Twenty five Legions; but in aftertimes we seldom find so many.

They borrowed their Names from the Order in which they were raised, as Prima,
Secunda, Tertia; but because it usually happened, that there were several
Primae, Secundae, etc. in several places, upon that account they took a sort of
Surname besides; either from the Emperors who first constituted them, as
Augusta, Claudiana, Galbiana, Flavia, Vlpia, Trajana, Antoniana; or from the
Provinces which had been conquered chiefly by their Valor; as Parthica,
Scythica, Gallica, Arabica, etc. Or from the Names of the particular Deities,
for whom their Commanders had an especial Honor; as Minervia, and Apollinaris:
Or from the Region where they had their Quarters; as Fretensis, Cyrenica,
Britannica, etc. Or sometimes upon account of lesser Accidents; as Adjutrix,
Martia, Fulminatrix, Rapax, etc.

CHAP. VI. The Division of the Cavalry, and of the Allies.
THE Horse required to every Legion was Three hundred, divided into ten Turmae,
or Troops; Thirty to a Troop; every Turma making Three Decuriae, or Bodies of
Ten Men. This number of Three hundred they termed justus Equitatus; and is
understood as often as we meet with Legio cum suo equitatu; or Legio cum justo
equitatu. And though we now and then find a different number, as Two hundred in
a place or two of Livy and Caesar; yet we must suppose this alteration to have
proceeded from some extraordinary cause, and consequently to be of no Authority
against the common current of History.

The foreign Troops, under which we may comprize the Socii and Auxiliaries were
not divided, as the Citizens, into Legions; but first into Two great Bodies,
termed Alae, or Cornua; and those again into Companies usually of the same
nature with those of the Romans: Though, as to this, we have little light in
History, as a matter of small importance.

We may further remark, That the Forces which the Romans borrowed of the
Confederate States, were equal to their own in Foot, and double in Horse;
though by disposing and dividing them with great Policy and Caution, they
prevented any Design that they might possibly entertain against the natural
Forces: For about a third part of the foreign Horse, and a fifth of the Foot,
was separated from the rest, under the Name of Extraordinarii; and a more
choice Part of those with the Title of Ablecti.

In the time of the Emperors, the Auxiliary Forces were commonly Honored with
the Name and Constitution of Legions, though the more ancient Appellation of
Alae frequently occurr. They were called Alae, from their position in the Army;
and therefore we must expect sometimes to find the same Name applied to the
Roman Soldiers, when they happened to have the same Station.

CHAP. VII. The Officers in the Roman Army; and first of the Centurions and
Tribunes; with the Commanders of the Horse, and of the Confederate Forces.
THE Military Officers may be divided, according to Lipsius, into proper and
Common; the first presiding over some particular Part, as the Centurions and
Tribunes, the other using an equal Authority over the whole force, as the
Legati and the General.

We cannot have a tolerable Notion of the Centurions, without remembering what
has been already delivered; That every one of the Thirty M^^ipuli in a Legion,
was divided into Two Ordines, or Ranks; and consequently the Three Bodies of
the Hastati, Principes, and Triarii, into Twenty Orders a-piece, as into Ten
Manipuli. Now every Manipulus was allowed Two Centurions, or Captains; One to
each Order, or Century: And to determine the point of Priority between them,
they were created at two different Elections. The Thirty, who were made first,
always took the Precedence of their Fellows, and therefore commanded the
Right Hand Orders, as the others did the Left.

The Triarii, or Pilani, being esteemed the most Honorable, had their
Centurions elected first; next to them the Principes, and afterward the
Hastati; whence they were called primus and secundus Pilus, primus and secundus
Princeps, primus and secundus Hastatus; and so on.

Here it may be observed, That primi ordines, is used sometimes in Historians
for the Centurions of those Orders; and the same Centurions are sometimes
styled Principes Ordinum, and Principes Centurionum.

We may take notice too what a large Field there lay for Promotion; first
through all the Orders of the Hastati, then quite through the Principes; and
afterward from the last Order of the Triarii, to the Primopilus, the most
Honorable of the Centurions, and who deserves to be particularly described.

This Officer, besides his Name of Primopilus, went under the several Titles of
Dux Legionis, Praefectus Legionis, Primus Centurionum, and Primus Centurio; and
was the Centurion of the Right Hand Order of the first Manipulus of the
Triarians or Pilani, in every Legion. He presided over all the other
Centurions; and, generally, gave the word Command in Exercises and Engagements
by Order of the Tribunes. Besides this, he had the care of the Eagle, or chief
Standard of the Legion: Hence Aquilae praeesse is to bear the Dignity of
Primopilus; and hence Aquila is taken by Pliny for the said Office; and Juvenal
seems to intimate the same.

Vt locupletem Aquilam tibi Sexagesimus annus Adferat.

Sat. 14. Nor was this Station only honorable, but very profitable too; for he
had a special Stipend allowed him, probably as much as a Knight's Estate; and
when he left that Charge, was reputed equal to the Members of the Equestrian
Order, bearing the Title of Primopilarius; in the same manner as those who had
discharged the greatest Civil Offices, were styled ever after Consulares,
Censorii, Praetorii, Quaestorii, and Aedilitii.

The Badge of the Centurion's Office was the Vitis or Rod which they bore in
their Hand, whence vitem poscere imports the same as to sue for a Centurion's
Place. The Evocati too had the Privilege of using the Vitis as being in all
respects rather superior to the Centurions.

As to the reason why this Rod should be made of a Vinebranch, an old Scholiast
upon Juvenal has a merry Fancy, that Bacchus made use of such a Scepter in his
Martial Expedition, and recommended the use of it to Posterity.

Besides the Centurions, every Manipulus had two Vexillarii or Ensigns; and
every Centurion chose two Optiones, or Succenturiones to be his Deputies or
Lieutenants.

The Tribunes owe their Name and Original to Romulus his Institution, when he
chose three Officers in chief of that nature out of the three Tribes into which
he divided his City. The number afterward increased to six in every Legion.
They were created, as at first by the Kings, so afterward by the Consuls for
some time, 'till about A. V. C. 393. when the People assumed this Right to
themselves: And tho in the War with Perseus King of Macedon, this Privilege was
regained by the Consuls Vide Live. lib. 42.
yet we find that in the very same War it quickly after returned to the People
Vide Live. lib. 43.
. It Is probable, that soon after they divided this Power between them, one half
of the Tribunes being assigned by the Consuls, the other half elected by the
People. The former sort were termed Rufuli, or Rutili, because one Rutilius
Rufus preferred a Law in their behalf: The others Comitiati, because they
obtained their Command by the public Votes in the Comitia Vide As^on. Paedian
in Verrin.
.

They were sometimes taken out of the Equestrian and Senatorian Orders: And in
the time of the Caesar's most (if not all) the Tribunes seem to have been either
Senators or Knights: Upon which account they were divided into the Laticlavii,
and the Angusticlavii; the latus clavus properly belonging to the former, and
the angustus clavus to the latter.

The business of the Tribunes was to decide all Controversies in the Army; to
give the Word to the Watch; besides the care of the Works and Camp, and several
other Particulars which will fall under our notice upon some other occasion.

They had the Honor of wearing a Gold Ring in the same manner as the Equites;
and because their Office was extremely desired to encourage and promote as many
as possible, their Command lasted but six Months: For the knowledge of both
these Customs we are beholden to one Verse of Juvenal, Sat. 7.

Semestri vatum digitos circumligat auro. Every Turma, or Troop of Horse had
three Decurions, or Captains of Ten; but he that was first elected commanded
the Troop, and the others were but his Lieutenants; though every one of the
Decurions had an Optio or Deputy under him.

As to the Confederate or Foreign Forces, we are not certain how the smaller
Bodies of them were commanded; but it seems most probable that the Romans
generally marshalled them according to their own Discipline, and assigned them
Officers of the same nature with those of the Legions. But the two Alae, or
great Divisions of the Allies, we are assured had each a Prefect appointed
them by the Roman Consul, who governed in the same manner as the Legionary
Tribunes.

CHAP. VIII. The Legati, and the Imperator, or General.
THE Design of the Legati at their first Institution, was not so much to
command as to advise; the Senate selecting some of the oldest and most prudent
Members to assist the General in his Counsels. Dionysius calls this The most
Honorable and Sacred Office among the Romans, bearing not only the Authority
of a Commander, but withal the Sanctity and Veneration of a Priest Dionys.
Halicarn, lib. 11.
. And he and Polybius give them no other Name than (...), or (...), Elders, or
Elders and Counselors.

They were chose commonly by the Consuls: the Authority of the Senate
concurring with their Nomination: Though this was sometimes slighted, or
contradicted, as appears from Cicero in his Orations for Sextius, and against
Vatinius.

They commanded in chief under the General, and managed all Affairs by his
Permission; whence Caesar calls their Power, Opera fiduciaria Civil. lib. 2.
. And when the Consul, or Proconsul was absent, they had the Honor of using
the Fasces, and were entrusted with the same Charge as the Officer whom they
representd.

As to the number of the Legati we have no certainty; but we may suppose this
to have depended upon the Pleasure of the General, and upon the nature and
consequence of the Affair in which they were engaged. However we have tolerable
grounds to assign one to every Legion.

Under the Emperors there were two sorts of Legati, Consulares and Praetorii;
the first of which commanded whole Armies as the Emperor's
Lieutenant-Generals; and the other only particular Legions.

The General excelled all other Officers, not only because he had the chief
Command of the whole Army, Horse and Foot, Legions and Auxiliaries; but
especially as he was allowed the Auspicia, or the Honor of taking Omens by
help of the Diviners, which made a very solemn Ceremony in all Martial
Expeditions. Hence they were said, gerere rem suis auspiciis, and su^divis:
This was most properly applied when they did not act in person; as Suctonius,
when he reckons up the Conquests of Augustus, expresses himself, Domuit autem
partim ductu, parti^^ auspiciis suis, etc Suet in Aug. cap. 21.
.

Machiavel Machiavel's Discourse on Livy.
highly extolls the Wisdom of the Romans in allowing their Generals unlimited
Commissions, by which they were empowered to fight or not fight; to assault
such a Town, o^ march another way, without control; the Senate reserving to
themselves only the Power of making Peace and decreeing War, unless upon
extraordinary occasions. This was several times the cause of remarkable
Victories, that in all probability had been otherwise prevented. Thus when
Fabius Maximus had given the Tuscans a considerable defeat at Sutrium, and
entered on a Resolution to pass the Ciminian Forest, a very dangerous and
difficult Adventure, he never staid to expect further Orders from Rome, but
immediately marched his Forces into the Enemies Country, and at the other side
of the Forest gave them a total overthrow. In the mean time, the Senate fearing
he might venture on such an hazardous attempt, sent the Tribunes of the Commons
with other Officers to desire Fabius that he would not by any means think of
such an Enterprise; but not arriving 'till he had effected his design, instead
of hindering his Resolution, they returned home with the joyful News of his
Success Livy, lib. 9.
.

The setting out of the General was attended with great Pomp and Superstition.
The Public Prayers and Sacrifices for his Success being finished, he, habited
in a rich Paludamentum, a Robe of Purple or Scarlet interweav'd with Gold,
begun his March out of the City, accompanied with a vast Retinue of all Sexes
and Ages; especially if the Expedition was undertaken against any potent or
renowned Adyersary, all Persons being desirous to see and follow with their
Wishes him on whom all their Hopes and Fortunes depended.

If it would not be too minute, we might add a description of the General's
Led-Horses, with their rich Trappings of Purple and Cloth of Gold; such as
Dionysius tells us they brought to honest Quinctius the Dictator, in lieu of
those he had left with his Plough: Or as that of Pompey the Great, which
Plutarch mentions to have been taken by the Enemy in the War with Sertorius.

The old Romans had one very Superstitious Fancy in reference to the General,
that if he would consent to be devoted or sacrificed to Jupiter, Mars, the
Earth, and the Infernal Gods, all the Misfortunes which otherwise might have
happened to his Party, would, by virtue of that pious Act, be transferred on
their Enemies. This Opinion was confirmed by several successful Instances, and
particularly in the most renowned Family of the Decii; of whom, the Father,
Son, and Grandson, all devoted themselves for the safety of their Armies: The
first being Consul with Manlius in the War against the Latins; and perceiving
the Left Wing, which he commanded, to give back, he called out to Valerius the
High Priest to perform on him the Ceremony of Consecration, (which we find
described by Livy in his eighth Book) and immediately spurred his Horse into
the thickest of the Enemies Forces, where he was killed, and the Roman Army
gained the Battle. His Son died in the same manner in the Tuscan War, and his
Grandson in the War with Pyrrbus; in both which the Romans were successful.
Juvenal has left them this deserved Encomium in his eighth Satyr.

Plebeiae Deciorum animae, plebeia fuerunt
Nomina: pro totis Legionibus hi tamen and pro
Omnibus auxiliis; at que omne pube Latina
Sufficient Diis infernis Terraeque Paronti,
Pluris enim Decii quam qui servantur ab illis.
From a mean Stock the pious Decii came:
Small their Estates, and Vulgar was their Name:
Yet such their Virtue, that their Loss alone
For Rome and all our Legions could atone:
Their Country Doom they by their own retrieved,
Themselves more worth than all the Host they saved.
Mr. Stepney. CHAP. IX. Of the Roman Arms and Weapons.
FOR the Knowledge of this Subject we need not take up with the common
Division, into Offensive and Defensive, but rather rank them both together, as
they belonged to the several sorts of Soldiers already distinguished.

As to the Velites, their Arms were the Spanish Swords, which the Romans
thought of the best Shape and Temper, and sit for execution, being
something like the Turkish Scymetars, but more sharp at the Point.

Hastae, or Javelins, seven in number to every Man, very light and slender.

Parma, a kind of round Buckler, three Foot in diameter, of Wood covered with
Leather.

Gale^, or Galerus, a light Casque for their Head, generally made of the Skin
of some wild Beast, to appear the more terrible. Hence Virgil, -- Fulvosque
lupi de pelle galeros. and P^^pertius. Et galea hicsuta compta lupina juba.

It seems probable that after the time when the Socii were admitted into the
Roman Legions, the particular Order of the Velites was discontinued, and some
of the youngest Soldiers were chose out upon occasion to skirmish before the
main Body. Hence we find among the Light Forces in the times of the Emperors,
the Sagiotarii and Funditores, the Darters and Slingers, who never constituted
any part of the proper Velites. And so before the institution of the Velites,
we meet with the Recarii, and the Accensi, whom Sallust calls Ferentarii, who
persorm'd the same Duty with several sorts of Weapons.

The Arms of the Hastati, Prineipes and Triarii were in a great measure the
same, and therefore Polybius has not divided them in his Description, but
speaks of them all together.

Their Sword was the same as that of the Velites; nor need we observe any thing
more about it, only that the Roman Soldiers used commonly to wear it on their
Right side, though they are often represented otherwise in ancient Monuments.

Their other Arms, worth our notice, were the Scutum, the Pilum, the Galea, and
the Lorica.

The Scutum was a Buckler of Wood, the parts being joined together with little
Plates of Iron, and the whole covered with a Bull's Hide: An Iron Plate went
about it without to keep off Blows, and another within to hinder it from taking
any damage by lying on the Ground: In the middle was an Iron Boss or Vmbo
jutting out, very serviceable to glance off Stones and Darts, and sometimes to
press violently upon the Enemy, and drive all before them. They are to be
distinguished from the Clypei, which were less, and quite round, belonging more
properly to other Nations, though for some little time used by the Romans. The
Scuta themselves were of two kinds; the Ovata, and the Imbricata; the former in
a plain oval Figure; the other oblong, and bending inward, like half a
Cylinder. Polybius makes the Scuta four Foot long, and Plutarch calls them
(...), reaching down to the Feet Plat in P. Aemylio.
: And it is very probable that they covered almost the whole Body, since in Livy
we meet with Soldiers who stood on the Guard, sometimes sleeping with their
Head laid on their Shield, having fixed the other part of it on the Earth Live.
lib. 41.
.

The Pilum was a Missive Weapon, which in a Charge they darted on the Enemy. It
was commonly apiece, but sometimes round, composed of a piece of Wood
about three Cubits long, and a slip of Iron of the same length, hooked and
jagged at the end. They took abundance of care in joining the two parts
together, and did it so artificially, that 'twould sooner break in the Iron it
self than in the Jo^nt. Every Man had two of these Pila; and this number the
Poets allude to.

Bina manu lato crispans hastilia ferro.

Virg. Aen. 1. Quae duo sola manu gestans acclivia monti
Fixerat intorquet jacula.
Statius Thebaid. 2. C. Marius in the Cimbrian War contrived these Pila after a
new fashion: For before, where the Wood was joined to the Iron it was made fast
with two Iron Pins, now Marius let one of them alone as it was, and pulling out
the other, put a weak wooden Peg in its place; contriving it so, that when
'twas stuck in the Enemies Shield, it should not stand outright as formerly;
but the wooden Peg breaking, the Iron should bend, and so the Javeling
sticking fast by its crooked Point, should weigh down the Shield Plutarch. in
Mario.
.

The Galea was a Headpiece, or Morrion, coming down to the Shoulders, commonly
of Brass: Though Plutarch tells us, that Camillus ordered those of his Army to be
Iron, as the stronger Metal Idem in Camill.
. The lower part of this they called Buccula, as we have it in Juvenal.

-- Tracta de casside Buccula pendens.

Sat. 10. A Chap-faln Beaver loosely hanging by
The Cloven Helm --
On the top was the Crista, or Crest; in adorning of which the Soldiers took a
great pride. In the time of Polybius they wore Plumes of Feathers dyed of
various Colors, to render themselves beautiful to their Friends, and terrible
to their Enemies, as the Turks do at present. But in most of the old Monuments
we find the Crests represented otherwise, and not much different from those on
the top of our Modern Head-pieces. Yet Virgil mentions the Feathers expressly.

Cujus olorinae surgunt de vertice pennae.

Aen. 10. And he describes Mezentius his Crest, as made of a Horses Mane.

-- Cristaque hirsutus equina.

Aen. 7. But whatever the common Soldiers had for their Crest, those of the
Officers were more splendid and curious, being usually worked in Gold or
Silver, and reaching quite cross the Helm, for distinction sake. If we might
speak of those of Foreign Commanders, the Crest of King Pyrrhus, as very
singular, would deserve our Remark; which Plutareh describes as made of two
Goats Horns Idem in Pyrrho.
.

The Lorica was a Brigandine or Coat of Mail, generally made of Leather, and
worked over with little Hooks of Iron; and sometimes adorned with small Scales
of thin Gold; as we find in Virgil. Loricam consertam hamis.

Aen. 3. And,

Nec duplici squama lorica fidelis and auro.

Aen. 9. Sometimes the Loricae were a sort of Linen Cassocks, such as Suetonius
attributes to Galba, and like that of Alexander in Plutarch; or those of the
Spanish Troops described by Polybius in his account of the Battle of Cannae.

The poorer Soldiers, who were rated under a thousand Drachms, instead of this
Brigandine, wore a Pectorale, or Breast Plate of thin Brass about twelve
Fingers square; and this, with what have been already described, rendered them
completely armed; unless we add the Ocreae or Greaves, which they were on their
Legs; which perhaps they borrowed (as many other Customs) from the Grecians, the

-- (...). In the elder times of the Romans, their Horse used only a round
Shield, with a Helmet on their Head, and a couple of Javelins in their Hands,
great part of their Body being lest without defense. But as soon as they found
the great inconveniences to which they were hereby exposed, they begun to arm
themselves like the Grecian Horse, or much like their own Foot, only their
Shield was a little shorter and squarer, and their Lance or Javelin thicker
with Spikes at each end, that if one miscarried the other might be serviceable.

CHAP. X. The Order of the Roman Army drawn up in Battalia.
WHEN the Officers martial'd the Army in order to an an Engagement, the Hastati
were placed in the Front in thick and firm Ranks; the Principes behind them;
but not altogether so close; and after them the Triarii, in so wide and loose
an Order, that, upon occasion, they could receive both the Principes and the
Hastati into their Body in any distress. The Velites, and in later times the
Bowmen and Slingers, were not drawn up in this regular manner, but disposed of
either before the Front of the Hastati, or scattered up and down among the void
spaces of the same Hastati; or sometimes placed in two Bodies in the Wings. But
wherever they were fixed, these Light-Soldiers began the Combat, skirmishing
in flying Parties with the first Troops of the Enemy: If they prevailed, which
very seldom happened, they prosecuted the Victory; but upon a Repulse they fell
back by the Flanks of the Army, or rallied again the Rear. When they were
retired, the Hastati advanced against the Enemy; and in case they found
themselves overpowered, retiring softly toward the Principes, fell into the
Intervals of their Ranks, and, together with them, renewed the Fight. But if
the Principes and the Hastati thus joined, were too weak to sustain the Fury of
the Battle, they all fell back into the wider intervals of the Triarii; and
then all together being united into a firm Mass, they made another Effort, much
more impetuous than any before: If this Assault proved ineffectual, the Day was
entirely lost as to the Foot, there being no farther Reserves.

This way of martialling the Foot, was exactly like the Order of Trees, which
Gardiners call the Quincunx; which is admirably compared to it in Virgil Georg.
2.
. And as the reason of that position of the Trees is not only for Beauty and
Show, but that every particular Tree may have room to spread its Root and
Boughs, without entangling and hindering the rest; so, in this ranking of the
Men, the Army was not only set out to the best advantage, and made the greatest
show, but too every particular Soldier had free room to use his Weapons, and to
withdraw himself between the void spaces behind him, without occasioning any
confusion or disturbance.

The Stratagem of reinforcing thus three times, has been reckoned almost the
whole Art and Secret of the Roman Discipline; and 'twas almost impossible it
should prove unsuccessful, if duly observed: For Fortune, in every Engagement,
must have failed them three several times, before they could be routed; and the
Enemy must have had the Strength and Resolution to overcome them in three
several Encounters, for the decis^on of one Battle; whereas most other Nations,
and even the Grecians themselves, drawing up their whole Army, as it were, into
one Front, trusted themselves and Fortunes to the Success of a single Charge.

The Roman Cavalry was posted at the two Corners of the Army, like the Wings on
a Body, and sought sometimes on foot, sometimes on horseback, as occasion
required, in the same manner as our Dragoons. The Confederate, or
Auxiliary-Forces, composed the Two Points of the Battle, and covered the whole
Body of the Romans.

As to the Stations of the Commanders, the General commonly took up his Post
near the middle of the Army, between the Principes and the Triarii, as the
fittest place to give Orders equally to all the Troops. Thus Virgil disposes
of Turnus: -- Medio Dux agmine Turnus
Vertitur Arma tenens. --
Aen. 9.

The Legati and the Tribunes were usually posted by him, unless the former were
ordered to Command the Wings, or the others some particular Part of the Army.

The Centurions stood every Man at the head of his Century to lead them up;
though sometimes, out of Courage and Honor, they exposed themselves in the Van
of the Army: As Sallust reports of Catiline, That he posted all his choice
Centurions, with the Evocati, and the Flower of the Common Soldiers, in the
front of the Battle: But the Primipili, or Chief Centurions, had the Honor to
stand with the Tribunes, near the General's Person.

The common Soldiers, were placed in the several Ranks, at the discretion of
the Centurions, according to their Age, Strength, and Experience; every Man
having three foot square allowed him to manage his Arms in: And 'twas most
religiously observed in their Discipline, never to abandon their Ranks, or
break their Order upon any account.

But besides the common methods of drawing up their Army, which are
sufficiently explained by every Historian of any Note, there were several other
very singular methods of forming their Battle into odd Shapes, according to the
nature of the Enemy's Body. Such as

The Cuneus, when an Army was ranged in the figure of a Wedge, or Triangle, the
most proper to pierce and break the Orders of the Enemy. This was otherwise
called Caput porcinum, which in some measure it resembled.

The Globus, when the Soldiers cast themselves into a firm round Body,
practiced usually in cases of extremity.

The Forfex, an Army drawn up as it were into the form of a pair of Sheers. It
seems to have been invented on purpose to receive the Cuneus, in case the Enemy
should make use of that Figure: For while he endeavored to open, and, as it
were, to cleave their Squadrons with his Wedge, by keeping their Troops open
like the Sheers, and receiving him in the middle, they not only hindered the
Damage designed to their own Men, but commonly cut the adverse Body in pieces.

The Turris, an oblong square Figure, after the fashion of a Tower, with very
few Men in a File, and the Files extended to a great length. This seems of very
ancient original, as being mentioned in Homer:

(...).

Iliad (...). The Serra, or Saw, when the first Companies in the front of the
Army, beginning the Engagement, sometimes proceeded, and sometimes drew back;
so that by the help of a large Fancy, one eight find some resemblance between
them and the Teeth of that Instrument.

CHAP. XI. The Ensigns and Colors; the Music; the Word in Engagements; the
Harangues of the General.
THERE are several things still behind, relating to the Army, very observable,
before we come to the Camp and Discipline; such as the Ensigns, the Music, the
Word, or Sign, in Engagements, and the Harangues of the General.

As to the Ensigns, they were either proper to the Foot, or to the Horse.
Ensigns belonging to the Foot, were either the common one of the whole Legion,
or the particular ones of the several Manipuli.

The common Ensign of the whole Legion, was an Eagle of Gold or Silver, fixed
on the top of a Spear, holding a Thunderbolt in his Talons, as ready to deliver
it. That this was not peculiar to the Romans, is evident from the Testimony of
Xenophon; who informs us, That the Royal Ensign of Cyrus was a golden Eagle
spread over a Shield, and fastened on a Spear; and that the same was still used
by the Persian Kings De Instit. Cyri, lib. 7.
.

What the Ensigns of the Manipuli formerly were, the very Word points out to
us; for, as Ovid expresses it.

Pertica suspensos portabat longa Maniplos,
Vnde Maniplaris nomina miles habet.
Manipulus properly signifying a Wisp of Hay, such as in ruder times the
Soldiers carried on a Pole for an Ensign.

But this was in the rustic Age of Rome; afterward they made use of a Spear
with a transverse piece on the top, almost like a Cross; and sometimes with a
Hand on the top, in allusion to Manipulus; below the transverse part was
fastened one little orbicular Shield; or more, in which they sometimes placed
the smaller Images of the Gods, and in later times of the Emperors. Augustus
ordered a Globe fastened on the head of a Spear to serve for this Use, in token
of the Conquest of the whole World.

The Ensign of the Horse was not solid as the others, but a Cloth almost like
our Colors, spreading on a Staff: On these were commonly the Names of the
Emperors, in Golden or Purple Letters.

The religious Care the Soldiers took of the Ensigns, was extraordinary; they
worshipped them, swore by them, and incurred certain death if they lost them.
Hence 'twas an usual Stratagem in a dubious Engagement, for the Commanders to
snatch the Ensigns out of the Bearers hands, and throw them among the Troops of
the Enemy, knowing that their Men would venture the extremest Danger to
recover them.

As for the several kinds of Standards and Banners, introduced by the later
Emperors just before Christianity, and afterward, they do not fall under the
present Enquiry, which is confined to the more flourishing and vigorous Ages of
the Commonwealth.

The Romans used only Wind-Musick in their Army; the Instruments which served
for that purpose, may be distinguished into the Tuba, the Cornua, the Buccinae,
and the Litui.

The Tuba is supposed to have been exactly like our Trumpet, running on wider
and wider in a direct Line to the Orifice.

The Cornua were bended almost round; they owe their Name and Original to the
old Horns of Beasts, put to the same use in the ruder Ages.

The Buccinae seem to have had the same rise, and may derive their Name from
Bos and Cano. It Is very hard to distinguish these from the Cornua, unless they
were something less, and not quite so crooked: Yet it is most certain that they
were of a different Species; because we never read of the Cornua in use with
the Watch, or Sentinels, but only these Buccinae.

The Litui were a middle kind between the Cornua and the Tuba, being almost
straight, only a little turning in at the top, like the Lituus, or sacred Rod
of the Augur, whence they borrowed their Name.

These Instruments being all made of Brass, the Players on them went under the
common Name of Aeneatores, besides the particular Terms of Tubicines,
Cornicines, Buccinatores, etc. and there seems to have been a set number
assigned to every Manipulus and Turma, besides several of a higher Order, and
common to the whole Legion. In a Battle, the former took their Station by the
Ensign, or Colors, of their particular Company, or Troop: The Signorum Milites
genera.
Sagitarius.

Funditor.

Legionarius.

Due Milites cum Utensibus.

others stood near the Chief Eagle in a Ring, hard by the General and Prime
Officers; and when the Alarm was to be given, at the Word of the General, these
latter began it, and were followed by the common Sound of the rest, dispersed
through the several parts of the Army.

Besides this Classicum, or Alarm, the Soldiers gave a general Shout at the
first Encounter, which in later Ages they called Barritus, from some German
Original.

This Custom seems to have rose from an Instinct of Nature, and is attributed
almost to all Nations that engaged in any Martial Action; as, by Homer to the
Trojans; by Tacitus to the Germans; by Livy to the Gauls; by Quintus Curtius to
the Mac^donians and Persians; by Thucydides, Plutarch, and other Authors, to
the Grecians. Polyaenus honors Pan with the invention of the Device, when he
was Lieutenant General to Bacchus in the Indian Expedition; and, if so, we have
a very good Original for the Terrores Panici, or Panick Fears, which might well
be the consequence of such a dismal and surprising Clamor. The Romans made one
addition to this Custom, at the same time clashing their Arms with great
violence, to improve the Strength and Terror of the Noise. This they called
concussio Armorum.

The Signs of Battle, besides the Classicum, were either a Flag, or Standard,
erected for that purpose, which Plutarch, in two several places, calls a Purple
Robe; or more properly some Word or Sentence communicated by the General to the
Chief Officers, and by them to the whole Army. This commonly contained some
good Omen; as, Felicitas, Libertas, Victoria, Fortuna C^saris, and the like; or
else the Name of some Deity, as Julius Caesar used Venus Genetrix; and
Augusius, Apollo. The old Tessera put to this use, seems to have been a sort of
Tally, delivered to every Soldier to distinguish him from the Enemy; and
perhaps on that they used to inscribe some particular Word, or Sentence, which
afterward they made use of without the Tally.

One great Encouragement which the Soldiers received in the entrance on any
Adventure, was from the Harangue of the General; who upon the undertaking an
Enterprise, had a Throne erected with green Turf, surrounded with the Fasces,
Ensigns, and other Military Ornaments; from whence he addressed himself to the
Army, put them in mind of the noble Achievements of their Ancestors, told them
their own Strength, and explained to them the Order and Forces of the Enemy;
raising their Hopes with the glorious Rewards of Honor and Victory, and
dissipating their Fears by all the Arguments that a natural Courage and
Eloquence could suggest. This Custom, though now laid aside as antiquated and
useless, is yet highly commended in the ancient Discipline, and without doubt
has been often the cause of extraordinary Successes, and the means of stiffing
Sedition, hindering rash Action, and preventing many unfortunate Disorders in
the Field.

CHAP. XII. The Form and Division of the Roman Camp.
THE Romans were more exact in nothing than in forming their Camp; and two very
great Commanders Philip of Macedon, and King Pyrrhus, upon view of their
admirable Order and Contrivance herein, are reported to have expressed the
greatest Admiration imaginable of the Roman Art, and to have thought them more
than Barbarians, as the Grecians termed all People besides themselves.

Before we take a particular Prospect of the Camp, we had best distinguish
between the C^stra Aestiva, and Castra Hiberna: The former were sometimes light
and moveable, so that they might be set up or took down in a Night, and then
they called them simply Castra. At other times, when they designed to continue
long in their Encampments, they took more pains to fortisie and regulate them,
for the Convenience and Defense of their Men; and then they termed them Castra
Stativa.

As for the Hiberna, or Winter Quarters, they were commonly taken up in some
City or Town, or else so built, and contrived as to make almost a Town of
themselves. And hence the Antiquarians observe, that the Modern Towns whose
Names end in cester, were originally these Castra Hiberna of the Romans.

The Figure of the Roman Camp was apiece, divided into two chief
Partitions, the Upper and the Lower. In the Upper Partition were the Pavilion
of the General, and the Lodgments of the chief Officers: In the Lower were
disposed the Tents of the common Soldiers, Horse and Foot.

ICONISMUS ACIEI VULGATAE


The General's Apartment, which they called Praetorium (because the ancient
Latins styled all their Commanders Praetores) seems to have been of a round
Figure: The chief parts of it were the Tribunal, or General's Pavilion; the
Augurale set aside for Prayers, Sacrifices, and other Religious Uses; the
Apartments of the young Noblemen who came under the care of the General, to
inform themselves in the nature of the Countries, and to gain some Experience
in Military Affairs: These Gentlemen had the honorable Title of Imperatoris
Contu^ernales.

On the Right side of the Praetorium stood the Quaestorium assigned to the
Quaestor, or Treasurer of the Army; and hard by the Forum, serving not only for
the sale of Commodities, but too for the meeting of Councils, and giving
Audience to Ambassadors: This is sometimes called Quintana.

On the other side of the Praetorium were lodged the Legati, or
Lieutenant-Generals: And below the Praetorium the Tribunes took up their
Quarters by six and six, opposite to their proper Legions, to the end they
might the better govern and inspect them.

The Praefecti of the Foreign Troops were lodged at the sides of the Tribunes,
over against their respective Wings: Behind these were the Lodgments of the
Evocati, and then those of the Extraordinarii and Ablecti equites, which
concluded the higher part of the Camp.

Between the two Partitions was included a Spot of Ground about an hundred Foot
in length, which they called Principia, where the Altars and Statues of the
Gods, and (perhaps) the chief Ensigns were fixed all together.

The middle of the lower Partition, as the most Honorable Place, was assigned
to the Roman Horse; and next to them were quartered the Triarii, then the
Principes; close by them the Hastati; afterward the Foreign Horse; and in the
last place the Foreign Foot.

But the Form and Dimensions of the Camp, cannot be so well described any other
way as in a Table where they are exposed to view. However we may remark two
great pieces of Policy in the way of disposing the Confederate Forces: For in
the first place, they divided the whole Body of Foreigners, placing part in the
highest Partition of the Camp, and part in the lower; and then the matter was
ordered so, that they should be spread in thin Ranks round the Troops of the
State; so that the latter, possessing the middle space, remained firm and
solid, while the others were Masters of very little strength, being separated
so vast a distance from one another, and lying just on the Skirts of the Army.

The Romans fortified their Camp with a Ditch and Parapet, which they termed
Fossa and Vallum; in the last some distinguish two Parts, the Agger and the
Sudes. The Agger was no more than the Earth cast up to form the Vallum; and the
Sudes were a sort of wooden Stakes to secure and strengthen it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Duties, Works, and Exercises of the Soldiers.
THE Duties and Works of the Soldiers consisted chiefly in their Watches and
Guards, and their diligence in casting up Intrenchments and Ramparts, and such
other laborious Services.

The Watches and Guards were divided into the Excubiae, and the Vigiliae: the
first kept by Day, the other by Night.

As to the Excubiae, they were kept either in the Camp, or at the Gates and
Intrenchments. For the former there was allowed a whole Manipulus to attend
before the Praetorium; and four Soldiers to the Tent of every Tril^^ne.

The Triarii, as the most honorable Order, were excused from the ordinary
Watches; yet being placed exactly opposite ^o the Equites, they were obliged to
have an Eye over their Horses.

The Excubiae, at the Gates of the Camp, and at the Intrenchments they properly
called Stationes. There seem to have been assigned one Company of Foot and one
Troop of Horse to each of the four Gates every Day. And 'twas a most
unpardonable Crime to desert their Post, or to abandon their Corpse of Guards.
The excellency of the Roman Discipline in this particular has appeared on many
occasions to their great Honor, and to the benefit of their Affairs. To give
one instance: At the Siege of Agrigentum in Sicily, in the first Punick War,
when the Roman Guards had dispersed themselves abroad a little farther than
they ought into the Fields for Forage; and the Carthaginians, laying hold on
the opportunity, made a vigorous Sally from the Town, and in all probability
would have forced the Camp; the Soldiers, who had carelessly neglected their
Duty, being sensible of the extreme Penalty they had incurred, resolved to
repair the Fault by some remarkable Behavior; and accordingly rallying
together, they not only sustained the Shock of the Enemy, to whom they were far
inferior in number, but in the end made so great a slaughter among them, as
compelled them to retreat to their Works, when they had well-nigh forced the
Roman Lines Vide Polyb. lib. 1.
.

The Night-guards assigned to the General and Tribunes, were of the same nature
as those in the Day. But the proper Vigiles were four in every Manipulus,
keeping Guard three Hours, and then relieved by four others: So that there were
four Sets in a Night, according to the four Watches, which took their Name from
this Custom.

The way of setting this nightly Guard was by a Tally or Tessera, with a
particular Inscription given from one Centurion to another quite through the
Army, 'till it came again to the Tribune who at first delivered it. Upon the
receipt of this the Guard was immediately set. The Person deputed to carry the
Tessera from the Tribunes to the Centurions was called Tesserarius.

But because this was not a sufficient regulation of the Business, they had the
Circuitio Vigilium, or a visiting the Watch, performed commonly about four
times in the Night by some of the Horse. Upon extraordinary occasions the
Tribunes and Lieutenant-Generals, and sometimes the General himself, made these
Circuits in Person, and took a strict view of the Watch in every part of the
Camp.

Livy Lib. 9.
, when he takes an occasion to compare the Macedonians with the Roman Soldiers,
gives the latter particularly the preference, for their unwearied labor and
patience in carrying on their Works. And that this was no mean Encomium appears
from the Character Polybius Lib. 5.
has bestowed on the Macedonians, that scarce any People endured Hardships
better, or were more patient of Labor, whether in their Fortifications or
Encampments, or in any other painful and hardy Employment incident to the Life
of a Soldier. There is no way of showing the excellency of the Romans in this
Affair, but by giving some remarkable instances of the Military Works; and we
may be satisfied with an account of some of them which occur under the Conduct
of Julius Caesar.

When he besieged a Town of the Atuatici in Gallia, he begirt it with a Rampart
twelve Foot high, and as many broad; strengthening it with a vast number of
wooden Forts, the whole Compass including fifteen Miles: And all this he
finished with such wonderful Expedition, that the Enemy were obliged to confess
they thought the Romans assisted in these Attempts by some Supernatural or
Divine Power Caesar de Bell. Gall. lib. 2. cap. 8.
.

At another time, in an Expedition against the Helvetii in the same Country,
with the assistance only of one Legion, and some Provincial Soldiers, he raised
a Wall nineteen Mile long, and sixteen Foot high, with a Ditch proportionable
to defend it Idem, Gall. lib. 1.
.

More remarkable than either of these were his Fortifications before Alesia, or
Alexia in Burgundy, described by himself at large in his seventh Book; by which
he protected his Army against fourscore thousand Men that were in the Town, and
two hundred and forty thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse that were arrived
to the assistance of the Enemy Ibid. lib. 7.
.

But his most wonderful Performance of this nature were the Works with which he
shut up Pompey and his Army in Dyrrachium, reaching from Sea to Sea; which are
thus elegantly described by Lucan, Lib. 6.

Franguntur montes, planumque per ardua Caesar
Ducit opus: pandit fossas, turritaque summis
Disponit Castella jugis, magnoque recessu
Amplexus sines, salius, nemorosaque tesqua,
Et silvas vastaque feras indagine claudit:
Non desunt Campi; non desunt pabula Magno
Castraque Caesareo circumdatus aggere mutat, etc.
Vast Clifts beat down, no more o'er-look the main,
And levelled Mountains form a wondrous Plain:
Unbounded Trenches with high Forts secure
The stately Works, and scorn a Rival Power.
Woods, Forests, Parks in endless Circuits joined,
With strange Enclosures cheat the Savage kind.
Still Pompey's Foragers secure may range;
Still he his Camp, without confinement, change.
The Exercises of their Body were, Walking, Running, Leaping, Vaulting, and
Swimming. The first was very serviceable upon account of tedious Marches, which
were sometimes of necessity to be undertaken; the next to make them give a more
violent Charge on the Enemy; and the two last for climbing the Ramparts and
passing the Ditches. The Vaulting belonged properly to the Cavalry, and is
still owned as useful as ever.

The Exercises of their Arms Hipsius divides into Palaria and Armatura.

The Exercitia ad Palum, or Palaria, were performed in this manner: They set up
a great Post about six Foot high, suitable to the Stature of a Man; and this
the Soldiers were wont to assail with all Instruments of War, as if it were
indeed a real Enemy, learning upon this, by the assistance of the
Campidoctores, how to place their Blows a-right. Juvenal brings in the very
Women affecting this Exercise.

-- Vel quis non vidit vulnera Pali
Quem cavat assiduis sudibus, seutoque lacessit?
Sat. 6. Who has not seen them, when without a Blush,
Against the Post their wicker Shields they crush,
Flourish the Sword, and at the Plastron push?
Armatura consisted chiefly in the Exercises performed with all manner of
Missive Weapons; as throwing of the Spear or Javelin, shooting Arrows and the
like; in which the Tyrones, or new listed Men, were trained with great care,
and with the severest Discipline. Juvenal may perhaps allude to this Custom in
his first Satyr.

Tu scabie frueris mali, quod in aggere rodit
Qui tegitur parma and galea, metuensque slagolii
Discit ab hirsuto jaculum torquere Capello.
To you such scabb'd harsh Fruit is given, as raw
Young Soldiers at their Exercisings gnaw,
Who trembling learn to throw the fatal Dart,
And under Rods of rough Centurions smart.
Nor did the common Soldiers only practice these Feats, but the Commanders
themselves often set them an Example of Industry, and were very eminent for
their Dexterity in Performances of this nature. Thus the famous Scipio is
described by Silius Italicus.

Ipse inter medios venturae ingentia laudis
Signa dabat, vibrare sudem, transmittere saltu
Murales fossas, und^sum frangere nando
Indutus thoraca vadum, spectacula tantae
Ante acies virtutis erant, saepe alite planta
Ilia perfossum, and campi per aperta volantem
Ipse pedes praevertit equum: saepe arduus idem
Castrorum spatium and saxo transmisit and hasta.
Lib. 8. Among the rest the noble Chief came forth,
And showed glad Omens of his future worth.
High over his Head, admired by all the Brave,
He brandished in the Air his threatening Staff,
Or leaped the Ditch, or swam the spacious Moat,
Heavy with Arms, and his embroidered Coat.
Now fiery Steeds, though spurred with Fury on,
On Foot he challenged, and on Foot outrun.
While cross the Plain he shaped his aerie Course,
Flew to the Goal, and shamed the generous Horse.
Now ponderous Stones, well poised, with both his Hands
Above the wondering Crowd unmoved he sends;
Now cross the Camp aims his long Ashen Spear,
Which over ten thousand Heads flies singing through the Air.
Thus have we taken a short view of the chief Duties, Works, and Exercises of
the Soldiers; but we must not forget their constant Labor and Trouble of
carrying their Baggage on their Shoulders in a March; this was commonly so
heavy a Burden, and so extreme tiresom, that Virgil calls it injustus faseis.
Georgie. 3.

Non secus ac patriis acer Romanus in armis
Injusto sub fasce viam dum carpit, and ante
Hosti expectatum positis stat in ordine castris.
Thus under heavy Arms the Youth of Rome
Their long laborious Marches overcome;
Bending with unjust Loads they chearly go,
And pitch their sudden Camp before the Foe.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Soldiers Pay.
THE Roman Pay consisted of three Parts, Money, Corn, and Clothes.

As to the Money it is very certain, that for above three hundred Years together
the Army served gratis, and at their own Charge; and when afterward a certain
Pay came to be established, it was no more than two Oboli a Day to the common
Foot, and to the inferior Officers, and the Centurions four Oboli; to the
Horse a Dram a-piece. It Is probable, that the Tribunes received what was
counted very considerable (though Polybius is silent in this matter) since in
several Authors we find a large Salary expressed by a Metaphor taken from a
Tribunes Stipend: Thus Juvenal particularly: -- Alter enim, quantum in Legione
Tribuni
Accipiunt, donant Calvinae vel Catienae.
Sat. 3. For 'tother wealthy Rogue can throw away
Upon a single Girl a Tribune's Pay.


Yet Lipsius has conjectured, from very good Authority, that it could not be
more than four times the ordinary Stipend, or a Dram and two Oboli.

And these were all such mean Considerations, that Livy had very good Reason
for his Remark: Nulla unquam Respublica fuit in quam tam serae avaritia
luxuriaque immigraverint, nec ubi tantus ac tam diu paupertati ac parcimoniae
honos fuit Lib. 1.
. Never was there any State or Kingdom in which Avarice and Luxury so late
gained a Head, or where honest Poverty and Frugality continued longer in Esteem
and Veneration.

Julius Casar was the first that made any considerable alteration in this
Affair; who, as Suetonius affirms, doubled the Legionary Pay for ever.

Augustus settled a new Stipend raised to ten Asses a Day; and the following
Emperors made such large Additions, that in the time of Domitian, the ordinary
Stipend was twenty five Asses per Diem.

The Officers whom they received the Money from, were the Quaestors; or rather
the Tribuni Aerarii, who were a distinct Society from the former, and who, (as
Vossius In Etymolog. Ling. Lat. in Voc. Tribu^.
has settled the Point) were commissioned to take up Money of the Quaestors to
pay off the Army. But it is probable that, being many in number, as they are
constantly represented in History, they had some other Business besides this
given them in charge. Calvin the Lawyer says. That they had the supervisal of
all the Money coined in the City, as the Quaestors took care of the Taxes
coming in from the Provinces Calvin. Lex. Jurid. in Voc. Trib. Aerarii.
.

Besides the Pay received in Money, we read of Corn and Clothes often given to
the Soldiers: But Polybius assures us, that the Quaestor always subtracted
some part of their Pay on that account: And Plutarch, among the popular Laws of
C. Gracchus, makes him the Author of one, ordaining, That the Soldiers should
be clothed at the Expense of the State, without the least diminution of their
Stipend. The Wheat allowed to the Foot was every Man four Modii a Month, to the
Horse two Modii, and seven of Barley.

It was common for the Soldiers, especially in the time of the strict
Discipline, to prepare their Corn themselves for their own use; and therefore
some carried Hand-Mills about with them to grind it with; others pounded it
with Stones; and this hastily baked upon the Coals, very often furnished them
with a Meal, which they made upon Tables of Turf, with no other Drink than bare
Water, or what they called Posca, Water sharpened with a mixture of Vinegar.

CHAP. XV. Of the Military Punishments.
THE Punishments used in the Camp, were such as reached either the Offender's
Body, Credit, or Goods. The Corporal Punishments were usually beaten with the
Vites, or Rods, or bastinading with the Fustes: The last, though already reckoned
up among the Civil Punishments which did not touch the Life of the Malefactor;
yet in the Camp it was for the most part Capital, and was performed after this
manner. The convicted Person being brought before the Tribune, was by him
gently struck over the Shoulders with a Staff: After this the Criminal had
liberty to run, but at the same time the rest of the Soldiers had liberty to
kill him if they could: So that being persecuted with Swords, Darts, Stones,
and all manner of Weapons on every hand, he was presently dispatched. This
Penalty was incurred by stealing any thing out of the Camp; by giving false
Evidence; by abandoning their Post in a Battle; by pretending falsely to have
done some great Exploit, out of hopes of a Reward; by fighting without the
General's Order; by losing their Weapons; or by aggravating a Misdemeanour less
than either of these, by repeating it three times.

If a great number had offended, as by running from their Colors, mutinying,
or other general Crimes, the common way of proceeding to Justice was by
Decimation, or putting all the Criminal's Names together in a Shield or Vessel,
and drawing them out by Lot, every tenth Man being to die without Reprieve,
commonly in the manner just now described; so that by this means, though all were
not alike sensible of the Punishment; yet all were frighted into Obedience. In
later Authors we meet sometimes with Vicesimatio, and Centesimatio, which Words
susciently explain themselves.

The Punishments which reached no farther than their Credit, by exposing them
to public Shame, were such as these: Degrading them from a higher Station to a
lower; giving them a set quantity of Barley instead of Wheat; ungirding them,
and taking away their Belt; making them stand all Supper-time, while the rest
sat down; and such other little Marks of Disgrace.

Besides these, Agellius has recorded a very singular Punishment, by letting
the Delinquent Blood: His Judgment concerning the original of this Custom is to
this purpose: He fancies that in elder times this used to be prescribed to the
drowsy and sluggish Soldiers, rather as a Physical Remedy than a Punishment;
and that in after Ages it might have been applied in most other Faults, upon
this Consideration, That all those who did not observe the Rules of their
Discipline, were to be looked upon as stupid or mad; and for Persons in those
Conditions Blood-letting is commonly successful Agell. lib. 10. cap. 8.
. But because this reason is hardly satisfactory, the great Critic Muretus has
obliged us with another, believing the design of this Custom to have been, that
those mean-spirited Wretches might lose that Blood with shame and disgrace,
which they dared not spend nobly and honorably in the Service of their Country
Muret. Variar. Lect. lib. 13. cap. 20.
.

As for the Punishments relating to their Goods and Money, the Tribunes might
for several Faults impose a Fine on the Delinquents, and force them to give a
Pledge in case they could not pay. Sometimes too they stopped the Stipend;
whence they were called, by way of reproach, Aere diruti.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Military Rewards.
BUT the Encouragements of Valor and Industry were much more considerable than
the Proceedings against the contrary Vices. The most considerable (not to speak
of the Promotion from one Station to another) were first the dona Imperatoria,
such as

The Hasta pura, a fine Spear of Wood without any Iron on it; such an one as
Virgil has given Sylvius in the sixth of the Aeneids.

Ille, vides? pura juvenis qui nititur hasta. The Armillae, a sort of
Bracelets, given upon account of some eminent Sevice, only to such as were born
Romans.

The Torques, Golden and Silver Collars, wreathed with curious Art and Beauty.
Pliny attributes the Golden Collars to the Auxiliaries, and the Silver to the
Roman Soldiers; but this is supposed to be a mistake.

The Phalerae, commonly thought to be a Suit of rich Trappings for a Horse; but
because we find them bestowed on the Foot as well as the Cavalry, we may rather
suppose them to have been golden Chains of like nature with the Torques, only
that they seem to have hung down to the Breast; whereas the others only went
round the Neck. The hopes of these two last are particularly urged, among the
Advantages of a Military Life by Juvenal, Sat. 16.

Vt laeti phaleris omnes, and torquibus omnes. The Vexilla, a sort of Banners
of different Colors, worked in Silk or other curious Materials, such as
Augustus bestowed on Agrippa, after he had won the Sea Fight at Aclium.

We may in the next place take notice of the several Coronets, received on
several occasions. As,

Corona Civica, given to any Soldier that had saved the Life of a Roman Citizen
in an Engagement. This was reckoned more honorable than any other Crown, though
composed of no better Materials than Oaken Boughs. Virgil calls it Civilis
Quercus, Aen. 6.

Atque umbrata gerunt civili tempora Quereu. Plutarch has guessed very happily
at the reason why the Branches of this Tree should be made use of before all
others. For the Oaken Wreath, says he, being otherwise sacred to Jupiter, the
great Guardian of their City, they might therefore think it the most proper
Ornament for him who had preserved a Citizen. Besides, the Oak may very well
claim the preference in this case, because in the Primitive times, that Tree
alone was thought almost sufficient for the preserving of Man's Life: Its
Acorns were the principal Diet of the old Mortals, and the Honey which was
commonly found there, presented them with a ver^ pleasant Liquor Vide Plutarch.
in Coriolano.
.

It was a particular Honor conferred on the Persons who ha^ merited this
Crown, that when they came to any of the public Shows, the whole Company, as
well Senate as People should signify their Respect, by rising up when they saw
them enter; and that they should take their Seat on these occasion^ among the
Senators; being also excused from all troublesom^ Duties and Services in their
own Persons, and procuring the same Immunity for their Father, and Grandfather
by his side Vide Plin. lib. 16. cap. 4.
.

Corona Muralis, given to him who first scaled the Walls of a City in a general
Assault; and therefore in the shape of it there was some Allusion made to the
Figure of a Wall.

Corona Castrensis, or Vallaris, the Reward of him who had first forced the
Enemies Intrenchments.

Corona Navalis, bestowed on such as had signalized their Valor in an
Engagement at Sea; being set round with Figures like the Beaks of Ships.

-- Cui belli insigne superbum
Tempora navali fulgent rostrata Corona.
Virg. Aen. 8. Lipsius fancies the Corona Navalis, and the Rostrata, to have
been two distinct Species, though they are generally believed to be the same kind
of Crown.

Corona obsidicnalis: This was not, like the rest, given by the General to the
Soldiers, but presented by the common consent of the Soldiers to the General,
when he had delivered the Romans or their Allies from a Siege. It was composed
of the Grass growing in the besieged Place.

Corona Triumphalis, made with Wreaths of Laurel, and proper only to such
Generals as had the Honor of a Triumph. In after Ages this was changed for
Gold Aurum Coronarium.
, and not only restrained to those that actually Triumphed, but presented on
several other accounts, as commonly by the Foreign States and Provinces to
their Patrons and Benefactors. Several of the other Crowns too are thought to
have been of Gold, as the Castrensis, the Mural, and the Naval.

Besides these we meet with the Coronae aureae, often bestowed Corona
Triumphalis

Corona Obsidio nalis

Corona Civica

Corona Muralis

Corona Vallaris vel Castrensis

Corona Navalis

on Soldiers without any other additional Term. And Dion Cassius mentions a
particular sort of Coronet made of Olive Boughs, and bestowed like the rest, in
consideration of some signal Act of Valor. Lipsius believes these to have
succeeded in the room of the Golden Crowns after they were laid aside.

The most remarkable Person upon Record in History for obtaining a great number
of these Rewards was one C. Siccius (or ^icinius) Dentatus; who had received in
the time of his Military Service eight Crowns of Gold; fourteen Civick Crowns,
three Mural, eighty three Golden Torques, sixty Golden Armillae, eighteen
Hastae purae, and seventy five Phalerae Vide Agell. lib. 2. cap. 11. Valor.
Max. etc.
.

But far greater Honors were conferred on the Victorious Generals, some of
which were usually decreed them in their absence; others at their arrival in
the City. Of the former kind were the Salutatio Imperatoris, and the
Supplicatio; of the latter the Ovation and the Triumph.

The first of these was no more than the saluting the Commander in chief with
the Title of Imperator, upon account of any remarkable Success; which Title was
decreed him by the Senate at Rome, after it had been given him by the joint
Acclamations of the Soldiers in the Camp.

The Supplicatio was a solemn Procession to the Temple of the Gods to return
thanks for any signal Victory. After the obtaining any such remarkable
Advantage, the General commonly gave the Senate an account of the Exploit by
Letters wreathed about with Laurel Literae Laureatae.
, In which, after an account of his Success, he desired the favor of a
Supplication, or public Thanksgiving. This being granted for a set number of
Days, the Senate went in a solemn manner to the chief Temples, and assisted at
the Sacrifices proper to the occasion, holding a Feast in the Temples to the
Honor of the respective Deities. Hence Servius explains that of Virgil, --
Simul Divum Templis indicit honorem.

Aen. 1. as alluding to a solemn Supplication.

In the mean time the whole Body of the Commonalty kept Holy Day, and
frequented the Religious Assemblies giving Thanks for the late Success, and
imploring a long continuance of the Divine Favor and Assistance.

Octavius Caesar, together with the Consuls, Hirtius and Pansa, upon their
raising the Siege of Mutina, were honored with Supplication fifty Days long.

The Ovation some fancy to have derived its Name from shouring Evion! to
Bacchus; but the true Original is Ovis, the Sheep which was usually offered in
this Procession, as an Ox in the Triumph. The Show generally began at the
Albanian Mountain whence the General, with his Retinue, made his Entry into the
City: He went on foot, with many Flutes, or Pipes, sounding in Consort as he
passed along, wearing a Garland of Myrtle as a Token of Peace, with an Aspect
rather raising Love and Respect, than Fear. Agellius informs us, that this
Honor was then conferred on the Victor, when either the War had not been
proclaimed in due method, or not undertaken against a lawful Enemy, and on a
just account; or when the Enemy was but mean and inconsiderable Noel. At. lib.
5. cap. 6.
. But Plutarch has delivered his Judgment in a different manner: He believes
that heretofore the difference betwixt the Ovation and the Triumph, was not
taken from the Greatness of the Atchievments, but from the manner of performing
them: For they who having fought a set Battle, and slain a great number of the
Enemy, returned Victors, led that Martial and (as it were) Cruel Procession of
the Triumph. But those who without force, by Benevolence and civil Behavior,
had done the Bus^ness, and prevented the shedding of Human Blood, to these
Commanders Custom gave the Honor of this peaceable Ovation. For a Pipe is the
Ensign, or Badge, of Peace, and Myrtle the Tree of Venus, who beyond any of the
other Deities, has an extreme aversion to Violence and War Plut. in Marcell.
.

But whatever other difference there lay between these two Solemnities, we are
assured the Triumph was much the more noble and splendid Procession. None were
capable of this Honor but Dictators, Consuls, or Praetors; though we find some
Examples of a different practice; as particularly in Pompey the Great, who had
a Triumph decreed him while he was only a Roman Knight, and had not yet reached
the Senatorian Age Plut. in P^^^.
.

A regular account of the Proceedings at one of these Solemnities, will give us
a better knowledge of the matter, than a larger disquisition about the several
Parts and Appendages that belonged to it: And this the excellent Plutarch has
favored us with, in his Description of Paulus Aemylius's Triumph, after the
taking King Perseus Prisoner, and putting a final period to the ICONISMUS TRIU
Macedonian Empire. This must be owned to be the most glorious occasion
imaginable; and therefore we may expect the most complete Relation that can
possibly be desired. The Ceremony then of Aemylius's Triumph, was performed
after this manner:

The People erected Scaffolds in the Forum, and the Circo's, and in all other
Parts of the City where they could best behold the Pomp. The Spectators were
clad in white Garments; all the Temples were open, and full of Garlands and
Perfumes; the Ways cleared and cleans'd by a great many Officers and Tipstaffs,
that drove such as thronged the Passage, or stragled up-and-down. This Triumph
lasted three Days: On the first, which was scarce long enough for the Sight,
was to be seen the Statues, Pictures, and Images of an extraordinary bigness,
which were taken from the Enemy, drawn upon Seven hundred and fifty Chariots.
On the second was carried, in a great many Wains, the fairest and the richest
Armor of the Macedonians, both of Brass and Steel, all newly furbish'd and
glittering; which although pil'd up with the greatest Art and Order, yet seemed
to be tumbled on heaps carelessly and by chance; Helmets were thrown on Shields,
Coats of Mail upon Greaves, Cretian Targets, and Thracian Bucklers and Quivers
of Arrows lay hudled among the Horses Bitts; and through these appeared the
Points of naked Swords, intermixed with long Spears. All these Arms were tied
together with such a just liberty, that they knocked against one another as
they were drawn along, and made a harsh and terrible noise; so that the very
Spoils of the Conquered could not be beheld without dread. After these Wagons
laden with Armor, there followed Three thousand Men, who carried the Silver
that was coined, in Seven hundred and fifty Vessels, each of which weighed
three Talents, and was carried by four Men. Others brought Silver Bowls, and
Goblets, and Cups, all disposed in such order as to make the best Show; and all
valuable, as well for their bigness, as the thickness of their engraved Work.
On the third Day early in the Morning, first came the Trumpeters, who did not
sound as they were wont in a Procession or solemn Entry, but such a Charge as
the Romans use when they encourage their Soldiers to fight. Next followed young
Men girt about with Girdles curiously wrought, which led to the Sacrifice
Sixscore stall'd Oxen, with their Horns gilded, and their Heads adorned with
Ribbands and Garlands; and with these were Boys that carried Platters of Silver
and Gold. After this was brought the Gold Coin, which was divided into Vessels
that weighed three Talents, like to those that contained the Silver; they were
in number Fourscore wanting three. These were followed by those that brought
the consecrated Bowl, which Aemylius caused to be made, that weighed ten
Talents, and was all beset with precious Stones: Then were exposed to view the
Cups of Antigonus and Seleucus, and such as were made after the fashion
invented by Thericles, and all the Gold-Plate that was used at Perseus's Table.
Next to these came Perseus's Chariot, in the which his Armor was placed, and
on that his Diadem: And, after a little intermission, the King's Children were
led Captives, and with them a Train of Nurses, Masters, and Governors, who all
wept, and stretched forth their Hands to the Spectators, and taught the little
Infants to beg and entreat their Compassion. There were two Sons and a
Daughter, who by reason of their tender Age, were altogether insensible of the
greatness of their Misery; which insensibility of their Condition, rendered it
much more deplorable; insomuch, that Perseus himself was scarce regarded as he
went along, whilst Pity had fixed the Eyes of the Romans upon the Infants; and
many of them could not forbear Tears: All beheld the Sight with a mixture of
Sorrow and Joy, until the Children were past. After his Children and their
Attendants came Perseus himself, clad all in black, and wearing Slippers after
the fashion of his Country: He looked like one altogether astonished and
deprived of Reason, through the greatness of his Misfortunes. Next followed a
great Company of his Friends and Familiars, whose Countenances were disfigured
with Grief, and who testified to all that beheld them by their Tears, and their
continual looking upon Perseus, that it was his hard Fortune they so much
lamented, and that they were regardless of their own. -- After these were
carried Four hundred Crowns all made of Gold, and sent from the Cities by their
respective Ambassadors to Aemylius, as a Reward due to his Valor. Then he
himself came seated on a Chariot magnificently adorned (a Man worthy to be
beheld even without these Ensigns of Power;) He was clad in a Garment of Purple
interwoven with Gold, and held out a Laurel-Branch in his Right Hand. All the
Army in like manner, with Boughs of Laurel in their Hands, divided into Bands
and Companies, followed the Chariot of their Commander, some singing Odes
(according to the usual Custo^n) mingled with Raillery; others, Songs of
Triumph, and the Praises of Aemylius's Deeds, who was admired, and accounted
happy by all Men, and unenvied by every one that was good.

There was one remarkable Addition to this Solemnity, which, though it seldom
happened, yet ought not to escape our notice: This was when the Roman General
had, in any Engagement, killed the Chief Commander of the Enemy with his own
Hands; for then, in the Triumphal Pomp, the Arms of the slain Captain were
carried before the Victor, decently hanging on the Stock of an Oak, and so
composing a Trophy. In this manner the Procession was led on to the Temple of
Jupiter Feretrius (so called a feriendo); and there the General making a formal
Dedication of his Spoils (the Spolia opima, as they termed them) hung them up
in the Temple. The first who performed this Gallant piece of Religion, was
Romulus, when he had slain Acron, King of the Coeninenses; the second Cornelius
Cossus, with the Arms of Tolumnius, a General of the Veientes; the third and
last M. Marcellus, with those taken from Viridomarus, King of the Gauls; whence
Virgil says of him, Aeneid. 6.

Tertiaque arma patri suspendet capta Quirino. Where Quirino must be understood
only as an Epithet applied to Jupiter, as denoting his Authority and Power in
War; as the same Word is attributed to Janus, by Horace and Sueton. Therefore
Servius is most certainly guilty of a Mistake, when he tells us, that the first
Spoils of this nature were, according to Numa's Laws, to be presented to
Jupiter; the second to Mars; and the third to Quirinus, or Romulus; for that
Decree of Numa only took place, if the same Person had the good Fortune to take
these Spoils three times; but we are assured, that not only Romulus, but Cossus
and Marcellus too all made the Dedication to Jupiter.

The Admirers of the Roman Magnificence will be infinitely pleased with the
Relation already given from Plutarch of the Triumphal Pomp: while others, who
fancy that People to have been possessed with a strange measure of vainglory,
and attribute all their Military State and Grandeur to an ambitions
Ostentation, will be much better satisfied with the satirical Account which
Juvenal furnishes us with, in his Tenth Satyr. He is saying, that Democritus
found subject enough for a continual Fit of Laughter, in places where there was
no such formal Pageantry, as is commonly to be seen in Rome; and then he goes
on: Quid si vidisset Praetorem curribus altis
Extantem, and medio sublimem in pulvere Circi
In tunica Jovis, and pictae Sarrana ferentem
Ex humeris aulaea togae, magnaeque coronae
Tantum orbem quanto cervix non sufficit ulla?
Quippe tenet sudans hanc publicus, and sibi Consul
Ni placeat, curru servus portatur eodem.
Da nunc and volucrem, Sceptro quae surgit eburno,
Illinc Cornicines, hinc praecedentia longi
Agminis officia, and niveos ad fraena Quirites,
Defossa in loculis, quos sportula fecit amicos.
What had he done, had he beheld on high
Our Consul seated in mock-Majesty:
His Chariot rolling over the dusty Place,
While with dumb Pride, and a set formal Face,
He moves in the dull ceremonial Track,
With Jove's embroidered Coat upon his Back:
A Suit of H^^gings had not more oppressed
His Shoulders, than that long, laborious Vest.
A heavy Gewgaw (called a Crown) that spread
About his Temples, drowned his narrow Head;
And would have crushed it with the massy Freight,
But that a sweating Slave sustained the weight:
A Slave in the same Chariot seen to ride,
To mortify the mighty Mad-man's Pride.
And now the Imperial Eagle raised on high,
With golden Beak (the Mark of Majesty)
Trumpets before, and on the left and right
A Cavalcade of Nobles, all in white:
In their own Natures false and flattering Tribes;
But made his Friends by Places and by Bribes.
[Mr. Dryden.

CHAP. XVII. The Roman Way of declaring War, and of making Leagues.
THE Romans used abundance of Superstition in entering upon any Hostility, or
closing in any League, or Confederacy: The Public Ministers who performed the
Ceremonial Part of both these, were the Feciales, or Heralds, already described
among the Priests; nothing remains, but the Ceremonies themselves, which were
of this nature: When any neighboring State had given sufficient reason for the
Senate to suspect a Design of breaking with them; or had offered any Violence
or Injustice to the Subjects of Rome, which was enough to give them the repute
of Enemies; one of the Feciales, chosen out of the College on this occasion,
and habited in the Vest belonging to his Order, together with his other Ensigns
and Habiliments, set forward for the Enemy's Country. As soon as he reached the
Confines, he pronounced a formal Declaration of the cause of his arrival,
calling all the Gods to witness, and imprecating the Divine Vengeance on
himself and his Country, if his Reasons were not just. When he came to the
chief City of the Enemy, he again repeated the same Declaration, with some
addition, and withal desired satisfaction. If they delivered into his Power the
Authors of the Injury, or gave Hostages for security, he returned satisfied to
Rome; if, otherwise they desired time to consider, he went away for ten Days,
and then came again to hear their Resolution. And this he did, in some cases,
three times: But if nothing was done toward an Accommodation in about thirty
Days, he declared that the Romans would endeavor to assert their Right by
their Arms. After this, the Herald was obliged to return, and to make a true
Report of his Ambassie before the Senate, assuring them of the Legality of the
War, which they were now consulting to undertake; and was then again dispatched
to perform the last part of the Ceremony, which was to throw a Spear into (or
toward) the Enemy's Country, in token of Defiance, and as a Summons to War,
pronouncing at the same time a set Form of Words to the same purpose.

As to the making of Leagues, Polybins acquaints us, That the Ratification of
the Articles of an Agreement between the Romans and the Carthaginians, was
performed in this manner: The Carthaginians swore by the Gods of their Country;
and the Romans, after their ancient Custom, swore by a Stone, and then by Mars.
They swore by a Stone thus: The Herald who took the Oath having sworn in behalf
of the Public, takes up a Stone, and then pronounces these Words:

If I keep my Faith, may the Gods vouchsafe their Assistance, and give me
success; if, on the contrary, I violate it, then may the other Party be
entirely safe, and preserved in their Country, in their Laws, in their
Possessions, and, in a word, in all their Rights and Liberties; and may I
perish and fall alone as now this Stone does. And then he lets the Stone fall
out of his Hands Polyb. lib. 3.
.

Livy's account of the like Ceremony is something more particular; yet differs
little in substance, only that he says the Herald's concluding Clause was,
Otherwise may Jove strike the Roman People as I do this Hog; and accordingly he
killed an Hog that stood ready by with the Stone which he held in his Hand.
This last Opinion is confirmed by the Authority of Virgil, when speaking of the
Romans and Albanians, he says, -- Et caesa jungebant foedera Porca. And perhaps
both these Customs might be in use at different times.

CHAP. XVIII. The Roman Method of treating the People they conquered; with the
Constitution of the Coloniae, Municipia, Praefecturae, and Provinces.
THE civil Usage and extraordinary Favors with which the Romans obliged the
poor conquered Nations, has been reasonably esteemed one of the prime Causes of
the extent of their Dominions, and the establishment of their Command: Yet when
they saw occasion, they were not to seek in severer Methods, such as the
seizing on the greatest part of the Enemy's Land, or removing the Natives to
another Soil. If a State or People had been necessitated to surrender
themselves into the Roman Power, they used sub jugum mitti, to be made pass
under a Yoke in token of Subjection: For this purpose, they set up two Spears,
and laying a third cross them at the top, ordered those who had surrendered
their Persons to go under them without Arms or Belts. Those who could not be
brought to deliver themseves up, but were taken by force, as they suffered
several Penalties, so very often sub corona venibant, they were publicly sold
for Slaves. Where by Corona some understand a sort of Chaplets which they put
about the Captives Heads for distinction; others would have it mean the Ring of
the Roman Soldiers, who stood round the Captives while they were exposed to
sale. Agellius preferrs the former reason Lib. 7. cap. 4.
.

The several Forms of Government which the Romans established in their
Conquests, are very well worth our knowledge, and are seldom rightly
distinguished. We may take notice of these Four: Colonies, Municipia,
Praefecturae, and Provinces.

Colonies (properly speaking) were States, or Communities, where the chief part
of the Inhabitants had been transplanted from Rome; and though mingled with the
Natives who had been left in the conquered Place, yet obtained the whole Power
and Authority in the Administration of Affairs. One great Advantage of this
Institution was, That by this means the Veteran Soldiers, who had served out
their Legal time, and had spent their Vigor in the Honor and Defense of their
Country, might be favored with a very agreeable Reward, by forming them into a
Colony, and sending them where they might be Masters of large Possessions, and
so lead the remainder of their Days in ease and plenty.

Municipia, were properly Corporations, or Infranchised Places, where the
Natives were allowed the use of their old Laws and Constitutions, and at the
same time honored with the Privilege of Roman Citizens. But then this
Privilege, in some of the Municipia, reached no farther than the bare Title,
without the proper Rights of Citizens; such as voting in the Assemblies,
bearing Offices in the City, and the like. Of this latter sort, the first
Example were the Caerites, a People of Tuscany, who for preserving the sacred
Relics of the Romans, when the Gauls had taken the City, were afterward
dignified with the Name of Roman Citizens; but not admitted into any part of
the Public Administration. Hence the Censors Tables, where they entered the
Names of such Persons as for some Misdemeanour, were to lose their Right of
Suffrage, had the Name of Caerites Tabulae A. Gell. lib. 16. cap. 13.
.

The Praefecturae were certain Towns of Italy, whose Inhabitants had the Name
of Roman Citizens; but were neither allowed to enjoy their own Laws nor
Magistrates, being governed by annual Praefects sent from Rome. These were
generally such Places as were either suspected, or had some way or other
incurred the Displeasure of the Roman State; this being accounted the hardest
Condition that was imposed on any People of Italy Calv. Lexicon Juridic. in
voce.
.

All other Cities and States in Italy, which were neither Colonies, Municipia,
nor Praefecturae, had the Name of Foederatae Civitates, enjoying entirely their
own Customs and Forms of Government without the least alteration, and only
joined in confederacy with the Romans, upon such terms as had been adjusted
between them Ibid.
.

The Provinces were foreign Countries of larger extent, which, upon the entire
reducing them under the Roman Dominion, were new-modell'd according to the
Pleasure of the Conquerours, and subjected to the Command of annual Governors
sent from Rome, being commonly assigned such Taxes and Contributions as the
Senate thought fit to demand. But because the several Towns and Communities in
every Country did not behave themselves in the same manner toward the Romans,
some professing more Friendship, and a Desire of Union and Agreement, while
others were more obstinate and refractary, and unwilling to part with their old
Liberty upon any terms; therefore to reward those People who deserved well at
their hands, they allowed some Places the use of their own Constitutions in
many respects, and sometimes excused the Inhabitants from paying Tribute;
whence they were termed Immunes, in opposition to the Vectigales.

The Tribute exacted from the Provinces, was of two sorts, either certain or
uncertain. The certain Tribute, or Stipendium, was either a set Sum of Money
to be collected by the Provincial Quaestor, which they called pecunia
ordinaria; or else a Subsidy raised on the Provincials for particular
occasions, such as the maintaining so many Soldiers, the rigging out, and
paying such a number of Vessels, and the like, termed pecunia extraordinaria.

The uncertain Tribute consisted of what they called Portorium, Scriptura, and
Decuma. The Portorium was a Duty imposed upon all Goods and Wares, imported and
exported.

The Scriptura was a Tax laid upon Pastures and Cattle.

The Decuma was the quantity of Corn which the Farmers were obliged to pay to
the Roman State, commonly the tenth part of their Crop. But besides this, which
they properly termed Frumentum Decumanum, and which was farmed by the
Publicans, hence called Decumani, there was the Frumentum emptum, and the
frumentum aestimatum, both taken up in the Provinces. The Frumentum emptum was
of two sorts, either decumanum, or imperatum; the former was another Tenth paid
upon the consideration of such a Sum, as the Senate had determined to be the
price of it, who rated it so much a Bushel at their pleasure. The Frumentum
imperatum, was a quantity of Corn equally exacted of the Provincial Farmers
after the two Tenths, at such a price as the chief Magistrate pleased to give.
Frumentum aestimatum, was a Corn-Tax required by the Chief Magistrate of the
Province for his private Use, and the Occasions of his Family. This was
commonly compounded for in Money, and on that account took its Name ab
aestimando, from rating it at such a Sum of Money.

Besides all these, Sigonius mentions Frumentum honorarium upon the Authority
of Cicero, in his Oration against Piso: But perhaps Cicero in that place does
not restrain the Honorarium to Corn, but may mean, in general, the Present
usually made to the Provincial Governors, soon after their entrance on their
Office.

After Augustus had made a Division of the Provinces between himself and the
People, the annual Taxes paid by the Provinces under the Emperor, were called
Stipendia; and those which were gathered in the peoples Provinces, Tributa
Calvin. Lexicon Jurid. in Tributa.
.

CHAP. XIX. The Roman Way of Taking Towns; with the most remarkable Inventions
and Engines made use of in their Sieges.
BEFORE we enquire into this Subject, a very memorable Custom presents it self
to our notice, which was always practiced as soon as the Roman Army invested
any Town; and that was the evocatio Deorum tutelarium, or the enviting out the
Guardian Deities: The reason of which seems to have been, either because they
thought it impossible to force any Place, while it enjoyed such powerful
Defenders; or else, because they accounted it a most heinous act of Impiety, to
act in Hostility against the Persons of the Gods. This Custom is described at
large by Macrobius, in his Saturnalia, lib. 3. cap. 9.

The Romans were seldom desirous of attempting any Town by way of Siege,
because they thought it would scarce answer the Expense and Incommodity of the
Method; so that this was generally their last Hopes; and in all their great
Wars, there are very few Examples of any long Leagures undertook by them. The
means by which they possessed themselves of any important Places, were commonly
either by Storm or Surrendry. If they took a Town by Storm, it was either by
open force, or by stratagem. In the former they made their Attacks without
battering the Wall, and were only said aggredi Vrbem cum corona, to begirt a
Town; because they drew their whole Army round the Walls, and fell on in all
Quarters at once. If this Way was ineffectual, they battered down the Walls
with their Rams and other Engines. Sometimes they min'd, and entered the Town
underground: Sometimes, that they might engage with the Enemy upon equal terms,
they built wooden Towers, or raised Mounts to the height of the Walls, from
whence they might gall and molest them within their Works. The Besieged were in
most danger in the first case, upon a general Assault; for their Walls were to
be made good in all places at once; and it fell out many times, that there were
not Men enough to supply and relieve all the Parts; and if they had a
sufficient number of Men, yet perhaps all were not of an equal Courage; and if
any gave ground, the whole Town was in great hazard of being lost: So that the
Romans oftentimes carried very considerable Places at one Storm. But if they
battered the Walls with Engines, they were under some disadvantage, their
Quarters being of necessity to be extended; so that they must be thinner and
weaker in some places than in others, and unable to make a stout opposition
against any considerable Sally. Besides, the Besieged were not at a loss for
ways of defeating their Stratagems; as, they eluded the Force of their Mines by
Countermining, or by disturbing them in their Works; particularly putting Oil
and Feathers, with other stinking Stuff, into Barrels of Wood, and then setting
them on fire, they tumbled them among the Romans, that the noisomness of the
Stench might force them to quit their Stations. Their Towers of Wood, their
Rams and other Engines, they commonly set on fire, and destroyed, and then for
the Mounts which were raised against the Walls, they used, by diging
underneath, to steal away the Earth, and loosen the Foundations of the Mount
till it fell to the ground.

Upon this account the Romans (as was before observed) much preferred the
sudden and brisk way of attacking a Place; and if they did not carry it in a
very little time, they frequently raised the Siege, and prosecuted the War by
other means. As Scipio, in his African Expedition, having assaulted Vtica
without success, he changed his Resolution, drew off his Men from the Place,
and addressed himself wholly to bring the Carthaginian Army to an Engagement:
And therefore, though sometimes they continued a tedious Siege, as at Veii,
Carthage, and Jerusalem, yet generally they were much more desirous of drawing
the Enemy to a Battle; for by defeating an Army, they many times got a whole
Kingdom in a day; whereas an obstinate Town has cost them several Years.

See Machiavel's Art of War, Book II.

The Inventions and Engines which the Romans made use of in their Sieges were
very numerous, and the Knowledge of them is but of little Service at present;
however we may take a short view of the most considerable of them, and which
most frequently occur in Caesar and other Historians: These are the Turres
mobiles, the Testudines, the Musculus, the Vineae, and the Plutei, together
with the Aries, the Balista, the Catapulta, and the Scorpio.

The Turres mobiles, or moveable Turrets, were of two sorts, the lesser and the
greater: The lesser sort were about sixty Cubits high, and the square sides
seventeen Cubits broad; they had five or six, and sometimes ten Stories or
Divisions, every Division being made open on all sides. The greater Turret was
120 Cubits high, 23 Cubits square; containing sometimes fifteen, sometimes
twenty Divisions. They were of very great use in making approaches to the
Walls, the Divisions being able to carry Soldiers with Engines, Ladders,
Casting Bridges, and other Necessaries. The Wheels on which they went were
contrived to be within the Planks, to defend them from the Enemy, and the Men
who were to drive them forward stood behind, where they were most secure; the
Soldiers in the inside were protected by raw Hides which were thrown over the
Turret, in such places as were most exposed.

The Testudo was properly a Figure which the Soldiers cast themselves into; so
that their Targets should close all together above their Heads, and defend them
from the missive Weapons of the Enemy; as if we suppose the first rank to have
stood upright on their Feet, and the rest to have stooped lower and lower by
degrees 'till the last Rank kneeled down on their Knees; so that every Rank
covering with their Target the Heads of all in the Rank before them, they
represented a Tortoise-shell, or a sort of Pent-house. This was used as well in
Field Battles as in Sieges. But besides this, the Romans called in general all
their covered defensive Engines, Testudines: Among which, those which most
properly obtained the Name, seemed to have been almost of an oval Figure
composed of Boards, and wattled up at the sides with Wicker; serving for the
conveyance of the Soldiers near the Walls, on several occasions; they run upon
Wheels, and so were distinguished from the Vineae, with which they are
sometimes confounded.

The Musculus is conceived to have been much of the same nature as the
Testudines; but it seems to have been of a small size, and composed of stronger
Materials, being exposed a much longer time to the force of the Enemy; for in
these Musculi the Pioneers were sent to the very Walls, where they were to
continue, while with their Dolabrae, or Pick-Axes, and other Instruments, they
endeavored to undermine the Foundations. Caesar has described the Musculus at
large in his second Book of the Civil Wars.

The Vineae were composed of Wicker Hurdles laid for a Roof on the top of
Posts, which the Soldiers, who went under it for Shelter, bore up with their
Hands. Some will have them to have been contrived with a double Roof; the first
and lower Roof of Planks, and the upper Roof of Hurdles to break the force of
any Blow without disordering the Machine.

The Plutei consisted of the same Materials as the former, but were of a much
different Figure, being shaped like an arched sort of Wagon; and having three
Wheels, so conveniently placed, that the Machine would move either way with
equal case. They were put much to the same Uses as the Musculi.

The Engines hitherto described were primarily intended for the defense of the
Soldiers; the Offensive are yet behind. Of these the most celebrated, and which
only deserves a particular Description, was the Aries or Ram: This was of two
sorts, the one rude and plain, the other artificial and compound. The former
seems to have been no more than a great Beam which the Soldiers bore on their
Arms and Shoulders, and with one end of it by main force assailed the Wall. The
compound Ram is thus described by Josephus: The Ram (says he) is a vast long
Beam, like the Mast of a Ship, strengthened at one end with a Head of Iron,
something resembling that of a Ram, whence it took its Name. This is hanged by
the midst with Ropes to another Beam, which lies cross a couple of Posts, and
hanging thus equally balanced, it is by a great number of Men violently thrust
forward, and recoiled backward, and so shakes the Wall with its Iron Head. Nor
is there any Tower or Wall so thick or strong, that after the first Assault of
the Ram, can asterwards resist its force in the repeated Assaults Flav. Jeseph.
de Excidio Hiersolym. lib. 3.


Plutarch informs us that Mark Antony in the Parthian War made use of a Ram
fourscore Foot long: And Vitruvius tells us, That they were sometimes 106,
sometimes 120 Foot in length; and to this perhaps the force and strength of the
Engine was in a great measure owing. The Ram was managed at one time by a whole
Century or Order of Soldiers; and they being spent were seconded by another
Century; so that it played continually without any intermission, being usually
covered with a Vinea, to protect it from the Attempts of the Enemy.

As for the other Engines which served not for such great uses, and are not so
celebrated in Authors, a mechanical Description of them would be vexatious as
well as needless: Only it may in short be observed, That the Balista was always
employed in throwing great Stones, the Catapulta in casting the larger sort of
Darts and Spears, and the Scorpio in sending the lesser Darts and Arrows.

CHAP. XX. The Naval Affairs of the Romans.
THE Romans, though their City was seated very conveniently for Maritime Affairs,
not being above fifteen Miles distant from the Tyrrhenian Sea; and having the
River Tyber running through it, capable of receiving the smaller Vessels, yet
seem to have wholly neglected all Naval Concerns for many Years after the
building of Rome. And some are willing to assign this as one of the main Causes
which preserved that State so long in its primitive Innocence and Integrity;
free from all those Corruptions which an intercourse with Foreigners might
probably have brought into fashion. However Dionysius assures us, that Ancus
Martius built Ostia at the Mouth of the Tyber for a Port, that the City might
by this means be supplied with the Commodities of the neighboring Nations
Dionys. Halic. lib. 3.
. And it appears from the Reasons of the Tarentine War agreed upon by all
Historians, that the Romans in that Age had a Fleet at Sea. Yet Polybius
expressly maintains, that the first time they ever adventured to Sea was in the
first Punick War Lib. 1.
; but he must either mean this only of Ships of War, or else contradict
himself: For in another part of his Works, giving us a Transcript of some
Articles agreed on between the Romans and the Carthaginians in the Consulship
of M. Brutus and Horatius, soon after the Expulsion of the Royal Family; one of
the Articles is to this effect, That the Romans, and the Allies of the Romans,
shall not navigate beyond the Fair Promontory, unless constrained by Weather,
or an Enemy, etc. And after this, in two other Treaties, which he has presented
us with, there are several Clauses to the same purpose Polyb. Lib. 3.
. But howsoever these matters are to be adjusted, we are assured, that about
the Year of the City 492 Casaubon. Chronolog. ad Polyb.
. the Romans observing that the Coast of Italy lay exposed to the Depredations
of the Carthaginian Fleet, which often made Descents upon them; and considering
withal, that the War was likely to last, they determined to render themselves
Masters of a Naval Army. So wonderful was the Bravery and Resolution of that
People in Enterprises of the greatest hazard and moment; that having hitherto
scarce dreamed of Navigation, they should at one heat resolve on so adventurous
an Expedition, and make the first proof of their Skill in a Naval Battle with
the Carthaginians, who had held the Dominion of the Sea uncontested, derived
down to them from their Ancestors. Nay, so utterly ignorant were the Romans in
the Art of Ship-building, that it would have been almost impossible for them to
have put their design in effect, had not F^^^^he, who always espoused their
Cause, by a mere Accident instructed them in the method. For a Carthaginian
Galley, which was out a cruising, venturing too near the Shore, chanced to be
stranded; and before they could get her off, the Romans intercepting them, took
her; and by the Model of this Galley they built their first Fleet. But their
way of instructing their Seamen in the use of the Oar is no less remarkable,
wherein they proceeded after this manner: They caused Banks to be contrived on
the Shore in the same fashion and Order as they were to be in their Galleys,
and placing their Men with their Oars upon the Banks, there they exercised
them: An Officer for that purpose being seated in the midst, who by Signs with
his Hand instructed them how at once and all together they were to dip their
Oars, and how in like manner to recover them out of the Water: And by this
means they became acquainted with the management of the Oar. But in a little
time, finding their Vessels were not built with extraordinary Art, and
consequently proved somewhat unweildy in working, it came into their Heads to
recompense this Defect, by contriving some new Invention, which might be of use
to them in Fight. And then it was that they devised the famous Machine called
the Corvus; which was framed after the following manner: They erected on the
Prow of their Vessels, a round piece of Timber, of about a Foot and an half
diameter, and about twelve Foot long; on the top whereof they had a Block or
Pully: round this piece of Timber they laid a Stage or Platform of Boards, four
Foot broad, and about eighteen Foot long, which was well framed, and fastened
with Iron. The entrance was long-ways, and it moved about the aforesaid upright
piece of Timber, as on a Spindle, and could be hoisted up within six Foot of
the top: about this was a sort of a Parapet, Knee high, which was defended with
upright Bars of Iron, sharpened at the ends; toward the top whereof there was a
Ring; through this Ring, fastening a Rope, by the help of the Pully, they
hoisted or lowred the Engine at pleasure; and so with it attacked the Enemies
Vessels, sometimes on their Bow, and sometimes on their Broadside, as occasion
best served. When they had grapled the Enemy with those Iron Spikes, if they
happened to swing Broadside to Broadside, then they entered from all parts;
but in case they attacked them on the Bow, they entered two and two by the help
of this Machine, the foremost defending the forepart, and those that followed
the Flanks, keeping the Boss of their Bucklers level with the top of ^^e
Parapet.

To this purpose Polybius (according to the late most excellent Version) gives
us an account of the first Warlike Preparations, which the Romans made by Sea.
We may add, in short, the Order which they observed in drawing up their Fleet
for Battle; taken from the same Author. The two Consuls were in the two Admiral
Galleys in the Front of their two distinct Squadrons, each of them just ahead
of their own Divisions, and abreast of each other; the first Fleet being posted
on the Right, the second on the Left, making two long Files or Lines of Battle.
And whereas it was necessary to give a due space between each Galley, to ply
their Oars, and keep clear one of another, and to have their Heads or Prows
looking somewhat outward; this manner of drawing up did therefore naturally
form an Angle, the point whereof was at the two Admiral-Galleys, which were
near together; and as their two Lines were prolonged, so the distance grew
consequently wider and wider toward the Rear. But because the Naval as well as
the Land Army consisted of four Legions, and accordingly the Ships made four
Divisions, two of these are yet behind: Of which the third Fleet, or the third
Legion, was drawn up Front-ways in the Rear of the first and second, and so
stretching along from point to point composed a Triangle, whereof the third
Line was the Base. Their Vessels of Burden, that carried their Horses and
Baggage, were in the Rear of these; and were by the help of small Boats
provided for that purpose, towed or drawn after them. In the Rear of all was
the fourth Fleet, called the Triarians, drawn up likewise in Rank or
Front-ways, parallel to the third: but these made a longer Line, by which means
the Extremities stretched out, and extended beyond the two Angles at the Base.
The several Divisions of the Army being thus disposed, formed, as is said, a
Triangle; The Area within was void, but the Base was thick and solid, and the
whole Body quick, active, and very difficult to be broken.

If we descend to a particular Description of the several sorts of Ships; we
meet commonly with three kinds, Ships of War, Ships of Burden, and Ships of
Passage: The first for the most part rowed with Oars; the second steered with
Sails; and the last often towed with Ropes. Ships of Passage were either for
the Transportation of Men, such as the (...) or (...); or of Horses, as the
Hippagines. The Ships of Burden, which the Roman Authors call Naves onerariae,
and the Grecian (...), and (...), (whence the Name of our Hulks may probably be
derived) served for the conveyance of Victuals and other Provisions, and
sometimes too for the carrying over Soldiers, as we find in Caesar. Of the
Ships of War, the most considerable were the Naves longae, or Galleys, so named
from their Form, which was the most convenient to wield round, or to cut their
way; whereas the Ships of Burden were generally built rounder and more hollow,
that they might be the more casie to load, and might hold the more Goods. The
most remarkable of the Naves longae were the Triremis, the Quadriremis, and the
Quinqueremis. (...), and (...); exceeding one another by one Bank of Oars;
which Banks were raised slopingly one above another; and consequently those
which had most Banks were built highest, and rowed with the greatest strength.
Some indeed fancy a different Original of these Names, as that in the
Triremes, for Example, either there were three Banks one after the other on a
level, or three Rowers sat upon one Banks; or else three Men tugged all
together at one Oar: But this is contrary not only to the Authority of the
Classicks, but to the Figures of the Triremes still appearing in ancient
Monuments. Besides these there were two other Rates, one higher, and the other
lower. The higher Rates we meet with are the Hexeres, the Hepteres, the
Octeres, and so on to the (...); nay, Polybius relates that Philip of Macedon,
Father to Perseus, had an (...) Polyb. in Fragment.
; which Livy translates, navis quam sexdecim versus remorum agebant Lib. 53.
, a Ship with sixteen Banks: Yet this was much Inferior to the Ship built by
Philopater, which Plutarch tells us had forty Banks In Demetrio.
. The lower Rates were the Biremis and the Moneres. The Bireme in Greek (...),
or (...), consisted of two Banks of Oars: Of these, the fittest for Service, by
reason of their lightness and swiftness, were called Liburnicae, from the
Liburni, a People in Dalmatia, who first invented that sort of Building; for
being generally Corsairs, they rowed up and down in these light Vessels, and
maintained themselves by the Prizes they took Dacier on Horace, Epod. 1
. Yet in later times, all the smaller and more expedite Ships, whether they had
more or less than two Banks, were termed in general Liburnae, or Liburnicae.
Thus Horace and Propertius call the Ships which Augustus made use of in the
Sea-Engagement at Actium: And Florus informs us, that his Fleet was made up of
Vessels from three to six Banks Lib. 4. cap. 11.
. Suetonius mentions an extravagant sort of Liburnicae invented by the Emperor
Caligula, adorned with Jewels in the Poop, with Sails of many Colors, and
furnished with large Portico's, Bagnio's and Dining-rooms, besides the curious
Rows of Vines and Fruit Trees of all sorts Sueton. in Calig. cap. 37.
.

The Moneres mentioned by Livy, was a Galley having but one single Bank of
Oars, of which we find five sorts in Authors, the (...) or Actuar^^, the (...),
the (...), the (...), and the (...), of twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, and an
hundred Oars.

It may be observed, that though these Under-Rates are supposed to have been
built in the form of the (...), yet they are not so generally honored with
that Name; and sometimes in Authors of credit we find them directly opposed to
the Naves longae, and at other times to the (...), or War-ships.

But the Ships of War occur under several other different Denominations, as the
Tectae, or Constratae, or the Apertae. The Tectae, or (...) were so called,
because they had (...) or Hatches; whereas the Apertae or (...) had none. The
greater Ships, as the Quadriremes and upwards, seem always to have had Hatches;
the Triremes and Biremes are sometimes described otherwise; and all below these
were Apertae. Cicero and other Authors sometimes use the Word Aphractum for a
particular sort of Ship; and Polybius (...), for a Quinquereme. Besides these
we meet with the Naves rostratae and Naves turritae; the first were such as had
Beaks or Rostra, necessary to all Ships which were to engage in a Battle. The
others were such as had Turrets erected on their Decks, from whence the
Soldiers used all manner of Weapons and Engines, as if it had been on Land, and
so engaged with the greatest Fury imaginable; as Virgil describes the Fight at
Actium.

-- Pelago credas innare revulsas
Cycladas, aut montes concurrere montibus altos;
Tanta mole viri turritis puppibus instant.
Aen. 8. The Officers in the Navy were the Praefectus Classis, or Admiral, and
sometimes the Duumviri, when two were joined in Commission, together with the
Trierarchus, or Captain of a particular Ship, most properly of the Trireme; the
Gubernator, or Master; the Celeustes, or Boatswain, and others of inferior
Note.

Under the Emperors, as there were Legions established in most parts of the
Roman Dominions, so had they constantly Fleets in those Seas, which lay
conveniently for the defense of the neighboring Countries. As Augustus kept
one Navy at Misenum in the Mare inferum, to protect and keep in obedience
France, Spain, Mauritania, Egypt, Sardinia, and Sicily: Another at Ravenna in
the Mare superum, to defend and bridle Epirus, Macedon, Achaia, Crete, Cyprus,
together with all Asia. Nor were their Navies only maintained on the Seas, but
several too on the principal Rivers, as the Germanica Classis on the Rhine, the
Danubiana, the Euphratensis, etc. to be met with in Tacitus, and other
Historians.

[ See Sir Henry Savil 's Dissertation at the end of his Translation of
Tacitus.]

To this Subject of the Roman Shipping we may add a very remarkable Custom of
such as had escaped a Wreck at Sea, which we find hinted at in almost every
Place of the Poets, and often alluded to by other Authors; on which the great
Modern Critic delivers himself to this purpose.

It was a Custom for those who had been saved from a Shipwreck to have all the
Circumstances of their Adventure represented on a Table. Some Persons made use
of their Table to move the Compassion of those that they met as they traveled
up and down; and by their Charity to repair their Fortunes, which had suffered
so much at Sea. These Juvenal describes Sat. 14.

-- Mersa rate naufragus assem
Dum rogat, and picta se tempestate tuetur.
His Vessel sunk, the Wretch at some Lane's end
A painted Storm for Farthings does extend,
And lives upon the Picture of his Loss.
For this purpose they hung the Tablet about their Necks, and kept singing a
sort of canting Verses, expressing the manner of their Misfortunes; almost like
the Modern Pilgrims. Persius Sat. 1.

-- Cantet si naufragus assem
Protulerim? Cantas cum fracta te in trabe pictum
Ex humero ports?
Say, should a Ship-wrack'd Saylor sing his Woe,
Would I be moved to pity; or bestow
An Alms? Is this your Season for a Song,
When your despairing Phiz you bear along,
Daubed on a Plank, and over your Shoulders hung?
Others hung up such a Table in the Temple of the particular Deity, to whom
they had addressed themselves in their Exigence, and whose assistance, had, as
they thought, effected their safety. This they termed properly votiva Tabella.
Juvenal has a fling at the Roman Superstition in this point, when he informs us
that 'twas the business of a whole Company of Painters to draw Pictures on
these accounts for the Temple of Isis.

-- Quam votiva testantur Fana Tabella
Plurima, pictores quis nescit ab Iside pasci?
Such as in Isis some may be surveyed,
On Votive Tablets to the Life portrayed,
Where Painters are employed and earn their Bread.
But the Custom went much farther; for the Lawyers at the Bar used to have the
Case of their Client expressed in a Picture, that by showing his hard Fortune,
and the Cruelty and Injustice of the adverse Party, they might move the
Compassion of the Judge. This Quintilian declares himself against in his sixth
Book. Nor was this all; for such Persons as had escaped in any fit of Sickness,
used to dedicate a Picture to the Deity whom they fansied to have relieved
them. And this gives us a light into the meaning of Tibullus, Lib. 1. Eleg. 3.

Nunc dea, nunc succurre mihi: nam posse mederi
Picta docet Templis multa tabella tuis.
Now, Goddess, now thy tortured Suppliant heal,
For Votive Paints attest thy sacred Skill.
Thus the old Christians Casaubon. in Persius, Sat. I. V. 88.
, upon any signal recovery of their Health, used to offer a sort of Medal in
Gold or Silver, on which their own Effigies was expressed, in Honor of the
Saint whom they thought themselves obliged to for their Deliverance. And this
Custom still obtains in the Popish Countries Dacier on Horace, lib. 1. Od. 5.
.

PART II.
BOOK V. Miscellany Customs of the Romans.
CHAP. I. Of the Private Sports and Games.
A Great part of the Roman Pomp and Superstition was taken up in their Games
and Shows, and therefore very many of their Customs have a dependence on those
Solemnities. But in our way we should not pass by the private Sports and
Diversions; not that they are worth our notice in themselves, but because many
Passages and Allusions in Authors would otherwise be very difficult to
apprehend.

The Private Games particularly worth our Remark are, the Latrunculi, the Tali
and Tesserae, the Pila, the Par impar, and the Trochus.

The Game at Latrunculi seems to have been much of the same nature as the
Modern Chess: The Original of it is generally referred to Palamedes his
Invention at the Siege of Troy: Though Seneca attributes it to Chilon, one of the
seven Grecian Sages; and some fancy that Pyrrhus King of Epirus contrived this
Sport, to instruct his Soldiers, after a diverting manner, in the Military Art.
However, it is certain, it expresses the Chance and Order of War so very
happily, that no place can lay so just a Claim to the Invention as the Camp.
Thus the ingenious Vida begins his Poem on this Subject.

Ludimus effigiem belli simulataque veris
Praelia, buxo acies fictas, and ludicra regna:
Vt gemini inter se reges, albusque nigerque
Pro land oppositi, certant bicoloribus armis.
Wars harmless Shape we sing, and Boxen Trains
Of Youth, encountering on the Cedar Plains.
How two tall Kings by different Armor known,
Traverse the Field, and combat for Renown.
The Chess-men which the Romans used, were generally of Wax or Glass, their
common Name was Calculi, or Latrunculi: The Poets sometimes term them Latrones;
whence Latrunculus was at first derived: For Latro among the Ancients signified
at first a Servant (as the Word Knave in English) and afterward a Soldier.

Seneca has mentioned this Play oftener perhaps than any other Roman Author;
particularly in one place he has a very remarkable Story, in which he designs
to give us an Example of wonderful Resolution and Contempt of death; though some
will be more apt to interpret it as on instance of insensible Stupidity. The
Story is this: One Canius Julius (whom he extols very much on other Accounts)
had been sentenced to death by Caligula; the Centurion coming by with the Tribe
of Malefactors, and ordering him to bear them company to execution, happened to
find him engaged at this Game. Canius upon his first Summons presently fell to
counting his Men, and bidding his Antagonist be sure not to brag falsely of the
Victory after his death, he only desired the Centurion to bear witness, that he
had one Man upon the Board more than his Companion; and so very readily joined
himself to the poor Wretches that were going to suffer Seneca de Tranquil.
Animi. cap 14.
.

But the largest and most accurate Account of the Latrunculi given us by the
Ancients, is to be met with in the Poem to Piso; which some will have to be
Ovid's, others Lucan's, and many the Work of an unknown Author.

The Tali and the Tesserae, by reason of so many Passages in Authors equally
applicable to both, have often times been confounded with one another, and by
some distinguished as a separate Game from the lusus aleae, or Dice: Whereas,
properly speaking, the Greeks and Romans had two sorts of Games at Dice, the
Ludus talorum, or play at Cockall, and the Ludus tesserarum, or what we call
Dice. They played at the first with four Tali, and at the other with three
Tesserae. The Tali had but four sides, marked with four opposite numbers; one
side with a Tres, and the opposite with a Quatre; one with an Ace, and the
contrary with a Sice. The Dice had six Faces, four marked with the same Numbers
as the Tali, and the two others with a Deux and a Cinque, always one against
the other; so that in both Plays the upper Number and the lower, either on the
Talus or Tessera, constantly made seven.

There were very severe Laws in force against these Plays, forbidding the use
of them at all Seasons, only during the Saturnalia; though they gam'd ordinarily
at other times, notwithstanding the Prohibition. But there was one use made of
them at Feasts and Entertainments, which perhaps did not fall under the extent
of the Laws; and that was to throw Dice who should command in chief, and have
the power of prescribing Rules at a Drinking Bout; whom Horace calls Arbiter
bibendi.

They threw both the Tali and the Tesserae out of a long Box; for which they
had several Names, as Fritillum, Pyrgus, Turricula, Orca, etc.

There are many odd Terms scattered up and down in Authors, by which they
signified their fortunate and unfortunate Casts, we may take notice of the best
and the worst. The best Cast with the Tali, was when there came up four
different Numbers, as Tres, Quatre, Sice, Ace: The best with the Dice was three
Sices; the common Term for both, was Venus, or Basilicus; the poorest cast in
both having the Name of Canis. Persius opposes the Senio and the Canicula as
the best and worst Chances.

-- Quid dexter senio ferret
Scire erat in votis; damnosa canicula quantum
Raderet Angustae collo non fallier Orcae.
Sat. 3. But then my Study was to cog the Dice,
And dext'rously to throw the lucky Sice.
To shun Ames-Ace that swept my Stakes away;
And watch the Box, for fear they should convey
False Bones, and put upon me in the Play.
[Mr. Dryden. The wiser and severer Romans thought this sedentary Diversion fit
only for aged Men, who could not so well employ themselves in any stirring
Recreation. Let them, (says old Cato in Tully) have their Armor, their Horses,
and their Spears; let them take their Club and their Javelin; let them have
their swimming Matches and their Races, so they do but leave us among the
numerous Sports, the Tali and the Tesserae. But the general corruption of
manners made the Case quite otherwise: Si damnosa senem juvat alea, ludit and
haeres
Bullatus, parvoque eadem movet arma fritillo.
If Gaming does an aged Sire entice,
Then my young Master swiftly learns the Vice,
And shakes, in Hanging-sleeves, the little Box and Dice.


Nor was it probable that this Game should be practiced with any moderation in
the City, when the Emperors were commonly professed Admirers of it. Augustus
himself played unreasonably, without any regard to the time of Year Sueton.
Aug. cap. 71.
. But the great Master of this Art was the Emperor Claudius, who, by his
constant Practice (even as he rid about in his Chariot) gained so much
Experience as to compose a Book on the Subject. Hence Seneca in his Sarcastical
Relation of that Emperor's Apotheosis; when, after a great many Adventures, he
has at last brought him to Hell, makes the infernal Judges condemn him (as the
most proper Punishment in the World) to play continually at Dice with a Box
that had the bottom out; which kept him always in Hopes, and yet always balked
his Expectations.

Nam quoties missurus erat resonante fritillo,
Vtraque subducto fugiebat Tessera fundo;
Cum quae recollectos auderet mittere talos,
Lusuro similis semper, semperque petenti,
Decepere fidem: refugit, digitosque per ipsos
Fallax assiduo dilabitur alea furto.
Sic cum jam summi tanguntur culmina montis,
Irrita Sisyphio volvuntur pondera collo.
For whensoe'er he shook the Box to cast,
The rattling Dice delude his eager have:
And if he tried again, the waggish Bone
Insensibly was through his Fingers gone;
Still he was throwing, yet he never had thrown.
So weary Sisyphus, when now he sees
The welcome Top, and feeds his joyful Eyes,
Straight the rude Stone, as cruel Fate commands,
Falls sadly down, and meets his restless Hands.
The Ancients had four sorts of Pilae or Balls used for Exercise and Diversion.
The Follis, or Balloon, which they struck about with their Arm, guarded for
that purpose with a wooden Bracer: Or if the Balloon was little, they used
only their Fists. The Pila Trigonalis, the same as our common Balls; to play
with this, there used to stand three Persons in a Triangle, striking it round
from one to the other; he that first let it come to the Ground was the loser
See Dacier on H^race, Book 2. Sat. 2.
. Paganica, a Ball stuffed with Feathers, which Martial thus describes: Haec
quae difficilis turget Paganica, pluma
Toll minus laxa est, and minus arcta pila.


The last sort was the Harpastum, a harder kind of Ball which they played with,
dividing into two Companies, and striving to throw it through one another's
Goals, which was the conquering Cast.

The Game at Par impar, or Even and Odd, is not worth taking notice of, any
farther than to observe, that it was not only proper to the Children, as is
generally fansied: For we may gather from Suetonius, that it was sometimes used
at Feasts and Entertainments, in the same manner as the Dice and Chess See
Sueton. in Aug. cap. 71.
.

The Trochus has been often thought the same as the Turbo, or Top; or else of
like nature with our Billiards: But both these Opinions are now exploded by the
Curious. The Trochus therefore was properly a Hoop of Iron five or six Foot
Diameter, set all over in the inside with Iron Rings. The Boys and young Men
used to whirl this along, as our Children do the wooden Hoops, directing it
with a Rod of Iron having a wooden Handle; which Rod the Grecians called
(...), and the Romans Radius. There was need of great Dexterity to guide the
Hoop right. In the mean time the Rings, by the clattering which they made, not
only gave the People notice to keep out of the way, but contributed very much
to the Boy's Diversion See Dacier on Horace, Book 3. Od. 24.
. We must take care not to think this only a childish Exercise, since we find
Horace ranking it with the other manly Sports, Ludere qui nescit, campestribus
abstinet armis,
Indoctusve pilae, discive, trochive quiescit De Art. Poet.
.


CHAP. II. Of the Circensian Shows; and first of the Pentathlum, the
Chariot-Races, the Ludus Trojae, and the Pyrrhica Saltatio.
IT IS hard to light on any tolerable Division which would take in all the
Public Sports and Shows; but the most accurate seems to be that which ranks
them under two Heads, Ludi Circenses, and Ludi Scenici: But because this
Division is made only in respect of the Form and Manner of the Solemnities, and
of the place of Action, there is need of another to express the End and Design
of their Institution; and this may be Ludi Sacri, Votivi, and Funebres.

The Circensian Plays may very well include the Representations of Sea Fights,
and the Sports performed in the Amphitheatres: For the former were commonly
exhibited in the Circo's fisted for that use; and when we meet with the
Naumachiae, as places distinct from the Circo's, we suppose the Structure to
have been of the same nature. And as to the Amphitheatres, they were invented
for the more convenient Celebration of some particular Shows, which used before
to be presented in the Circo's: So that in this extent of the Head, we may
inform our selves of the Pentathlum, of the Chariot-Races, of the Ludus Trojae,
of the Shows of wild Beasts, of the Combats of the Gladiators, and of the
Naumachiae.

The Pentathlum, or Quinquertium, as most of their other Sports, was borrowed
from the Grecian Games; the five Exercises that composed it were, Running,
Wrestling, Leaping, Throwing, and Boxing. The two last have something
particularly worth our notice; the former of them being sometimes performed
with the Disous, and the other with the Cestus. The Discus, or Quoit, was made
of Stone, Iron, or Copper, five or six Fingers broad, and more than a Foot
long, inclining to an Oval Figure: They sent this to a vast distance, by help
of a leathern Thong tied round the Person's Hand that threw. Several learned
Men have fansied, that instead of the aforesaid Thong, they made use of a Twist
or Bread of Hair; but it is possible they might be deceived by that Passage of
Claudian.

Quis melius vibrata puer vertigine molli
Membra rotet? vertat quis marmora crine supino?
What Youth could wind his Limbs with happier Care?
Or fling the Marble Quoit with tossed back Hair?
Where the Poet by Crine supino intends only to express the extreme Motion of
the Person throwing; it being very natural on that account to cast back his
Head, and so make the Hair fly out behind him See Dacier on Herace, Book 1. Od.
8.
.

Homer has made Ajax and Ulysses both great Artists at this Sport: And Ovid
when he brings in Apollo and Hyacinth playing at it, gives an elegant
Description of the Exercise.

Corpora vest levant, and succo pinguis olivae
Splendescunt, latiq, incunt certamina disci,
Quem prius derias libratum Phoebus in auras
Misit, and oppositas disjecit pondere nubes.
Decidit in solidam longo post tempore terram
Pondus, and exhibuit junctam cum viribus artem Metamorphos. 10.
.
They strip, and wash their naked Limbs with Oil,
To whirl the Quoit, and urge the sportive Toil.
And first the God his well-poiz'd Marble flung,
Cut the weak Air, and bore the Clouds along.
Sounding at last the massy Circle fell,
And showed his Strength a Rival to his Skill.
Scaliger, who attributes the Invention of the whole Pentathlum to the rude
Country People, is of Opinion, That the throwing the Discus is but an
Improvement of their old Sport of casting their Sheep-Hooks: This Conjecture
seems very likely to have been borrowed from a Passage of Homer: (...),
(...),
(...), Iliad. ps.

As when some sturdy Hind his Sheep-hook throws,
Which, whirling, lights among the distant Cows;
So far the Hero cast over all the Marks.


And indeed the Judgment of the same Critic, that these Exercises owe their
Original to the Life of Shepherds is no more than what his admired Virgil has
admirably taught him in the second Georgick.

Ipse dies agitat Festos; fususque per herbam
Ignis ubi in medio, and Socii cratera coronant,
Te libens Lenaee vocat, pecorisque magistris
Velocis jaculi certamina ponit in ulmo;
Corporaque agresti nudat praedura palaestra.
When any Rural Holy Days invite
His Genius forth to innocent Delight;
On Earths fair Bed, beneath some sacred Shade,
Amidst his equal Friends carelessly laid,
He sings thee, Bacchus, Patron of the Vine:
The Beechen Bowl foams with a flood of Wine;
Not to the loss of Reason, or of Strength.
To active Games and manly Sports at length
Their Mirth ascends; and with full Veins they see
Who can the best at better Trials be.
[Mr. Cowley. The Cestus were either a sort of leathern Guards for the Hands,
composed of Thongs, and commonly filled with lead or Iron, to add force and
weight to the blow: or, according to others, a kind of Whorlbars or Bludgeons
of Wood, with Lead at one end: Though Scaliger censures the last Opinion as
ridiculous; and therefore he derives the Word from (...), a Girdle, or Belt De
Re Poetic lib. 1. cap. 22.
. This Exercise is most admirably described by Virgil, in the Combat of Dares
and Entellus, Aeneid. 5. The famous Artist at the Cestus, was Eryx of Sicily,
overcome at last at his own Weapons by Hercules. Pollux too was as great a
Master of this Art, as his Brother Castor at Encounters on Horseback. The Fight
of Pollux and Amycus with the Cestus, is excellently related by Theocitus,
Idyllium 30.

The CHARIOT RACES occur as frequently as any of the Circensian Sports. The
most remarkable thing belonging to them, were the Factions or Companies of the
Charioteers; according to which the whole Town was divided, some favoring one
Company, and some another. The four ancient Companies, were the Prasina, the
Russata, the Alba, and the Veneta; the Green, the Red, the White, and the
Skycolour'd, or Sea-colour'd. This Distinction was taken from the Color of
their Liveries, and is thought to have born some allusion to the four Seasons
of the Year; the first resembling the Spring, when all things are Green; the
next, the fiery color of the Sun in Summer; the third the Hoar of Autumn; and
the last, the Clouds of Winter; or else the fourth may be applied to Autumn,
and the third to Winter. The Prasina, and the Veneta are not so casie Names as
the other two; the former is derived from (...), a Leek; and the other from the
Veneti, or the Venetians, a People that particularly affected that Color. The
most taking Company were commonly the Green, especially under Caligula, Nero,
and the following Emperors; and in the time of Juvenal, as he hints in his
eleventh Satyr, and with a finer stroke of his Pen, handsomely censures the
strange Pleasure which the Romans took in these Sights.

-- Mihi pace
Immensae nimiaeque licet si dicere plebis
Totam hodie Romam circus capit, and fragor aurem
Percutit eventum viridis quo colligo panni:
Nam si deficeret; moestam attonitamque videres
Hanc Vrbem, veluti Cannarum in pulvere victis
Consulibus. --
This Day all Rome (if I may be allowed,
Without Offense to such a numerous Crowd,
To say all Rome) will in the Circus sweat,
Echoes already to their Shouts repeat.
Methinks I hear the Cry -- Away, away,
The Green have won the Honor of the Day.
Oh, should these Sports be but one Year forborne,
Rome would in Tears her loved Diversion mourn;
And that would now a cause of Sorrow yield,
Great, as the loss of Cannae's fatal Field.
[Mr. Congreve. The Emperor Domitian, as Suetonius informs us, added two new
Companies to the former, the Golden, and the Purple Domitian, cap. 7.
. Xiphilin calls them the Golden, and the Silver; but this seems to be a
mistake, because the Silver Liveries would not have been enough to distinguish
from the White. But these new Companies were soon after laid down again by the
following Emperors Lips. Com. in locum.
.

In ordinary reading we meet only with the Bigae, and the Quadrigae; but they
had sometimes their Sejuges, Septemjuges, etc. And Suetonius assures us, That
Nero, when he was a Performer in the Olympic Games, made use of a Decemjugis,
or Chariot drawn with ten Horses coupled together Suet. Ner. cap. 24.
. The same Emperor sometimes brought in pairs of Camels to run in the Circo,
instead of Horses Idem cap. 11.
And Heliogabalus obliged Elephants to the same Service Lamprid. in Heliogab.
.

The Races were commonly ended at seven turns round the Metae, though upon
extraordinary occasions we now and then meet with fewer Heats. In like manner
the usual number of Missus, or Matches, were twenty four; though sometimes a far
greater number was exhibited. For Suetonius tells us, That the Emperor
Domitian presented an hundred Matches in one Day Domit. cap. 4.
. De la Cerda will have us believe it is impossible this should be meant of the
number of the Matches; but only of the Chariots, so as to make no more than
twenty five Missus: But his Opinion is not taken notice of by the Critics who
have commented on Suetonius. Servius Ad Georg. 3.
on the Verse of Virgil, Centum Quadrijugos agitabo ad flumina currus. takes
occasion to inform us, that anciently there were always twenty five Matches of
Chariots, four in every Match, so as to make an hundred in all. The last Missus
was set out at the Charge of the People, who made a gathering for that purpose;
and was therefore called Aerarius: But when this Custom of a Supernumerary
Missus was laid aside, the Matches were no more than twenty four at a time; yet
the last four Chariots still kept the Name of Missus aerarius.

The time when these Races should begin was anciently given notice of by sound
of Trumpet.

Inde ubi clara dedit sonitum tuba; finibus omnes,
Haud mora, prosiluere suis.
Virg. Aeneid. 5. But afterward the common Sign was the Mappa, or Napkin hung
out at the Praetor, or the chief Magistrate's Seat. Hence Juvenal calls the
Megalensian Games,

-- Megaliacae Spectacula Mappae.

Sat. 11. The common Reason given for this Custom is, that Nero being once at
Dinner, and the People making a great noise, desiring that the Sports might
begin, the Emperor threw the Napkin he had in his Hand out of the Window, as a
Token that he had granted their Request Cassiodor. lib. Epist. 5.
.

The Victors in these Sports were honored with Garlands, Coronets, and other
Ornaments, after the Grecian manner; and very often with considerable Rewards
in Money: Insomuch that Juvenal makes one eminent Charioteer able to buy an
hundred Lawyers.

-- Hinc centum patrimonia causidicorum,
Part alia solum russati pone Lacertae.
Sat. 7. It has been already hinted, that they reckoned the conclusion of the
Race from the passing by the Meta the seventh time: And this Propertius
expressly confirms, Book 2. Eleg. 24.

Aut prius infecto deposcit praemia cursu,
Septima quam metam triverit art rota.
What Charioteer would with the Crown be graced,
Ere his seventh Wheel the mark has lightly passed?
So that the greatest Specimen of Art and Slight appears to have been, to
avoid the Metae handsomely when they made their turns; otherwise the Chariot and
the Driver would come off with great Danger, as well as Disgrace.

-- Metaque fervidis
Evitata rotis. Horace.
On this account it is that Theocritus, when he gives a Relation of the
Exercises in which they instructed young Hercules, assigns him in this Point,
as a matter of the greatest consequence, his own Father for his Tutor.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...). To drive the Chariot, and with steady Skill
To turn, and yet not break the bending Wheel,
Amphitruo kindly did instruct his Son:
Great in that Art; for he himself had won
Vast precious Prizes on the Argive Plain:
And still the Chariot which he drove remains,
Never hurt in the Curse, though time had broke the falling Reins.
[Mr. Creech. They who desire to be informed of the exact manner of these
Races; which certainly was very noble and diverting, may possibly receive as
much pleasure and satisfaction from the Description which Virgil has left us of
them in short, as they could expect from the sight it self.

Nonne vides? cum praecipiti certamine campum
Corripuere, ruuntque effusi carcere currus;
Cum spes arrectae juvenum, exultantiaque haurit
Corda pavor pulsans: illi instant verbere torto,
Et proni dant lora: volat vi fervidus axis.
Jamque humiles, jamque elati sublime videntur
Era per vacuum ferri, atque assurgere in auras.
Nec mora nec requies. At fulvae nimbus arenae
Tollitur; humescunt spumis flatuque sequentum:
Tantus amor laudum, tanta est victoria curae.
Have thou beheld, when from the Goal they start
The youthful Charioteers with beating Heart,
Rush to the Race; and panting, scarcely bear
The extremes of feverish Hope and chilling Fear;
Stoop to the Reins, and lash with all their force;
The flying Chariot kindles in the Course.
And now a-low, and now aloft they fly,
As born through Air, and seem to touch the Sky;
No stop, no stay; but Clouds of Sand arise,
Spurned and cast backward on the follower's Eyes;
The hindmost blows the foam upon the first:
Such is the love of Praise; an honorable Thirst.
[Mr. Dryden. The Troja, or Ludus Trojae, is generally referred to the
Invention of Ascanius. It was celebrated by Companies of Boys neatly dressed,
and furnished with little Arms and Weapons, who mustered in the public Circo.
They were taken, for the most part, out of the noblest Families; and the
Captain of them had the honorable Title of Princeps Juventutis; being
sometimes the next Heir to the Empire; and seldom less than the Son of a
principal Senator. This Custom is so very remarkable, that it would be an
unpardonable Omission not to give the whole Account of it in Virgil's own
Words; especially because the Poet using all his Art and Beauties on this
Subject, as a Compliment to Augustus (a great Admirer of the Sport) has left us
a most Divine Description.

Aeneid. 5. Ver. 545. At pater Aeneas, nondum certamine misso,
Custodem ad sese comitemque impubis Juli
Epytiden vocat, and fidam sic fatur ad aurem:
Vade age: and Ascanio, si jam puerile paratum
Agmen habet secum, cursusque intruxit equorum,
Ducat avo turmas, and sese ostendat in armis,
Dic, ait. Ipse omnem longo decedere circo
Infusum populum, and campos jubet esse patentes.
Incedunt pueri, pariterque ante ora parentum
Fraenatis lucent in equis: quos omnis euntes
Trinacriae mirata fremit Trojaeque juventus.
Omnibus in morem tonsa coma pressa corona:
Cornea bina ferunt praefixa hastilia ferro,
Pars leves humero pharetras: it pectore summo
Flexilis obtorti per collum circulus auri.
Tres equitum numero turmae, ternique vagantur
Ductores: pueri bisseni quemque secuti,
Agmine partito fulgent, paribusque Magistris.
Vna acies juvenum, ducit quam parvus ovantem
(Nomen avi referens) Priamus, tua clara, Polite,
Progenies, auctura Italos: quem Thracius albis
Portat equus bicolor maculis: vestigia primi
Alba pedis, frontemque ostentans arduus albam.
Alter Atys, genus unde Atti duxere Latini:
Parvus Atys, pueroque puer dilectus Iiilo.
Extremus, formaque ante omnes pulcher Iiilus
Sidonio est invectus equo: quem candida Dido
Esse sui dederat monumentum and pignus amoris.
Caetera Trinacriis pubes senioris Acestae
Fertur equis.
Excipiunt plausu pavidos, gaudentque tuentes
Dardanidae, veterumque agnoscunt ora parentum.
Postquam omnes laeti concessum oculosque suorum
Lustravere in equis: signum clamore paratis
Epytides long dedit, insonuitque flagello.
Olli discurrere pares, atque agmina terni
Diductis solvere choris: rursusque vocati
Convertere vias, infestaque tela tulere.
Inde alios ineunt cursus, aliosque recursus,
Adversis spatiis: alternosque orbibus orbs
Impediunt, pugnaeque cient simulachra sub armis:
Et nune terga fugae nudant, nune spicula vertunt
Infensi, facta pariter nunc pace feruntur:
Vt quondam Creta fertur Labyrinthus in alta
Parjetibus textum coecis iter, ancipitemque
Mill viis habuisse dolum, qua signa sequendi
Falleret indeprensus and irremeabilis error.
Haua aliter Teucrum nati vestigia cursu
Impediunt, texuntque fugas and proelia ludo:
Delphinum similes, qui per maria humida nando
Carpathium Libycumque secant, luduntque per undas.
Huno morem, hos cursus atque haec certamina primus
Ascanius, longam muris cum cingeret Albam,
Rettulit, and priscos docuit celebrare Latinos,
Quo puer ipse modo, secum quo Troia pubes,
Albani docuere suos: hinc maxima porro
Acceptit Roma, and patrium servavit honorem:
Trojaque nunc pueri, Trojanum dicitur agmen.
But Prince Aeneas, ere the Games were done,
Now called the wise Instructor of his Son,
The good Epytides, whose faithful Hand
In noble Arts the blooming Hero trained:
To whom the Royal Chief his Will declared,
Go bid Ascanius if he stands prepared
To march his youthful Troops, begin the Course,
And let his Grandsire's shade commend his growing Force.
Thus he; and ordered straight the swarming Tide
To clear the Circo; when from every side
Crowds bear back Crowds, and leave an open space,
Where the new Pomp in all its Pride might pass.
The Boys move on, all glittering lovely bright,
On well-rein'd Steeds in their glad Parents sight.
Wondering, the Trojan and Sicilian Youth
Crown with Applause their Virtue's early growth.
Their flowing Hair close flowery Chaplets grace,
And two fair Spears their eager Fingers press.
Part bear light Quivers, on their Shoulders hung,
And Twists of bending Gold lie wreathed along
Their Purple Vest; which at the Neck begun,
And down their Breasts in shining Circles run.
Three lovely Troops three beauteous Captains led,
And twice six Boys each hopeful Chief obeyed.
The first gay Troop young Priam marshal's on,
Thy Seed, Polites, not to Fame unknown,
That with Italian Blood shall join his own:
Whose kinder Genius ripening with his Years,
His wretched Grandsire's Name to better Fortune bears.
A Thracian Steed with Spots of spreading White
He rode, that paw'd, and craved the promised Fight.
A lovely White his hither Fetlocks stains;
And White his high erected Forehead shines.
And next with stately pace young Atys moved;
Young Atys, by the young Ascanius loved.
From his great Line the noble Attain Stemm,
In Latium nursed, derive their ancient Name.
The third with his Command Ascanius graced;
Whose Godlike Looks his Heavenly Race confessed;
So beautiful, so brave, he shone above the rest.
His sprightly Steed from Sidon's Pastures came,
The noble Gift of the fair Tyrian Dame,
And fruitless Pledge of her unhappy Flame.
The rest Sicilian Coursers all bestrode
Which old Acestes on his Guests bestowed.
Them hot with beating Hearts, the Trojan Crew
Receive with Shouts; and with fresh Pleasure view;
Discovering in the Lines of every Face
Some venerable Founder of their Race.
And now the youthful Troops their Round had made,
Panting with joy, and all the Crowd surveyed;
When sage Epytides, to give the Sign
Clack'd his long Whip, and made the Course begin.
At once they start, and spur with artful speed,
'Till in three Troops the little Chiefs divide
The close Battalion: Then at once they turn,
Commanded back; while, from their Fingers born,
Their hostile Darts aloft upon the Wind
Fly shivering. Then in circling Numbers joined,
The manag^d Coursers with due measures bound,
And run the rapid Ring, and trace the mazy Round.
Files facing Files, their bold Companions dare,
And Wheel, and Charge, and urge the sportive War.
Now Flight they feign, and naked Backs expose:
Now with turned Spears drive headlong on the Foes;
And now, Confederate grown, in peaceful Ranks they close.
As Crete's famed Labyrinth to thousand Ways,
And thousand darkened Walls the Guest conveys;
Endless, inextricable Rounds amuze,
And no kind Track the doubtful Passage shows.
So the glad Trojan Youth their winding Course
Sporting pursue; and charge the Rival Force.
As sprightly Dolphins in some calmer Road
Play round the silent Waves, and shoot along the Flood.
Ascanius, when (the rougher Storms o'er-blown)
With happier Fates he raised fair Alba's Town;
This youthful Sport, this solemn Race renewed,
And with new Rites made the plain Latins proud.
From Alban Sires the Hereditary Game
To matchless Rome by long Succession came:
And the fair Youth in this Diversion trained,
Troy they still call, and the brave Trojan Band.
Lazius in his Commentaries de Repub. Romana fancies the Justs and Tournaments,
so much in fashion about two or three hundred Years ago, to have owed their
Original to this Lud^^ Trojae; and that Torniamenta is but a Corruption of
Trojamenta. And the learned and noble Du Fresne acquaints us, that many are of
the same Opinion. However, though the Word may perhaps be derived with more
probability from the French, Tourner, to turn round with Agility; yet the
Exercises have so much resemblance as to prove the one an Imitation of the
other.

The Pyrrhice, or Saltatio Pyrrhica, is commonly believed to be the same with
the Sport already described. But besides that none of the Ancients have left
any tolerable Grounds for such a Conjecture, it will appear a different Game if
we look a little into its Original, and on the manner of the performance. The
Original is, by some, referred to Minerva, who led up a Dance in her Armor
after the Conquest of the Titans: By others, to the Curetes, or Corybantes,
Jupiter's Guard in his Cradle; who leaped up and down, clashing their Weapons,
to keep old Saturn from hearing the Cries of his Infant-Son. Pliny attributes
the Invention to Pyrrhus, Son to Achilles, who instituted such a Company of
Dancers at the Funeral of his Father Not. Hist. lib. 57.
. However, that it was very ancient is plain from Homer; who, as he hints at it
in several Descriptions, so particularly he makes the exact form and manner of
it to be engraved on the Shield of Achilles, given him by Vulcan. The manner of
the performance seems to have consisted chiefly in the nimble turning the Body,
and shifting every Part, as if it were done to avoid the stroke of an Enemy:
And therefore this was one of the Exercises in which they trained the young
Soldiers. Apuleius describes a Pyrrhick Dance performed by young Men and Maids
together Milesiar. lib. 10.
; which only would be enough to distinguish it from the Ludus Trojae.

CHAP. III. Of the Shows of wild Beasts, and of the Naumachiae.
THE Shows of Beasts were in general designed for the Honor of Diana the
Patroness of Hunting. For this purpose no Cost was spared to fetch the most
different Creatures from the farthest Parts of the World: Hence Claudian, --
Ratibus pars ibat onustis
Per freta, vel sluvios; exanguis dextera torpet
Remigis, and propriam metuebat navita mercem,
-- Part in laden Vessels came,
Born on the rougher Waves, or gentler Stream;
The fainting Slave let fall his trembling Oar;
And the pale Master feared the Freight he bore.


And presently after, -- Quodeunque tremendum est
Dentibus, aut insigne jubis, aut nobile corn^^,
Aut rigidum setis capitur, decus omne timorque
Sylvarum, non caute latent, non mole resistunt.
All that with potent Teeth command the Plain,
All that run horrid with erected Mane,
Or proud of stately Horns, or bristling Hair
At once the Forest's Ornament and Fear;
Born from their Deserts by the Roman Power,
Nor strength can save nor craggy Dens secure.


Some Creatures were presented merely as strange Sights and Rarities, as the
Crocodiles, and several outlandish Birds and Beasts; others for the Combat, as
Lions, Tigers, Leopards, etc. other Creatures, either purely for delight, or
else for the use of the People, at such times as they were allowed the liberty
of catching what they could for themselves; as Hares, Deer, and the like. We
may reckon up three sorts of Diversions with the Beasts, which all went under
the common Name of Venatio; the first when the People were permitted to run
after the Beasts, and catch what they could for their own use; the second when
the Beasts fought with one another; and the last when they were brought out to
engage with Men.

When the People were allowed to lay hold on what they could get, and carry off
for their own use, they called it Venatio direptionis: This seems to have been
an Institution of the later Emperors. It was many times presented with
extraordinary Charge, and great variety of contrivances: The middle part of the
Circo being set all over with Trees, removed thither by main force, and
fastened to huge Planks, which were laid on the Ground; these being covered
with Earth and Turf, represented a natural Forest; into which the Beasts being
let from the Caveae, or Dens under ground, the People, at a Sign given by the
Emperor, fell to hunting them, and carried away what they killed to regale
upon at home. The Beasts usually given, were Boars, Deer, Oxen, and Sheep.
Sometimes all kinds of Birds were presented after the same manner.

The Fights between Beasts were exhibited with great Variety; sometimes we find
a Tiger matched with a Lion; sometimes a Lion with a Bull; a Bull with an
Elephant, a Rhinoceros with a Bear, etc. Sometimes we meet with Deer hunted on
the Arena by a pack of Dogs. But the most wonderful Sight was, when by bringing
the Water into the Amphitheatre, huge Sea Monsters were introduced to combat
with wild Beasts.

Nec nobis tantum sylvestria cernere monstra
Contigit, aequoreos ego cum certantibus ursis
Spectavi vitulos.
Calphurn. Eclog. 7. Nor Sylvan Monsters we alone have viewed,
But huge Sea-Calves died red with hostile Blood
Of Bears, lie floundring in the wondrous Flood.
The Men that engaged with wild Beasts had the common Name of Bestiarii: Some
of these were condemned Persons, and have been taken notice of in another place
Book 3. chap. 20.
: Others hired themselves at a set pay, like the Gladiators; and, like them
too, had their Schools where they were instructed and initiated in such
Combats. We find several of the Nobility and Gentry many times voluntarily
undertaking a part in these Encounters. And Juvenal acquaints us, that the very
Women were ambitious of showing their Courage on the like occasions, though with
the Forfeiture of their Modesty.

Cum -- Moevia Tuscum
Figat aprum, and nuda teneat venabula mamma.
Sat. 1. Or when with naked Breast the mannish Whore
Shakes the broad Spear against the Tuscan Boar.
And Martial compliments the Emperor Domitian very handsomely on the same
account.

Belliger invictis quod Mars tibi saevit in armis,
Non satis est, Caesar, saevit and ipsa Venus.
Prostratum vasta Nemees in valle leonem
Nobile and Herculeum fama canebat opus.
Prisca fides taceat: nam post tua munera, Caesar,
Haec jam foeminea vidimus acta manu.
Not Mars alone his bloody Arms shall wield;
Venus, when Caesar bids, shall take the Field,
Nor only wear the Breeches, but the Shield.
The savage Tyrant of the Woods and Plain,
By Hercules in doubtful Combat slain,
Still fills our Ears with the Nemaean Vale,
And musty Rolls the mighty Wonder tell:
No wonder now; for Caesar's Reign has shown
A Woman's equal Power; the same Renown
Gained by the Distaff which the Club had won.
Those who cop'd on plain Ground with the Beasts commonly met with a very
unequal Match; and therefore, for the most part, their safety consisted in the
nimble turning of their Body, and leaping up and down to delude the force of
their Adversary. Therefore Martial may very well make a Hero of the Man who
slew twenty Beasts, all let in upon him at once, though we suppose them to have
been of the inferior kind.

Herculeae laudis numeretur gloria: plus est
Bis denas pariter perdomuisse feras.
Count the twelve Feats that Hercules has done;
Yet twenty make a greater, joined in one.
But because this way of engaging commonly proved succesful to the Beasts, they
had other ways of dealing with them; as by assailing them with Darts, Spears,
and other missive Weapons, from the higher parts of the Amphitheatre, where
they were secure from their reach; so as by some means or other they commonly
contrived to dispatch three or four hundred Beasts in one Show.

In the Show of wild Beasts exhibited by Julius Caesar in his third Consulship,
twenty Elephants were opposed to five hundred Footmen; and twenty more with
Turrets on their Backs, sixty Men being allowed to defend each Turret, engaged
with five hundred Foot, and as many Horse Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 7.
.

The NAVMACHIAE owe their Original to the time of the first Punick War, when
the Romans first initiated their Men in the knowledge of Sea Affairs. After the
improvement of many Years they were designed as well for the gratifying the
Sight, as for increasing their Naval Experience and Discipline; and therefore
composed one of the solemn Shows, by which the Magistrates or Emperors, or any
Affecters of Popularity so often made their Court to the People.

The usual Accounts we have of these Exercises seem to represent them as
nothing else but the Image of a Naval Fight. But it is probable that sometimes
they did not engage in any hostile manner, but only rowed fairly for the
Victory. This Conjecture may be confirmed by the Authority of Virgil; who is
acknowledged by all the Critics in his Descriptions of the Games and
Exercises, to have had an Eye always on his own Country, and to have drawn them
after the manner of the Roman Sports. Now the Sea-contention which he presents
us with, is barely a trial of Swiftness in the Vessels, and of Skill in
managing the Oars; as it is most admirably delivered in his first Book: Prima
pares ineunt gravibus certamina remis
Quatuor ex omni delectae class carinae, etc.


The most celebrated Naumachiae, were those of the Emperor Domitian; in which
were engaged such a vast number of Vessels as would have almost formed two
complete Navies Su^^on. in Domit. cap. 4.
for a proper Fight; together with a proportionable Channel of Water, equalling
the Dimensions of a natural River. Martial has a very genteel turn on this
Subject.

Si quis ades longis serus speclator ab oris,
Cui lux prima sacri muneris ista dies,
Ne te decipiat ratibus navalis Enyo,
Et par unda fretis: hic modo terra fuit.
Non credis? Spectes dum laxent aequora Martem:
Parva mora est; dices hic modo pontus erat.
Stranger, who ever from distant parts arrived,
But this one sacred Day in Rome has lived:
Mistake not the wide Flood, and pompous Show
Of Naval Combats: Here was I and but now.
Is this beyond your Credit? only stay
'Till from the Fight the Vessels bear away;
You Will cry with wonder, Here but now was Sea!
It Is related of the Emperor Heliogabalus, that in a Representation of a Naval
Fight he filled the Channel, where the Vessels were to ride, with Wine instead
of Water (c). A Story scarce credible, though we have the highest Conceptions of
his prodigious Luxury and Extravagance. Lampridius in Heliogab.


CHAP. IV. Of the Gladiators.
THE first rise of the Gladiators is referred to the ancient Custom of killing
Persons at the Funerals of great Men. For the old Heathens fansying the Ghosts
of the deceased to be satisfied, and rendered propitious by Human Blood, at
first they used to buy Captives, or untoward Slaves, and offered them at the
Obsequies. Afterward they contrived to veil over their impious Barbarity with
the specious Show of Pleasure, and voluntary Combat; and therefore training up
such Persons as they had procured in some tolerable knowledge of Weapons, upon
the Day appointed for the Sacrifices to the departed Ghosts, they obliged them
to maintain a mortal Encounter at the Tombs of their Friends. The first Show of
Gladiators Munus Gladiatorium.
exhibited at Rome, was that of M. and D. Brutus, upon the death of their
Father, A. V. C. 490. in the Consulship of Ap. Claudius, and M. Fulvius Val.
Max. lib. 2. cap. 4.
.

Within a little time, when they found the People exceedingly pleased with such
bloody Entertainments; they resolved to give them the like Diversion as often
as possible; and therefore it soon grew into a Custom, that not only the Heir
of any great or rich Citizen newly deceased, but that all the principal
Magistrates should take occasions to present the People with these Shows, in
order to procuring their Esteem and Affection. Nay, the very Priests were
sometimes the Exhibitors of such impious Pomps; for we meet with the Ludi
Pontificales in Suetonius August. cap. 44.
, and with the Ludi Sacerdotales in Pliny. Epist. lib. 7.
.

As for the Emperors, it was so much their Interest to ingratiate themselves
with the Commonalty, that they obliged them with these Shows almost upon all
occasions: As on their Birthday; at the time of a Triumph, or after any signal
Victory; at the Consecration of any public Aedifices; at the Games which
several of them instituted, to return in such a term of Years; with many
others, which occurr in every Historian.

And as the occasions of these Solemnities were so predigiously increased, in
the same manner was the length of them, and the number of the Combatants. At
the first Show exhibited by the Bruti, it is probable there were only three pair
of Gladiators; as may be gathered from that of Ausonius.

Tres primas Threcum pugnas, tribus ordine bellis,
Juniadae patrio inferias misere Sepulchro.
Yet Julius Caesar in his Aedileship presented three hundred and twenty Pair
Plutarch. in Caesar.
. The excellent Titus exhibited a Show of Gladiators, wild Beasts, and
Representations of Sea-sights an hundred Days together Dio. lib. 66.
: And Trajan, as averse from Cruelty as the former, continued a Solemnity of
this nature an hundred and twenty three Days; during which he brought our a
thousand pair of Gladiators Dio. lib. 68.
: Two thousand Men of the same Profession were listed by the Emperor Otho to
se^ve against Vitellius Tacitus.
. Nay, long before this, they were so very numerous, that in the time of the
Catilinarian Conspiracy, and Order passed, to send all the Gladiators up and
down into the Garrisons, for fear they should raise any disturbance in the City
Salust. Catilin.
, by joining with the disaffected Party. And Plutarch informs us, that the
famous Spartacus, who at last gathered such a numerous Force as to put Rome
under some unusal Apprehensions, was no more than a Gladiator; who, breaking
out from a Show at Verena, with the rest of his Gang, dared proclaim War
against the Roman State Plutarth. in Crass.
.

In the mean time the wiser and the better Romans were very sensible of the
dangerous Consequence, which a Corruption of this nature might produce; and
therefore Cicero preferred a Law, That no Person should exhibit a Show of
Gladiators within two Years before he appeared Candidate for an Office Cicero
in Vatin.
. Julius Caesar ordered, that only such a number of Men of this Profession
should be in Rome at a time Suet. Caes. cap 10.
. Augustus decreed, that only two Shows of Gladiators should be presented in a
Year, and never above sixty pair of Combatants in a Show Dio.
. Tiberius provided by an Order of Senate, That no Person should have the
privilege of gratifying the People with such a Solemnity, unless he was worth
four hundred thousand Sesterces Tacit. An. 4.
. Nerva in a great measure regulated this Affair, after the many Abuses of the
former Emperors: But the Honor of entirely removing this Barbarity out of the
Roman World was reserved for Constantine the Great; which he performed about
the Year of the City 1067. nigh six hundred Years after their first
institution. Yet under Constantius, Theodosius, and Valentinian the same cruel
Humor began to revive, 'till a final stop was put to it by the Emperor
Honorius; the occasion of which is given at large by the Authors of
Ecclesiastical History.

Thus much may be proper to observe in general concerning the Original,
Increase, and Restraint of this Custom. For our farther information it will be
necessary to take particular notice of the Condition of the Gladiators; of
their several Orders or Kinds; and of their manner of Duelling.

As for their Condition, they were commonly Slaves or Captives: For 'twas an
ordinary Custom to sell a disobedient Servant to the Lanistae, or the
Instructors of the Gladiators, who after they had taught them some part of
their Skill, let them out for Money at a Show. Yet the Freemen soon put in for
a share of this Privilege to be killed in Jest; and accordingly many times
offered themselves to hire for the Amphitheatre; whence they had the Name of
Auctorati. Nay, the Knights and Noblemen, and even the Senators themselves at
last were not ashamed to take up the same Profession; some to keep themselves
from starving, after they had squandered away their Estates; and others to
curry favor with the Emperors: So that Augustus was forced to command by a
public Edict, that none of the Senatorian Order should turn Gladiators Dio.
lib. 48.
: And soon after he laid the same restraint on the Knights Sueton. Aug. cap.
43. Oto. lib. 54.
. Yet these Prohibitions were so little regarded by the following Princes, that
Nero presented at one Show (if the numbers of Suetonius are not corrupted) 400
Senators, and 600 of the Equestrian Rank Idem. Ner. cap. 12.
.

But all this will look like no wonder, when, upon a farther search, we meet
with the very Women engaging in these public Encounters; particularly under
Nero and Domitian. Juvenal has exposed them very handsomely for this mannish
Humor in his sixth Satyr.

Quale decus rerum si conjugis auctio fiat,
Balteus and manicae, and cristae, crurisque sinistri
Dimidium tegmen? vel si diversa movebit
Praelia, tu foelix ocreas, vendente puella.
Hae sunt quae tenui sudant in cyclade, quarum
Delicias and panniculus bombycinus urit.
Adspice quo fremitu monstratos perferat ictus,
Et quanto galeae curvetur pondere; quanta
Poplitibus sedeat, quam denso fascia libro!
Oh, what a decent sight it is to behold
All thy Wife's Magazine by Auction sold!
The Belt, the crested Plume, the several Suits
Of Armor, and the Spanish-Leather Boots!
Yet these are they that cannot bear the heat
Of figured Silks, and under Sarcenet sweat.
Behold the strutting Amazonian Whore,
She stands in Guard with her Right Foot before:
Her Coats tucked up; and all her Motions just:
She stamps, and then cries hah! at every thrust.
[Mr. Dryden. Yet the Women were not the most inconsiderable Performers, for a
more ridiculous set of Combatants are still behind; and these were the Dwarfs;
who encountering one another, or the Woman, at these public Diversions, gave a
very pleasant Entertainment. Statius has left us this elegant Description of
them.

His audax subit ordo pumilorum,
Quos natura brevi statu peracto
Nodosum semel in globum ligavit.
Edunt vulnera, conseruntque dextras,
Et mortem sibi qua manu minentur.
Ridet Mars pater and cruenta Virtus;
Cassuraeque vagis grues rapinis
Mirantur pumilos ferociores.
To mortal Combat next succeed
Bold Fencers of the Pigmy breed;
Whom Nature, when she half had wrought,
Not worth her farther labor thought,
But closed the rest in one hard Knot.
With what a Grace they drive their blow,
And ward their Jolt-head from the Foe?
Old Mars and rigid Virtue smile
At their redoubted Champion's toil.
And Cranes, to please the Mob let fly,
Admire to see their Enemy,
So often by themselves o'ercomo
Inspired with nobler Hearts at Rome.
The several kinds of Gladiators worth observing, were the Retiarii, the
Secutores, the Myrmillones, the Thracians, the Samnites, the Pinnirapi, the
Essedarii, and the Andabatae. But before we enquire particularly into the
distinct Orders, we may take notice of several Names attributed in common to
some of every kind, upon various occasions. Thus we meet with the Gladiatores
Meridiani, who engaged in the Afternoon, the chief part of the Show being
finished in the Morning. Gladiatores Fiscales, those who were maintained out of
the Emperor's Fiscus, or private Treasury; such as Arrian calls (...),
Caesar's Gladiators. Gladiatores Postulatitii, commonly Men of great Art and
Experience, whom the People particularly desired the Emperor to produce,
Gladiatores Catervarii, such as did not sight by Pairs, but in small Companies:
Suetonius uses catervarii pugiles in the same Sense Aug. cap. 45.
. Gladiatores ordinarii, such as were presented according to the common manner,
and at the usual time, and fought the ordinary way: On which account they were
distinguished from the Catervarii, and the Postulatitii.

As for the several kinds already reckoned up, they owed their distinction to
their Country, their Arms, their way of Fighting, and such Circumstances; and
may be thus, in short, described:

The Retiarius was dressed in a short Coat, having a Tuscina or Trident in his
Left Hand, and a Net in his Right; with which he endeavored to entangle his
Adversary; and then with his Trident might easily dispatch him. On his Head he
wore only a Hat tied under his Chin with a broad Ribbon. The Secutor was armed
with a Buckler, and a Helmet, whereon was the Picture of a Fish, in allusion to
the Net. His Weapon was a Scymetar, or Falx supina. He was called Secutor,
because if the Retiarius, against whom he was always matched, should happen to
fail in casting his Net, his only safety lay in flight; so that in this case he
plied his Heels as fast he could about the place of Combat, 'till he had got
his Net in order for a second throw: In the mean time this Secutor, or
Follower, pursued him, and endeavored to prevent his design. Juvenal is very
happy in the Account he gives us of a young Nobleman that scandalously turned
Retiarius in the Reign of Nero: Nor is there any relation of this sort of
Combat so exact in any other Author.

-- Et illic
Dedecus urbis habes: nec myrmillonis in armis
Nec clypeo Gracchum pugnantem and falce supina,
(Damnat enim tales habitus, sed damnat and odit,)
Nec galea faciem abscondit; movet ecce tridentem,
Postquam librata pendentia retia dextra
Nequicquam effudit, nudum ad spectacula vultum
Erigit, and tota fugit agnoscendus arena.
Credamus tunicae, de faucibus aurea cum se
Porrigat, and longo jactetur spira galero.
Ergo ignominiam graviorem pertulit omni
Vulnere, cum Graccho jussus pugnare secutor.
Sat. 8. Go to the Lists where Feats of Arms are shown,
There you will find Gracchus (from Patrician) grown
A Fencer, and the scandal of the Town.
Nor will he the Myrmillo's Weapons bear,
The modest Helmet he disdains to wear.
As Retiarius he attacks his Foe:
First waves his Trident ready for the throw,
Next casts his Net, but neither levelled right,
He stares about, exposed to public sight,
Then places all his safety in his flight.
Room for the noble Gladiator! see
His Coat and Hatband show his Quality.
Thus when at last the brave Myrmillo knew
'Twas Gracchus was the Wretch he did pursue,
To conquer such a Coward grieved him more,
Than if he many glorious Wounds had bore.
[Mr. Stepney] Here the Poet seems to make the Myrmillo the same as the
Secutor; and thus all the Comments explain him. Yet Lipsius will have the
Myrmillones to be a distinct Order, who fought completely armed; and therefore
he believes them to be the Crupellarii of Tacitus Annal. 3.
; so called from some old Gallick Word, expressing that they could only creep
along by reason of their heavy Armor.

The Thracians made a great part of the Choicest Gladiators, that Nation having
the general repute of fierceness and cruelty beyond the rest of the World. The
particular Weapon they used was the Sica, or Fauchion; and their defense
consisted in a Parma, or little round Shield, proper to their Country.

The Original of the Samnite Gladiators is given us by Livy; The Campanians
(says he) bearing a great hatred to the Samnites, they armed a part of their
Gladiators after the fashion of that Country, and called them Samnites Lib. 9.
. What these Arms were he tells us in another place: They wore a Shield broad
at the top, to defend the Breast and Shoulders, and growing more narrow toward
the bottom, that it might be moved with the greater Convenience. They had a
sort of Belt coming over their Breast, a Greave on their Left Foot, and a
crested Helm on their Head^: Whence it is plain, that the Description of the
Amazonian Fencer already given from Juvenal, is expressly meant of assuming the
Armor and Duty of a Samnite Gladiator.

Balteus and manicae, and cristae, crurisque sinistri
Dimidium tegmen.
The Pinnae, which adorned the Samnite's Helmet denominated another sort of
Gladiators, Pinnirapi; because, being matched with the Samnites, they used to
catch at those Pinnae, and bear them off in Triumph, as marks of their Victory.
Dr. Holyday takes the Pinnirapus to be the same as the Retiarius Illustration
on Juvenal Sat. 3.
.

Lipsius fancies the Provocatores, mentioned by Cicero in his Oration for
Pestius, to have been a distinct Species, and that they were generally matched
with the Samnites. Though perhaps the Words of Cicero may be thought not to
imply so much.

The Hoplomachi, whom we meet with in Seneca Controvers. lib. 3.
and Suctonius In Calig. 35.
, may probably be the same either with the Samnites, or the Myrmillones: called
by the Greek Name (...), because they fought in Arms.

The Essedarii, mentioned by the same Authors Senec. Epist. 39. Sucton. Calig
35. Clau l. 21.
, and by Tully In Epistolis.
, were such as on some occasions engaged one another out of Chariots Esseda
: Though perhaps at other times, they fought on Foot like the rest. The Essedum
was a sort of Wagon, from which the Gauls and the Britains used to assail the
Romans in their Engagements with them.

The Andabatae, or (...), fought on Horseback, with a sort of Helmet that
covered all the Face and Eyes; and therefore Andabatarum more pugnare is to
combat Blindfold.

As to the manner of the Gladiators Combats, we cannot apprehend it fully,
unless we take in what was done before, and what after the Fight, as well as
the actual Engagement. When any Person designed to oblige the People with such
a Show, he set up Bills in the public Places, giving an account of the time,
the number of the Gladiators, and other Circumstances. This they called Munus
pronunciare, or proponere; and the Libelli, or Bills, were sometimes termed
Edicta. Many times, besides these Bills, they set up great Pictures, on which
were described the manner of the Fight, and the Effigies of some of the most
celebrated Gladiators, whom they intended to bring out. This Custom is
elegantly described by Horace. Book 2. Sat. 7.

Vel cum Pausiaca torpes insane tabella,
Qui peccas minus atque ego, cum Fulvi Rutubaeque
Aut Placideiani conrento poplite miror
Praelia, rubrica pic^a aut carbone, velut si
Revera ^^gnent, feriant, vitentque moventes
Arma viri?
Or when on some rare Piece you wondering stand,
And praise the Colors, and the Master's Hand,
Are you less vain than I, when in the Street
The painted Canvass holds my ravished Sight?
Where with bent Knees the skilful Fencers strive
To speed their Pass, as if they moved alive:
And with new Sleights, so well expressed, engage,
That I, surpised, stare up, and think them on the Stage.
At the appointed Day for the Show, in the first place the Gladiators were
brought out all together, and obliged to take a Circuit round the Arena, in a
very solemn and pompous manner. After this they proceeded paria componere, to
match them by Pairs; in which great care was used to make the Matches equal.
Before the Combatants fell to it in earnest, they tried their Skill against one
another with more harmless Weapons, as the Rudes, and the Spears without Heads,
the blunted Swords, the Files, and such like. This Cicero admirably observes;
Si in illo ipso gladiatorio vitae certamine, quo ferro decernitur, tamen ante
congressum multa fiunt, quae non ad vulnus, sed ad speciem valere videantur;
quanto magis hoc in Oratione expectandum est? If in the Mortal Combats of the
Gladiators, where the Victory is decided by Arms, before they actually engage,
there are several Flourishes given, more for a show of Art than a design of
hurting: How much more proper would this look in the Contention of an Orator?
This Flourishing before the Fight, they called in common Praelusio; or in
respect of the Swords, only Ventilatio. This Exercise was continued 'till the
Trumpets sounding gave them notice to enter on more desperate Encounters; and
then they were said vertere Arma.

-- Ita rem natam esse intelligo,
Necessum est vorsis armis depugnarier.
Plaut. The Terms of striking, were Petere and Repetere; of avoiding a Blow,
exire.

Corpora tela modo, atque oculis vigilantibus exit.

Virg. When any Person received a remarkable Wound, either his Adversary or the
People, used to cry out habet, or, hoc habet. This Virgil alludes to Aeneid. 12.

-- Teloque orantem multa, trabali
Desuper altus equo graviter ferit atque ita fatur:
Hoc habet: haec magnis melior data victima divis.
-- Him, as much he prayed,
With his huge Spear Messapus deeply struck,
From his high Courser's Back; and chasing, spoke,
He has it; and to this auspicious Blow
A nobler Victim the great Gods shall owe.
The Party who was worsted submitted his Arms, and acknowledged himself
conquered: Yet this would not save his Life unless the People pleased, and
therefore he made his Application to them for Pity. The two Signs of Favor,
and Dislike given by the People, were Premere pollicem, and Vertere pollicem,
Phrases which the Critics have quarreled much about, to little purpose. But
Monsieur Dacier seems to have been more happy in his Explanation than his
Predecessors. The former he takes to be a clenching of the Fingers of both
Hands between one another, and so holding the two Thumbs upright close
together. This was done to express their Admiration of the Art and Courage
showed by both Combatants, and a sign to the Conqueror to spare the Life of his
Antagonist, as having performed his Part remarkably well. Hence Horace, to
signify the extraordinary Commendation that a Man could give to one of his own
Temper and Inclinations, uses Fautor utroque tuum laudabit pollice ludum.

And Menander has (...), to press the Fingers; a Custom on the Grecian Stage,
designed for a mark of Approbation, answerable to our Clapping.

But the contrary Motion or bending back of the Thumbs, signified the
dissatisfaction of the Spectators, and authorized the Victor to kill the other
Combatant outright for a Coward.

-- Verso pollice vulgi
Quemlibet occidunt populariter.
Juv. Sat. 3. Where influenced by the Rabbles bloody Will,
With Thumbs bent back they popularly kill.
Besides this Privilege of the People, the Emperors seem to have had the
liberty of saving whom they thought fit, when they were present at the
Solemnity: And pehaps upon the bare coming in of the Emperor into the place of
Combat, the Gladiators, who in that instant had the worst of it, were delivered
from farther danger.

Caesaris adventu tuta Gladiator arena
Exit, and auxilium non leve vultus habet.
Martial. When Caesar comes the worsted Fencer lives,
And his bare Presence (like the Gods) reprieves.
After the Engagement there were several Marks of Favor conferred on the
Victors: as many times a present of Money, perhaps gathered up among the
Spectators; which Juvenal alludes to Sat. 7.

Accipe victori populus quod postulat aurum. -- take the Gains,
A conquering Fencer of the Crowd obtains.
But the most common Rewards were the Pileus and the Rudis: the former was
given only to such Gladiators as were Slaves for a Token of their obtaining
Freedom. The Rudis seems to have been bestowed both on Slaves and Freemen; but
with this difference, that it procured for the former no more than a discharge
from any farther Performance in public; upon which they commonly turned
Lanistae, spending their time in training up young Fencers. Ovid calls it tuta
Rudis.

Tutaque deposito poscitur ense rudis. But the Rudis when given to such Persons
as, being free, had hired themselves out for these Shows, restored them to a
full Enjoyment of their Liberty. Both these sorts of Rudiarii, being excused
from farther Service, had a Custom to hang up their Arms in the Temple of
Hercules, the Patron of their Profession; and were never called out again
without their consent. H^race has given us a full account of this Custom in his
first Epistle to Maecenas.

Prima dicte mihi summa dicende camoena,
Speclatum satis and denatum jam rade, quaeris,
Maecenas, iterum antiquo me includere ludo.
Non eadem est aetas, non men's. Vejanius armis
Herculis ad postem sixis, latet abditus agro;
Ne populum extrema toties exoret arena.
Maecenas, you whose Name and Titles graced
My early Labors, and shall crown my last:
Now when I Have long engaged with wished Success,
And, full of Fame, obtained my Writ of Ease:
While sprightly Fancy sinks with heavy Age,
Again you would bring me on the doubtful Stage.
Yet wise Veianius, hanging up his Arms
To Hercules, some little Cottage farms:
Least he be forced, if giddy Fortune turns,
To cringe to the vile Rabble that he scorns:
The learned Dacier, in his Observations on this Place acquaints us, That 'twas
a Custom for all Persons, when they laid down any Art or Employment, to
consecrate the proper Instruments of their Calling, to the particular Deity,
who was acknowledged for the President of that Profession. And therefore the
Gladiators, when thus discharged, hung up their Arms to Hercules; who had a
Chapel by every Amphitheatre; and where there were no Amphitheatres, in the
Circo's, and over every place assigned to such manly Performances, there stood
a Hercules with his Club:

We may take our leave of the Gladiators with the excellent passage of Cicero,
which may serve in some measure as an Apology for the Custom. Crudele
Gladiatorum spectaculum and inhumanum nonnullis videri solet: and haud scio an
non ita sit, ut nunc fit: cum vero sontes ferro depugnabant auribus fortasse
multae, oculis quidem nulla poterat esse fortior contra dolorem and mortem
disciplina Tuscul. Quaest. 2.
. The Shows of Gladiators may possibly to some Persons seem barbarous and
inhumane: And indeed, as the Case now stands, I cannot say that the Censure is
unjust: But in those times, when only guilty Persons composed the number of
Combatants, the Ear perhaps might receive many better Instructions; but it is
impossible that any thing which affects our Eyes, should fortify us with more
success against the assaults of Grief and Death.

CHAP. V. Of the LUDI SCENICI, or Stage Plays; amd first of the Satires, and
the Mimick Pieces, with the Rise and Advances of such Entertainments among the
Romans.
THE LVDISCENICI, or Stage Plays, have been commonly divided into four Species,
Satire, Mimick, Tragedy, and Comedy. The elder Scaliger will have Satire to
have proceeded from Tragedy, in the same manner as the Mimus from Comedy: But
we are assured this was in use at Rome long before the more perfect Drama's had
gained a place on the Stage. Nor has the same excellent Critic been more happy
in tracing the Original of this sort of Poetry as far as Greece: For we cannot
suppose it to bear any resemblance to the Chorus or Dance of Satyrs, which used
to appear in the Theaters at Athens, as an Appendage to some of their
Tragedies, thence called Satyrique. This kind of Greek Farce was taken up
purely in the Characters of Mirth and Wantonness, not admitting those
Sarcastical Reflections, which were the very Essence of the Roman Satire.
Therefore Casaubon and Dacier, without casting an Eye toward Greece, make no
question but the Name is to be derived from Satura, a Roman Word, signifying
full: The (u) being changed into an (i), after the same manner as optumus and
maxumus were afterward spelled optimus and Maximus. Satura being an Adjective,
must be supposed to relate to the Substantive Lanx, a Platter or Charger; such
as they filled yearly with all sorts of Fruit, and offered to the Gods at their
Festivals, as the Primitiae, or first Gatherings of the Season. Such an
Expression might be well applied to this kind of Poem, which was full of
various matter, and written on different Subjects. Nor are there wanting other
instances of the same way of speaking; as particularly per Saturam sententias
exquirere is used by Salust, to signify the way of voting in the Senate, when
neither the Members were told, nor the Voices counted, but all gave their
Suffrages promiscuously, and without observing any Order. And the Historiae
Saturae, or per Saturam of Festus, were nothing else but Miscellaneous Tracts
of History. The Original of the Roman Satire will lead us into the Knowledge of
the first Representations of Persons, and the rude Essays toward Dramatick
Poetry in the Rustic Ages of Rome; for which we are beholden to the accurate
research of Dacier, and the improvement of him by Mr. Dryden.

During the space of almost four hundred Years from the building of the City,
the Romans had never known any Entertainments of the Stage: Chance and Jollity
first found out those Verses, which they called Saturnian, because they
supposed such to have been in use under Saturn; and Fescennine from Fescennia,
a Town in Tuscany where they were first practiced. The Actors, upon occasions
of Merriment, with a gross and rustic kind of Raillery, reproached one another
ex tempore with their failings; and at the same time were nothing sparing of it
to the Audience. Somewhat of this Custom was afterward retained in their
Saturnalia, or Feast of Saturn, celebrated in December: At least all kind of
freedom of Speech was then allowed to Slaves, even against their Masters: And
we are not without some Imitation of it in our Christmas Gambols. We cannot have
a better Notion of this rude and unpolished kind of Farce, than by imagining a
Company of Clowns on a Holyday dancing lubberly, and upbraiding one another in
ex tempore Doggrel with their Defects and Vices; and the Stories that were told
of them in Bake-houses and Barbers Shops.

This rough-cast unhewn Poetry was instead of Stage Plays for the space of an
hundred and twenty Years together: But then, when they began to be somewhat
better bred, and entered, as one may say, into the first Rudiments of Civil
Conversation, they left these Hedge-notes for another sort of Poem, a little
more polished, which was also full of pleasant Raillery, but without any
mixture of Obscenity. This new Species of Poetry appeared under the Name of
Satire, because of its variety, and was adorned with Compositions of Music,
and with Dances.

When Livius Andronicus, about the Year of Rome 514, had introduced the new
Entertainments of Tragedy and Comedy, the People neglected and abandoned their
old Diversion of Satires: But not long after they took them up again, and then
they joined them to their Comedies, playing them at the end of the Drama; as
the French continue at this Day to act their Farces in the nature of a separate
Representation from their Tragedies.

A Year after Andronicus had opened the Roman Stage with his new Drama's,
Ennius was born; who when he was grown to Man's Estate, having seriously
considered the Genius of the People, and how eagerly they followed the first
Satires, thought it would be worth his while, to refine upon the Project, and
to write Satires not to be acted on the Theater, but read. The Event was
answerable to his Expectation, and his Design being improved by Pacuvius,
adorned with a more graceful turn by Lucilius, and advanced to its full height
by Horace, Juvenal, and Persius, grew into a distinct Species of Poetry, and
has ever met with kind Reception in the World. To the same Original we owe the
other sort of Satire, called Varronian (from the learned Varro who first
composed it. This was written freely, without any restraint to Verse or Prose,
but consisting of an intermixture of both: Of which nature are the Satyricon of
Petronius, Seneca's mock Deification of the Emperor Claudius, and Boethius his
Consolation.

As for the Mimus, from (...), to imitate, Scaliger defines it to be a Poem
imitating any sort of Actions, so as to make them appear ridiculous De re Poet.
lib. 1. cap. 10.
. The Original of it he refers to the Comedies; in which, when the Chorus went
off the Stage, they were succeeded by a sort of Actors who diverted the
Audience, for some time with Apish Postures and Antique Dances. They were not
masqu'd, but had their Faces smeared over with Soot, and dressed themselves in
Lamb-skins, which are called pescia in the old Verses of the Salii. They wore
Garlands of Ivy, and carried Baskets full of Herbs and Flowers to the Honor of
Bacchus, as had been observed in the first Institution of the Custom at Athens.
They acted always barefoot, and were thence called Planipedes.

These Diversions being received with universal Applause by the People, the
Actors took assurance to model them into a distinct Entertainment from the
other Plays, and present them by themselves. And perhaps it was not 'till now
that they undertook to write separate pieces of Poetry with the Name of Mimi,
representing an imperfect sort of Drama, not divided into Acts, and performed
only by a single Person. These were a very frequent Entertainment of the Roman
Stage long after Tragedy and Comedy had been advanced to their full height, and
seem to have always maintained a very great Esteem in the Town.

The two famous Mimicks, or Pantomini as they called them, were Laberius and
Publius, both Contemporary to Julius Caesar. Laberius was a Person of the
Equestrian Rank, and at threescore Years of Age, acted the Mimick Pieces of his
own composing, in the Games which Caesar presented to the People; for which he
received a Reward of five hundred Sestertia and a Gold Ring, and so recovered
the Honor which he had forfeited by performing on the Stage Sueton. in Jul.
cap. 39. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 7.
. Macrobius has given us part of a Prologue of this Author, wherein he seems to
complain of the Obligation which Caesar laid on him to appear in the Quality of
an Actor, so contrary to his own Inclinations, and to the former Course of his
Life: Some of them, which may serve for a taste of his Wit and Style, are as
follows:

Fortuna immoderata in bono aeque atqque in malo,
Si tibi erat libitum litterarum laudibus
Floris cacumen nostrae famae frangere,
Cur, cum vigebam membris praeviridantibus
Satisfacere populo etc tali cum poteram viro,
Non flexibilem me concurvasti ut carperes?
Nunc me quo dejicis? Quid ad scenam affero:
Decorum formae, an dignitatem corporis,
Animi virtutem, an vocis jucundae sonum?
Vt hedera serpens vires arboreas necat;
Ita me vetustas amplexu annorum enecat.
Sepulchri similis nihil nisi nomen retineo.
Horace indeed expressly taxes his Composures with want of Elegance Lib. 1.
Sat. 10.
: But Scaliger De re Poet. lib. 1. cap. 10.
thinks the Censure to be very unjust; and that the Verses cited by Macrobius
are much better than those of Horace, in which this Reflection is to be found.

There goes a sharp Repartee of the same Laberius upon Tully, when upon
receiving the Golden Ring of Caesar, he went to resume his Seat among the
Knights; they, out of a Principle of Honor, seemed very unwilling to receive
him; Cicero particularly told him, as he passed by, That indeed he would make
room for him with all his Heart, but that he was squeezed up already himself.
No wonder (says Laberius) that you who commonly make use of two Seats at once,
fancy your self squeezed up, when you sit like other people. In which he gave
a very severe wipe on the double dealing of the Orator Macr^b. Sa^urn. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
.

Publius was a Syrian by Birth; but received his Education at Rome in the
condition of a Slave. Having by several Specimens of Wit obtained his Freedom,
he set to write Mimick Pieces, and acted them with wonderful Applause about the
Towns in Italy. At last, being brought to Romo, to bear a part in Caesar's
Plays, he challenged all the Dramatick Writers and Actors, and won the Prize
from every Man of them one by one, even from Laberius himself Idem. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
. A Collection of Sentences taken out of his Works are still extant. Joseph
Scaliger gives them a very high Encomium, and thought it worth his while to
turn them into Greek.

CHAP. VI. Of the Roman Tragedy and Comedy.
THE Roman Tragedy and Comedy were wholly borrowed from the Graecians, and
therefore do not so properly fall under the present Design: Yet in order to a
right understanding of these Pieces, there is scope enough for a very useful
Enquiry without roaming so far as Athens, unless upon a necessary account. The
Parts of a Play agreed on by ancient and modern Writers are these four: First,
the Protasis, or Entrance, which gives a light only to the Characters of the
Persons, and proceeds very little to any part of the Action. Secondly, the
Epitasis or working up of the Plot, where the Play grows warmer; the Design or
Action of it is drawing on, and you see something promising that it will come
to pass. Thirdly, the Catastasis, or, in a Roman Word, the Status, the height
and full growth of the Play: This may properly be called the Counter-turn,
which destroys that Expectation, imbroils the Action in new Difficulties, and
leaves us far distant from that Hope in which it found us. Lastly, the
Catastrophe, or (...), the discovery or unravelling of the Plot: Here we see
all things settling again on their first Foundations; and the Obstacles which
hindered the Design or Action of the Play once removed, it ends with that
resemblance of Truth and Nature, that the Audience are satisfied with the
Conduct of it Mr. Dryden's Dramat. Essay.
. It Is a question* whether the first Roman Drama's were divided into Acts; or
at least it seems probable, that these were not admitted into Comedy 'till
after it had lost its Chorus, and so stood in need of some more necessary
Divisions than could be made by the Music only. Yet the five Acts were so
established in the time of Horace, that he gives it for a Rule,

Neve minor, neu sit quinto productior actu
Fabula.
The distinction of the Scenes seems to have been an Invention of the
Grammarians, and is not to be found in the old Copies of Plautus and Terence;
and therefore these are wholly left out in the late excellent Translations.

The Drama's presented at Rome, were divided in general into Palliatae and
Togatae, Grecian, and properly Roman: In the former, the Plot being laid in
Greece, the Actors were habited according to the fashion of that Country; in
the other the Persons were supposed to be Romans. But then the Comedies
properly Roman were of several sorts; Praetextatae, when the Actors were
supposed to be Persons of Quality, such as had the liberty of wearing the
Praetexta, or Purple Gown: Tabernarae, when the Tabernae, low ordinary
Buildings were expressed in the Scenes, the Persons being of the lower Rank.
Suetonius De claris Grammat. 21.
informs us, That C. Melissus, in the time of Augustus, introduced a new sort
of Togatae, which he called Trabeate. Monsieur Daeier is of Opinion, that they
were wholly taken up in matters relating to the Camp, and that the Persons
represented were some of the chief Officers Not. on Horace's Art. Poet.
: For the Trabea was the proper Habit of the Consul when he set forward on any
warlike design. There was a Species of Comedy different from both these, and
more inclining to Farce, which they called Atellanae, from Atella, a Town of
the Oscians in Campania, where it was first invented. The whole design of it
was Mirth and jesting (though sometimes with a mixture of Debauchery and
lascivious Postures) and therefore they were not reckoned among the Histriones,
or common Players; but kept the benefit of their Tribe, and might be listed for
Soldiers, a Privilege allowed only to Freemen. Sometimes perhaps the Atellanae
were presented between the Acts of other Comedies, by way of Exodium, or
Interlude: As we meet with Exodium Atellanicum in Suetonius Tiber. 45.
.

Though all the Rules by which the Drama is practiced at this Day, either such as
relate to the Justness and Symmetry of the Plot, or the Episodical Ornaments;
such as Descriptions, Narrations, and other Beauties not essential to the Play,
were delivered to us by the Ancients, and the Judgment which we make of all
P^rformances in this kind, are guided by their Examples and D^^^tions; yet
there are several things belonging to the old Dramat^^ Pieces which we cannot
at all understand by the Modern, since, not being essential to these Works,
they have been long disused. Of this sort we may reckon up, as particularly
worth our Observation, the Buskin and the Sock, the Masks, (...) C^orus, and
the Flutes.

The Cothurnus, and the Soccus, were such eminent marks of ^^inction between
the old Tragedy and Comedy, that they were brought, not only to signify those
distinct Species of Dramatick Poetry, but to express the sublime and the humble
Style in any other Compositions: As Martial calls Virgil Cothurnatus, though he
never meddled with Tragedy.

Grande Cothurnati pone Maronis opus. This Cothurnus is thought to have been a
square high sort of Boot, which made the Actors appear above the ordinary size
of Mortals, such as they supposed the old Heroes to have generany been, and at
the same time giving them leave to move but slowly, were well accommodated to
the State and Gravity which Subjects of that nature required. Yet it is plain
they were not in use only on the Stage; for Virgil brings in the Goddess Venus
in the Habit of a Tyrian Maid, telling Aeneas,

Virginibus Tyriis mos est gestare pharetras,
Purpureoque alte suras vincire cothurno.
From which it appears, that the Hunters sometimes wore Buskins to seenre their
Legs: But then we must suppose them to be much lighter and better contrived
than the other, for fear they should prove a hindrance to the Swiftness and
Agility required in that Sport. The Women in some Parts of Italy, still wear a
sort of Shoes, or rather Stilts, somewhat like these Buskins, which they call
Cioppini: Lassel's informs us, that he had seen them at Venice a full half-yard
high.

The Socci were a slight kind of covering for the Feet, whence the Fashion and
the Name of our Socks are derived. The Comaedians wore these to represent the
vility of the Persons they represented; as debauched young Sparks, old crazy
Misers, Pimps, Parasites, Strumpets, and the rest of that Gang. For the Sock
being proper to the Women, as it was very light and thin, was always counted
scandalous when worn by Men. Thus Seneca De Benesic. lib. 2. cap. 12.
exclaims against Caligula for sitting to judge upon Life and Death in a rich
pair of Socks adorned with Gold and Silver.

Another Reason why they were taken up by the Actors of Comedy might be,
because they were the fittest that can be imagined for dancing. Thus Catullus
invokes Hymen the Patron of Weddings.

Huc veni niveo gerens
Luteum pede soccum,
Exitus hilari die
Voce Carmina tinnula
Pelle humum pedibus.
The Persona, or Masque Agellius derives (according to an old Author) from
Persono, to sound thoroughly; because these Vizards being put over the Face, and
left open at the Mouth, rendered the Voice much clearer and fuller, by
contracting it into a lesser compass. But Scaliger will not allow of this
Conjecture. However, the reason of it (which is all that concerns us at
present) appears from all the old Figures of the Masks, in which we find
always a very large wide hole designed for the Mouth. Madam Dacier, who met
with the Draughts of the Comic Vizards in a very old Manuscript Terence,
informs us, that they were not like ours which cover only the Face: But that
they came over the whole Head, and had always a sort of Peruque of Hair
fastened on them, proper to the Person whom they were to represent.

The Original of the Masque is referred by Horace to Aeschylus; whereas before
the Actors had not other disguise, but to smear over their Faces with odd
Colors; and yet this was well enough when their Stage was no better than a
Cart.

Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camoenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse Poemata Thespis,
Quae canerent agerentque peruncti faecibus ora.
Post hunc personae pallaeq: repertor honestae
Aeschylus and modicis implevit pulpita tignis;
Et docuit magnumque loqui, nitique Cothurno.
When Thespis first exposed the Tragic Muse,
Rude were the Actors, and a Cart the Scene;
Where ghastly Faces, stained with Lees of Wine,
Frighted the Children, and amused the Crowd.
This Aeschylus (with Indignation) saw,
And built a Stage, found out a decent Dress;
Brought Vizards in (a civiler disguise)
And taught Men how to speak and how to act.
The Chorus Hedelin defines to be, a Company of Actors, representing the
Assembly, or Body of those Persons, who either were present, or probably might
be so, upon that Place or Scent, where the business was supposed to be
transacted. This is exactly observed in the four Grecian Dramatick Poets,
Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and Aristophanes: But the only Latin Tragedies
which remain, those under the Name of Seneca, as they are faulty in many
Respects, so particularly are they in the Chorus's: For sometimes they hear all
that is said upon the Stage, see all that is done, and speak very properly to
all: At other times one would think they were blind, deaf, or dumb. In many of
these Drama's one can hardly tell whom they represent, how they were dressed,
what reason brings them on the Stage, or why they are of one Sex more than of
another. Indeed the Verses are fine, full of Thought, and over-loaded with
Conceit; but may in most places be very well spared, without spoiling any thing
either in the Sense or the Representation of the Poem. Besides, the Thebais has
no Chorus at all; which may give us occasion to doubt of what Scaliger affirms
so positively, That Tragedy was never without Chorus's. For it seems probable
enough, that in the time of the debauched and loose Emperors, when Mimicks and
Bussoons came in for Interludes to Tragedy as well as Comedy, the Chorus ceased
by degrees to be a part of the Dramatick Poem, and dwindled into a Troop of
Musicians and Dancers, who marked the Intervals of the Acts.

The Office of the Chorus is thus excellently delivered by Horace.

Actoris parts Chorus officiumque virile
Defendat: neu quid medios intercinat actus
Quod non proposito conducat and haereat apt.
Ille bonis faveatque and concilietur amicis,
Et regat iratos, and amet peccare timentes;
Ille dapes laudet mensae brevis; ille s^lubrem
Justitiam, legesq, and apertis otia portis,
Ille tegat commissa; deosque precetur and oret
Vt redeat miseris, abeat fortuna superbis.
A Chorus should supply what Action wants,
And has a generous and a manly part;
Bridles wild Rage, loves rigid Honesty,
And strict observance of impartial Laws;
Sobriety, Security, and Peace:
And begs the Gods to turn blind Fortune's Wheel;
To raise the wretched, and pull down the Proud.
But nothing must be sung between the Acts
But what some way conduces to the Plot.
This Account is chiefly to be understood of the Chorus of Tragedies; yet the
old Comedies, we are assured, had their Chorus's too, as yet appears in
Aristophanes; where, besides those composed of the ordinary sort of Persons, we
meet with one of Clouds, another of Frogs, and a third of Wasps; but all very
conformable to the nature of the Subject, and extremely Comical.

'Twould be foreign to our present purpose to trace the Original of the Chorus,
and to show how it was regulated by Thespis, (generally honored with the Title
of the first Tragedian;) whereas before 'twas nothing else but a Company of
Musicians singing and dancing in honor of Bacchus. It may be more proper to
observe, how it came, after some time, to be left out in Comedy, as it is in
that of the Romans. Horace's Reason is, that the Malignity and Satirical Humor
of the Poets was the cause of it; for they made the Chorus's abuse People so
severely, and with so bare a Face, that the Magistrates at last forbad them to
use any at all.

-- Chorusque
Turpiter obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.
But perhaps, if the Rules of probability had not likewise seconded this
Prohibition, the Poets would have preserved their Chorus still, bating the
Satirical Edge of it. Therefore a farther Reason may be offered for this
Alteration. Comedy took its Model and Constitution from Tragedy; and when the
downright abusing of living Persons was prohibited, they invented new Subjects
which they governed by the Rules of Tragedy; but as they were necessitated to
paint the Actions of the Vulgar, and consequently confined to mean Events, they
generally chose the place of their Scene in some Street before the Houses of
those whom they supposed concerned in the Plot: Now it was not very likely that
there should be such a Company in those places, managing an Intrigue of
inconsiderable Persons from Morning 'till Night. Thus Comedy of it self let
fall the Chorus, which it could not preserve with any probability.

The Tibi^e, or Flutes, are as little understood as any particular Subject of
Antiquity; and yet without the knowledge of them we can make nothing of the
Titles prefixed to Terences Comedies. Horace gives us no farther light into
this matter, than by observing the difference between the small rural Pipe, and
the larger and louder Flute afterward brought into fashion: However his
Account is not to be passed by:

Tibia non ut nunc orichalco vincta, tubaeque
Aemula; sed tenuis simplexque, foramine pauco,
Adspirare and adesse choris erat utilis, atque
Nondum spissa nimis complere sedilia statu,
Quo sane populus numerabilis, ut pote parvus,
Et frugi castusque verecundusque coibat.
Post quam coepit agros extendere victor, and urbem
Latior amplecti murus, vinoque diurno
Placari Genius festis impune diebus;
Accessit numerisque modisque licentia major.
Indoctus quid enim saperet, liberque laborum
Rusticus Vrbano confusus, turpis honesto?
Sic priscae motumque and luxuriam additit arti
Tibicen, traxitque vagus per pulpita vestem.
First the shrill sound of a small rural Pipe,
(Not loud like Trumpets, nor adorned as now)
Was Entertainment for the Infant Stage,
And pleased the thin and bashful Audience,
Of our well-meaning frugal Ancestors.
But when our Walls and Limits were enlarged,
And Men (grown wanton by Prosperity)
Studied new Arts of Luxury and Ease,
The Verse, the Music, and the Scenes improved;
For how should Ignorance be Judge of Wit,
Or Men of Sense applaud the Jests of Fools?
Then came rich Clothes, and graceful Action in,
And Instruments were taught more moving Notes.
This Relation, though very excellent, cannot salve the main difficulty, and that
is, to give the proper distinction of the Flutes, according to the several
Names under which we find them, as the Pares, and Impares, the Dextrae and
Sinistrae, the Lydiae, the Sarrana, and the Phrygiae. Most of the eminent
Critics have made some Essays toward the clearing of this Subject,
particularly Scaliger, Aldus Manutius, Salmasius, and Tanaguillus Faber; from
whose Collections, and her own admirable Judgment, Madam Dacier has lately
given us a very rational Account of the Matter. The Performers of the Music
(says she) played always on two Flutes, the whole time of the Comedy. That
which they stopped with their Right Hand was on that Account called
Right-handed; and that which they stopped with their Left, Left Handed. The
first had but a few Holes, and sounded a deep Base; the other had a greater
number of Holes, and gave a shriller and sharper Note. When the Musicians
played on two Flutes of a different Sound, they used to say the Piece was
played tibiis imparibus, with unequal Flutes, or Tibiis dextris and sinistris,
with Right and Left Handed Flutes. When they played on two Flutes of the same
sound, they used to say, the Music was performed tibiis paribus dextris, on
equal Right-handed Flutes, if they were of the deeper sort; or else tibiis
paribus sinistris, on equal Left Handed Flutes, if they were those of the
shriller Note.

Two equal Right-handed Flutes they called Lydian; two equal Left Handed ones
Sarran^e, or Tyrian; two unequal Flutes Phrygian, as Imitations of the Music
of those Countries. The last sort Virgil expressly attributes to the Phrygians.
Aeneid. 9.

O vere Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges! ite per alta.
Dindyma, ubi assuetis biforem dat tibia cantum.
Where by biforem cantum the Commentators understand an unequal sound, such as
was made by two different Pipes, one flat, and the other sharp.

The Title of Terence's Andria cannot be made out according to this
Explanation, unless we suppose (as there is very good reason) that the Music
sometimes changed in the acting of a Play; and at the proper Intervals, two
Right-handed, and two Left Handed Flutes might be used.

Our late ingenious Translators of Terence, are of a different opinion from the
French Lady, when they render tibiis paribis dextris and sinistris, two equal
Flutes, the one Right-handed, and the other Left Handed: Whereas the Music
should seem rather to have been performed all along on two equal Flutes,
sometimes on two Right-handed, and sometimes on two Left Handed.

Old Donatus would have us believe, that the Right-handed, or Lydian Flutes
denoted the more serious Matter and Language of the Comedy: That the
Left Handed, or Sarranae were proper to express the lightness of a more jocose
Style: And that when a Right-handed Flute was joined with a Left Handed, it
gave us to understand the mixture of Gravity and Mirth in the same Play. But
since the Title of the Heautontimoroumenos, or self Self-tormentor, informs us,
that the Music was performed, the first time of Acting on unequal Flutes, and
the second time on Right-handed Flutes, we cannot agree with the old Scholiast,
without supposing the same Play, at one time to be partly serious and partly
merry, and at another time to be wholly of the graver sort; which would be
ridiculous to imagine. Therefore the ingenious Lady happily advances a very
fair Opinion, That the Music was not guided by the Subject of the Play, but by
the occasion on which it was presented. Thus in the Pieces which were acted at
Funeral Solemnities, the Music was performed on two Right-handed Flutes, as
the most grave and Melancholy: In those acted on any joyful Account, the Music
consisted of two Left Handed Flutes, as the briskest and most airy. But in the
great Festivals of the Gods, which participated of an equal share of Mirth and
Religion, the Music in the Comedies was performed with unequal Flutes, the one
Right-handed, and the other Left Handed; or else by turns, sometimes on two
Right-handed Flutes, and sometimes on two Left Handed, as may be judged of
Terence's fair Indrian.

If any thing farther deserves our notice in relation to the Roman Drama's, it
is the remarkable difference between their Actors and those of Greece. For at
Athens the Actors were generally Persons of good Birth and Education, for the
most part Orators or ^oets of the first Rank. Sometimes we find Kings
themselves ^erforming on the Theaters; and Cornelius Nepos assures us, that ^o
appear on the public Stage was not in the least injurious to a^y Man's
Character or Honor In Poaefat. vit.
.

But in Rome we meet with a quite contrary Practice: For ^he Histriones (so
called from Hister signifying a Player in the ^anguage of the Tuscans, from
whom they were first brought ^o Rome to appease the Gods in time of a Plague)
were the most scandalous Company imaginable; none of that Profession being
allowed the privilege to belong to any Tribe, or ranked any higher than the
Slaves. However, if any of them happened at the same time to be excellent
Artists, and Men of good Morals, they seldom failed of the Esteem and Respect
of the chiefest Persons in the Commonwealth. This is evident from the Account
we have in History of the admirable Roscius, of whom Tully, his familiar
Friend, has left this lasting Commendation: Cum artifex cjusmodi sit, ut solus
dignus videatur esse qui in Scena spectetur; tum vir ejusmodi est, ut solus
dignus videatur qui co non accedat Pro Quinct.
. So complete an Artist, that he seemed the only Person who deserved to tread
the Stage; and yet at the same time so excellent a Man in all other Respects,
that he seemed the only Person, who of all Men should not take up that
Profession.

CHAP. VII. Of the Sacred, Votive, and Funeral Games.
THE Sacred Games, being instituted on several occasion to the Honor of
several Deities, are divided into many Species, all which very frequently occur
in Authors, and may be thus in short described.

The LVDI MEGALENSES were instituted to the Honor of the great Goddess, or the
Mother of the Gods, when her Statue was brought with so much Pomp from Pessinum
to Rome. They consisted only of Scenical Sports, and were a solemn time of
Invitation to Entertainments among Friends. In the solemn Procession the Women
danced before the Image of the Goddess; and the Magistrates appeared in all
their Robes; whence came the Phrase of Purpura Megalensis. They lasted six
Days, from the Day before the Nones of April to the Ides. At first they seem to
have been called the Megalensia, from (...), great, and afterward to have lost
the n; since we find them more frequently under the Name of Megalesia. It is
particularly remarkable in these Games, that no Servant wa allowed to bear a
part in the Celebration.

The LVDI CEREALES were designed to the Honor of Ceres, and borrowed from
Eleusine in Greece. In these Games the Matrons represented the Grief of Ceres,
after she had lost her Daughter Proserpine, and her Travails to find her again.
They were held from the Day before the Ides of April, eight Days together in
the Circus, where, besides the Combats of Horsemen and other Diversions, was
led up the Pompa Circensis, or Cereslis, consisting of a solemn Procession of
the Persons that were to engage in the Exercises, accompanied with the
Magistrates and Ladies of Quality, the Statues of the Gods and of famous Men,
being carried along in State on Wagons, which they called Thensae.

LVDI FLORALES, sacred to Flora, and celebrated (upon advice of the Sibylline
Oracles) every Spring to beg a Blessing on the Grass, Trees, and Flowers. Some
are of opinion, that they owe their Original to a famous Whore, who having
gained a great Estate by her Trade, left the Commonwealth her Heir, with this
Condition, that every Year they should celebrate her Birthday with public
Sports: The Magistrates, to avoid such a public Scandal, and at the same time
to keep their Promise, held the Games on the Day appointed, but pretended that
it was done in Honor of a new Goddess, the Patroness of Flowers. Whether this
Conjecture be true or no, we are certain that the main part of the Solemnity
was managed by a Company of lewd Strumpets, who ran up and down naked,
sometimes dancing, sometimes fighting, or acting the Mimicks. However it came
to pass, the wisest and gravest Romans were not for discontinuing this Custom,
though the most indecent imaginable: For Porcius Cato when he was present at
these Games, and saw the People ashamed to let the Maids strip while he was
there, immediately went out of the Theater, to let the Ceremony have its Course
Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 5.


LVDI MARTIALES, instituted to the Honor of Mars, and held twice in the Year,
on the fourth of the Ides of May, and again on the Kalends of August, the Day
on which his Temple was consecrated. They had no particular Ceremonies that we
can meet with, besides the ordinary Sports in the Circo, and Amphitheatre.

LVDI APOLLINARES, celebrated to the Honor of Apollo. They owe their Original
to an old Prophetical sort of a Poem casually found; in which the Romans were
advised, that if they desired to drive out the Troops of their Enemies which
infested their Borders, they should institute yearly Games to Apollo, and at
the time of their Celebration make a Collection out of the public and private
Stocks, for a Present to the God; appointing ten Men to take care they were
held with the same Ceremonies as in Greece Live. lib. 25.
. Macrobius relates, that the first time these Games were kept, an Alarm being
given by the Enemy, the People immediately marched out against them, and during
the Fight, saw a Cloud of Arrows discharged from the Sky on the adverse Troops,
so as to put them to a very disorderly Flight, and secure the Victory to the
Romans Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 17.
. The People sat to see the Circensian Plays, all crowned with Laurel, the
Gates were set open, and the Day kept Sacred with all manner of Ceremonies.
These Games at first were not fixed, but kept every. Year upon what Day the
Praetor thought fit; 'till about the Year* of the City 545. a Law passed to
seule them for ever on a constant Day, which was near the Nones of July: This
Alteration was occasioned by a grievous Plague then raging in Rome, which they
thought might in some measure be allayed by that Act of Religion Live. lib. 28.


LVDI CAPITOLINI, instituted to the Honor of Jupiter Capitolinus, upon account
of his preserving his Temple from the Gauls. A more famous sort of Capitoline
Games were brought up by Domitian, to be held every five Years with the Name of
Agones Capitolini, in imitation of the Graecians. In these the Professors of
all sorts had a public Contention, and the Victors were crowned, and presented
with Collars and other Marks of Honor.

LVDI ROMANI, the most ancient Games, instituted at the first building of the
Circus by Tarquinius Priscus. Hence, in alstrict Sense, Ludi Circenses is often
used to signify the same Solemnity. They were designed to the Honor of the
three great Deities, Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva. It Is worth observing, that
though they were usually called Circenses, yet in Livy we meet with the Ludi
Romani Scenici Live. lib. 3.
, intimating that they were celebrated with new Sports. The old Fasti make them
to be kept nine Days together, from the Day before the Nones to the Day before
the Ides of September: In which too we find another sort of Ludi Romani,
celebrated five Days together, within two Days after these. P. Manutius thinks
the last to have been instituted very late, not 'till after the Prosecution of
Verres by Cicero P. Manut. in Verrin.
.

LVDI CONSVALES, instituted by Romulus, with design to surprise the Sabine
Virgins; the Account of which is thus given us by Plutarch: He gave out as if
he had found an Altar of a certain God hid under Ground; the God they called
Consus, the God of Counsel: This is properly Neptune, the Inventer of
Horse-riding; for the Altar is kept covered in the great Circo, only at
Horse-Races, then it appears to public view: And some say it was not without
reason that this God had his Altar hid under Ground, because all Counsels ought
to be secre^ and concealed. Upon discovery of this Altar, Romulus, by
Proclamation, appointed a Day for a splendid Sacrifice, and for public Games
and Shows to entertain all sorts of People, and many flocked thither; he
himself sat uppermost among his Nobles, clad in Purple. Now the sign of their
falling on was to be, whenever he arose and gathered up his Robe, and threw it
over his Body; his Men stood all ready armed, with their Eyes intent upon him;
and when the Sign was given, drawing their Swords, and falling on with a great
Shout, bore away the Daughters of the Sabines, they themselves flying, without
any let or hindrance. These Games were celebrated yearly on the twelfth of the
Kalends of September, consisting for the most part of Horse-Races, and
Encounters in the Circ^^s.

LVDI COMPITALITII, so called from the Compita, or Cross-Lanes, where they were
instituted and celebrated by the rude Multitude that was got together, before
the building of Rome. They seem to have been laid down for many Years, 'till
Servius Tullius revived them. They were held during the Compitalia, or Feast of
the Lares, who presided as well over Streets as Houses. Suetonius tells us,
that Augustus ordered the Lares to be crowned twice a Year at the Compitalitian
Game, with Spring-Flowers and Summer-Flowers Aug. cap. 31. cap: 58*
. This crowning the Houshold-Gods, and offering Sacrifices up and down in the
Streets, made the greatest part of the Solemnity of the Feast.

LVDI AVGVSTALES and PALATINI, both instituted to the Honor of Augustus after
he had been enrolled in the number of the Gods; the former by the common
consent of the People, and the other by his Wife Livia, which were always
celebrated in the Palace Die. lib. 56. Suct. Colig. 56.
. They were both continued by the succeeding Emperors.

LVDI SAECVLARES, the most remarkable Games that we meet with in the Roman
Story. The common Opinion makes them to have had a very odd Original; of which
we have a tedious Relation in Valerius Maximus Lib. 2. cap. 4.
of the Ancients, and Augelus Politianus M^s^^llan
of the Moderns. Monsieur Dacier in his excellent Remarks on the Secular Poem
of Horace, passes by this old Conceit as trivial and fabulous, and assures us,
that we need go no farther for the rise of the Custom, than to the Sibylline
Oracles, for which the Romans had so great an Esteem and Veneration.

In these sacred Writings there was one famous Prophecy to this effect; That if
the Romans at the beginning of every Age should hold solemn Games in the Campus
Martius to the Honor of Pluto, Proserpine, Juno, Apollo, Diana, Ceres, and the
Parcae, or three fatal Sisters, their City should ever flourish, and all
Nations be subjected to their Dominion. They were very ready to obey the
Oracle, and in all the Ceremonies used on that occasion conformed themselves to
its Directions. The whole manner of the Solemnity was as follows: In the first
place the Heralds received Orders to make an invitation of the whole World, to
come to a Feast which they had never seen already, and should never see again.
Some few Days before the beginning of the Games, the Quindecemviri, taking
their Seats in the Capitol and in the Palatine Temple, distributed among the
People Parcels of purifying Stuff, as Flambeaus, Brimstone, and Sulphur. From
hence the People passed on to Diana's Temple on the Aventine Mountain, carrying
Wheat, Barley, and Beans as an Offering; and after this they spent whole Nights
in Devotion to the Destinies. At length, when the time of the Games was
actually come, which continued three Days and three Nights, the People
assembled in the Campus Martius, and sacrificed to Jupiter, Juno, Apollo,
Latona, Diana, the Parcae, Ceres, Pluto, and Proserpine. On the first Night of
the Feast, the Emperor, accompanied by the Quindecemviri, commanded three
Altars to be raised on the Bank of Tyber, which they sprinkled with the Blood
of three Lambs, and then proceeded to burn the Offerings and the Victims. After
this they marked out a Space which served for a Theater, being illuminated by
an innumerable multitude of Flambeaus and Fires; here they sung some certain
Hymns composed on this occasion, and celebrated all kinds of Sports. On the Day
after, when they had been at the Capitol to offer the Victims, they returned to
the Campus Martius, and held Sports to the Honor of Apollo and Diana. These
lasted 'till the next Day, when the noble Matrons, at the hour appointed by the
Oracle, went to the Capitol to sing Hymns to Jupiter. On the third Day which
concluded the Feast, twenty seven young Boys, and as many Girls sung in the
Temple of Palatine Apollo Hymns and Verses in Greek and Latin, to recommend the
City to the Protection of those Deities, whom they designed particularly to
honor by their Sacrifices.

The famous Secular Poem of Horace was composed for this last Day, in the
Secular Games held by Augustus. Dacier has given his Judgment on this Poem, as
the Masterpiece of Horace, and believes, that all Antiquity cannot furnish us
with any thing more happily complete.

There has been much Controversy, whether these Games were celebrated every
hundred or every hundred and ten Years. For the former Opinion Censorinus De
Die Natali, cap. 17.
alleges the Testimony of Valerius Antias, Varro, and Livy; and this was
certainly the space of time which the Romans called, Saeculum, or an Age. For
the latter he produces the Authority of the Registers, or Commentaries of the
Quindecemviri, and the Edicts of Augustus; besides the plain Evidence of Horace
in his Secular Poem.

Certus undenos decies per annos, etc. This last Space is expressly enjoined by
the Sibylline Oracle it self; the Verses of which relating to this purpose are
transcribed by Zozimus in the second Book of his History.

(...)
(...), etc.
Yet according to the ancient Accounts we have of their Celebration in the
several Ages, neither of these Periods are much regarded.

The first were held A. V. C. 245. or 298. The second A. 305. or 408. The third
A. 518. The fourth either A. 605. or 608. or 628. The fifth by Augustus, A.
736. The sixth by Claudius, A. 800. The seventh by Domitian, A. 841. The eighth
by Severus, A. 957. The ninth by Philip, A. 1000.
This Disorder without question was owing to the Ambition of the Emperors, who
were extremely desirous to have the Honor of celebrating these Games in their
Reign; and therefore, upon the slightest Pretense many times, made them return
before their ordinary Course. Thus Claudius pretended, that Augustus had held
the Games before their due time, that he might have the least excuse to keep
them within sixty four Years afterward. On which account Suetonius tells us,
that the People scoffed his Cryers, when they went about proclaiming Games that
no Body had ever seen, nor would see again; whereas there were not only many
Persons alive who remembered the Games of Augustus, but several Players who had
acted in those Games, were now again brought on the Stage by Claudius Sueton.
Claud. 21.
.

We may conclude our Enquiry into this celebrated Subject with two excellent
Remarks of the French Critic. The first is, that in the number Three, so much
regarded in these Games, they had probably an Allusion to the Triplicity of
Phoebus, of Diana, and of the Destinies.

The other Observation which he obliges us with, is, that they thought the
Girls which had the honor to bear a part in singing the Secular Poem should be
the soonest married. This Superstition they borrowed from the Theology of the
Graecians, who imagined that the Children who did not sing and dance at the
coming of Apollo, should never be married, and should certainly die young. To
this purpose Callimachus in his Hymn to Apollo.

(...)
(...),
(...).
And Horace encouraging the Chorus of Girls to do their best in singing the
Secular Poem, tells them how proud they would be of it, when they were well
married.

Nupta jam dices: Ego diis amicum
Seculo festas referente luces,
Reddidi carmen, docilis modorum
Vatis Horati,
All those Games, of what sort soever, had the common Name of Votivi, which
were the effect of any Vow made by the Magistrates or Generals, when they set
forward on any Expedition, to be performed in case they returned successful.
These were sometimes occasioned by advice of the Sibylline Oracles, or of the
South-sayers; and many times proceeded purely from a Principle of Devotion and
Piety in the Generals. Such particularly were the Ludi Magni, often mentioned
in Historians, especially by Livy. Thus he informs us, That in the Year of the
City 536. Fabius Maximus the Dictator, to appease the Anger of the Gods, and to
obtain Success against the Carthaginian Power, upon the Direction of the
Sibylline Oracles, vowed the Great Games to Jupiter, with a prodigious Sum to
be expended at them; besides three hundred Oxen to be sacrificed to Jupiter,
and several others to the rest of the Deities Live. lib 22.
. M. Acilius the Consul did the same in the War against Antiochus Idem. lib. 36.
. And we have some Examples of these Games being made Quinquennial, or to
return every five Years Live. lib. 27. and lib. 30.
. They were celebrated with Circensian Sports four Days together Ibid.
.

To this Head we may refer the

Ludi Victoriae, mentioned by Vell. Paterculus Lib. 2. cap. 27.
and Asconius In Verr^^. 2.
. They were instituted by Sylla upon his concluding the Civil War. It seems
probable, that there were many other Games with the same Title, celebrated on
account of some remarkable Success, by several of the Emperors.

The Ludi quinquennales, instituted by Augustus Caesar after his Victory
against Anthony; which resolving to deliver famous to succeeding Ages, he built
the City Nicopolis, near Actium, the place of Battle, on purpose to hold these
Games; whence they are often called Ludi Actiaci. They consisted of Shows of
Gladiators, Wrestlers, and other Exercises, and were kept as well at Rome as at
Nicopolis. The proper Curators of them were the four Colleges of Priests, the
Pontifices, the Augurs, the Septemviri, and the Quindecemviri.

Virgil in allusion to this Custom, when he brings his Hero to the Promontory
of Actium, makes him hold solemn Games with the Lustrations and Sacrifices used
on that occasion by the Romans.

Lustramurque Jovi, votisque incendimus aras;
Actiaque Iliacis celebramus littora Ludis.
Aen. 3. Nero, after the manner of the Graecians, instituted Quinquennial
Games, at which the most celebrated Masters of Music, Horseracing, Wrestling,
etc. disputed for the Prize Sueton. Ner. 12.
.

The same Exercises were performed in the Quinquennial Games of Domitian,
dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus; together with the Contentions of Orators and
Poets Idem. Domit. 4.
; at which the famous Statius had once the ill Fortune to lose the Prize; as he
complains several times in his Miscellany Poems.

Ludi Decennales, or Games to return every tenth Year, were instituted by
Augustus with this political Design, to secure the whole Command to himself,
without incurring the Envy or Jealousy of the People. For every tenth Year
proclaiming solemn Sports, and so gathering together a numerous Company of
Spectators, he there made a solemn proffer of resigning his Imperial Office to
the People; though he immediately resumed it, as if continued to him by the
common consent of the Nation Dio. lib. 53.
. Hence a Custom was derived for the succeeding Emperors every tenth Year of
their Reign, to keep a magnificent Feast, with the Celebration of all sorts of
public Sports and Exercises Ibid.
.

The Ludi Triumphales were such Games as made a part of the Triumphal Solemnity.

Ludi Natalitii, instituted by every particular Emperor to commemorate his own
Birthday.

Ludi Juveniles, instituted by Nero at the shaving of his Beard; and at first
privately celebrated in his Palace or Gardens; but they soon became Public,
and were kept with great State and Magnificence. Hence the Games held by the
following Emperors in the Palace yearly on the first of January took the Name
of Juvenilia Sueton. N^r. 11. (...).
.

Cicero speaks of the Ludi Juventutis, instituted by Salinator in the Senensian
War, for the Health and safety of the Youth, a Plague then reigning in the City
in ^^^^o
.

The Ludi Miscelli, which Suetonius makes Caligula to have instituted at Lions
in France, seem to have been a Miscellany of Sports, consisting of several
Exercises joined together in a new and an unusual manner Sueton. C^i^g. 20.
T^rr^^^ allo^.
.

The LVDIFVNEBRES, assigned for one Species of the Roman Public Games, as to
their original and manner, have been already described in the Chapter of the
Gladiators. It may be proper to observe farther, that Tertullian in his
particular Tract De Spectaculis, as he derives the Custom of the Gladiatorian
Combats from the Funeral Rites, so he takes notice, that the Word Munus applied
originally to these Shows, is no more than Officium, a kind Office, to the
dead. We must remember too that though the Shows of Gladiators, which took their
Rise from hence, were afterward exhibited on many other occasions; yet the
Primitive Custom of presenting them at the Funeral of great Men, all along
prevailed in the City, and Roman Provinces. Nor was it confined only to Persons
of Quality, but almost every rich Man was honored with this Solemnity after
his Death. And this they very commonly provided for in their Wills, defining
the number of Gladiators, who should be hired to engage. In so much that when
any weal^hy Person deceased, the People* used to claim a Show of Gladiators, as
their due by long Custom. Suetonius to this purpose tells us of a Funeral, in
which the common People extorted Money by force from the deceased Person's
Heirs to be expended on this account Suet. Tib. 37.
.

Julius Caesar brought up a new Custom of allowing this Honor to the Women,
when he obliged the People with a Feast, and a public Show, in memory of his
Daughter Idem. Jul. 26.
.

It is very memorable, that though the Exhibitors of these Shows were private
Persons, yet during the time of the Celebration they were considered as of the
highest Rank and Quality; having the Honor to wear the Praetexta, and to be
waited on by the Lictors and Beadles, who were necessary to keep the People in
order, and to assist the Designatores, or Marshallers of the Procession
Kirckman de Funer. Romans lib. 4. cap. 8.
.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Roman Habit.
THE Roman Habit has given as much trouble to the Critics as any other part of
Antiquity: And though the most learned Men have been so kind as to leave us their
Thoughts on this Subject, yet the Matter is not fully explained, and the
Controversies about it admit of no Decision. However, without enquiring into
the several Fashions of the Romans, or defining the exact time when they first
changed their leathern Jerkins, and their primitive Hides of wild Beasts, for
the more decent and graceful Attires; it will be sufficient to the present
design, to observe the several sorts of Garments in use with both Sexes, and to
give the best distinction of them that can be found out at this distance.

The two common and celebrated Garments of the Romans, were the Toga and the
Tunica.

The Toga, or Gown seems to have been of a Semicircular Form, without Sleeves,
different in largeness according to the Wealth or Poverty of the wearer; and
used only upon occasion of appearing in public; whence it is often called
Vestis forensis Feriar. de re Vestiar. lib. 1. cap. 28.
.

The Color of the Gown is generally believed to have been White. The common
Objections against this Opinion are, how it could then be distinguished from
the Toga Candida, used by Competitors for Offices; or how it comes to pass that
we read particularly of their wearing white Gowns on Holy Days and public
Festivals; as in Horace; Ille repotia natales, aliosque dierum
Festos albatus celebret Lib. 2. Sat. 2.
. --
if their ordinary Gowns were of the same Color. But both these Scruples are
easily solved. For between the Toga Alba and Candida we may apprehend this
difference, that the former was the natural color of the Wool, and the other
an artificial White, which appeared with a greater advantage of Luster; and
therefore Polybius chooses rather to call the Candidates Gown (...) than (...);
not of a bare White, but of a bright shining color. For this purpose they made
use of a fine kind of Chalk; whence Persius took the hint of Cretata ambitio
Sat. 5. ver. 177.
. As to the Holy Days or solemn Festivals, on which we find the Romans always
attired in White, it is reasonable to believe, that all Persons of any fashion
constantly put on new Gowns, which were of the purest White on these Occasions:
and those of meaner condition might perhaps chalk over their old Gowns, which
were now grown rusty, and had almost lost their Color Dips. Elect. lib. 1.
cap. 13.
.

The Dispute between Manutius and Sigonius, whether the Roman Gown was tied
about with a Girdle or not, is commonly decided in favor of Manutius. Yet it
must be acknowledged, that the best Authors allow some kind of Cincture to the
Gown; but then it must be understood to be performed only by help of the Gown
it self; or by that part of it, which coming under the Right Arm, was drawn
over to the Left Shoulder, and so covering the Vmbo, or knot of Plaights, which
rested there, kept the Gown close together. This Lappet Quinctilian calls the
Belt, in his Advice to the Orators about this matter: Ille qui sub humero
dextro ad sinistrum oblique ducitur, velut balteus, nec strangulet, nec fluat
Institut. lib. 11. cap. 3.
.

This Belt being loosed, and the Left Arm drawn in, the Gown flowed out, and
the Sinus, or main Lappet hung about the Wearer's Feet. This was particularly
observed in Caesar, who commonly let his Gown hang dragging after him: whence
Sylla used to advise the Noblemen, ut puerum male praecinctum caverent Sueton.
Jul. cap. 15. Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 2. cap. 3.
.

The accurate Ferrarius is certainly in a mistake as to this Point; for,
maintaining that the Gown had no kind of cinctus but what they called Gabinus,
he will have this meant only of the Tunica: But the plain Words of Macrobius
make this Supposition impossible; and Lacinium trahere expressly points out the
Gown; for the Tunick being only a short Vest, cannot by any means be conceived
to have a Lappet dragging on the Ground Graevius ad Sueton. Jul. 45.
.

The same Fault which Sylla objected to Caesar, was commonly observed in
Maecenas, and is a mark of that effeminate Softness, which makes an unhappy
Part of his Character in History.

The learned Graevius observes, that the Word Praecingi was proper to the Gown,
because the Lappet did not close about the whole Gown, but only the forepart
of it Ibidem.
.

The Cinctus Gabinus is most happily described by Ferrarius: Cinctus Gabinus
non aliud fuit quam cum togae lacinia laevo brachio subducta in tergum ita
rejiciebatur, ut contracta retraheretur ad pectus atque ita in nodum
necteretur; qui nodus sive cinctus togam contrahebat, brevioremque and
strictiorem reddidit Dear Vestia^. lib. 1. cap. 14.
. The Cinctus Gabinus was nothing else, but when the Lappet of the Gown, which
used to be brought up to the Left-Shoulder, being drawn thence, was cast off in
such a manner upon the Back, as to come round short to the Breast, and there
fasten in a Knot; which Knot or Tincture tucked up the Gown, and made it
shorter and straighter. This Cinctus was proper only to the Consuls or
Generals, upon some extraordinary occasions; as the denouncing War, burning the
Spoils of the Enemy, devoting themselves to death for the safety of their Army,
and the like. It was borrowed from the Inhabitants of Gabii, a City of
Campania, who at the time of a public Sacrifice, happening to be set upon
suddenly by their Enemies, were obliged, through have, to gather up their Gowns
in this manner, and so march out to oppose them Servius ad Vi^gil Ae^eid. 7. v.
61^.
.

In the ordinary wear the upper part of the Gown used to lay over the Right
Shoulder; yet upon occasion 'twas an easy matter to draw back that part again,
and make it cover the Head. And learned Men are of opinion that the Romans
while they continued in the City, made use of this sort of covering only for
the Head; never appearing in any kind of Caps or Hats, unless they were on a
Journey out of Town. Thus Plutarch informs us of the deference paid to great
Men as they passed the Streets: (...). The Romans when they meet any Person who
deserves a particular respect, if they chance to have their Gown on their Head,
presently uncover. And the same Author reckoning up the Marks of Honor which
Sylla showed Pompey, adds (...); and pulling off his Gown from his Head.

The several sorts of the Roman Gowns were the Toga Praetexta, the Pulla, the
Sordida, and the Picta, Purpurea, Palmata, etc. or the Trabea.

Every one knows that the Gown was the distinguishing Mark of the Romans from
the Greeks, who wore the Pallium or Cloak as their common Garment; whence
Togatus and Palliatus are often used for Roman and Grecian. As also, that the
Gown was the proper Badge of Peace, being generally laid aside upon engaging in
any martial Design. Yet it appears from several Passages of Livy and Plutarch,
that it was sometimes worn in the Camp. If so, perhaps the Equites and
Centurions had this peculiar Privilege, and that only when they lay still in
the Camp without any thoughts of sudden Action; as Manutius learnedly
conjectures De Quaesitis per Epist. lib. 2. Ep. 1.
.

The Toga Praetexta had a Border of Purple round the Edges whence it took its
Name, and in allusion to which the Grecian Writers call it (...). It seems
Originally to have been appropriated to the Magistrates and some of the
Priests, when at first introduced by Tullus Hostilius. How it came to be
bestowed on the young Men is differently related. Some fancy that Tarquinius
Priscus in a Triumph for a Victory against the Sabines, first honored his own
Son with the Praetexta and the Bulla aurea as Rewards of his Valor for killing
one of the Enemies with his own Hands. For as the former was the Robe of the
Magistrates, so the Bulla aurea was 'till then used only by Generals in their
Triumphal Procession; being a sort of hollow golden Ball hanging about their
Necks, in which was enclosed some secret Amulet, or Preservative against Envy.
Others, without regarding this first Story, tell us, that the same Tarquin
among other wise Constitutions, took particular Care in assigning the proper
Habit to the Boys, and accordingly ordained that the Sons of Noblemen should
make use of the Praetexta, and the Bulla aurea, Provided their Fathers had born
any Curule Office; and that the rest should wear the Praetexta only as low as
the Sons of those who had served on Horseback in the Army the full time that
the Law required. A third Party referr the Original of this Custom to Romulus
himself, as the Consequence of a Promise made to the Sabine Virgins, that he would
bestow a very considerable Mark of Honor on the first Child that was born to
any of them by a Roman Father. Many believe that the Reason of giving them the
Bulla and the Praetexta was, that the former, being shaped like a Heart, might
as often as they looked on it be no inconsiderable incitement to Courage; and
that the Purple of the Gown might remind them of the Modesty which became them
at that Age Macr^b. Saturnal. lib. 1. cap 6.
.

But on what account soever this Institution took its rise, it was constantly
observed by all the Sons of the Ingenui, or Freeborn. The Libertini too in some
time obtained the same Privilege, only instead of the Golden Bulla they wore a
Leathern one: As Juvenal intimates, Sat. 5.

-- Etruscum puero si contigit aurum,
Vel nodus tantum and signum de paupere Coro.
It Is commonly believed, that the Boys changed this Gown at the Age of fourteen
Years for the Toga Virilis: But this is a great mistake. For 'till they were
thirteen Years old they wore a sort of Vest with Sleeves, which they called
Alicata Chlamys, and then left off that to put on the Praetexta: which they did
not change 'till they had reached the Age of Puberty, or their seventeenth Year
Da^^r on H^race. Lib. 5. Od 5.
.

It Is a very pertinent Remark, that this Praetexta was not only a Token of the
Youth and Quality of the Wearer, but besides this had the Repute of a Sacred
Habit, and therefore when they assigned it for the Use of the Boys, they had
this especial Consideration, that it might be a kind of Guard or Defense to
them against the Injuries to which that Age was exposed Daci^r ibid
. Thus the poor Boy in Horace cries out to the Witch Canidia that, was
tormenting him.

Per hoc inane purpurae decus Precor.

Epod. 5. And Persius calls it custos purpura, in his fifth Satyr. But
Quinctilian most expressly, Ego vobis allego etiam illud sacrum praetextarum,
quo sacerdotes velantur; quo Magistratus, quo infirmitatem pueritiae sacram
facimus ac venerabilem In Declamat.
: I allege too the Sacred Habit of the Praetexta, the Robe of Priests and
Magistrates; and that by which we derive an holy Reverence and Veneration to
the helpless Condition of Childhood.

We find farther that the Citizen's Daughters were allowed a sort of Praetexta,
which they wore 'till the Day of Marriage. Thus Cicero against Verres, Eripies
pupillae togam praetextam. And Propertius, Mox ubi jam facibus cessit Praetexta
maritis. The Praetorii and Consulares too, (if not all the Senators) at the
Ludi Romani made use of the Praetexta Cicero Philipp. 2.
. And the Matrons on the Caprotine Nones, celebrated the Festival in this sort
of Gown Varo de Ling. Lat. lib. 9.
.

The Toga pura was the ordinary Garment of private Persons, when they appeared
abroad, so called because it had not the least addition of Purple to the White.
We meet with the same Gown under the Name of Virilis and Libera. It was called
Toga Virilis, or the Manly Gown; because when the Youths came to Man's Estate,
or to the Age of seventeen Years, they changed the Praetexta for this Habit, as
was before observed. On which Occasion the Friends of the Youngster carried him
into the Forum (or sometimes into the Capitol) and attired him in the new Gown
with abundance of Ceremony. This they called dies tyrocinii, the day on which
he commenced a Tyro, in relation to the Army where he was now capacitated to
serve.

It had the Name of Toga libera, because at this time the young Men entered on a
State of Freedom and were delivered from the Power of their Tutors and
Instructors. Thus the young Gentleman intimates in Persius.

Cum primum pavido custos mihi purpura cessit,
Bullaque succinctis laribus donata pependit;
Cum blandi Comites, totaque impune suburra
Permisit sparsisse oculos jam candidus umbo.
Sat. 5. When first my Childish Robe resigned its Charge,
And left me unconfined to live at large.
When now my Golden Bulla (hung on high
To Household Gods) declared me past a Boy,
And my white Plaights proclaimed my Liberty:
When with my wild Companions I would roll
From Street to Street; and sin without control.
Mr. Dryden; But for all this Liberty they had one remarkable restraint; being
obliged for the first whole Year to keep their Arms within their Gown, as an
Argument of Modesty. This Cicero observes: Nobis quidem olim annus erat unus ad
cohibendum brachium toga constitutus Cicero pro Coelio.
.

The Toga pulla and Sordida are very commonly confounded. Yet upon a strict
Enquiry it will appear that the first sort was proper to Persons in Mourning,
being made of black Cloth, whence the Persons were called atrati. The Toga
sordida was Black as well as the other, but from a different Cause, having
grown so by the long wearing and sullying of it: And this (as has been already
observed) was worn by the Prisoners at their Trial, as well as by the ordinary
People. It may here be remarked that the Pullati whom we meet with in the
Classics, were not only those who wore the Toga pulla or the Toga sordida, but
such too as were attired in the Penulae or Lacernae which were usually Black.
Thus the Learned Casaubon interprets pullatorum turba in Suetonius August. cap.
40.
: and Quinctilian calls the Rabble pullatus circulus Lib. 2. cap. 12.
and pullata turba Lib. 6. cap. 4.
. Hence it may reasonably be conjectured that when the Roman State was turned
into a Monarchy, the Gown began to be laid aside by Men of the lower Rank, the
Penulae and Lacernae being introduced in their room, and commonly worn without
them, or sometimes over them. This irregularity had gained a great Head even in
Augustus his time; who to rectify it in some Measure, commanded the Aediles
that they should suffer no Person in the Forum or Circus to wear the Lacerna
over his Gown; as was then an ordinary Practice. The same excellent Prince
taking notice at a public Meeting of an innumerable Company of Rabble in these
indecent Habits, cried out with Indignation,

-- En
Romanos rerum dominos gentemque togatam Sueton. August. cap. 40.
!
The Toga picta, purpurea, palmata, the Consular Trabea the Paludamentum and
the Chlamys had very little Difference, and are promiscuously used one for the
other; being the Robes of State proper to the Kings, Consuls, Emperors, and
all Generals during their Triumph. This sort of Gown was called Picta from the
rich Embroidery, with Figures in Phrygian-Work: And purpurea, because the
Groundwork was Purple. The Toga palmata indeed very seldom occurs, but may
probably be supposed the same with the Former, called so on the same Account as
the Tunica palmata. which will be described hereafter. That it was a part of
the Triumphal habit Martial intimates.

I comes, and magnis illaesa merere triumphos,
Palmataeque ducem (sed cito) read togae.
Antiquaries are very little agreed in reference to the Trabea. The vulgar
Opinion follows the distinction of Servius and Scaliger into three sorts, one
Proper to the Kings, another to the Consuls, and a third to the Augurs. But
Lipsius Ad Tacit. Ann. 3.
and Rubenius De re Vestiar. and praecipue de laticlavo. lib. 1. cap. 5.
acknowledge only one proper Sort of Trabea belonging to the Kings: Being a
white Gown, bordered with Purple, and adorned with clavi or trabes of Scarlet.
Where the Vests of the Consuls, and the Augurs, and the Emperors were called
by the same Name, only, because they were made in the same Form. For the old
Paludamentum of the Generals was all Scarlet, only bordered with Purple; and
the Chlamydes of the Emperors were all Purple, commonly beautified with a
golden or embroidered Border.

Sidoniam picto chlamydem circumdata limbo.

Virg. Aen. 4. When the Emperors were themselves Consuls, they wore Trabea
adorned with Gems, which were allowed to none else. Claudian in his Poems on
the Third, Fourth and Sixth Consulship of Honorius, alludes expressly to this
Custom.

-- Cinctusque mutata Gabinos
Dives Hydaspaeis augescat purpura gemmis.
And again,

-- Asperat Indus
Velamenta lapis, pretiosaque fila smaragdis
Ducta virent. --
And in the last,

Membraque gemmato trabeae viridantia cinctu. There are several other Names
under which we sometimes find the Gown, which have not yet been explained, nor
would be of much Use if thoroughly understood: Such as the Toga undulata,
scriculata, rasa, paverata, Phryxiana, scutulata, etc. See Ferrar. de Re Vest.
lib. 2. cap. 10.

The Tunica, or close Coat, was the common Garment worn within Doors by it
self, and abroad under the Gown. The old Romans (as Gellius informs us Lib. 7.
cap. 12.
) at first were clothed only in the Gown. In a little time they found the
Convenience of a short strait Tunic, that did not cover the Arms; such as the
Graecians called (...). Afterward they had Sleeves coming down to the Elbow,
but no farther. Hence Suetonius tell's us that Caesar was remarkable in his
Habit, because he wore the Laticlavian Tunick, closed with Gatherings about his
Wrist Suet. Jul. cap. 45.
. Rubenius thinks he might do this piece of Singularity to show himself
descended from the Trojans, to whom Romulus objects, in Virgil, as an Argument
of their Effeminacy,

Et tunicae manicas, and habent redimicula mitrae Aeneid. 11.
. And Iulus or Ascanius is still to be seen dressed after the same Fashion in
some old Gemms Rubenius de Laticlav. lib. 1. cap. 12.
.

Yet in the Declension of the Empire, the Tunies did not only reach down to the
Ankles, whence they were called Talares, but had Sleeves too coming down to the
Hands, which gave them the Name of Chitodotae. And now it was counted as
Scandalous to appear without Sleeves, as it had been hitherto to be seen in
them. And therefore in the Writers of that Age, we commonly find the accused
Persons at a Trial habited in the Tunick without Sleeves, as a mark of Infamy
and Disgrace ibidem.
.

The several sorts of the Tunic, were the Palmata, the Angusticlavia, and the
Laticlavia.

The Tunica Palmata was worn by Generals in a Triumph, and perhaps always under
the Toga picta. It had its Name either from the great breadth of the Clavi,
equal to the Palm of the Hand; or else from the Figures of Palms, embroidered
on it Festus in voce.
.

The whole Body of the Critics are strangely divided about the Clavi. Some
fancy them to have been a kind of Flowers interwoven in the Cloth: Others will
have them to be the Buttons or Clasps by which the Tunick was held together. A
Third sort contend that the Latus clavus was nothing else but a Tunic, bordered
with Purple. Scaliger thinks the Clavi did not belong properly to the Vest, but
hung down from the Neck, like Chains, and Ornaments of that Nature. But the
most general Opinion makes them to have been Studs or Purls something like
Heads of Nails, of Purple or Gold worked into the Tunic.

All the former Conjectures are learnedly refuted by the accurate Rubenius, who
endeavors to prove, that the clavi were no more than purple Lines or Streaks
coming along the middle of the Garments, which were afterward improved to
golden and embroidered Lines of the same Nature. We must not therefore suppose
them to have received their Name, as an immediate allusion to the Heads of
Nails, to which they bore no Resemblance; but may remember that the Ancients
used to inlay their Cups and other precious Utensils with Studs of Gold, or
other Ornamental Materials. These from their likeness to Nailheads they called
in general Clavi. So that it was very natural to bring the same Word to
signify these Lines of Purple or other Colors which were of a different Kind
from all the rest of the Garment; as those ancient Clavi were of a different
Color and Figure from the Vessels which they adorned.

These Streaks were either transverse or straight down the Vest; the former
were used only in the Liveries of the Popes and other public Servants; by the
Musicians, and some Companies of Artificers, and now and then by the Woman;
being termed Paragaudae. The proper Clavi came straight down the Vest, one of
them making the Tunic, which they called the Angusticlave, and two the
Laticlave.

However this Opinion has been applauded by the Learned, Monsieur Dacier's
Judgment of the Matter cannot fail to meet with as kind Reception.

He tells us that the Clavi were no more than purple Galoons, with which they
bordered the fore Part of the Tunic, on both Sides, in the Place where it came
together. The broad Galoons made the Laticlave, and the narrow the
Angusticlave. Therefore they are strangely mistaken who make the only
Difference between the two Vests to consist in this, that the one had but a
single Clavus, the other two, and that the Senatorian Clavus being in the
middle of the Vest could possibly be but one. For it is very plain they had each
of them two Galoons binding the two Sides of the Coat where it opened before;
so that joining together with the Sides they appear' just in the Middle; whence
the Greeks called such a Vest (...). That the Galoons were sowed on both sides
of the Coat, is evident beyond Dispute from the following Passage of Varro, nam
si quis tunicam ita consuit, ut altera plagula sit angustis clavis, altera
latis, utraque pars in suo genere caret analogia. For if any one should sow a
Coat in this Manner, that one Side should have a broad Galoon, and the other a
narrow one, neither part has any thing properly answering to it. As to the Name
of the Clavi, he thinks there needs no farther Reason be given, than that the
Ancients called any thing which was made with Design to be put upon another
thing Clavus (g)

It has been a received Opinion that the Angusticlave distinguished the Knights
from the Common People, in the same Manner as the Laticlave did the Senators
from those of the Equestrian Rank. But Rubenius averrs that there was no manner
of Difference between the Tunics of the Knights, and those of the Commons. This
Conjecture seems to be favored by Appian in the second Book of his History,
where he tells us, (...). The Slave in Habit goes like his Master; and
excepting only the Senator's Robe, all other Garments are common to the
Servants. And Pliny, when he says that the Rings distinguished the Equestrian
Order from the Common People, as their Tunick did the Senate from those that
wore the Rings; would not probably have omitted the other Distinction had it
been real. Besides both these Authorities Lampridius in the Life of Alexander
Severus confirms the present Assertion. He acquaints us that the aforesaid
Emperor had some Thoughts of assigning a proper Habit to Servants different
from that of their Masters: But his great Lawyers Vlpian and Paulus dissuaded
him from the Project, as what would infallibly give Occasion to much
quarrelling and dissension; so that upon the whole he was contented only to
distinguish the Senators from the Knights by their Clavus.

But all this Argument will come to nothing unless we can clear the Point about
the use of Purple, among the Romans, which the Civilians tell us was strictly
forbid the Common People under the Emperors. It may therefore be observed that
all the Prohibitions of this Nature, are restrained to some particular species
of Purple. Dacier or Horace, lib. 1. Sat. 5.
Thus Julius Caesar forbad the use of the Conchilian Garments, or the (...)
Sueton. Jul. cap. 43.
. And Nero afterward prohibited the ordinary Use of the Amethystine or Tyrian
Purple Idem Nero, cap. 32.
. These Conjectures of Rubenius need no better confirmation than that they are
repeated and approved by the most judicious Graevius Ad Sueton. Jul. 43. Otho.
10. Domitian. 10.
.

According to this Opinion it is an easy Matter to reconcile the great Contest
between Manutius and Lipsius and the inferior Critics of both Parties about
the Color of the Tunic, the former asserting it to be Purple, and the other
White: For it is evident it might be called either, if we suppose the
Groundwork to have been White, with the addition of these Purple Lists or
Galoons.

As to the Persons who had the Honor of wearing the Laticlave it may be
maintained, that the Sons of those Senators who were Patritians had the
Privilege of using this Vest in their Childhood together with the Praetexta.
But the Sons of such Senators as were not Patritians, did not put on the
Laticlave 'till they applied themselves to the Service of the Commonwealth,
and to bearing Offices See Pliny Lib. 8. Epist. 23.
. Yet Augustus changed this Custom and gave the Sons of any Senators leave to
assume the Laticlave presently after the time of their putting on the Toga
Virilis, though they were not yet capable of Honors Sueton. Aug. cap. 37.
. And by the particular Favor of the Emperors, the same Privilege was allowed
to the more splendid Families of the Knights. Thus Ovid speaks of himself and
Brother, who are known to have been of the Equestrian Order.

Interea, tacito passu, labentibus annis,
Liberior fratri sumpta mihique toga;
Induiturque humeris cum lato purpura clavo, etc. Tristium Lib. 4. ^leg. 10.
.
And Statius of Metius Celer, whom in another Place he terms Splendidissimus
Praefat. ad lib. 3. Sylvarum.
, (the proper Style of the Knights)

-- Puer hic sudavit in armis
Notus adhuc tantum majoris munere clavi Sylv. lib. 3. carm. 2.
.
Beside the Gown and Tunic we hardly meet with any Garments of Roman Original,
or that deserve the Labor of an enquiry into their Difference. Yet among these
the Lacerna and the Penula occur more frequently than any other. In the old
Gloss upon Persius Sat 1. Verse 68. they are both called Pallia; which identity
of Names might probably arise from the near resemblance they bore one to the
other and both to the Grecian Pallium. The Lacerna was first used in the Camp,
but afterward admitted into the City, and worn upon their Gowns to defend them
from the Weather. The Penula was sometimes used with the same Design, but being
shorter and fitter for expedition, it was chiefly worn upon a Journey See Lips.
Elect. lib. 1. cap. 13. Dr. Holyday on Juvenal Sat. 1.
.

Rubenius will have the Lacerna and the Penula to be both closebodied kind of
Frocks, girt about in the Middle, the only Difference between them being that
the Penulae were always Brown, the Lacernae of no certain Color; and that the
Cucullus the Cowl or Hood was sowed on the former, but worn as a distinct thing
from the other De Laticlav. lib. 1. cap. 6.
. But Ferrarius who has spent a whole Book in animadverting on that Author,
wonders that any Body should be so Ignorant, as not to know these two Garments
to have been of a quite distinct Species Analect. de Re Vest. cap. ult.
.

It will be expected that the Habits of the Roman Priests should be
particularly described; but we have no certain Intelligence, only what concerns
the chief of them, the Augurs, the Flamens, and the Pontifices. The Augurs wore
the Trabea first died with Scarlet, and afterward with Purple. Rubenius takes
the Robe which Herod in Derision put on our Savior to have been of this
Nature, because St. Matthew calls it Scarlet, and St. Luke Purple. Cicero uses
Dibaphus (a Garment twice died) for the Augural Robe Epist. Famil. Lib. 2.
Epist. 16.
.

The proper Robe of the Flamens was the Laena a sort of Purple Chlamys, or
almost a double Gown, fastn'd about the Neck with a Buckle or Clasp. It was
interwoven curiously with Gold, so as to appear very Splendid and Magnificent.
Thus Virgil describes his Hero in this Habit.

-- Tyrioque ardebat murice laena
Demissa ex humeris: dives quae munera Dido
Fecerat, and tenui telas discreverat auro.
Aen. 4. The Pontiffs had the honor of using the Praetexta; and so had the
Epulones, as we learn from Livy. Lib. 43.

The Priests were remarkable for their modesty in Apparel, and therefore they
made use only of the Common-purple, never affecting the more Chargeable and
Splendid. Thus Cicero, Vestitus asper nostra hac purpura plebeia ac pene fusca
Pro Sestio.
. He calls it our Purple because he himself was a Member of the College of
Augurs.

There are two farther Remarks which may be made in reference to the Habits in
general. First that in the time of any public Calamity, 'twas an usual Custom
to change their Apparel, as an Argument of Humility and Contrition; of which we
meet with many Instances in History. On such Occasions the Senators laid by the
Laticlave, and appeared only in the Habit of Knights. The Magistrates threw
aside the Praetexta, and came abroad in the Senatorian Garb. The Knights left
off their Rings, and the Commons changed their Gowns for the Sagum or Military
Coat See Ferrar. de Re Vestiar. lib. 1. cap. 27.
.

The other Remark is the Observation of the great Casaubon, that the Habit of
the Ancients; and particularly of the Romans, in no Respect differed more from
the Modern Dress, than in that they had nothing answering to our Breeches and
Stockins which if we were to express in Latin, we should call femoralia and
tibialia. Yet instead of these under their lower Tunics or Wastcoats, they
sometimes bound their Thighs and Legs round with Silken Scarfs or fasciae; though
these had now and then the Name of foeminalia or femoralia and tibialia, from
the Parts to which they were applied Sueton. August. cap. 82. Casaubon ad locum.
.

As to the Habit of the other Sex, in the ancient Times of the Commonwealth
the Gown was used alike by Men and Women Vid. Ferrar. de re vest. lib. 3. cap.
17.
. Afterward the Women took up the Stola and the Palla for their separate
Dress. The Stola was their ordinary Vest, worn within Doors, coming down to
their Ankles: When they went abroad they flung over it the Palla or Pallium, a
long open Manteau Dacier on Horace. lib. 1. Sat. 2. ver. 99.
, which covered the Stola and their whole Body. Thus Horace,

Ad talos stola demissa and circumdata palla Horace ibid.
. And Virgil, describing the Habit of Camilla,

Pro crinali auro, pro longae tegmine pallae
Tigridis exuviae per dorsum a vertice pendent Aen. 11. ver. 576.
.
Rubenius has found this Difference in the Stolae, that those of the ordinary
Women were White, trimmed with a Golden Border; and those of Ladies of Quality
Purple with Golden Purls De Laticlav. lib. 1. cap. 16.
.

They dressed their Heads with what they called Vittae and Fasciae, Ribbonds and
thin Sashes; and the last Sort they twisted round their whole Body, next to the
Skin, to make them Slender; to which Terence alludes in his Eunuch Act. a.
Scen. 4.
.

Haud similis virgo est virginum nostrarum quas matres student
Demissis humeris esse, vincto pectore, ut graciles sient.
The former Ovid makes to be the distinguishing Badge of honest Matrons and
chaste Virgins.

Este procul vittae tenues insigne pudoris De Art. Amand. lib. z:
. And describing the chaste Daphne, he says,

Vitta coercebat positos sine lege capillos Metamorph. lib. 1. Fab. 9.
. It Is very observable that the Common Courtezans were not allowed to appear in
the Stola, but obliged to wear a sort of Gown, as a Mark of Infamy, by reason
of its Resemblance to the Habit of the opposite Sex. Hence in that place of
Horace.

-- Quid interest
in matrona, ancilla peccesve togata?
L. 1. S. 2. V. 63. The most judicious Dacier understands by Togata the common
Strumpet, in opposition both to the Matron and the Serving-Maid.

Some have thought that the Women (on some Account or other) wore the Lacerna
too: But the rise of this Fancy is owing to their Mistake of that Verse in
Juvenal, Ipse lacernatae cum se jactaret amicae.

Where it must be observed that the Poet does not speak of the ordinary Misses,
but of the Eunuch Sporus, upon whom Nero made an Experiment in order to change
his Sex. So that Juvenal's Lacernata amica is no more than if we should say a
Mistress in Breeches.

The Attire of the Head and Feet will take in all that remains of this Subject.
As to the first of these it has been a former Remark that the Romans ordinarily
used none, except the Lappit of their Gown; and this was not a constant Cover,
but only occasional, to avoid the Rain, or Sun, or other accidental
Inconveniences. Hence it is that we see none of the old Statues with any thing
on their Heads, besides now and then a Wreath, or something of that Nature.
Eustathius on the first of the Odysses, tells us that the Latins derived this
Custom of going bareheaded from the Greeks; it being notorious that in the Age
of the Heroes, no kinds of Hats or Caps were at all in Fashion: Nor is there
any such thing to be met with in Homer. Yet at some particular Times we find
the Romans using some sort of Covering for the Head; as at the Sacrifices, at
the Public Games, at the Feast of Saturn, upon a Journey, or a warlike
Expedition. Some Persons too were allowed to have their Heads always covered;
as Men who had been lately made Free, and were there upon shaved close on their
Head, might wear the Pileus, both as a Defense from the Cold, and as a Badge of
their Liberty. And the same Privilege was granted to Persons under any
Indisposition Lipsius de Amphithe. cap. 19.
.

As for the several sorts of Coverings designed for these Uses, many of them
have been long confounded beyond any possibility of a Distinction: And the
Learned Salmasius a Vopisc. and ad Graevii Sueton. Claud. 2.
has observed that the Mitra, the Pileus, the Cucullus, the Galerus and the
Palliolum, were all Coverings of the Head, very little differing from one
another, and promiscuously used by Authors. However there are some of them
which deserve a more particular Enquiry.

The Galerus Vossius derives from Galea, the Roman Helmet, to which we must
suppose it to have born some Resemblance, Servius, when he reckons up the
several sorts of the Priest's Caps, makes the Galerus one of them, being
composed of the Skin of the Beast offered in Sacrifice: The other Two being the
Apex, a stitched Cap with a little Red standing up in the Middle of the Top;
and the Tutulus a Woollen Turban much like the former, proper to the
High Priest. By the Galerus it is likely he means the Albo-Galerus made of the
Skin of a white Beast offered in Sacrifice, with the addition of some Twigs
taken from a Wild-Olive-Tree; and belonging only to Jupiter's Flamen. Yet we
find a sort of Galerus in use among the ordinary Men; and the Galericulum
(which some do call Galerus) common to both Sexes. This was a Skin so neatly
dressed with Man or Woman's Hair, that it could not easily be distinguished
from the Natural It was particularly used by those who had thin Heads of Hair;
as Sueton reports of Nero Cap. 12.
: As also by the Wrastlers to keep their own Hair from receiving any Damage by
the nasty Oils with which they were rubbed all over before they exercised. This
we learn from Martial's Distich on the Galericulum.

Ne lutet immundum nitidos ceroma capillos
Hac poteris madidas condere pelle comas.
The Pileus was the ordinary Cap or Hat worn at Public Shows and Sacrifices,
and by the Freed-Men For a Journey they had the Petasus, differing only from
the former in that it had broader Brims, and bore a nearer Resemblance to our
Hats, as appears from the common Pictures of Mercury: And hence it took its
Name from (...) to open or spread out Vossius Etymolog. in v. Petasus. Lipsius
de Amphithcat. cap. 19.
.

The Mitra, the Tiara, and the Diadem, though we often meet with them in Roman
Authors, are none of them beholden to that Nation for their Original. The Mitre
seems to owe its Invention to the Trojans; being a crooked Cap, tied under the
Chin with Ribbons. It belonged only to the Women among the Romans; and is
attributed to the foreign Courtezans that set up their Trade in that City: Such
as the -- Picta lupa barbara mitra in Juvenal. Yet among the Trojans we find it
in use among the Men. Thus Remulus scouts them in Virgil.

Et tunicae manicas and habent redimicula mitrae:
O vere Phrygiae; neque enim Phryges Aen. 9.616.
!
And even Aeneas himself is by Iarbas described in this Dress..

Moeonia mentum mitra crinemque madentem
Subnexus.
Aen. 4.216. The Tiara was the Cap of State used by all the Eastern Kings, and
Great Men, only with this difference, that the Princes wore it with a sharp
strait Top, and the Nobles with the Point a little bending downwards Dempster
ad Rosin. lib. 5. cap. 35.
.

The Diadem belonged to the Kings of Rome as well as to the foreign Princes.
This seems to have been no more than a white Scarf or Fascia bound about the
Head like that which composeth the Turkish Turban. Those who are willing to
find some nearer Resemblance between the Diadem and our Modern Crowns, may be
convinced of their Mistake from that Passage of Plutarch, where he tells us of
a Princess that made use of her Diadem to hang her self with Plut. in Lucull.
.

These white Fasciae among the Romans were always looked on as the Marks of
Sovereignty; and therefore when Pompey, the Great appeared commonly abroad with
a white Scarf wound about his Leg, upon pretense of a Bruise or an Ulcer, those
who were jealous of his growing Power, did not fail to interpret it as an Omen
of his affecting the supreme Command, and one Favonius plainly told him, it
made little Odds on what Part he wore the Diadem, the Intention being much the
same Valor. Max. lib. 6. cap. 2.
.

To descend to the Feet, the several sorts of the Roman Shoes, Slippers, etc.
which most frequently occur in reading, are the Perones, the Calcei lunati, the
Mullei, the Soleae and Crepidae, and the Caligae; besides the Cothurnus and
Soccus which have been already described.

The Perones were a kind of High-Shooes rudely formed of raw Hides, and
reaching up to the Middle of the Leg. They were not only used by the
Country People, as some imagine; but in the City too by Men of ordinary Rank.
Nay, Rubenius averrs that in the elder times of the Commonwealth, the Senators
as well as others went in the Pero's De Laticlav. lib. 2. cap. 1.
. However when they came to be a little polished they left this clumsy Wear to
the Plough-Men and Laborers; and we scarce find them applied to any one else
by the Authors of the flourishing Ages. Thus Persius brings in the -- Peronatus
arator;

S. 5. V. 102.

And Juvenal

-- Quem non pudet alto
Perglaciem perone tegi. --
S. 14. V. 186. Virgil indeed makes some of his Soldiers wear the Pero: But
then they were only a company of plain Rusticks, Legio. agrestis, is he calls
them; and besides they wore it but on one Foot.

-- Vestigia nuda sinistri
Instituere pedis, crudus tegit altera pero.
Aen. 7.690. The Calcei Lunati were proper to the Patritians to distinguish
them from the Vulgar, so called from an Half Moon in Ivory worn upon them.
Baldwin will have the Half Moon to have served in stead of a Fibula or Buckle
De Calceo. Antiqu. cap. 9.
: But Rubenius De Laticlav. lib. 2. cap.
refutes this Conjecture, by showing from Philostratus, that it was showed by
way of Ornament, not on the forepart of the Shoe like the Buckle, but about
the Ankle. Plutarch in his Roman Questions gives abundance of Reasons why they
used the Half Moon rather than any other Figure; but none of his Fancies have
met with any Approbation from the Learned. The common Opinion makes this Custom
an allusion to the Number of Senators at their first institution; which being
an Hundred was Signified by the Numeral Letter C.

Yet the Patritians before they arrived at the Senatorian Age, and even before
they put on the Praetexta had the Privilege of using the Half Moon on their
Shoes. Thus Statius Sylv. 5.

Sic te clare puer genitum sibi curia sensit:
Primaque Patritia clausit vestigia luna.
As for the Senators who were not Patritians they did not indeed wear the
Half Moon, but that Ornament seems not to have been the only Difference between
the Senatorian and the common Shoes. For the former are commonly represented
as Black, and coming up to the middle of the Leg; as in Horace Book 1. Sat. 6.

-- Nigris medium impediit crus
Pellibus.
Rubenius will have this understood only of the Four black Straps, which he
says fastened the Senators Shoes, being tied pretty high on the Leg De Re
Vest. lib. 2. cap. 3.
. Dacier tells us the Senat^rs had two sorts of Shoes one for Summer, and the
other for Winter. The Summer Shoes he describes with such Leathern Straps
crossing one another many times about the Leg, and nothing but a Sole at the
Bottom. These he calls Campagi: (though Rubenius attributes this Name to a sort
of Caligae worn by the Senators under the later Emperors Ibid. cap 5.
. The Winter-Shooes he says were made of an entire black Skin, or sometimes of
a white one reaching up to cover the greatest part of the Leg, without any open
Place except on the Top Dacier on Horace Book. 1. Sat. 6.
.

It Is uncertain whether the Calcei Mullei were so called from the Color of the
Mullet, or whether they lent a Name to that Fish from their reddish Dye. They
were at first the peculiar Wear of the Alban Kings, afterward of the Kings of
Rome, and upon the Establishment of the free State were appropriated to those
Persons who had born any Curule Office; but perhaps they might be worn only on
great Days at the Celebration of some Public Sports, when they were attired in
the whole Triumphal Habit, of which too these Shoes made a part. Julius
Caesar, as he was very singular in his whole Habit, so was particularly
remarkable for wearing the Mullei on ordinary Days; which he did to show his
Descent from the Alban Kings D^^. lib. 49.
. In Color and Fashion they resembled the Cothurni, coming up to the middle
Leg, though they did not cover the whole Foot but only the Sole like Sandals Lib.
2. cap. 2.
. Dacier informs us that at such time as the Emperors took up the use of these
red Shoes, the Curule Magistrates changed the Fashion for Embroidered ones
(...) on Herace Book. 1. Sat. 6.
.

The Roman Soleae were a sort of Sandals or Pantofles without any
Upper-Leather, so that they covered only the Sole of the Foot, being fastened
above with Straps and Buckles. These were the ordinary Fashion of the Women,
and therefore counted Scandalous in the other Sex. Thus Cicero exposes Verres
Ver^in (...),
and Clodius De Har^^^. Respons.
for using this indecent Wear, and Livy acquaints us that the great Scipio was
censured on the same Account Lib. 2^.
. Yet upon all Occasions of Mirth and Recreation or lawful Indulgence 'twas
Customary for the Men to go thus loosly shod. As at Entertainments, and at the
Public Shows of all sorts in the Circos or Amphitheatres.

The Crepidae, which now and then occur in Roman Authors, are generally
supposed to be the same as the Soleae under the Greek Name (...). But Baldwin
is so Nice as to assign this Difference, that the Crepida had two Soles,
whereas the Solea consisted of but one. Therefore he is not willing to be
beholden to the Greeks for the Word, but thinks it may be derived from the
Crepitus or creaking that they made, which could not be so well conceived in
those which had but a single Leather Baldwin Calc. Antiqu. cap. 13.
. That the Grecian (...) did really make such a kind of Noise (which we cannot
easily imagine of the Soleae) is plain from the common Story of Momus, who
being brought to give his Censure of Venus, could find no Fault only that her
(...) or Slipper creak'd a little too much.

The Caliga was the proper Soldiers Shoe, made in the Sandal Fashion, so as
not to cover the upper Part of the Foot, though it reached to the Middle of the
Leg. The Sole was of Wood like our old Galoches, or the Sabots of the French
Peasants, and stuck full of Nails. These Nails were usually so very long in the
Shoes of the Scouts and Sentinels, that Suetonius Caligid. cap. 52.
and Tertullian De Coron. Milit.
call those Caligae Speculatoriae, as if by mounting the Wearer to a higher
Pitch, they gave a greater Advantage to the Sight.

'Twas from these Caligae that the Emperor Caligula took his Name, having been
born in the Army, and afterward bred up in the Habit of a Common-Soldier
Sueton. Caligul. Cap. 9.
. And hence Juvenal Sat. 16. v. 24.
and Suetonius August. 25.
use Caligati for the Common-Soldiers without the addition of a Substantive.

CHAP. IX. Of the Roman Marriages.
THE Marriages of the Romans, which have been so learnedly explained by so many
eminent Hands, as the great Lawyers Tiraguel, Sigonius, Brissonius, and the two
Hotmans, will appear very intelligible from a diligent enquiry into the
Espousals, the Persons that might lawfully marry with one another, the proper
Season for Marriage, the several Ways of contracting Matrimony, the Ceremonies
of the Wedding, and the Causes and Manner of Divorces.

The Espousals or Contract before Marriage was performed by an Engagement of
the Friends on both Sides, and might be done as well between absent Persons as
Present; as well in private, as before Witnesses. Yet the common Way of
Betrothing was by Writings drawn up by common Consent, and sealed by both
Parties. Thus Juvenal Sat. 6.

Si tibi legitimis pactam junctamque tabellis
Non es amaturus.
And again Sat. 10.

-- Veniet cum Signatoribus auspex. Besides this, the Man sent a Ring as a
Pledge to the Woman, which in Pliny's time was used to be of Iron, without any
Stone in it Plin. N. H. lib. 33. cap. 1,
. Thus the same Satyrist

Conventum tamen and pactum and spensalia nostra
Tempestate paras, jamque a tonsore magistro
Pecteris, and digito pignus fortasse dedisti.
Sat. 6. There was no Age determined by the Laws for Espousals. but they might
be made at any time, provided that both Parties were sensible of the
Obligation; which they were not supposed ^o be 'till their Seventh Year. Yet
Augustus afterward ordered that no Espousals should be esteemed valid, except
such as were consummated by the Nuptials within Two Years Time Sueton. Aug.
cap. 34.
.

No Roman might marry with any other than a Roman; but ^hen this was extended
to any free Denizon of the City, though ^orn in any other parts: For thus
Dionysius Lib. 6.
, reports of the Latins, Livy Lib. 38.
of the Campanians, and Cicero In Philipp.
of the In^abitants of Aricia. Yet in Rome we meet with one eminent restraint
about these Matters, and that is a Law of the Decemvi^i prohibiting any
Marriage between the Patritian Families and the Plebeians. But within Seven or
Eight Years the Commons ^ad given so many dangerous Tokens of their resentment
of this Injury, that, upon the Motion of Canuleius Tribune of the People, the
Consuls were even forced to give consent to the enacting of a contrary Decree,
allowing a free alliance in Marriage between Persons of all Orders and Degrees
Live. lib. 4.
.

The Romans were very superstitious in reference to the Particular Time of
Marriage, fansying several Days and Seasons very Unfortunate to this Design.
The Kalends, Nones, and Ides of every Month were strictly avoided. So was the
whole Feast of the Parentalia in February, as Ovid observes Faslor. 2.

Conde tuas, Hymenaee, faces, and ab ignibus atris
Aufer, habent alias moesta sepulchra faces.
Go, Hymen, Stop the long expecting Dames,
And hide thy Torches from the dismal Flames.
Thy Presence would be fatal while we mourn;
And at sad Tombs must other Tapers burn.
The whole Month of May, was looked on as Ominous to constracting Matrimony as
Plutarch acquaints us in his Roman Questions. And Ovid, Fast. 5.

Nec viduae taedis cadem, nec virginis apta
Tempora, quae nupsit nec diuturna fuit.
Hac quoque de causa, si te proverbia tangunt,
Mense malas maio nubere vulgus ait.
No Tapers then should burn, nor ever Bride
Linked at this Season long her Bliss enjoyed.
Hence our wise Masters of the Proverbs say?
The Girls are all stark Naught that wed in May.
In short the most happy Season in all Respects for Celebrating the Nuptial
Solemnity was that which followed the Ides of June. Thus Ovid speaking of his
Daughter

Hanc ego cum vellem genero dare tempora taedis
Apta requirebam, quaeque cavenda forent.
Tune mihi post sacras monstratur Julius Idus
Vtilis and nuptis, utilis esse viris.
Fast. 2. Resolved to match the Girl I tried to find
What Days unprosp'rous were, what Moons were kind.
After June's Sacred Ides my fancy staid,
Good to the Man and Happy to the Maid.
The Three Ways of contracting Matrimony, were far, coemptione, and usu,
which fall properly under the consideration of the Civil-Law; the main
difference of them in short was this. Confarreatio was when the Matrimonial
Rites were performed with solemn Sacrifices, and Offerings of burnt Cakes, by
the Pontifex Maximus and the Flamen Dialis. Pliny says this was the most Sacred
Tie of all Lib. 18. cap. 2.
: Yet we are assured that after some time it was almost universally laid a
side, as thought to include too many troublesome Ceremonies Tacit. Annal. 4.
. Coemptio was when the Persons solemnly bound themselves to one another by the
Ceremony of giving and taking a Piece of Money, The Marriage was said to be
made by use, when with the Consent of her Friends the Woman had lived with the
Man a whole Year complete without being absent Three Nights; at which time she
was reckoned in all Respects a lawful Wife, though not near so closely joined as
in the former Cases.

The Nuptial Ceremonies were always begun with the taking of Omens by the
Auspices, Hence Tully, Nubit genero socrus nullis auspicibus, nullis
auctoribus, funestis ominibus omnium Orat. pro Cluent.
.

In dressing the Bride they never omitted to divide her Locks with the Head of
a Spear; either as a token that their Marriages first began by War and Acts of
Hostility upon the Rape of the Sabine Virgins Plutarch in Rom^^^.
: Or as an Omen of bearing a valiant and warlike Offspring: Or to remind the
Bride, that being married to One of a Martial Race, she should use her self to
no other than a plain unaffected Dress: Or because the greatest Part of the
Nuptial Care is referred to Juno, to whom the Spear is Sacred, whence she took
the Name of Dea Quiris; Quiris among the Ancients signifying this Weapon Ibid.
Quaest. Romans 87.
. Ovid alludes to this Custom in the second of his Fasti.

Nec tibi quae cupid^e matura videbere matri
Comat virgineas hasta recurva comas.
Thou whom thy Mother frets to see a Maid,
Let no bent Spear thy Virgin Locks divide.
In the next Place they crowned her with a Chaplet of Flowers, and put on her
Veil or Flammeum, proper on this Occasion. Thus Catullus,

Cinge tempor a Floribus:
Suaveolentis amaraci
Flammeum cape?
And Juvenal, describing Messalina when about to marry Silius.

-- Dudum sedet illa parato
Flammeolo:
Sat. 10. Instead of her ordinary Clothes she wore the Tunica recta or common
Tunic, called recta from being woven upwards, of the same Nature with that
which the young Men put on with their Manly Gown P^iny. lib. 8. cap. 48.
; this was tied about with a Girdle which the Bridegroom was to unloose.

Being dressed after this Manner in the Evening she was lead toward the
Bridegroom's House by Three Boys habited in the Praetexta, whose Fathers and
Mothers were alive. Five Torches were carried to light her; for which
particular Number Plutarch has troubled himself to find out several Reasons
Romans Quaest. 2.
. A Distaff and a Spindle was likewise born along with her, in memory of Caia
Caecilia or Tanaquil, Wife to Tarquinius Priscus, a famous Spinster Pliny, lib.
8. cap. 48.
: And on the same account the Bride called her self Caia, during the Nuptial
Solemnity, as a fortunate Name.

Being come to the Door (which was garnished with Flowers and Leaves, according
to that of Catullus.

Vestibulum ut molli velatum fronde vireret.) she bound about the Posts with
Woollen Lists, and washed them over with melted Tallow, to keep out Infection,
and Sorcery. This Custom Virgil alludes to Aen. 4.

Praeterea fuit in tectis de marmore templum
Conjugis antiqui miro quod honor colebat,
Velleribus niveis, and festa fronde revinctum.
Being to go into the House she was not by any means to touch the Threshold,
but was lifted over by main strength. Either because the Threshold was Sacred
to Vesta, a most chaste Goddess, and so ought not to be defiled by one in these
Circumstances: Or else that it might seem a piece of Modesty to be compelled
into a Place where she was to lose her Maidenhead Plutarch Romans Quaest 1.
Servius ad Virgil. Eclog. 8.
.

Upon her entrance she had the Keys of the House delivered to her, and was
presented by the Bridegroom with Two Vessels, one of Fire, the other of Water;
either as an Emblem of Purity and Chastity, or as a Communication of Goods, or
as an Earnest of sticking by one another in the greatest Extremities Plutarch.
Romans Quaest. 1.
.

And now she and her Companions were treated by the Bridegroom at a splendid
Feast, on which Occasion the Sumptuary Laws allowed a little more Liberty than
ordinary in the Expenses. This kind of Treat was seldom without Music,
composed commonly of Flutes; the Company all the while singing Thalassius or
Thalassio, as the Greeks did Hymenaeus. There are several Reasons given by
Plutarch Idem in Romul. and Romans Quaest. 31.
for the use of this Word, the common Opinion makes it an Admonishment to good
Huswifery, the Greek Word (...) signifying Spinning; and among the Conditions
which were agreed upon by the Sabines and Romans after the Rape of the Virgins,
This was one, that the Women should be obliged to do no other servile Office
for their Husbands, any farther than what concerned Spinning.

At the same time the Bridegroom threw Nuts about the Room for the Boys to
scramble: Thus Virgil Eclog. 8.

Sparge, marite, nuces. -- Out of the many Reasons given for this Custom the
most commonly received makes it a Token of their leaving Childish
Divertisements, and entering on a more serious State of Life, whence Nucibus
relictis has passed into a Proverb. This Conjecture is favored by Catullus

Da nuces pueris, iners
Concubine: Satis diu
Lusisti nucibus. Lubet
Jam servire Thalassio.
Concubine, nuces da.
In the mean time the Genial Bed was got ready, and a Set of good old Wives,
that had been never married but to one Man, placed the Bride on it with a great
deal of Ceremony. Thus Catullus

Vos bonae senibus viris
Cognitae breve foeminae
Collocate puellulam.
Jam licet venias, marite, etc.
Nothing now remained but for the Bridegroom to loose her Girdle, a custom that
wants no Explanation; only it may be observed to have been of great Antiquity:
Thus Moschus in his Story of Jupiter and Europa:

-- (...),
(...).
Homer Odyss. 2.

(...). And Musaeus in Hero and Leander:

(...)
(...).
There seldom wanted a Company of Boys, and mad Sparks got together, to sing a
parcel of Bawdy Verses, which were tolerated on this Occasion. They consisted
of a kind of Fescennine Rhimes. Hence Catullus

Nec diu taceat procax
Fescennina locutio.
And Claudian:

Permissisque jocis turba licentior
Exultet tetricis libera legibus.
The Day after, the new Married Man held a stately Supper, and invited all his
old Companions to a Drinking Match; which they termed repotia.

The whole Subject of Divorces belongs entirely to the Lawyers, and the
distinction between repudium and divortium is owing to their Nicety; the first
they make the breaking off a Contract, or Espousal; and the last a Separation
after actual Matrimony. Plutarch mentions a very severe Law of Romulus, which
suffered not a Wife to leave her Husband, but gave a Man the Liberty of turning
off his Wife, either upon poisoning her Children, or counterfeiting his private
Keys, or for the Crime of Adultery. But if the Husband on any other Occasion
put her away, he ordered one Moiety of his Estate to be given to the Wise, and
the other to fall to the Goddess Ceres; and that who ever sent away his Wise
should make an Atonement to the Gods of the Earth Plutarch in Romul.
. It Is very memorable that almost Six Hundred Years after the Building of the
City, one P. Servilius or Carvilius Spurius, was the first of the Romans that
ever put away his Wife Valor. Man. lib. 2. cap. 1. Plutarch Compar. Romul. and
These. etc Romans (...). 1^.
.

The common way of Divorcing was by sending a Bill to the Woman containing the
Reasons of the Separation and the tender of all her Goods which she brought
with her, this they termed repudium mittere. Or else it was performed in her
presence before sufficient Witnesses, with the Formalities of tearing the
Writings, refunding the Portion, taking away the Keys, and turning the Woman
out of Doors. But however the Law of Romulus came to fail, it is certain that in
later Times the Women too as well as the Men might sue a Divorce, and enter on
a separate Life. Thus Juvenal Sat. 9.

-- Fugientem saepe puellam
Amplexu rapui, tabulas quoque fregerat and jam
Signabat.
And Martial Lib. 10. Epigr. 41.

Mense novo Mati veterem Proculeia maritum
Deseris, atque jubes res sibi habere suas.
We have here a fair Opportunity to enquire into the grounds of the common
Opinion about the borrowing and lending of Wives among the Romans. He that
charge them most severely with this Practice is the most Learned Tertullian
in his Apology, chap. 39. Omnia indiscreta sunt apud nos, etc. All things (says
he, speaking of the Christians) are common among us, except our Wives: We admit
no Partnership in that one thing, in which other Men are more professedly
Partners, who not only make use of their Friend's Bed, but very patiently
expose their own Wives to a new Embrace: I suppose, according to the
Institution of the most wise Ancients, the Grecian Socrates, and the Roman
Cato, who freely lent out their Wives to their Friends. And presently after, O
sapientiae Atticae and Romanae gravitatis exemplum! leno est Philosophus and
Censor. O wondrous Example of Attick Wisdom, and of Roman Gravity! a
Philosopher and a Censor turn a Pair of Pimps.

Chiefly on the strength of this Authority, the Romans have been generally
taxed with such a Custom: And a very great Man of our own Country Sir William
Temple, Introduction to the Hist. of Eng.
expresses his Compliance with the vulgar Opinion, though he ingeniously
extenuates the Fault in a parallel Instance. So much indeed must be granted
that though the Laws made those Husbands liable to a Penalty who either hired out
their Wives for Money, or kept them after they had been actually convicted of
Adultery; yet the bare permission of that Crime did not fall under the Notice
of the civil Power. And Vlpian says expressly, ei qui patitur uxorem suam
delinquere, matrimoniumque suum contemnit; quique contaminatione non
indignatur, poena adulterum non infligitur. He that suffers his Wife to defile
his Bed, and contemning his Matrimonial Contract is not displeased at the
Pollution, does not incurr the Penalty of Adulterers. But it is almost
impossible that this should give Occasion to such a Fancy, being no more than
what is tolerated at present. I may therefore be alleged in Favor of the
Romans that this Opinion might probably have its Rise from the frequent
practice of that sort of Marriage, according to which a Woman was made a Wife
only by Possession and Use, without any farther Ceremony. This was the most
Incomplete of all Conjugal Ties; the Wise being so, rather by the Law of
Nature, than according to the Roman Constitution; and therefore she was not
called Materfamilias, nor had any Right to inherit the Goods of her Husband;
being supposed to be taken purely on the Account of procreating Issue: so that
after the bearing of Three or Four Children, she might lawfully be given to
another Man.

As to the Example of Cato, (not to urge that Tertullian has mistook the Censor
for him of Vtica, and so lost the Sting of his Sarcasm) the best Accounts of
that Matter may be had from Strabo and Plutarch. The Place of Strabo is in his
seventh Book. (...). They report of these Tapurians that it is counted lawful
among them to give away their Wives to other Men, after they have had Two or
Three Children by them: As Cato, in our time, upon the request of Hortensius,
gave him his Wife Marcia, according to the old Custom of the Romans. Here by
(...) and (...) we should not understand the lending or letting out of Women,
but the marrying them to new Husbands; as Plato uses (...), to bestow
Daughters in Marriage.

Plutarch before he proceeds to his Relation, has premised that this Passage in
the Life of Cato, looks like a Fable in a Play, and is very difficult to be
cleared, or made out with any certainty. His Narration is taken out of
Thraseas, who had it from Munatius, Cato's Friend and constant Companion, and
runs to this Effect.

Quintus Hortensius, a Man of signal Worth, and approved Virtue, was not
content to live in Friendship and Familiarity with Cato, but desired also to be
united to his Family, by some alliance in Marriage. Therefore waiting upon Cato
he begun to make a proposal about taking Cato's Daughter Porcia from Bibulus,
to whom she had already born three Children, and making her his own Wife,
offering to restore her after she had born him a Child, if Bibulus was not
willing to part with her altogether: Adding that though this in the Opinion of
Men might seem Strange, yet in Nature it would appear Honest and Profitable to
the Public, with much more to the same Purpose. Cato could not but express his
Wonder at the strange Project, but withal approved very well of uniting their
Houses: When Hortensius turning the Discourse did not stick to acknowledge,
that it was Cato's own Wife which he really desired. Cato perceiving his
earnest Inclinations, did not deny his Request, but said that Philip the Father
of Martia ought also to be consulted. Philip, being sent for, came, and finding
they were well agreed, gave his Daughter Martia to Hortensius, in the presence
of Cato, who himself also assisted at the Marriage.

So that this was nothing like lending a Wife out, but actually marrying her to
another while her first Husband was alive, to whom she may be supposed to have
came by that kind of Matrimony which is founded in the right of Possession. And
upon the whole the Romans seem to have been hitherto Unjustly Taxed with the
Allowance of a Custom not usually practiced among the most barbarous and savage
part of Mankind.

CHAP. X. Of the Roman Funerals.
THE most ancient and generally received Ways of Burying have been Interring
and Burning; and both these we find at the same time in Use among the Romans,
borrowed in all probability from the Graecians. That the Graecians interred
their dead Bodies may in short be evinced from the Story of the Ephesian Matron
in Petronius, who is described sitting and watching her Husband's Body laid in
a Vault. And from the Argument which Solon brought to justify the Right of the
Athenians to the Isle of Salamis, taken from the dead Bodies which were buried
there not after the manner of their Competitors the Megarensians, but according
to the Athenian Fashion; for that the Megarensians, turned the Carcass to the
East, and the Athenians to the West; and that the Athenians had a Sepulcher for
every Body, whereas the Megarensians put Two or Three into one Plutarch in
Solon.
. That the same People sometimes burnt their dead is beyond dispute from the
Testimony of Plutarch, who speaking of the Death of Phocion tells us, that for
some time none of the Athenians dared light a Funeral Pile, to burn the Body
after their manner. As also from the description of the Plague of Athens in
Thucydides (...), etc. with the Translation of which passage Lucretius
concludes his Poem.

Namque suos consanguineos aliena rogorum
Insuper extructa ingenti clamore locabant,
Sudebantque faces, multo cum sanguine saepe
Rixantes potius quam corpora desererentur.
To prove that both these ways of Burial were used by the Romans is almost
unnecessary. For Burning is known by every one to have been their common
Practice. And as for Interring, their great Lawgiver Numa particularly forbad
the burning of his own Body, but commanded it to be laid entire in a Stone
Coffin Plutarch in Number.
. And we learn from Cicero De Leg. lib. 2.
and Pliny N. H. lib. 7. cap. 54.
, that the Family of the Cornelii interred their dead all along 'till the time
of Sylla the Dictator, who in his Will gave express Orders to have his Body
burnt: probably to avoid the Indignities that might have been offered it after
burial by the Marian Faction, in return for the violence showed by Sylla's
Soldiers to the Tomb and Relics of Marius.

But though Burning was the ordinary Custom, yet in some particular Cases it was
Positively forbid, and looked on as the highest Impiety. Thus Infants who died
before the breeding of Teeth were enclosed unburnt in the Ground Idem lib. 7.
cap. 16.
.

-- Terra clauditur infans
Et minor igne rogi.
Juvenal Sat. 15. The Place set apart for the interment of these Infants was
called Suggrundarium. The same Superstition was observed in reference to
Persons who had been struck dead with Lightning or Thunder Idem lib 2. cap. 54.
. For they were never burnt again, but after a great deal of Ceremony performed
by the Auspices, and the Sacrifice of a Sheep, were either put into the Earth,
or else Consecratio sive Indigetatio Imperatoris post Obitum.
Ordo FUNERIS.

sometime let alone to lie upon the Ground where they had fallen. In both Cases
the Place was presently enclosed either with a stone Wall, or Stakes, or
sometimes only with a Rope, having the Name of Bidental, from the Bidens or
Sheep that was offered. Persius uses Bidental for the Person that had come to
this unhappy End.

An quia non sibris ovium Ergennaque jubente
Triste jaces lucis, evitandumque bibental.
Sat. For they fansied that where ever a Thunderbolt fell, the Gods had a
particular Desire to have that place Sacred to their Worship; and therefore
whether a Man had been killed or no, they used the same Superstition in
hallowing the Ground Dacier on Horace Art. Poet. Verse 471.
.

The several sorts of Funerals fall under the common Heads of Funus indictivum
and Funus tacitum. The funus indictivum had its Name ab indicendo from
inviting, because on such Occasions there was made a general Invitation of the
People by the Mouth of a public Crier. This was celebrated with extraordinary
Splendour and Magnificence, the People being presented with public Shows and
other uncommon Divertisements. The Funus Publicum which we meet with so often,
may be sometimes understood as entirely the same with the Indictive Funeral,
and sometimes only as a species of it. It is the same when it denotes all the
State and Grandeur of the more noble Funerals, such as were usually kept for
rich and great Men. It is only a species of the Indictive Funeral, when either
it signifies the proclaiming of a Vacation, and an enjoyment of public Sorrow,
or the defraying the Charges of the Funeral out of the Public Stock. For it is
probable that at both these Solemnities a general Invitation was made by the
Crier, yet in this Latter it was done by Order of the Senate, and in the Former
by the Will of the deceased Person, or the Pleasure of his Heirs. But no one
will hence conclude that the Funerals of all such rich Men were attended with
the Formality of a Vacation, and an Order for Public Grief. For this was
counted the greatest Honor that could be showed to the Relics of Princes
themselves: Thus the Senate decreed a Public Funeral for Syphax the once great
King of Numidia; and for Perses King of Macedon, who both died in Prison under
the Power of the Romans Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 1.
. And Suetonius informs us that Tiberius cap. 75.
and Vitellius cap. 3.
were buried in the same State. Yet upon account of having performed any signal
Service to the Commonwealth, this Honor was often conferred on private Men:
and sometimes upon Women too, as Dio relates of Attia the Mother of Julius
Caesar Lib. 47.
; and Xiphilin of Livia In Tiberio.
. Nor was this Custom peculiar to the Romans, for Laertius reports of
Democritus that deceasing after he had lived above a Hundred Years he was
honored with a Public Funeral. And Justin tells us that the Inhabitants of
Marceilles, then a Grecian Colony, upon the News of Rome's being taken by the
Gauls, kept a Public Funeral to testify their condolance of the Calamity Lib.
43.
.

There seem to have been different sorts of Public Funerals in Rome according
to the Magistracies or other Honors which the deceased Persons had born. As
the Praetorium, the Consulare, the Censorium and the Triumphale. The Two last
were by much the more Magnificent, which though formerly distinguished, yet in
the time of the Emperors were joined in One with the name of funus censorium
only; as Tacitus often uses the Phrase. Nor was Censorian Funeral consigned to
Private Persons, but the very Emperors themselves were honored with the like
Solemnity after their Deaths; as Tacitus reports of Claudius Annal. 12.
and Capitolinus of Pertinax.

The Funus tacitum, opposed to the Indictive or Public Funeral, was kept in a
private manner without the solemnization of Sports, without Pomp, without a
Marshaller, or a general Invitation. Thus Seneca de Tranquil. Anim. Morti natus
es: minus molestiarum habet funus tacitum. And Ovid. Trist. 1. Eleg. 3.

Quocunque aspiceres luctus gemitusque sonabant,
Formaque non taciti funeris instar erat.
This is the same that Capitolinus calls Funus vulgar, when he reports that
Marcus Antoninus was so extremely kind and munificent, as to allow even Vulgar
Funerals to be kept at the Charge of the Public. Propertius calls it plebeium
funus.

-- Adsint
Plebeii parvae funeris exequiae.
Lib. 2. El. 4. Ausonius: Funus commune.
Tu gremio in proavi funus commune locatum.
And Suetonius, funus translatitium, when he informs us that Britannicus was
Buried after this manner by Nero Ner. 33.
.

To the silent Funerals may be referred the Funera acerba, or untimely
Obsequies of Youths and Children; which Juvenal speaks of Sat. 11.

Non praematuri cineres, non funus acerbum
Luxuriae, etc.
And Virgil. Aen. 6.

Infantumque animae flentes in limine primo:
Quos dulcis vitae expertes and ab ubere raptos
Abstulit atra dies, and funere mersit acerbo.
The Funeral Ceremonies may be divided into such as were used to Persons when
they were dying, and such as were afterward performed to the dead Corpse.

When all Hopes of Life were now given over, and the Soul as it were just ready
for its flight, the Friends, and nearest Relations of the dying Party were wont
to kiss him, and embrace his Body 'till he expired. Thus Suetonius August. 91.
relates that Augustus expired in the Kisses of Livia. Nor need there be any
farther Proof of a Custom, which every Body is acquainted with. The Reason of
it is not so well known: Most probably, they thought by this pious Act to
receive into their own Bodies the Soul of their departing Friend. Thus
Albinovanus in the Epicede of Livia.

Sospite te salem moriar, Nero; tu mea condas
Lumina, and accipias hane animam ore pio.
For the Ancients believed that the Soul when it was about leaving the Body
made use of the Mouth for its Passage; whence animam in primo ore, or in primis
labris tenere, is, to be at Death's Door. And they might well imagine the Soul
was thus to be transfused in the last Act of Life, who could fancy that it was
communicated in an ordinary Kiss, as we find they did from these Love-Verses
recited by Macrobius, the Original of which is attributed to Plato:

Dum semihulco savio
Meum puellum savior
Dulcemque slorem spiritus
Duco ex aperto tramite,
Anima tune aegra and saucia
Cucurrit ad labias mihi, etc. Macrob. Suturn. lib. 2. cap. 2.
.
Nor did they only kiss their Friends when just expiring, but afterward too,
when the Body was going to be laid on the Funeral-Pile. Thus Tibullus Lib. 1.
Eleg. 1.

Flebis, and arsuro positum me, Delia, lecto,
Tristibus and lachrymis oscula mixta dabis.
And Propertius Lib. 2. Eleg. 12.

Osculaque in gelidis pones suprema labellis,
Cum dabitur Syrio munere plenus onyx.
Another Ceremony used to Persons expiring was the taking off their Rings. Thus
Suetonius reports that when the Emperor Tiberius swoun'd away, and was reputed
Dead, his Rings were taken from him, though he afterward recovered, and asked
for them again Cap. 73.
. They are much mistaken who fancy him to have done this with Design to change
his Heir; for though 'twas an usual Custom with the Ancients to constitute their
Heir or Successor by delivering him their Rings on their Deathbed, yet this
signified nothing in case a Legal Will was produced to the contrary See Valor.
Max. lib. 7. cap. 8.
.

But whether they took off the Rings to save them from the Persons concerned in
washing and taking care of the dead Body, or on any other Account, it is very
probable that they were afterward restored again to the Fingers, and burnt in
the Funeral-Pile: as may be gathered from that Verse of Propertius, where
describing the Ghost of his Mistress in the Habit in which she was burned, he
says, Et solitum digito beryllon adederat ignis.

Lib. 4. El. 7.

The Custom of closing the Eyes of a departing Friend, common both to Romans
and Graecians, is known by any one that has but looked in a Classic Author. It
may only here be observed that this Ceremony was performed for the most part by
the nearest relation, as by Husbands to their Wives, and by Wives to their
Husbands, by Parents to their Children, and by Children to their Parents, etc.
of all which we have a multitude of Instances in the Poets. Pliny tells us that
as they closed the Eyes of the dying Persons, so they opened them too again
when the Body was laid on the Funeral-Pile: And his Reason for both Customs is,
ut neque ab homine supremum spectari fas sit, and coelo non ostendi nefas
Valor. Max. lib. 11. cap. 37.
; because they counted it equally impious, that the Eyes should be seen by men
at their last motion, or that they should not be exposed to the view of Heaven.

And for the Ceremonies used to Persons after they were dead, they may be
divided into Three Sorts, such as were performed before the Burial, such as
concerned the Act of the Funeral, and such as were done after that solemnity.

Before the Burial we meet with the Customs of washing and anointing the
Corpse, not by any means proper to the Romans, but anciently used by almost all
the civilized Parts of the World, owing their first Rise to the Invention of
the Egyptians. These Offices in Rome were either performed by the Women whom
they termed Funerae; or else in Richer or nobler Families by the Libitinarii, a
Society of Men who got their livelihood by preparing Things in order to the
solemnization of Funerals. They had their Names from Libitina the Goddess who
presided over Obsequies. Hence the Word Libitina is commonly used for Death it
self; or for every thing in general relating to the Funerals, because in the
Temple of that Goddess all necessaries proper on such Occasions were exposed to
Sale. Phaedrus alludes to this Custom, speaking of a covetous Miser, Lib. 5.
Fab. 77.

Qui circumcides omnem impensam Funeris,
Libitina ne quid de tuo faciat lucrum.
But, to return to the Libitinarii, they seem to have been the chief Persons
concerned in ordering Funerals, undertaking the whole Care and Charge of such a
solemnity at a set Price; and therefore they kept a great Number of Servants to
perform the working Part, such as the Pollinctores, the Vespillones, etc. The
first of these were employed to anoint the dead Body, and the others we may
chance to meet with hereafter. In allusion to this Custom of anointing the
Corpse, Martial plays very gentilely on the Master of an Entertainment, where
there was much Essence to be got, but very little Meat:

Vnguentum fateor bonum dedisti
Convivis, here, sed nihil scidisti.
Res salsa est been olere and esurire.
Qui non coenat and ungitur, Fabulle,
Is vere mihi mortuus videtur.
When the Body had been washed and anointed, they proceeded to wrap it in a
Garment: The ordinary People for this purpose made use of the common Gown, and
though in some Parts of Italy the Inhabitants were so rude as not to wear the
Gown while they lived, yet Juvenal informs us that they did not want it at
their Death;

Pars magna Italiae est, si verum admittimus, in qua
Nemo togam sumit nisi mortuus.
Sat. 3. But those who had born any Public Office in the State, or acquired
any Honor in War, were after their Death wrapped in the particular Garment which
belonged to their Place, or to their Triumph; as Livy Lib. 34.
and Polybius Lib. 6.
expressly report. It may here be observed that the Ancients were so very
careful and superstitious in reference to their Funeral Garment, that they
often wove them for themselves and their Friends during Life. Thus Virgil
brings in the Mother of Euryalus complaining,

-- Nec te tua funera matter
Produxi, pressive oculos, nec vulnera lavi:
Vest tegens, tibi quam noctes festina diesque
Vrgebam, and tela curas solabar aniles.
Aen. 11. If the Deceased had by his Valor obtained any of the honorable
Coronets, it was constantly put on his Head, when the Body was dressed for the
Funeral; that the reward of Virtue might in some measure be enjoyed after
Death; as Cicero observes in his second Book of Laws. Other Persons they
crowned with Chaplets of Flowers, and with those too adorned the Couch on which
the Body was laid. The Primitive Christians declaimed severely against this
Custom, as little less than Idolatry; as is to be seen particularly in Minutius
Felix Octav. page 109. Edit. Oxon.
and Tertullian De Corona Mil.
.

The next Ceremony that followed was the collocatio or laying ^ut of the Body,
performed always by the nearest Relations. Whence Dio censures Tiberius for his
neglect of Livia, (...). He neither visited her when she was sick, nor laid her
out with his own Hands, after she was dead.

The Place where they laid, the Body was always near the Threshold, at the
entrance of the House.

-- Recipitque ad limina gressum
Corpus, ubi exanimi positum Pallantis Acestes
Servabat senior. Virg.
Aen. 9. And they took particular care in placing the Body, to turn the Feet
outward, toward the Gate, which Custom Persius has left us Elegantly described
in his Third Satyr.

-- tandemque beatulus alto
Compositus lecto crassisque lutatus amomis
In portam rigidos calces extendit --
The reason of this Position was to show all Persons whether any Violence had
been the Cause of the Party's Death, which might be discovered by the outward
Signs.

We must not forget the Conclamatio, or general Outcry set up at such
Intervals before the Corpse, by Persons who waited there on purpose; this was
done, either because they hoped by this means to stop the Soul which was now
taking its flight, or else to awaken it is powers which they thought might only
lie silent in the Body without Action. For the first reason we are beholden to
Propertius:

At mihi non oculos quisquam inclamavit euntes,
Vnum impetrassem te revocante diem.
The other is taken from the explication of this Custom by Servius on the sixth
of the Aeneids, and seems much the more probable Design. For the Physicians
give several instances of Persons, who being buried through have, in an
Apoplectick Fit, have afterward come to themselves, and many times miserably
perished for want of assistance.

If all this crying out signified nothing, the Deceased was said to be
concl^matus, or past call, to which practice there are frequent Allusions in
almost every Author. Lucan is very elegant ^o this Purpose,

-- Sic funere primo
Attonitae tacuere domus, quum corpora nondum
Conclamata jacent, nec matter crine soluto,
Exigit ad saevos famularum brachia planctus,
Lib. 2. There is scarce any Ceremony remaining which was performed before the
Burial, except the Custom of sticking up some Sign, by which the House was
known to be in Mourning. This among the Romans was done by fixing Branches of
Cypress or of the Pitch-tree near the Entrance, neither of which Trees being
once cut down, ever revive, and have on that account been thought proper
Emblems of a Funeral Plin. lib 16. cap. 33. Serve. ad Aen. 4.
.

Thus much was done before the Funeral; in the Funeral we may take notice of
the Elatio or carrying forth, and the Act of Burial. What concerns the First of
these will be made out in observing the Day, the Time, the Persons, and the
Place. What Day after the Person's Death was appointed for the Funeral, is not
very well agreed on. Servius on that Passage of Virgil, Ae. 5. Verse. 65.
Praeterea, si nona dies mortalibus aegris, etc. expressly tells us that the Body
lay seven Days in the House, on the eighth Day was burned, and on the ninth the
Relics were buried. But there are many Instances to prove that this set Number
of Days was not always observed. Therefore perhaps this belonged only to the
Indictive and public Funerals, and not to the Private and Silent; especially
not to the acerba Funera, in which Things were always huddled up with wonderful
Haste. Thus Suetonius reports of the Funeral of Britannicus Ner. 33.
and of the Emperor Otho Otho 811.
: and Cicero pro Cluentic, Eo ipso die puer cum hora undecima in publico and
valens visus esset, ante noctem mortuus, and postridie ante lucem combustus.

As to the Time of carrying forth the Corpse, anciently they made use only of
the Night; as Servius observes on those words of Virgil,

-- De more vetusto
Funereas rapuere faces.
Aen. 11. V. 142. The Reason he gives for it, is, that hereby they might avoid
meeting with the Magistrates or Priests, whose Eyes they thought would be
defiled by such a spectacle. Hence the Funeral had its Name a funalibus from
the Torches, and the Vespillones or Vesperones were so called from Vespera the
Evening.

Nothing is more evident than that this Custom was not long observed, at least
not in the Public Funerals, though it seems to have continued in the silent, and
private, as Servius acquaints us in the same Place. Hence Nero took a fair
excuse for hurrying his Brother Britannicus his Body into the Grave immediately
after he had sent him out of the World. For Tacitus reports that the Emperor
defended the hasty Burial which had caused so much Talk and Suspicion, in a
public Edict, urging that it was agreeable to the old Institutions, to hide
such untimely Funerals from Men's Eyes, as soon as possible, and not detain them
with the tedious Formalities of Harangues and Pompous Processions. It may not
be too nice a Remark, that in the more splendid Funerals the former part of the
Day seems to have been designed for the Procession. Thus Plutarch relates of
the burial of Sylla, that the Morning being very Cloudy over Head, they
deferred carrying forth the Corpse 'till the Ninth Hour, or Three in the
Afternoon. But though this Custom of carrying forth the Corpse by Night in a
great Measure ceased, yet the bearing of Torches and Tapers still continued in
Practice. Thus Virgil in the Funeral of Pallas, Aen. 11.

-- Lucet via longo
Ordine flammarum, and late discriminat agros.
And Persius, Sat. 3.

Hinc tuba, candelae, etc. And because Tapers were likewise used at the Nuptial
Solemnity, the Poets did not fail to take the hint for bringing them both into
the same Fancy. As Propertius Book 4. Eleg. last:

Viximus insignes inter utramque facem. And Ovid in the Epistle of Cydippe to
Acontius:

Et face pro thalami fax mihi mortis erat. Among the Persons concerned in
carrying forth the Corpse we may begin with those that went before the
Funeral-Bed, such as the Siticines, the Praeficae, the Ludii and Histriones,
the new Freed-Men, the Bearers of the Images, etc. The Name of the Siticines A.
Gellius Lib. 20. cap. 2.
derives from Situs and Cano, from singing to the Dead. They were of Two sorts,
some sounding on the Trumpet, others on the Flute or Pipe. That the Trumpets
had a Share in this Solemnity we learn from Virgil in the Funeral of Pallas,
Aen. 11.

Exoritur clamorque virum, clangorque tubarum. And from Propertius Book 2.
Eleg. 7.

Ah! mea tum quales, caneret tibi Cynthia somnos,
Tibia, funesta tristior illa tuba.
And Plutarch tells a notable Story of a Mag-pye, that upon hearing the
Trumpets at the Funeral of a Rich Man, for some time after quite lost her
Voice, and could raise no manner of Note, when on a sudden, as if she had been
all this while deeply meditating on the Matter, she struck up exactly the same
Tunes that the Trumpets had played, and hit all the Turns and Changes to
Admiration Plut. de Animal. Solert.
.

But it is likely that the Trumpets were used only in the Public Funerals to
give the People Notice to appear at the Solemnity, as Lipsius instructs us De
militia, lib. 4. cap. 10.
.

The Tibicines some restrain to the Funerals of Children, and younger Persons,
as Servius observes on the first of the Aeneids, and Statius Theb. 6. in the
Funeral of Achemorus.

Tum si^^um luctus cornu grave mugit adunco
Tibia, cui teneros suetum producere manes.
The learned Dacier has lately declared himself of the same Opinion On Horace
Book 1. Sat. 6. v. 44.
. But it is certain that this cannot always have held Good. For Suetonius
mentions the Tibiae in the Funeral of Julius Caesar Cap. 83.
, and Seneca in that of Claudius, in his Apocolocynthosis. And Ovid says of
himself in plain Words.

Interea nostri quid agant nisi triste libelli?
Tibia funeribus convenit ista meis.
Trist. 1. El. 1. Therefore it seems more probable that the Flutes or Pipes
were used in all sorts of Funerals, as the most accurate Kirchman has given his
Judgment.

It appears from the Figures of Trumpets and Flutes on the old Monuments, that
the Instruments of those Kinds used at Funeral Solemnities were longer than the
ordinary ones; and so fitted to give a sharper and more mournful Sound. Hence
Ovid calls the Funeral Trumpet longa tuba.

Pro longa resonet carmina vestra tuba.

Amor. 2. El. 6. After the Musicians, went the Praeficae, or the Mourning
Women, hired on purpose to sing the naenia or Iessus, the Funeral Song, filled
with the Praises of the Deceased; but for the most part trifling and mean.
Hence the Grammarian in Gellius took his Flout against the Philosophers, Vos
Philosophi mera estis (ut M. Cato ait) mortuaria Glossaria. Nam qui collegistis
and lectitastis res tetras and inanes and frivolas, tanquam mulierum voces
praesicarum A. Gell. lib. 18. cap. 7.
: You Philosophers ( as Cato says) are mere dealers in trash, for you go and
read and collect a Parcel of dry worthless Stuff, just such for all the World,
as the old Women whine out who are hired to sing the Mourning Song at a Funeral.

That the Ludii and Histriones, the Mimicks and Players went before the
Funeral-Bed, and danced after the Satyrick manner, we have the Authority of
Dionysius in his Ninth Book. And Suetonius tells a Story of the Arch-Mimick who
acted at the Funeral of Vespasian Cap. 19.
.

The Custom for the Slaves to go with their Caps on before the Corpse, and to
be thereupon made Free, is confirmed by a Law of Justinian, and we meet with
many examples of it in History.

As to the Beds or Couches born before in the Funeral Solemnity, the Design of
these was to carrry the Waxen Images of the Deceased Person's Ancestors, which
were therefore used only in the Funerals of those who had the jus imaginum, the
right of keeping the Effigies of the Men of their Family, which at home were
set up in Wooden Presses, and taken thence to be publicly shown after this
Manner, on the Death of any of their near Relations Plin. N. H. lib. 35. cap.
2.^
. Before the Corpse of Princes or some extraordinary Persons, not only the
Effigies of their Ancestors, but the Statues too of other great Men were born
in State. Thus Augustus ordered Six Hundred Beds of Images to be carried before
at the Funeral of Marcellus; and Sylla the Dictator had no less than Six
Thousand Servius in Aen. 11.
.

Besides all this, such as had been eminent for their Atcheivements in War, and
gained any considerable Conquest, had the Images and Representations of the
Enemies they had subdued, or the Cities they had Taken, or the Spoils won in
Battle; as Dionysius Lib. 8.
reports in the Funeral of Coriolanus, and Dio Lib. 56.
in that of Augustus. This Custom Virgil alludes to in the Funeral of Pallas:

Multaque praeterea Laurentis praemia pugnae
Aggerat, and longo praedam jubet ordine duci.
And a little after:

Indutosque jubet truncos hostilibus armis
Ipsos far duces, inimicaque nomina figi.
The Lictors too made a part of the Procession, going before the Corpse to
carry the Fasces and other Ensigns of Honor, which the Deceased had a Right to
in his Lifetime. It Is very remarkable that the Rods were not now carried in
the ordinary posture, but turned quite the contrary way, as Tacitus reports in
the Funeral of Germanicus Annal. 3.
. Hence Albinovanus in the Funeral of Drusus:

Quos primum vidi fasces, in funere vidi,
Et vidi versos, indiciumque mali.
We may now go on to the Persons who bore the Bier, or the Funeral-Bed; and
these were for the most part the nearest Relations, or the Heirs of the
Deceased. Hence Horace Book 2. Sat. 5.

-- Cadaver
Vnctum oleo largo nudis humeris tulit haeres.
And Juvenal Sat 10.

Incolumi Troja Priamus venisset ad umbras
Assaraci magnis solemnibus, Hectore funus
Portante, and reliquis fratrum cervicibus --
Thus they report of Metellus who conquered Macedon, that ho was carried to the
Funeral-Pile by his four Sons; one of which was then Praetor, the other three
had been all Consuls, two had triumphed, and one performed the Office of Censor
Plin. lib. 7. cap. 44. Val. Max. l. 7.
.

Sometimes Persons who had deserved highly of the Commonwealth were born at
their Funerals, by the Magistrates, or the Senators, or the chief of the
Nobility. Thus Plutarch relates of Numa, Suetonius of Julius Caesar Cap. 84.
, and Tacitus of Augustus Annal. 1.
. And the very Strangers and Foreigners that happened to be at Rome at the
Death of any worthy Person, were very desirous of signifying their Respect to
his Memory, by the Service of carrying the Funeral-Bed, when he was to be
buried: As Plutarch tells us in the Funeral of Paulus Aemylius, that as many
Spaniards, Ligurians and Macedonians as happened to be present at the
Solemnity, that were young and of vigorous Bodies, took up the Bed and bore it
to the Pile.

Persons of meaner Fortunes, and sometimes great Men too, if they were hated by
the People, were carried to their Burial by the Vespillones or Sandapilones,
who lived by this Employment. Thus Suetonius Cap. 17
and Eutropius Lib. 7.
relate of the Emperor Domitian. Therefore in this last way of bearing out, we
may suppose them to have used the Sandapila or common Bier, as in the former
the Lecticae or Lecti, the Litters or Beds. This Bier is what Horace and Lucan
call vilis Arca.

-- Angustis ejecta cadavera cellis
Conservus vili portanda locabat in arca.
Hor. L. 1. S. 8. Da vilem Magno plebeii funeris arcam
Quae lacerum corpus siccos effundat in ignes.
Luc. lib. 8. It Is worth observing, that sometimes the Bier or Bed was covered,
and sometimes not. It was exposed open if the Party had died a natural Death,
and was not very much deformed by the Change; and therefore now and then they
used to paint the Face, especially of Women, to make them appear with more
Advantage to the Sight. Dio tells us in the Life of Nero, that he daubed the
Body of Britannicus over with a sort of White-Wash to hinder the Blueness of
the Flesh, and such other Marks of the Poison from being discovered; but a
great Rain falling at the time of the Procession, washed off the Paint, and
exposed the Fatal Tokens to the View of the whole People.

But in Case the Visage was very much distorted, or upon some other Account not
fit to be shown, they threw a Covering over the Bed. Thus Paterculus reports
that Scipio Africanus was carried forth to Burial velato capite Lib. 2.
. Sometimes too when the Face or Head had been miserably bruised, as if the
fall of an House or some such Accident had occasioned the Party's Death, they
used to enclose the Head and Face, in a Masque, to hinder them from appearing,
and the Funerals in which this was practiced they termed larvata funera.

But the greatest part of the Persons were those that followed the Corpse.
These in private Funerals were seldom many besides the Friends and Relations of
the Deceased, and 'twas very usual in a Will to bestow Legacies upon such and
such Persons, upon Condition they should appear at the Funeral, and accompany
the Corpse. But at the indictive or public Funerals the whole City flocked
together upon the General Invitation and Summons. The Magistrates and Senators
were not wanting at the Procession, nor even the Priests themselves, as we find
in the Funeral of Numa described by Plutarch.

To give an account of the Habit and Gesture of the Mourners, or of the
Relations and others that followed the Corpse, is in a great measure
unnecessary; for the weeping, the bitter Complaints against the Gods, the
letting loose the Hair, or sometimes cutting it off, the changing the Habit,
and the laying aside the usual Ornaments, are all too well known to need any
Explication. Yet there are many things singular in these Subjects which deserve
our farther Notice. Thus they did not only tear or cut off their Hair, but had
a Custom to lay it on the Breast, or sometimes on the Tomb of the Deceased
Friend. Hence Ovid, of the Sisters of Narcissus:

-- Planxere sorores
Naiades, and sectos fratri imposuere capillos.
And Statius, Theb. 7.

-- Tergoque and pectore fusam
Caesariem ferro minuit, sectisque jacentis
Obnubit tenuia ora comis --
It Is no less observable that at the Funerals of their Parents, the Sons went
covered on their Heads, and the Daughters uncovered: perhaps only to recede as
far as possible from their ordinary Habit. Yet it is likely that in ordering the
Sons to cover their Heads at such Solemnities they had regard to the common
Practice of always wearing something on their Heads when they worshipped the
Gods, and especially when they were present at a Sacrifice. The Original and
Grounds of this Superstition are most admirably given by Virgil in the Prophet
Helenus his Instructions to Aeneas:

Quin ubi transmissae steterint trans aequora classes,
Et positis aris, jam vota in littore solves,
Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu:
Nequa inter sanctos ignes in honor deorum
Hostilis facies occurrat, and omina turbet,
Hunc socii morem sacrorum, hunc ipse teneto:
Hac casti maneant in relligione nepotes.
Aen. 3. As to the mourning Habits it has been already observed Book 5. chap. 7.
that the Senators sometimes on these Occasions went attired like Knights, the
Magistrates like Senators, etc. and that the common Wear for Mourning was
Black. But we may farther remark that though this was the ordinary Color to
express their Grief, used alike by both Sexes; yet after the establishment of
the Empire, when abundance of Party-Colours came in Fashion, the old Primitive
White grew so much into contempt, that at last it became proper to the Women
for their Mourning Clothes. Thus Statius in the Tears of Hetruscus.

Huc vittata comam niveoque insignis amictu
Mitibus exsequiis ades.
And though it may with some Reason be thought that the Poet here directing his
Speech to the Goddess Piety, gives her that Habit rather as a mark of Purity
and Innocence, than as the proper Badge of Grief in her Sex; yet the matter of
Fact is still evident from the Authority of Plutarch, who States this Subject
for one of his Problems, and gives several Reasons for the Practice.

After the PERSONS follows the PLACE whither the Procession was directed, by
which we must be guided in our next enquiry. In all the Funerals of Note,
especially in the Public or indictive, the Corpse was first brought with a
vast Train of followers into the Forum. Thus Horace Book 1. Sat. 6.

-- At hic si plostra ducenta,
Concurrantque foro tria funera, magna sonabit
Cornua quod vincatque tubas.
Here one of the nearest Relations ascended the Rostra and obliged the Audience
with an Oration in Praise of the Deceased. If none of the Kindred undertook the
Office, it was discharged by some of the most eminent Persons in the City for
Learning and Eloquence, as Appian reports of the Funeral of Sylla (...). lib. 1.
. And Pliny the Younger reckons it as the last Addition to the Happiness of a
very great Man, that he had the Honor to be praised at his Funeral by the most
Eloquent Tacitus, then Consul Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
; which is agreeable to Quinctilian's Account of this Matter, Nam and funebres
etc. For Funeral Orations (says he) depend very often on some public Office,
and by order of Senate are many times given in charge to the Magistrates to be
performed by themselves in Person Insti^nt. lib. 3. cap. 9.
.

The invention of this Custom is generally attributed to Valerius Poplicola
soon after the expulsion of the Regal Family. Plutarch tells us, that,
honoring his Colleagues Obsequies with a Funeral Oration, it so pleased the
Romans, that it became customary for the best Men, to celebrate the Funerals of
great Persons with Speeches in their Commendation.

Nor was this Honor proper to one Sex alone, for Livy reports that the Matrons
upon account of making a Collection of Gold for the deliverance of Rome from
the Gauls, were allowed as a signal Favor, to have Funeral Panegyricks in the
same manner as the Men. Plutarch's Relation of this Matter differs from Livy
only in the Reasons of the Custom: He acquaints us that when it was agreed
after the taking of Veii, that a Bowl of Massy Gold should be made and sent to
Delphi, there was so great a scarcity of Gold, and the Magistrates so puzzled
in considering how to get it, that the Roman Ladies meeting together and
consulting among themselves, out of the Golden Ornaments that they wore,
contributed as much as went to the making the Offering, which in Weight came to
eight Talents of Gold. The Senate to give them the Honor they had deserved,
ordained that Funeral Orations should be used at the Obsequies of Women as well
as of Men, which had never been a Custom before. But it seems probable that
this Honor was at first only paid to aged Matrons; since we learn from the
same excellent Author that there was no President of any Funeral Oration on a
younger Woman, 'till Julius Caesar first made one upon the Death of his own
Wife.

Cicero In Bruto.
and Livy ^ib. 8.
complain very much of this Custom of Funeral-Speeches, as if they had conduced
in a great measure to the corruption and falsifying of History. For it being
ordinary on these occasions to be directed more by the Precepts of Oratory,
than by the true Matter of Fact, it usually happened, that the deceased Party
was extolled on the Account of several noble Atcheivements to which he had no
just Pretensions: and especially when they came to enquire into their Stock and
Original, as was customary at these Solemnities, they seldom failed to clap in
Three or Four of the most renowned Persons of the Commonwealth to illustrate
the Family of the Deceased; and so by Degrees well nigh ruined all proper
Distinctions of Houses and Blood.

The next place to which the Corpse was carried, was the place of Burning and
Burial. It has been a Custom among most Nations to appoint this without the
City, particularly among the Jews and Greeks, from whom it may be supposed to
have been derived down to the Romans. That the Jews Buried without the City is
evident from several places of the New Testament. Thus the Sepulcher in which
Joseph laid our Savior's Body was in the same Place in which he was crucified
John 19.41.
, which was near to the City John 19.20.
. And we read in St. Matthew that at our Lord's Passion the Graves were opened,
and many Bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and came out of the Graves
after his Resurrection, and went into the Holy City, and appeared unto many
Matthew 27.52 and 53.
.

As to the Graecians, Servius in an Epistle to Tully Famii, lib. 4* Epist. 12.
, giving an Account of the unhappy Death of his Colleague Marcellus, which fell
out in Greece, tells him, that he could not by any means obtain Leave of the
Athenians to allow him a Burying-Place within the City, they urging a religious
Restraint in that Point, and the want of Precedents for such a Practice.

The Romans followed the same Custom from the very first building of the City,
which was afterward settled in a Law by the Decemviri, and often revived and
confirmed by several later Constitutions. The Reason of this Ancient Practice
may be resolved into a sacred and a civil Consideration. As to the former the
Romans and most other People had a Notion that whatever had been consecrated to
the supernal Gods was presently defiled upon the touch of a Corpse, or even by
bringing such a Spectacle near it. Thus Agellius tells us that the Flamen
Dialis might not on any Account enter into a Place where there was a Grave; or
so much as touch a dead Body Lib. 10. cap. 15.
. And if the Pontifex Maximus happened to praise any one Publicly at a
Funeral, he had a Veil always laid over the Corpse to keep it from his Sight;
as Dio reports of Augustus Lib. 54.
, and Seneca of Tiberius Consolat. ad Mar. cap. 15.
. It Is likely that this might be borrowed from the Jewish Law, by which the
High Priest was forbid to use the ordinary Signs of Mourning, or to go in to
any dead Body Leviticus 21.10, 11.
.

The civil Consideration seems to have been that neither the Air might be
corrupted by the stench of putrefied Bodies, nor the Buildings endangered by
the frequency of Funeral Fires.

The Places then appointed for Burial without the City were either Private or
Public; the Private Places were the Fields or Gardens belonging to particular
Families. Hence Martial took the Jest in one of his Epigrams on a Gentleman
that had buried abundance of Wives:

Septima jam, Phileros, tibi conditur uxor in agro.
Plus nulli, Phileros, quam tibi reddit ager.
If it was possible they always buried in that part of the Field or Garden
which lay nearest to the Common Road, both to put passengers in mind of
mortality, and to save the best part of their land. Thus Juvenal Sat. 1.

-- Experiar quid concedatur in illos
Quorum Flaminia tegitur cinis atque Latina.
And we have scarce any Relation of a Burying in Authors, but they tell us the
Urn was laid near such a Way. Propertius is very carnest in desiring that he
may not be buried after this ordinary Custom, near a celebrated Road, for fear
it should disturb his Shade,

Dii faciant mea ne terra locet ossa frequenti
Qua facit assiduo tramite vulgus iter.
Post mortem tumuli sic infamantur amantum;
Me tegat arbonea devia terra coma.
Aut humet ignotae cumulus vallatus arenae;
Non juvat in media nomen habere via,
Lib. 3. Eleg. 15. The Public Burying Places were of Two Sorts, those which
were allotted to the Poor, and those which were put to this Use only at the
Funerals of great Persons. The former were the Puticulae or Puticuli without
the Esquilian Gate; they contained a great quantity of Ground, and were put to
no other Use, than the burying the Bones and Ashes of Persons of the lowest
Rank, who had no private Place of their own to lay the Corpse in. But because
the vast Number of Bones deposited here, infecting the Air, rendered the
neighboring Parts of the City unhealthy, Augustus gave away a great many Acres
of this Common Field to his Favorite Maecenas, who turned it into fine
Gardens. This Horace tells us at Large, Book 1. Sat. 8.

Huc prius angustis ejecta cadavera cellis
Conservus vili portanda locabat in arca,
Hic miserae plebi stabat commune sepulchrum, etc.
The public Place assigned for the Burial of great Persons was commonly the
Campus Martius; this Honor could not be procured but by a Public Decrec of
Senate, and was never conferred but on Men of the highest Stations and Merits.
Thus Plutarch relates of Lucullus, and Pompey; Appian of Sylla (...). lib. 1.
, Suetonius of Drusus Claud. cap. 1.
, and Virgil of Marcellus.

Quantus ille virum magnam Mavortis ad urbem
Campus aget gemitus? vel quae, Tiberine, videbis
Funera, cum tumulum praeterlabere recentem!
Aen. 6. Cicero in his Ninth Philippic reports, that Servius Sulpitius upon
account of his many signal Services to the Commonwealth, was honored with a
Public Sepulcher in the Campus Esquilinus, or in any other Place where he
pleased, Thirty Foot in Dimension every way, and to remain to his Heirs and
Posterity. But there are not many Instances of the like Practice.

It has been said that the ordinary Custom was to bury without the City, but we
must except some Sepulchers, as those of the Vestal Virgins, whom Servius tells
us the Laws allowed a Burying-Place within the City Ad Aen. 9.
. The same Honor was allowed to some extraordinary Persons, as to Valerius
Poplicola Plutarch in his Life.
, and to Fabritius Cicero.
, being to continue to their Heirs. Yet none of the Family were afterward
there interred, but the Body being carried thither, one placed a burning Torch
under it, and then immediately took it away; as an attestation of the
Deceas'd's Privilege, and his receding from his Honor: and then the Body was
removed to another Place.

Having done with the carrying forth, we come to the Act of Burial. The Corpse
being brought, in the manner already described, without the City, if they
designed to burn it, was carried directly to the Place appointed for that
purpose, (which if it was joined with the Sepulcher, was called Bustum, if
separate from it, Vstrina) and there laid on the rogus or Pyra; a Pile of Wood
prepared to burn it on. This Pile was built in the shape of an Altar, differing
in Height according to the Quality of the Deceased. Thus Virgil in the Funeral
of Misenus. Aen. 6.

-- Aramque sepulchri
Congerere arboribus, coeloque educere certant.
And Ovid against Ibis:

Et dare plebeio Corpus inane rogo. The Trees which they made use of, were
commonly such as had most Pitch or Rosin in them, and if they took any other
Wood they split it, for the more easy catching Fire:

Procumbunt piceae, sonat icta securibus ilex
Fraxineaeque trabes; cuneis and fissile robur
Scinditur. -- Virg.
Aen. 6. Round about the Pile they used to set a parcel of Cypress-Trees;
perhaps to hinder the noisome Smell of the Corpse. This Observation is owing to
Virgil in the same Place:

Ingentem struxere pyram, cui frondibus atris
Intexunt latera, and ferales ante cupressus
Constituunt.
That the Body was placed on the Pile not by it self but together with the
Couch or Bed on which it lay, we have the Authority of Tibullus, Book 1. El. 1.

Flebis, and arsuro positum me, Delia, lecto. This being done, the next of
Blood performed the Ceremony of lighting the Pile, which they did with a Torch,
turning their Face, all the while, the other way, as if it was done out of
Necessity, and not willingly. Thus Virgil Aen. 6.

-- Subjectam, more parentum,
Aversi tenuere facem.
As soon as the Wood took Fire, they wished and prayed for a Wind to assist the
Flames, and hasten the consuming of the Body which they looked on as a
fortunate Accident. Thus Cynthia in Propertius:

Cur ventos non ipse rogis, ingrate, petisti? And Plutarch in the Life of Sylla
reports, that the Day being Cloudy over Head, they deferred carrying forth the
Corpse 'till about Three in the Afternoon, expecting it would rain: But a
strong Wind blowing full against the Funeral-Pile, and setting it all on a
Flame, his Body was consumed in a Moment. As the Pile shrunk down, and the Fire
was upon going out, the Clouds shower'd down, and continued raining till Night.
So that his good Fortune was firm even to the last, and did as it were
officiate at his Funeral.

At the Funerals of the Emperors or Renowned Generals, as soon as the Wood was
lighted, the Soldiers and all the Company made a solemn Course (Decursio) three
times round the Pile, to show their Affection to the Deceased; of which we have
numerous Examples in History. Virgil has not forgot to express this Custom:

Ter circum accensos cincti fulgentibus armis
Decurrere rogos, ter moestum funeris ignem
Lustravere in equis, ululatusque ore dedere.
Aen. 11. The Body never burnt without Company, for because they fansied that
the Ghosts delighted in Blood, 'twas customary to kill a great Number of
Beasts, and throw them on the Pile:

Multa boum circa mactantur corpora morti
Setigerasque sues, raptasque ox omnibus agris
In flammam jugulant pecudes -- Virg.
Aen. 11. In the more ignorant and barbarous Ages they used to murder Men, and
cast them into the Funeral-Flames of Princes and Commanders. The Poets never
burn a Hero, without this inhumane Ceremony. Homer gives Patroclus

(...). And Virgil lib. 10.

Quatuor hic juvenes, totidem quos educat Vfens,
Viventes rapit, infernis quos immolet umbris,
Captivoque rogi perfundat sanguine flammas.
But besides these there were abundance of Presents thrown into the Fatal
Flames of several sorts: These consisted for the most Part of costly Garments
and Perfumes thrown on the Body as it burned. Thus Virgil Aen. 6.

Purpureasque super vestes velamina nota,
Conjiciunt.
And Plutarch makes the extravagant Expenses of Cato Junior at the Funeral of
his Brother Caepio, to have been taken up in a vast quantity of costly Garments
and Perfumes.

All the Precious Gums, Essences, and Balsams that the Ancients were acquainted
with, we find employed in their Funerals. Hence Juvenal describes a Fop that
used abundance of Essence:

Et matutino sudans Crispinus amomo,
Quantum vix redolent duo funera. --
Sat. 4. The Soldiers and Generals had usually their Arms burnt with them on
the Pile. Thus Virgil in the Funeral of Misenus.

-- Decorantque super fulgentibus armis.

Aen. 6. And in another Place he adds the Spoils taken from the Enemy:

Hinc alii spolia occisis direpta Latinis
Conjiciunt igni, galeas ensesque decoros,
Fraenaque ferventesque rotas: Pars munera nota
Ipsorum clypeos, and non felicia tela,
When the Pile was burned down they put out the remains of the Fire, by
sprinkling. Wine, that they might the more easily gather up the Bones and Ashes.

Postquam collapsi cineres, ac Flamma quicvit,
Relliquias vino and bibulam lavere favillam, Virg.
Aen. 6. This gathering up the Bones and Ashes, and putting them into an Urn,
was the next Office paid to the Deceased, which they termed ossilegium. The
whole Custom is most fully and elegantly described by Tibullus in his Third
Book Eleg. 2.

Ergo ubi cum tenuem, etc. How the Ashes and Bones of the Man came to be
distinguished from those of the Beasts, and Wood, and other Materials, is not
easy to be conceived, unless we suppose the difference to have arose from the
artificial placing of the Corpse on the Pile, so that every thing else should
fall away on each side, and leave the Humane Relics in a Heap by themselves.

Nothing now remained but to put the Urn into the. Sepulcher, and so sprinkle
the Company with Holy Water, and so dismiss them. Virg. Aen. 6.

Ossaque lecta cavo texit Chorinaeus aheno,
Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda,
Spargens rore levi and ramo felicis olivae,
Lustravitque viros, dixitque novissima verba.
These novissima verba were either directed to the Deceased, or to the Company.
The form of Speech with which they took leave of the Deceased was, Vale, vale,
vale, nos te ordine quo natura permiserit cuncti sequemur. The word with which
the Praefica dismissed the People was ILICET, as much as ire licet. As they
went away they had a Custom of wishing for Light Earth, to lay on the Relics,
which they reckoned a great Happiness. Hence it is an usual Inscription on
Ancient Funeral Monuments S. T. T. L. or Sit tibi terra levis.

To enquire into the Original of Sepulchers, their several Kinds and Forms, the
variety of Ornaments, the difference of Inscriptions, and the many ways of
violating the Tombs of the Dead would be too nice a Disquisition for the
present Design. Yet we must not pass by the Cenotaphia, or Monuments erected on
a very singular account, either to Persons buried in another Place, or to those
who had received no Burial, and whose Relics could not be found.

Thus Suetonius tells us that the Soldiers in Germany, raised an Honorary Tomb
to the Memory of Drusus, though his Body had been carried to Rome, and deposited
in the Campus Martius Sucton. Claud. cap. 1.
. And we often find the Generals raising Tombs to the Honor of those Soldiers
whose Bodies could not be found after a fight. These tumu^i inanes or
honorarii, when erected to the Memory of particular Persons, were usually kept
as sacred as the true Monuments, and had the same Ceremonies performed at them.
Thus Virgil describes Andromache keeping the Anniversary of Hector's Death.
Aen. 3.

Solemnes tum forte dapes, and tristia dona
Libabat cineri Andromache, manesque vocabat
Hectoreum ad tumulum, viridi quem cespite inanem,
Et geminas causam lachrymis sacraverat aras.
AFTER THE FUNERAL we are to take Notice of the several Rites performed in
Honor of the Dead, at the Festivals instituted with that design. The chief
time of paying these Offices was the Feralia, or Feast of the Ghosts in the
Month of February, but 'twas ordinary for particular Families to have proper
Seasons of discharging this Duty, as the Novennialia, the Denicalia and the
like. The Ceremonies themselves may be reduced to these Three Heads,
Sacrifices, Feasts, and Games; to which if we Subjoin the Customs of Mourning
and of the Consecration, we shall take in all that remains on this Subject.

The Sacrifices (which they called Inferiae) consisted of Liquors, Victims and
Garlands. The Liquors were Water, Wine, Milk, Blood and liquid Balsam.

Hic duo rite mero libans carchesia Baccho
Fundit humi, duo lacte novo, duo sanguine sacro.
Virg. Aen. 5. The Blood was taken from the Victims offered to the Manes, which
were usually of the smaller Cattle, though in ancient Times 'twas Customary to
use Captives or Slaves in this Inhumane Manner.

The Balsams and Garlands occur every where in the Poets. Propert. Lib. 3.
Eleg. 15.

Afferet huc unguenta mihi, sertisque sepulchrum
Ornabit, custos ad mea busta sedens.
Tibullus Lib. 3. Eleg. 4.

Atque aliquis senior, veteres veneratus amores,
Annua constructo serta dabit tumulo.
Besides these Chaplets, they strow'd loose Flowers about the Monument. Thus
Virgil Aen. 5.

Purpureos jacit flores, ac talia fatur. And again Aen. 6.

Tu Marcellus eris. Manibus date lilia plenis:
Purpureos spargam flores: animamque nepotis
His saltem accumulem do^is, and fungar inani
Munere.
The Feasts celebrated to the Honor of the Deceased were either Private, or
Public: The Private Feasts were termed Silicernia, from Silix and Coena, as if
we should say Suppers made on a Stone. These were prepared both for the Dead
and the Living. The Repast designed for the Dead, consisting commonly of Beans,
Lettices, Bread and Eggs, or the like, was laid on the Tomb for the Ghosts to
come out and eat, as they fansied they would, and what was left they burnt on
the Stone. Travelers tell us that the Indians at present have a superstitious
Custom much of this Nature, putting a piece of Meat always in the Grave with
the dead Body, when they bury in the Plantations.

'Twas from this Custom that to express the most miserable poverty of poor
starved Creatures they used to say such an one got his Victuals from the Tombs.
Thus Catullus:

Vxor Meneni saepe quam in sepulchretis
Vidistis ipso rapere de rogo c^^nam,
Quum devolutum ex igne prosequens panem
A semiraso tunderetur ustore.
And Tibullus his Curse is much to the same Purpose.

Ipsa fame stimulante furens eseasque sepulchro
Quaerat, and a saevis ossa relicta lupis.
The Private Feasts for the Living were kept at the Tomb of the Deceased, by
the nearest Friends and Relations only.

The Public Feasts were when the Heirs or Friends of some Rich or Great Person
obliged the People with a general Treat to his Honor and Memory; as Cicero
reports of Seipio Africanus In Orat p^o Nur^^.
, and Dio of that of Sylla Lib. 37.
. And Suetonius Cap. 22.
relates that Julius Caesar gave the People a Feast in Memory of his Daughter.
There was a Custom on these Occasions to distribute a Parcel of raw Meat among
the poor People, which they termed visceratio; though this was sometimes given
without the Public Feasts.

The Funeral Games have already been dispatched among the other Shows.

As to the Custom of Mourning, besides what has been before observed by the
bye, we may farther take Notice of the time appointed for that Ceremony, and
some of the most remarkable Ways of expressing it. Numa (as Plutarch tells us
in his Life) prescribed Rules for regulating the Days of Mourning according to
certain Times and Ages. As for Example, a Child of Three Years, and so upwards
to Ten, was to be mourned for so many Months as it was Years Old. And the
longest time of Morning for any Person whatsoever was not to exceed the Term of
Ten Months: Which also was the time appointed unto Widows to lament the Loss of
their deceased Husbands, before which they could not without great Indecency
pass unto second Marriages: But in case their Incontinence was such as could
not admit so long an Abstinence from the Nuptial-Bed, they were to sacrifice a
Cow with a Calf for expiation of their Fault.

Now Romulus his Year consisting but of Ten Months, when Numa afterward added
two Months more, he did not alter the Time he had before settled for Mourning,
and therefore though after that Time we meet with luctus annuus, or a Year's
Mourning often taken upon the Death of some Eminent Person, we must take it
only for the old Year of Romulus, or the Space of Ten Months.

There were several Accidents which often occasioned the concluding of a
Public or Private Mourning before the fixed Time; such as the Dedication of a
Temple, the Solemnity of Public Games or Festivals, the solemn Lustration
performed by the Censor, and the discharging any Vow made by a Magistrate or
General; which being Times of Public Rejoicing, would have otherwise implied a
Contradiction.

As to the Tokens of Private Grief they had none but what are common to most
Nations, as the keeping their House for such a time, the avoiding all manner of
Recreations and Entertainments, and the like. But in Public Mourning 'twas a
singular Custom to express their Concern by making the Term and all Business
immediately to end, and settling a Vacation, 'till such a Period; of which we
have frequent Instances.

The last Ceremony designed to be spoken of was Consecration. This belonged
properly to the Emperors yet we meet too with a private Consecration which we
may observe in our way. This was when the Friends and Relations of the Deceased
canonized him, and paid him Worship in Private, a piece of Respect commonly
paid to Parents by their Children, as Plutarch observes in his Roman Questions.
Yet the Parents too sometimes conferred the same Honor on their deceased
Children, as Cicero promises to do for his Daughter Tullia, in the End of his
Consolation; and though that Piece be suspected as we now have it, yet the
present Authority loses nothing of its Force, being cited heretofore by
Lactantius, according to the Copies extant in his time.

The Public Consecration had its Original from the Deification of Romulus, but
was afterward discontinued 'till the time of the Emperors, on most of whom
this Honor was conferred. The whole Ceremony is most accurately described by
Herodian in his Fourth Book, the Translation of which Place may conclude this
Subject.

The Romans (says he) have a Custom to consecrate those Emperors who leave
either Sons or designed Successors at their Death; and those who received this
Honor are said to be enrolled among the Gods. On this Occasion the whole City
maintain a Public Grief, mixed as it were with the Solemnity of a Festival.
The true Body is buried in a very Sumptuous Funeral, according to the ordinary
Method. But they contrive to have an Image of the Emperor in Wax, done to the
Life; and this they expose to public View, just at the entrance of the Palace
Gate, on a stately Bed of Ivory covered with rich Garments of Embroidered Work,
and Cloth of Gold. So the Image lies there all Pale, as if under a dangerous
Indisposition. Round the Bed there sit, the greatest part of the Day, on the
Left-side, the whole Senate in Black; on the Right, the Aged Matrons, who
either upon account of their Parents or Husbands are reputed Noble; they wear
no Jewels or Gold, or other usual Ornaments, but are attired in close white
Vests, to express their Sorrow and Concern. This Ceremony continues Seven Days
together; the Physicians being admitted every Day to the Bed, and declaring the
Patient to grow all along worse and worse. At last when they suppose him to be
dead, a select Company of Young Gentlemen of the Senatorian Order take up the
Bed on their Shoulders and carry it through the Holy Way into the old Forum, the
place where the Roman Magistrates used to lay down their Offices. On both sides
there are raised Galleries with Seats one above another, one side being filled
with a Choire of Boys all Nobly Descended, and of the most eminent Patritian
Families; the other with alike Set of Ladies of Quality; who both together sing
Hymns and Paeans composed in very Mournful and Passionate Airs, to the Praise
of the Deceased. When these are over, they take up the Bed again, and carry it
into the Campus Martius; where, in the widest part of the Field, is erected a
foursquare Pile, entirely composed of large Planks, in Shape of a Pavilion, and
exactly regular and equal in the Dimensions. This in the inside is filled up
with dry Chips, but without is adorned with Coverlids of Cloth of Gold, and
beautified with Pictures, and curious Figures in Ivory. Above this is placed
another Frame of Wood, much less indeed, but set off with Ornaments of the same
Nature, and having little Doors or Gates standing open about it. Over this are
set a Third and a Fourth Pile, every one being considerably less than that on
which it stands; and so others perhaps, 'till they come to the least of all,
which forms the Top. The Figure of this Structure altogether may be compared to
those Watch Towers, which are to be seen in Harbors of Note, and by the Fire
on their Top direct the course of the Ships into the Haven. After this,
hoisting up the Body into the second Frame of Building, they get together a
vast Quantity of all manner of sweet Odours and Persumes, whether of Fruits,
Herbs, or Gums, and pour them in Heaps all about it. There being no Nation, or
City, or indeed any Eminent Men, who do not rival one another in paying these
last Presents to their Prince. When the Place is quite sill'd with a huge Pile
of Spices and Drugs, the whole Order of Knights ride in a Solemn Procession
round the Structure, and imitate the Motions of the Pyrrhic Dance. Chariots
too, in a very regular and decent Manner, are drove round the Pile, having the
Coach-Men clothed in Purple, and bearing the Images of all the Illustrious
Romans, renowned either for their Command and Administration at Home, or their
Memorable Achievements in War. This Pomp being finished, the Successor to the
Empire taking a Torch in his Hand, puts it to the Frame, and at the same time
the whole Company assist in lighting it in several Places, when on a sudden the
Chips and Drugs catching Fire, the whole Pile is quickly consumed. At last,
from the highest and smallest Frame of Wood, an Eagle is let loose, which
ascending with the Flames toward the Sky is supposed to carry the Princes Soul
to Heaven.

CHAP. XI. Of the Roman Entertainments.
THE peculiar Customs of the Romans in reference to eating and drinking will
easily fall under the Three Heads of the Time, the Place and the Manner of
their Entertainments. As to the First, the Romans had no proper Repast besides
Supper, for which the ordinary Time was about their Ninth Hour, or our Three a
Clock. Thus Martial reckoning up the Business of every Hour,

^mperat exstructos frangere nona toros. But the more frugal made this Meal a
little before Sunset, in the declension of the Day.

Nunc eadem labente die convivia qu^erit.

Virg. Aen. 4. On the other side the Voluptuous and Extravagant commonly began
their Feasts before the ordinary Hour. Thus Horace Book 1. Od. 1.

Nec partem solido demere de die
Spernit.
And Juvenal Sat. 10.

Exul ab octava Marius bibit. -- Those that could not hold out 'till Supper,
used to break their Fast in some other part of the Day, some at the Second
Hour, some at the Fourth, answering to our Eighht and Ten; some at the Sixth or
about Noon, others at the Eight or our Two, as their Stomachs required or their
Employments gave them leave. At this time they seldom eat any thing but a bit
of Dry-bread, or perhaps a few Raisins or Nuts, or a little Honey. From the
different Hours of taking this Breakfast it is likely that the jentaculum,
prandium, merenda, etc. had their Original, being really the same Repast made
by several Persons at several times Dacier on Horace Book 1. Od. 1.
.

The PLACE in which the Romans eat, was anciently called coenaculum. Seneca,
Suetonius and others style it coenatio. But the most common Appellation, which
they borrowed from the Graecians was Triclinium. Servius on the first of the
Aeneids to that Verse Aunea composuit Sponda mediumque locavit. takes an
Occasion to reprehend those Grammarians who will have Triclinium to signify a
Room to sup in, and not barely a Table. Yet (to omit a tedious Number of
Citations from other Authors) Tully himself uses the Word in that Sense: For
in one of his Epistles he tells Atticus Lib. 15. Epist. 50.
that when Caesar came to Philippi, the Town was so full of Soldiers, as to
leave Caesar scarce a Triclinium to sup in.

Anciently the Romans used to sup sitting, as the Europeans at present, making
use of a long Table.

Perpetuis soliti patres consistere mensis.

Virg. Aen. 8. Afterward the Men took up a Custom of lying down, but the Women
for sometime after still kept to sitting as the more decent Posture Val. Max.
lib. 2. cap. 1.
. The Children too of Princes and Noblemen for the same Reason used to sit at
the Backs of the Couches Tacitus Ann. 13. Suetonius Claud. cap. 32.
, whence after a Dish or Two they withdrew without causing any Disturbance. Yet
as to the Women it is evident that in aftertimes they used the same Posture at
the Table as Men. Thus Cicero in an Epistle to Paetus relling him of one
Clyteris, a Gentlewoman that was lately at a Treat with him, makes use of the
Word accubuit. And Ovid in his Fourth Love-Elegy of the First Book, advises
his Mistress about her Carriage at the Table before her Husband,

Cum premit ille torum, vultu comes ipse modesto
Ibis ut accumbas. --
And Suetonius relates, that at an entertainment of the Emperor Caligula, he
placed all his Sisters one by one below himself, uxore supra cubante, his Wife
lying above him.

When they began thus to lay down in stead of sitting at Meat, they contrived a
sort of Beds or Couches of the same nature with those on which they slept, but
distinguished from them by the Name of lecti tricliniorum, or, tricliniares,
the other being called lecti cubicularii.

They were made in several forms, but commonly foursquare, sometimes to hold
Three or Four, sometimes Two Persons, or only one. Yet in the same
Entertaining-Room it was observed to have all the Couches of the same Shape and
Make. After the round Citron-Tables grew in Fashion, they changed the Three
Beds (which denominated the Triclinium) for the Stibadium, one single large
Couch in the Shape of a Half Moon, or of the Grecian Sigma, from which it
sometimes borrowed its Name, as in Martial,

Aceipe lunata scriptum testudine sigma. These Stibadia took their several
Names from the Number of Men that they held, as the Hexaclinon for Six, the
Heptaclinon for Seven, and so on.

The higher the Beds were, the more Noble and Stately, and the more Decent too
they were thought. Hence Virgil Aen. 2.

Inde toro pater Aencas sie o^sus ab alto. And again Aen. 6.

-- I ucent genialibus altis.
Aurea fulera toris --
On the contrary, low Couches were looked on as so extremely Scandalous, that
(as Valerius Maximus tells the Story) one Aelius Tubero, a Man of great
Integrity and of very Noble Progenitors, being a Candidate for the Praetorship,
lost the Place, only for making use of a low sort of Supping-Beds, when he gave
the People a public Entertainment Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 5.
.

On the Beds they laid a kind of Ticks or Quilts, stuffed with Feathers, Herbs,
or Tow; which they called culcitrae. Over these, they threw in ancient Times
nothing but Goat's Skins; which were afterward changed for the stragula, the
Coverlids or Carpets: These we some times find under the Name of toralia on
account of belonging to the torus. Thus in Horace,

-- Ne turpe toral, ne sordida mappa
Corruget nares.
Lib. 2. Epist. 5. And again,

Et Tyrias dare circum illota toralia vestes.

Lib 2. Sat. 4. On the Carpets were laid Pulvini, or Pillows, for the Guests to
lean their Backs on.

'Twou'd be endless to describe the Variety and Richness of the Furniture with
which they set off their Tables. It will be enough to observe from Pliny, that
when Carthage was finally destroyed by Scipio Africanus, the whole Mass of
Treasure found in that City, which had so long contended for Riches, Glory and
Empire with Rome it self, amounted to no more than what in Pliny's time was
often laid out in the Furniture of a Table Not. Hist. lib. 33. cap. 11.
.

As to the manner of the Entertainment, the Guests in the first place Bathed
with the Master of the Feast, and then changed their ordinary Cloths for the
vestis convivalis or coenatoria, a light kind of Frock; at the same time having
their soleae pulled off by the Slaves, that they might not foul the fine
Carpets, and Furniture of the Beds. And now taking their Places, the first Man
lay at the Head of the Bed, resting the fore Part of his Body on his
Left-Elbow, and having a Pillow or Bolster to prop up his Back. The next Man
lay with his Head toward the Feet of the first, from which he was defended by
the Bolster that supported his own Back; commonly reaching over to the Navel of
the other Man; and the rest after the same manner. Being settled on the Beds,
in the next place they washed their Hands:

-- Stratoque super discumbitur ostro
Dant manibus famuli lymphas.
Virg. Aen. 1. After this they were served with Garlands, of Roses and whatever
other Flowers were in Season, which they did not wear only on their Heads, but
sometimes too about their Necks and Arms: This too was the time to present them
with Essences and Perfumes.

The Number of Guests is by Agellius stated according to Varro, that they
should not be fewer than Three, or more than Nine; either to express the Number
of the Graces or the Muses.

The most honorable Place was the middle Bed, and the middle of that. Horace
describes the whole Order of sitting in his Eighth Satyr of the 2 Book:

Summus ego, and prope me Viscus Sabinus, and infra,
Si memini, Varius: cum Servilio Balatrone
Vibidius; quos Maeco^as adduxerat umbras,
Nomentanus crat super ipsum, Porcius infra.
So that infra aliquem cubare is the same as to lay in ones Bosom, as St. John
is said to have done in our Savior's; whence Learned Men have thought that
either the same Custom was observed in almost all Nations; or else that the
Jews, having been lately conquered by Pompey, conformed themselves in this, as
in many other respects, to the Example of their Masters.

At the beginning of the Feast they laid on their Bellies, their Breasts being
kept up with Pillows, that they might have both their Hands at Liberty; but
toward the Latter End they either rested themselves on their Elbows, as Horace
says, Languidus in cubitum jam se conviva reponet. or if they had not a mind to
talk, they lay all along; all which Postures are to be seen in the old Marbles,
which present the Draughts of an Entertainment.

They seem to have brought in the several Courses in Tables, not by single
Dishes; as Servius observes on that of Virgil, Aen. 5.

Postquam prima quies epulis, mensaeque remotae. But some will understand by
mensae in that place, rather the Dishes than the Tables, because it follows
presently after, Dixit, and in mensa laticum libavit honorem. unless we suppose
that as soon as the Table of Victuals was removed, another was set in its Place
with nothing but Drink.

They wanted no manner of Diversion while they were eating, having ordinarily
Music and Antic Dances, and in Ancient Times Combats of Gladiators.

Plutarch tells us that Julius Caesar, once in a Treat which he made for the
People, had no less than 22000 Triclinia, which is enough to give an Item of
their public Entertainments.

CHAP. XII. Of the Roman Names.
THE Roman Names, which many times grievously puzzle ordinary Readers may be
divided into four sorts, the Names of the ingenui, or Freeborn, the Names of
the Freed-Men and Slaves, the Names of the Women, and the Names of Adopted
Persons.

The Ingenui had Three several Names, the Praenomen, the Nomen, and the
Cognomen. Hence Juvenal Sat. 5.

-- Si quid tentaveris unquam
Hiscere, tanquam habeas tria nomina. --
The Praenomen answers to our Christian Name, but was not imposed 'till the
assuming the Manly Gown. The Names of this sort most in use, together with the
initial Letters, which ordinarily stand for them in Writing, are as follow;

A. Aulus, C. Caius, D. Decimus, K. Caeso, L. Lucius, M. Marcus and Manius, N.
Numerius, P. Publius, Q. Quinctus, T. Titus.

AP. Appius, CN. Cneus, SP. Spurius, TI. Tiberius, MAM. Mamercus, SER. Servius,
SEX. Sextus.

The Nomen immediately followed the Praenomen, answering to the Grecian
Patronymicks. For as among them the Posterity of Aeacus had the Name of
Aeacidae, so the Julian Family in Rome were so called from Iulus or Ascanius.
But there were several other Reasons which gave Original to some of the
Praenomens, as living-Creatures, Places, and Accidents, which are obvious in
reading.

The Cognemen was added in the Third Place, on the Account of distinguishing
Families, and was assumed from no certain Cause, but usually from some
particular Occurrence. But this must be understood principally of the first
Original of the Name, for afterward it was Hereditary, though frequently changed
for a new one.

The ^^^es in Ancient Times had no Name, but what they horrowed from the
Praenomen of their Master; as Lucipor, Publipor, M^rcipor, as much as to say,
Lucii puer, Publii puer, etc. Quinctilian Institut. lib. 1. cap. 4. Plin. N. H.
lib. 33. cap. 1.
. When this Custom grew out of Fashion, the Slaves were usually called by some
proper Name of their own, sometimes of Latin and sometimes of Grecian
Original; this was very often taken from their Country, as Davus, Syrus, Geta,
etc. Upon their Manumission they took up the Praenomen and the Nomen of their
Masters, but instead of the Cognomen made use of their former Name; as Marcus
Tullius Tyro, the Freed-Man of Cicero. After the same Manner it was customary
for any Foreigner who had been made a Free Denizen of ^^me, to bear the Nomen
and Praenomen of the Person on whose Account they obtained that Privilege.

The Women had Anciently their Praenomens as well as the Men, such as Caia,
Caeilia, Lucia, etc. But afterward they seldom used any other besides the
proper Name of their Family, as Julia, Marcia and the like. Where there were
two Sisters in a House, the distinguishing Terms were Major and Minor; if a
greater Number, Prima, Secunda, Terti^, Quarta, Quinta, or by contraction,
Secundilla, Quartilla, and Quintida.

Adopted Persons assumed all three Names of him who obliged them with this
kindness, but as a mark of their Proper descent added at the end either their
former Nomen or Cognomen; the first exactly the same as before, (as Q.
Servilius Cepio Agalo Brutus the Name of M. Junius Brutus, when adopted by Q.
Servilius Gepio Agalo:) The other with some slight Alteration, as C. Octavius
when adopted by Julius Caesar was called C. Julius Caesar Octavianus.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Roman Money.
IN enquiring into the Difference and Value of the Roman Coins, we may begin
with the lowest sort, that of Brass. The Aes then, or most Ancient Money, was
first stamped by Servius Tullius, whereas formerly it was distinguished only by
Weight and not by any Image. The first Image was that of Pecus or small Cattle,
whence it took the Name of Pecunia. Afterward it had on one side the Beak of a
Ship, on the other a Janus, and such were the Stamps of the As: For as for the
Triens, Quadrans, and Sextans, they had the Impression of a Boat upon them. A
long Time did the Romans use this and no other Money 'till after the War with
Pyrrbus A. U. C. 484. Five Years before the First Punick War, Silver began to
be coined. The Stamps upon the Silver Denarii are for the most part Wagons,
with Two or Four Beasts in them on the one side, and on the Reverse, the Head
of Rome, with an Helmet. The Victoriati have the Image of Victory sitting; the
Sestertii usually Castor and Pollus on the one side, and both on the reverse
the Image of the City: So the Custom continued during the Commonwealth.
Augustus caused Capricorn to be set upon his Coin, and the Succeeding Emperors
ordinarily their own Effigies: Last of all came up Coin of Gold, which was
First stamped Sixty Two Years after that of Silver, in the Consulship of M.
Livius Salinator, with the same Stamp and Images. So much for the several Kinds
of Money, we may now proceed to the several Pieces under every Kind.

The As was so named quasi Aes or Brass, being of that Metal, and at first
Consisted of a Pound weight, 'till in the first Punic War, the People being
greatly impoverished made Six Asses of the same Value out of One. In the Second
Punic War, Hannibal pressing very hardly upon them, and putting them to great
Shifts, the Asses were reduced to an Ounce a piece; and in Conclusion by a Law
of Papyrius was brought down to half an Ounce, and so continued. The As
contained the tenth Part of the Denarius and was in Value of our Money about
ob. qua. The Semissis or Semi-aes half as much: The Triens wa^ the Third Part
of the As, the Quadrans the Fourth, by some called Triuncis and Teruncius,
because it contained Three Ounces before the Value was diminished. The Sextans
or Sixth Part was that which every Head contributed to the Funeral of Menenius
Agrippa; but these were not sufficient for use, and therefore there were other
Pieces made, as the Vncia or Twelfth Part of the Pound, the Semuncia of the
weight of Four Drachms, and the Sextula or Sixth Part of an Ounce. Varro speaks
too of the Decussis in value Ten Asses, or of a Denarius; the Vicessis of Two
Denarii, and so upwards to the Centussis, the greatest Brass Coin, in Value 100
Asses, 10 Denarii, and of our Money 6 s. 3 d.

For the Silver Money the old Denarius was so named because it contained denos
aeris or asses, Ten Asses, though its Weight and Value was not all times alike.
For the old Roman Denarius during the Commonwealth, weighed the Seventh Part
of an Ounce; and was in Value of our Money 8 d. ob. c. with 1/7 c; But the new
Denarius which came up in the time of Claudius or a little before, weighed
exactly an Attick Dram, so that the Greek Writers when they speak of it, for
every Denarius mention a Dram; which of our Money was worth 7 d. ob.
Computations are generally made with reference to this new sort of Denarius; if
respect be had to the ancienter Times, then all Reckonings are to be increased
one seventh Part; for just so much the old one exceeded the new. When we meet
with Bigatus and Quadrigatus, we must understand the same Coin as the Denarius,
so called from the Bigae and Quadrigae stamped upon it. There was another Coin
called Victoriatus, from the Image of Victory upon it, first stamped in Rome by
an order of Clodius, in Value h^lf a Denarius, and therefore named also
Quinarius, as containing the Value of Five Asses; it was worth of our Money 3
d. ob. q. The next that follows, and, which makes so much Noise in Authors is
the Sestertius, so called quasi Sesquitertius, because it contained Two Asses
and a half, being Half the Victoriatus and a fourth Part of the Denarius. It Is
often called absolutely Nummus, because it was in most frequent Use, as also
Sestertius Nummus; it was worth of our Money 1 d. ob. qu. q. The Obolus was the
sixth Part of the Denarius, equal to the Attick (...), as much as 1 d. qu. with
us. The Libella was the tenth Part of the Denarius, and equal in Value to the
As; so called as a little Pound, being supposed equal to a Pound of Brass;
worth of our Money ob. qu. The Sembella, as if written Semi-libella, was half
this. And lastly the Teruncius was the fortieth Part of a Denarius, so named
because it was Worth Three Ounces of Brass; being inconsiderable in Value, and
next to Nothing.

To come at last to the Golden Coins; those most remarkable were the Aurei
Denarii, so termed, either because they had the same stamp as the Silver
Denarii, or because in Bigness they much resembled them. The old Aureus stamped
during the Commonwealth, weighed Two Silver Denarii; Worth of our Money 17 s.
1 d. ob. qua. The new Aureus stamped about the beginning of the Empire, was
lighter than the Former by One Seventh Part; Weighing Two Drachms; Worth about
15 s. of our Money. Thus they continued Didrachmi for the Time of the first
Five Caesar's; and then lost much in their Weight by the Fraud and Avarice of
the succeeding Princes. In Nero's Time they wanted a few Grains, under Galba a
little more, under Nerva, Trajan, and Adrian no fewer than Eight; under
Vespasian Ten, and the like under Antoninus Pius, M. Aurelius Severus, and
others. Domitian indeed had in his Reign restored to the Aurei their full
Weight of Two Drachms, and so did Aurelian afterward, which was the last
Regulation of the Matter while Rome continued to be the Seat of the Empire.

The Marks of the ordinary Coins are as follow. The As because at first it was
a Pound-Weight, is thus Expressed L. and the Sestertius, because it contained
in Value Two Pounds of Brass and a Half, thus HS. or HS. The Mark of the
Quinarius or Victoriatus was A. and of the Denarius X. or (...)

The Sums in use among the Romans were chiefly Three; the Sestertium, the
Libra, and the Talent. The Sestertium contained a Thousand Sestertii, about 7
l. 16 s. and 3 d. of our Money. We don't indeed find it in any Ancient Author
in the Singular Number, as now it is used, but we very often meet with it in
the Plural, though with the same Signification. In reckoning by Sesterces the
Romans had an Art, which may be understood by these Three Rules. The First is,
If a Numeral Noun agree in Case, Gender, and Number, with Sestertius, then it
denotes precisely so many Sestertii, as december Sestertii just so many. The
second is this, If a Numeral Noun of another Case be joined with the Genitive
Plural of Sestertius, it denotes so many Thousand, as December Sestertium
signifies Ten Thousand Sestertii. Lastly, if the Adverb Numeral be joined, it
denotes so many Hundred Thousand, as Decies Sestertium signifies Ten Hundred
Thousand Sestertii; or if the Numeral Adverb be put by it self, the
Signification is the same, Decies or Vigesies stand for so many Hundred
Thousand Sestertii, or as they say, so many Hundred Sestertia.

The Libra or pound, contained Twelve Ounces of Silver, or Ninety Six Drachms
or later Denarii; and was worth of our Money 3 l.

The Third Sum was the Talent, which contained Twenty Four Sestertia, and Six
Thousand later Denarii, being the same with the Attick Talent. For the Names of
Talent, Mina, and Dram, the Romans took from the Greeks, as the Greeks
borrowed from them the Libra and the Vncia. The Talent was worth of our present
Money 187 l. 10 s.

We meet too with a lesser Sum termed the Sportula, being what the rich Men
gave to every one of their Clients after having waited upon them in Public,
and now and then at other times as they pleased to appoint. It was in Value
about a Hundred quadrantes or 18 d. ob. qua. Formerly instead of this Sum they
used to deal a Doal to the Clients without the Door, who received the Victuals
in a little Basket made of a kind of Broom called Sportum.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A.
Ablecti (a sort of Soldiers) 187 * Acca Laurentia 66 Accensi 194 Accusatio 135
* Acilius Glabrio 12 Actionem intendere Vide edere. 132 Actiones Legis 145
Actium (the fight Fight there) 17 Actor 131 Actuarius 120 Ad bestias 143 Ad
ludos 143 Ad metalla 143 Addictio 133 * Adrian (Emper.) 22 Advocati 131 Aedes
sacrae 38 Aedicula 38 Aediles 113, 114 Aediles Cereales 114 Aediles Curules 114
Aediles Plebis 114 Aedilitii 189 * Aemylian (Empe.) 23 * Aemylius 12 Aeneatores
202 * Aequi. 7, 8 Aerarium facere 110 Aere diruti 214 Aes 365 Aestimatio litis
136 Aetius 27 Agger 206 Agones 86 * Alaric King of the Goths 27 Alba (Longa) 2,
3, 4 Albo-galerus 313 Alae 187 * Alexander severus (Emper.) 23 Alicata Chlamys
301 Almaigns 23 Ambire magistratum 104 Ambitus 173 Ampliatio 136 * Amulius 2, 3
(...) 269 * Ancus Martius 4 Ancylia 74 Andabatae (a sort of Gladiators) 269
Animadversio 136 Animam in primo ore, or in primis labris tenere 331 * Anna
Perenna 33 Annus bissextilis 88 Anquisitio 137 * Anthemius (Emper.) 28 Anthony
14. vid. Marc. * Antiochus King of Syria 12 * Antonius Caracalla (Emper.) 22
Vid. Marcus and Lucius * Antoninus Pius 22 * Antoninus his Pillar 54 Apex 25
Apex 312 Aphractum 236 Apparitores 120 * Appius Claudius 7.66 * Appius the
Decemvir 115 Aquae and ignis interdictio 140 Aquaeducts 57 Aquila (Standard of
a Legion) 189 Aquilae praeesse 189 Arabia (made a Province) 21 Arbiter bibendi.
242 Arbitri 131 Arches 52 Area of the Amphitheatre 43 Arena 43 Aries (the
battering-Ram) 231 Armatura 209 Armenia (made a Province) 21 Armillae 215
Armorum concussio 213 Arms of the Romans 194 Aruspices vid. Haruspices. As 365
Ascanius 2 Assyria (made a Province) 21 Atellanae (sort of Plays) 279 Athens (
taken by Sylla) 13 Atrati 303. * Attalus ( King of Pergamus) 13 * Attila the
Hun 27 Auctorati 264 * Aventinus ( an Alban King) 32 Augurale 205 Auguries 67,
68, 69 Augurs 67, 68, 69 * Augustulus (Emper.) 28 * Augustus (Emper.) Vid.
Octavius. Avens (River) 32 * Avitus 28 * Aulus Plantius 18 Aurei denarii 367 *
Aurelian (Emper.) 24 Auspicia 191 Auspices 68 Auspiciis suis rem gerere 192
Auxilia 184
B.
Bagnios 56, 57 * Balbinus (Emper.) 23 Balista 232 Barritus 203 Basilicae 48
Basilicus (a throw on the Dice) 242
Order of the Roman
BATTLE 198, etc. Beds of Images carried in Procession at Funerals 340
Beneficiarii 184 Bestiarii 143, 259 Bidental 329 Bigatus 366 Bigae 249 Biremis
236 Bissextus dies 88 Blood-letting, a Punishment of the Roman Soldiers 214
Borrowing and lending of Wives among the Romans, probably a mistake 325, etc.
Bridges of Rome 38 * Britain 17, 18, 22 * Brutus 5, 6, 15, 16 Buccinatores 202
Buccinae 202 Buccula 196 Bulla aurea 300 Burning of the Dead 327, 328 Bustum
348
C.
* Caia Caecilia Wife to Tarquinius Priscus 321 Caeliolus, or minor Caelius 31
Caelius or Caeles 31 Caerites 226 Caerites tabulae 226 CAESAR 14, 15 Calcei
lunati 314, 315, 316 Calcei mullei 316 Calculi 240 Caligati 317 Caligae 316,
317 Caligae Speculatoriae 317 CALIGVLA 17 CAMILLVS 7, 8 Camp (form and division
of it) 204, etc. Campagi 316 Campidoctores 209 Campus Martius 47 Campus
Sceleratus 78 Candidati 103 Candidatus Principis 112 Canicula (a throw on the
Dice) 242 Cannae (the Battle there) 11 Cantabria (subdued) 17 Capitol 39
Cappadocia (made a Province) 17 Caps and Hats not ordinarily used by the Romans
300 Caput porcinum 201 Carceres 46 CARINVS (Emper.) 25 Carmen Saliare 74
Carmenta 66 Carnifex 120 Carthage (destroyed) 12 CARVS (Emper.) 25 CASSIVS 15,
16 Castra aestiva 204 -- Hiberna ibid. -- Stativa ibid. Catapulta 232
Catastasis of the Drama 278 Catastrophe of the Drama ibid. Catilinarian
Conspiracy 14 CATTI 21 Cavea 43 Celeres 117 Celeustes 237 Cella of a Temple 41
Cenotaphia 352 Censors 109, 110, 111, 128 Censorii 189 Census 109 Census (put
for a rich Man) 166 Centesimatio 213 Centumviri litibus judicandis 119, 131
Centuria pr^erogativa 128 Centuries 127, 128 Centuries or Ordines of Soldiers
186 Centurions 188 Centurionum primus 188 Cerealia 94 Cestus (the Exercise
described) 248 Chariot Races 248 Charistia 93 Chirodotae 305 Chlamys vid,
alicata. 303, 304 Chorus 282 283, 284 CICERO 14 CIMBRI 13 Cincture of the Gown
298 Cinctus Gabinus 299 Circo 's 48 Circus Maximus ibid. Circuitio Vigilium 207
Civilis quercus 215 Civitates foederatae 226 Classes 127 Classici authors,
ibid. Classicum 202, 203 CLAUDIUS 18 CLAUDIUS the second 24 Clavi 305, etc.
CLAELIA 6, 7 CLEOPATRA 15, 17 Clients 96 Cloacae 58 Closing the Eyes of
departing Friends 332, 333 Clusium 7, 8 Cocles 6 Coemptio 320 Coenaculum 359
Coenatio ibid. Cognomen 364 Cohors Praetoria 186 Cohors prima, ibid. COLLATINVS
5 Collis Dianae 32 -- Hortulorum, ibid. -- Pincius ibid. -- Quirinalis 31
Collocatio 335 Colonies 225 Columna bellica 55 Columns, or Pillars 53 Comitia
125, etc. -- Calata 125 -- Centuriata 126, 127 -- Curiata 125 -- Tributa 126
Comitium 50 COMMODVS 22 Commons 97 Companies of Charioteers -- vid. Factio. --
the Golden 249 -- the Purple ib. -- the Silver ib. Conclamatio 335 Concussio
armorum 203 Confarreatio 320 Conquisitores 181 Consecration of Temples 40
Consecration of Emperors 356 -- Of Friends ibid. CONSTANTINE the GREAT 25
Constantinople ibid. CONSTANIVS 26 CONSTANTIVS CHLORVS 25 Consulares 189
Consuls 105, 106 Consules ordinarii 106 Consules suffecti ibid. CORNELIUS
SCIPIO 12 Cornicines 202 Cornua (Music) 202 Cornua (Parts of the Army) 187 Sub
Corona venire 225 Corona Castrensis 216 -- Civica 215 -- muralis 216 -- navalis
ibid. -- obsidionalis ibid. -- rostrata ibid. -- triumphalis ibid. -- vallaris
ibid. Coronae aureae 216 Corsica (subdued) 10 Corvus (Engine) 233 Corybantes 81
Cothurnus 280 Cottian Alps 18 CRASSVS 14 Crepidae 316 Cretata ambitio 298
Crimen adulterii 134 -- ambitus 133 -- falsi 134 -- inter sicarios 133 --
majestatis 123, 133 -- parricidii 134 -- peculatus 123, 133 -- Perduellionis
127 -- plagii 134 -- repetundarum 123, 133 -- veneficii 134 -- vis publicae 133
Crista 196 Crupellarii 268 Cucullus 309 Culcitrae 361 Culeus 142 Cultrarii 86
Cuneus 200 Curetes 31, 81 Curia Hostilia 48 Curia Pompeii ibid. Curiae 47, 48
Curio maximus 126 Curiones ibid. Custos purpura 301 Cybeel's Priests 81
D.
Daci 21 Dacia made a Province ibid. (...) 271 Dalmatia (subdued) 17 Damnum 139
Dapes saliares 75 Decemjugis 249 Decemviri 114, 115, 116 Decemviri litibus
judicandis 119 Decemviri, Keepers of the Sibylline Oracles 79 DECII 193
Decimatio 213 DECIVS (Emper.) 23 Decuma 227 Decumanis 227 Decuriae 187
Decuriones 190 Decursio at Funerals 390 Decussis 366 Deductores 104 Defensio
135 Defuncti pro rostris laudatio 50 Dejectio e rupe Tarpeia 141 Delatores 138
Delubrum 38 Denarius 366 Denicalia 353 Deportati 140 Deportatio ibid.
Designatores 297 Devoting of the Generals. 193 Diadem 313, 314 DIADVMEN
(Emper^) 23 Dibaphus 309 Dictator 106, 107, 108 DIDIVS JVLIAN 22 Didrachmi 367
Dies atri 90 -- comitiales ibid. -- comperendini ibid, -- fasti ibid -- festi
89 -- intercisi ibid. -- praeliares 90 -- profesti. 89, 90 -- postriduani 90 --
stati ibid. Diem dicere reo. 137 (...) 236 (...) ibid. DIOCLESIAN 25 Dirae 69
Diribitores 128 Disceptatio causae 132 Discus (the Exercise described) 246, 247
(...) 107 Divorces 324, etc. Do, Dico, Addico 90 Dolabrae 231 DOMITIAN 21 Ductu
suo rem gerere 192 Duumviri Classis 237 Duumviri, Keepers of the Sibylline
Oracles 78 Duumviri perduellionis or Capitales 119 Dux Legionis 188
E.
Edere actionem 131 Edicta (Bills for a Show of Gladiators) 269 EGERIA 74 (...)
236 (...) ibid. (...) ibid. (...) 245 Elatio 336 Elephants running in the Circo
249 Emeriti 184 Ensigns 201 Entertainments 358, etc. Epitasis of the Drama 278
Epula or Lectisternia 83 Epulae 89 Epulones, or septemviri epulonum 83
Equestria 44 Equi redditio Equitatus justus 187 Equites 181, 182 Equitum
probatio 182 Equitum recensio ibid. Equitum transvectio ibid. Equum adimere 110
Espousals 318 Essedarii 269 Essedum ibid. EVANDER, 66 EVDOXIA 28 Evocatio
deorum tutelarium 228 Evocati 184, 185 Euphrates (the bounds of the Empire) 22
Excubiae 206 Exercitia ad palum 209 Exilium 139 Exodium 208 Exodium
Atellanicum. 280 Extispices 69 Extraordinarii 187 (...) 305
F.
FABIVS MAXIMUS 11 Factio alba 248 -- prasina ibid. -- russata ibid. -- veneta
ibid.
Vid. Company of Charioteers.
Fari tria verba 90 Fasces 106 Fasciae 314 Fascis 210 Favete linguis 84
FAVSTVLVS 2, 3 Feasts in Honor of the Dead 354, 355 Februaca 65 Feciales 75,
76, 223 Femoralia 310 Feralia 92 Ferentarii 194 Feriae conceptivae 89 --
imperativae ibid. -- stativae ibid. Fescennine Verses 275, 324 Festivals in the
Roman Calendar 92, etc. Filius familiae 167 Flamen Dialis 73 -- martialis ibid.
-- quirinalis ibid. Flaminica ibid. Flamma, or Flammeum (the Flamens Cap.) 72
Flammeum (the Brides Veil) 321 Floralia 49 Follis (a sort of Ball) 244 Forfex
(a way of Drawing up an Army) 200 Form of Absolution 136 -- of Ampliation ibid.
-- of Condemnation ibid. Fortunate Names 179 Forums 48, etc. Forum Augusti 49
Forum Boarium 50 Fora civilia 49 Forum cupedinarium 50 Forum Holitorium ibid.
Forum Julium 49 Forum Latium ibid. Forum Nervae ibid. Forum Palladium 50 Forum
Pistorium 50 Forum Romanum 49 Forum Suarium 50 Forum Trajani 50 Forum
transitorium 49 Fora Venalia ibid. Fossa 206 Fratres Arvales 66 Freedom by
Manumission 98 Freedom by Testament. 97 Frontis inustio 136 Frumentum
aestimatum 227 -- decumanum ibid. -- emptum ibid. -- honorarium ibid. --
imperatum ibid. Funditores 194 Funerae 333 Funerals 327, etc. Funeral
Ceremonies before the Burial. 333, etc. -- in the Act of Burying 336, etc. --
after the Burial 353, etc. Funera acerba 331 Funera larvata 342 Funus
indictivum 329 -- publicum 329 -- tacitum 330 -- translatitium 331 -- vulgar,
or plebeium 330 Furca ignominiosa 141 Furca penalis ibid. Fustes 213
G.
GALBA 19 Galea 194, 196 Galericulum 313 GALERIVS (Emper.) 25 Galerus 312, 313
Galli ( Priests of Cybele) 81 GALLIENVS 23 GALLVS 23 Games 240, etc. Gates of
Rome 37 Gauls sack Rome 8 General 191, 192, 193 Genseric King of the Vandals 26
Gladiators 262, etc. Gladiato^es catervarii 266 -- fiscales ibid. -- meridiani
ibid. -- ordinarii ibid. -- postulati ibid. Globus (way of drawing up an Army)
200 Glycerius vid. Liarius. GORDIAN 23 Gown used to wrap dead Bodies in vid.
Toga. 334 GRATIAN 27 Gregorian Style 88 Gubernator 237
H.
Habet, or hoc habet (a form of Speech used by Gladiators after giving a Blow)
271 Habit of the Romans 297, etc. HANNIBAL 11, 12 Harangues of the Generals 203
Harpastum 244 Haruspices 69, 70, 71 Hasta pura 214 Hastae 194 Hastati 185
HELIOGABALVS 23 Heptaclinon 360 Hepteres 235 Hercules his Chapel near the
Amphitheaters and Circo's 273 Hexaclinon 360 Hexeres 235 Hippagines 235 HIRTIVS
16 Histriones 279 Hoc age 84 Honorary Tombs 352 HONORIVS 27 Hoplomachi 269
Hostia 84
I.
Janiculum 33 Idaei Dactyli 81 Ides 91 Jentaculum 359 Ignobiles 97 Ignomin^^
139 Ilicet 352 Illyricum (subdued) 17 Immolatio 85 Immunes 227 Imperator vid.
General. Imperatoris Contubernales 205 In crucem actio 141 In integrum
restitutio 133 Infra aliquem cubare 362 Infula 84 Ingenui 97 Intercessio 113
Interrex 117 JOVIAN 26 Irrogatio 137 Juba 15 Judex Quaestionis 134 Judgments
130, etc. Judices selecti 134 Judicia centumviralia 119 Judicium calumniae 136
Judicium falsi 133 Judicium praevaricationis 136 Sub jugum mittere 225 JVGVRTHA
13 Jugurthine War ibid. JVLIAN 26 Julian Account 88 Jupiter Feretrius 221 Jure
vocatae (Centuries and Tribes) 128 Jus civil 144 Jus civitatis 126 Jus dicere
and judicare (the difference between them) 109 Jus honorarium 145 Jus imaginis
97 Jus Papirianum 144 Jus trium liberorum 177 In jus reum vocare 131 In jus
vocatus aut eat aut satisdet ibid. Juramentum calumniae 132 JVSTINIAN 145
K.
Kalends 91 (...) 236 (...) ibid. Kissing of the dead Body 331, 332 Knights 97
Knights estate ibid. (...) 317
L.
LABERIVS the Mimick 277 Lacerna 309 Lacernata amica 311, 312 Laciniam trahere
299 Loena 68, 309 Lanistae 264 TITUS LARGIVS FLAVVS the first Dictator 107
LATINS 7 LATINVS 2 Latio sententiae 136 LATIVM 2 Latrones 241 Latrunculi 240,
241 Laudatio (a Custom at Trials) 136 LAVINIA 2 LAVINIVM ibid. LAVRENTIA ibid:
LAVRENTVM ibid. Law, vid. Lex. Laws 144, etc. -- de adulterio and pudicitia 171
-- Agrarian 159 -- de ambitu 173 -- of the Assemblies and Meetings 150 -- of
Citizens 148 -- of Constitutions, Laws and Privileges 156 -- of Corn 161 -- of
Crimes 169 etc. -- of Expenses 162 -- Falsi 171 -- of Judges 167 -- of
Judgments 169 -- of magistrates 153 -- de majestate 170 -- of Martial Affairs
164 -- Miscellaneous 177 -- of Money, Usury, etc. 166 -- de parricidis 171 --
de pecuniis repetundis 174 -- of Provinces and their Governors 157 -- of
Religion 145, etc. -- of the Senate 152 -- Inter Sicarios 171 -- de tutelis 165
-- de vi 172 -- of Wills, Heirs and Legacies 166 Leagues (how made) 224 Lecti
tricliniorum, or tricliniares 360 Lecticae or lecti (Funeral Beds) 342 Legati
124, 191 Legati Consulares ibid. Legati praetoris ibid. Legatio libera 153
Leges (how they differed from Plebiscita) 129 Legions 186 Lessus 339 Levy of
the Confederates 184 Levy of the Foot 179 Levy of the Horse ibid. Lex Acilia
175 -- Acilia Calpurnia 173 -- Aelia 150 -- Aemylia. -- Ampia Labiena 157 --
Antia 163 -- Antonia 147, 154, 168 -- Appuleia 170 -- Atia 147 -- Atilia 165 --
Attinia 155 -- Aufidia 173 -- Aurelia 155, 168 -- Caecilia 154, 175 -- Caecilia
Didia 156 -- Caecilia de jure Italiae and tributis tollendis 176 -- Caelia 151
-- Calpurnia 174 -- Campana 161 -- Cassia 151, 152, 159 -- Cincia 169 --
Claudia 151, 152, 167 -- Clodia 146, 150, 154, 157, 158, 159, 161, 172, 176 --
Cornelia 146, 147, 149, 153, 154, 155, 157, 160, 163, 168, 170, 171, 175 --
Curia 150 -- Didia 162 -- Domitia 147 -- Fabia 173 -- Fannia 162 -- Flaminia
160 -- Flavia 161 -- Furia 166 -- Fusia 150 -- Gabinia 151, 152, 164, 167, 170
-- Gellia Cornelia 150 -- Genutia 153, 154 -- Hieronica 162 -- Hirtia 154 --
Hortensia 156 -- Julia 158, 161, 163 168, 170, 171, 175 -- Julia de civitate
149 -- Julia de maritandis ordinibus 176 -- Julia Papia 177 -- Junia 148, 175
-- Junia Licinia 156 -- Junia Sacrata 155 -- Laetoria 165 -- Licinia 146, 147
159, 162 -- Licinia Aebutia 166 -- Licinia Mutia 149 -- Licinia de sodalitiis
173 -- Livia 168 -- Livia de sociis 149 -- Mamillia 161 -- Manilia 151, 165 --
Manlia 146 -- Marcia 154 -- Maria 151 -- Maria Portia 164 -- Marita 177 --
Memmia 169 -- Muneralis ibid. -- Ogulnia 146 -- Oppia 163 -- Orchia 162 --
Papia 146, 148 -- Papia Poppaea 177 -- Papiria 146, 151 -- Plautia 168, 172 --
Pompeia 155, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173 -- Porcia 148 -- Pupia 152 -- Remmia 169
-- Roscia 147 -- Sacrata militaris 164 -- Scatinia or Scantinia 171 --
Sempronia 148, 151, 153, 157, 160, 161, 164 166, 167 -- Sentia 152 -- Servilia
148, 160, 167, 175 -- Sextia Licinia 146, 154 -- Silvani and Carbonis 149 --
Sulpitia 152, 164 -- Sulpitia Sempronia 46 149 -- Terentia Cassia 161 -- Thoria
160 -- Titia 155, 159 -- Trebonia 159 -- Tullia 152, 173 -- de Vacatione 147 --
Valeria 148, 155, 166 -- Valeria Horatia 148 -- Varia 149, 170 -- Vatinia 158
-- Vallia annalis 153 -- Voconia 166 LIARIVS or GLYCERIVS 28 Libamina prima 85
Libatia ibid. Libella 366 Libelli (Bills for a Sword-Play) 269 Liberti 97
Libertini ibid. LIBITINA 333 Libitinarii ibid. Libra 368 Libri elephantini 41
Liburnicae 236 LICINIVS 25 Lictores 119, 120 Litem intendere 132 Literae
laureatae 217 Litus 202 Lituus 68 LIVIVS ANDRONICVS 275 Lorica. 197 Luci 42
LUCIUS ANTONIUS 22 LVCRETIA 5 Luctus annuus 355 LVCVLLVS 13 Lucti Actiaci 295
-- Apollinares 289 -- Augustales 291 -- Capitolini 290 -- Cereales ibid. --
Circenses 245, etc. -- Compitalitii 291 -- Consuales 290 -- Decennales 295 --
Florales 288 -- Funebres 296 -- Juvenales 296 -- Magni 294 -- Martiales 289 --
Megalenses 288 -- Miscelli 296 -- Natalitii ibid. -- Palatini 291 --
Pontificales 263 -- Quinquennales 295 -- Romani 290 -- Sacerdotales 263 --
Saeculares 291, etc. -- Scenici 274, etc. -- Triumphales 2^6 -- Victoriae 295
-- Votivi 294 Ludii and Histriones at a Funeral 339 LVPA 2 Lupercalia 64, 65
Luperci 64 Luperci Fabiani Luperci Quinctiliani 65 Lustrum 111 Lustrum condere
ibid. Lying on Couches at the Table 359, etc.
M.
Magister equitum 108 Magistrates 103 -- when admitted 127 -- when designed
ibid. Magistratus curules 103 Magistratus extraordinarii ibid. -- majores ibid.
-- minores ibid. -- mixti ibid. -- ordinarii -- Patricii ibid. -- plebeii^
ibid. -- Provinciales ibid. -- urbani ibid. MAGNENTIVS 26 MAJORIANVS 28
Mandatores 138 Mandatum 131 Manipulus 185, 201 MANLIVS 8, 10 Mappa 250 MARC
ANTONY 16, 17 MARCUS ANTONIUS 22 MARIUS 13 Marriage 318, etc. Marriage by Use
320 Proper time for Marriage 319 Matronalia 93 (...) (Ships of War) 236
MAXENTIVS 25 MAXIMIAN. ibid. MAXIMIN 23 MAXIMINIAN 25 MAXIMUS 28 Megalesia 288
C. MELISSVS 279 Mercidinus, or Mercidonius 87 Merenda 359 (...) 307 Mesopotamia
(made a Province) 21 Meta in the Circo 46 Metallici 143 Miliarium aureum 55
Milites subitarii 181 Mimus 276 Missus (the Matches in the Races) 249, 250
Missus aerarius 250 MITHRIDATES King of Pontus 13 Mitra 312 Mittere judices in
consilium 136 Mola 85 Moneres 236 Of the Money 365, etc. Mons Aventinus 32 --
Augustus 31 -- Caballus, or Caballinus ibid. -- Caelius ibid. -- Capitolinus 30
-- Esquilinus, exquilinus, or excubinus 31 -- Murcius 32 -- Palatinus 30 --
Querculanus, or quercetulanus 31 -- Remonius 32 -- Saturni 30 -- Tarpeius 30 --
Vaticanus 33 -- Viminalis 32 Montorius 33 Mors (Capital Punishment) 41
Mortuaria glossaria 339 Mourning 355, 356 Mourning Habit 343, 344 Municipia 226
Munus pronunciare, or proponere 269 Musculus 230 Music of the Army 202 MVTIVS
6, 7 Myrmillones 268
N.
Naenia 339 Of the Names 363 Natalis urbis 93, 94 Naval Affairs of the Romans
232, etc. Naves apertae 236 -- Constratae ibid. -- longae 235 -- onerariae
ibid. -- rostratae 237 -- tectae 236 -- turritae 237 Navis of a Temple 41
Naumachiae (the Place) 46 Naumachiae (the Sport) 260, etc. NEPOS 28 NERO 18
Nerva 21 Nerva's Arch 50 Nobiles 97 Nomen 363 Nominis delatio 134 Nonae
Caprotinae 94 Nones 91 Notarius 120 Novennialia 353 Novi 97 Novissima verba 352
Novus homo 97 Nucibus relictis 323 NVMA 4 NVMERIAN 25 NVMITOR 2, 3 Nummus 366
Nundinae 89 Nuts strewn at Marriage-Feasts 323
O.
Oath of the Soldiers 183 Obolus 366 Ocreae 197 OCTAVIUS or AUGUSTUS 16, 17
Octeres 235 Odeum 46 ODOACER 27, 28 Officers in the Army 188, etc. (...) 235
OLYBRIVS 28 Omne tulit punctum 126 OPILIVS MACRINVS 23 (...) 235 (...) 269
Optimates 97 Optiones 189 Orchestra 44 Ordines Primi 188 ORESTES 28 ORMISDAS 50
Ornari apparitoribus, Scribis, etc. 122 Ornari provincia 121 Ossilegium 351
Ostia (the Port) 232 OSTORIVS SCAPVLA 18 OTHO 19 Ovation 218 Ovilia 128
P.
Pactum 132 Paganica (a sort of Ball) 244 Palantes 30 Palaria 209 Palatium 30
PALES 94 Palilia 94 Palla 310 Palladium 77 Palliatae (Plays) 279 Palliatus 300.
Palmyra 24 Paludamentum 192, 303, 304 Palus Capreae 94 Panici terrores 203
Pannonia (subdued) 17 PANSA 16 Pantheon 39 Pantomimi 277 PAPIRIVSCVRSOR 8 Par
impar 244 Paria componere 270 Parma 194 Parricidium 93 Pater patratus 76
Patibulum 142 Patres conscripti 99 Patricians 96 Patrons 96, 131 Pectorale 197
Pecunia 365 Pecunia extraordinaria 227 Pecunia ordinaria ibid. PEDIVS 16 (...)
236 Pentathlum 246 (...) 235 (...) ibid. Penula 309 Percussio securi 141 (...)
300 Perones 314, 315 PERSEVS 12, 218, 220 Persona 281 PERTINAX 22 Pescia 276
Petasus 313 Petere 270 Phalerae 215 PHILIP (Emper.) 23 PHILIP of Macedon 12
Philippi (the Battle there) 16 (...) 235 Phrygians (Priests of Cybele) 81 Picts
22 Pila trigonalis 244 Pilae (the several sorts) ibid. Pilani 185 Pileus 313
Pileus (the Reward of Gladiators) 272 Pilum 195 Pinarii 65, 66 Pinnirapi 268
PISO 19 Pitched Shirts 143 Place (which reckoned the most Honorable at the
Table) 362 Places for burning and burying the dead 346, 347 Planipedes 276
Plebeians 96 Plebiscita 129, 145 Plutei 231 Pollicem premere 271 Pollicem
vertere ibid: Pollinctores 333 Pomaerium 29, 30 Pompa Circensis 288 POMPEY 13,
14, 15 De ponte dejici 128 Pontes ibid. Pontifices 71, 72 Pontifices majores 71
Pontifices minores ibid: Pontifex maximus 72 Pontificum coenae 75 PONTIVS
PILATE 125 Popae 86 Poplifugium 94 Populares 97 Popularia 44 PORSENNA 6, 7
Porta Capena, or Appia 38 -- Carmentalis 37 -- Flaminia ibid. -- Flumentana
ibid. -- Naevia ibid. -- Saliana 38 -- Triumphalis ibid. Portico^s 51
Portitores 176 Portoria ibid. Portorium 227 Posca 212 Postulatio actionis 132,
134 Potitii 65, 66 Praecingi 299 Praecipitatio de robore 141 Praecones 120
Praefecturae 226 Praefectus alae 190 Praefectus aerarii 118 Praefectus classis
237 Praefectus frumenti 218 Praefectus legionis 188 Praefectus Praetorio 118
Praefectus vigilum ibid. Praefectus urbis ibid. Praeficae 339 Praelusio 270
Praenomen 363 Praetexta, vide Toga Praetextatae (Plays) 279 Praetor peregrinus
109 Praetor urbanus ibid. Praetorii 189 Praetorium 122, 205 Praetors 108, 109
Praetors of the Provinces 123, 124 Prandium 359 Prerogative-Century 128
Prerogative-Tribe ibid. Priests 64, etc. Primopilarius 189 Primopilus 188
Princeps juventutis 252 Princeps senatus 99 Principalis constitutio 145
Principes 185 Principes Centurionum 188 Principes ordinum ibid. PROBVS 24
PROCAS 2 Proconsuls 120 etc. Procuratores 131 Procuratores Caesaris 125
Projectio in profluentem 141, 142 Propraetors 124 Proquaestors ibid. Proscenium
43 Proscripti 140 Proscriptio ibid. Protasis (of the Drama) 278 Provinces 226
Provinces (Consular) 124 -- (Praetorian) ibid. Provincial Magistrates 120, 121,
122 Provocatores Publius the Mimick 277, 278 PVBLIVS SCIPIO 12 Pullarius 68
Pullata turba 303 Pullatorum circulus ibid. Pulvini 361 Punishments 139, etc.
Punishments of the Soldiers 213 PVPIENVS 23 Purpura Megalensis 288 Puteal
Libonis 51 Puteal Scribonium ibid. Puticulae, or Puticuli 347 Pyra 348
Pyrrhicae, or Saltatio Pyrrhica 256, 257 PYRRHVS 9
Q.
Quadrans 366 Quadrigae 249 Quadrigatus 366 Quadriremis 235 Quatuorviri viarum
curandarum 119 Quaesitores 109 Quaesitores parricidii, vel rerum capitalium
119, 134 Quaestiones 109 Quaestor palatii 112 Quaestor principis ibid.
Quaestores perigrini 111 -- Vrbani ibid. Quaestorii 189 Quaestorium 205
Quaestors 111, 112 Quaestors of Provinces 124, 125 Quinarius (Coin) 366 Lucius
QVINCTIVS 7 Quincunx 198 Quindecemviri (Keepers of the Sibylline Oracles) 79
Quinquatrus, or quinquatria 93 Quinqueremis 235 Quinquertium 246 Quintana 205
QVINCTILIVS 24 Quiris (dea) 321
R.
Radius 245 Recuperatores 131 Refer ad senatum 100 Regions of the City 34
REGVLVS 10 Relegatio 140 REMVS 2, 3 Renunciari consul, etc. 130 Repetere 270
Repotia 324 Repudium ibid. Repudium mittere ibid. Retiarius 266, 267 Review of
the Cavalry 179 180 Reus 131 Rex Sacrorum, or sacrificulus 73 RHEA SYLVIA 1, 2
Rings taken off from Persons just expired) 332 Robigalia 94 Robigo, or Robigus
ibid. Robur 139 Rogatio 126, 137 Rogus 348 Rome built 3 -- Sacked by the Gauls
8 -- sacked by Genseric 28 -- taken by Odoacer ibid. -- the circuit of it in
the time of Valerian. 33 -- number of Inhabitants 34 ROMULUS 2, 3, 4 Rorarii
194 ROSCIVS the Player 287 Rudiarii 272 Rudis (the reward of Gladiators 272
S.
Sabines 7 Sacellum 38 Sacramenta ( put for milites or militia) 183 Sacrifices
84 Sacresancti (the Tribunes so called) 113 Saeculum 293 Sagittarii 194 Sagum
310 Salii 74 Salii Collini, or Agonenses 75 Salii Palatini ibid. Salisubsulus
75 Salust 's Garden 32 Salutatio imperatoris 217 Salutatores 104 Samnite
Gladiators 268 Sandapilones 341 Sardinia (subdued) 10 Sarmatians 21 Satire 274,
275, 276 Satur^e historiae 275 per Saturam sententias exquirere 274 Saturna^ia
95 Saturnian Verses 275 Scena 43 SCIPIO 11, 15 Scorpio 232 SCOTS 22 Scrib^^ 120
S^^tum 195 S^^^ imbrica^^. ibid. Scuta otata ibid. Se stitisse 132 Sectatores
104 Securis 106 Secutor 267 Sejuges 249 Sembella 366 Semissis ibid. Semuncia
ibid. Senaculum 48 The Senate 98, etc. Senatorian Age 99 Senators 97, etc.
Senator's Estate 99 Senator's Sons (their liberty of coming into the House) 102
Senatores pedarii ibid. Senatu ejicere. 110 Senatus indictus 100 Senatus
legitimus ibid. Senatus authoritas 101 Senatus consultum. ibid.
Senatus-consulta tacita ibid. 145 Senio (a throw on the Dice) 242 Septa, or
Ovilia 47, 128 Septemjuges 249 Serra (way of drawing up an Army) 200 Servitus
140 SERVIVS TVLLIVS 4 Sestertium 367 Way of counting by Sesterces ibid.
Sestertius 366 SEVERUS 22, 25, 28 SEVERIAN 28 Sextans 366 Shoes 314, etc.
Shows of Wild Beasts 257 etc. SIBYLS 80 SICAMBRI 17 C. SICCIVS DENTATVS 217
Sicily (subdued) 10 Signs of Grief at Funerals 343 Silicernia 353 Sinus of the
Gown 298 Siticines 338 Soccus 281 Socii 184 Sodales Titii 83 Sodalitia 173
Soleae 316 Soleae pulled off at Feasts 361 Sortitio judicum 135 Spanish Swords
194 Spolia opima 221 (...) 75 Sportula 368 Sportum ibid. Stadia 46 Stamp on the
Money 365 Stationes 206 Status of a Play 278 Stibadium 360 Stipendia 228 Stola
310, 311 Stragula 361 Strangulatio 141 (...) 235 Succenturiones 189 Sudes 206
SVEVI 17 Suggrundarium 328 SVLPICIVS 13 Suovetaurilia 111 Supplicatio 217 SYLLA
13
T.
Tabella votiva 237, etc. Tabella 127 Tabernatae (a sort of Plays) 279 Tablet
marked with A. 129 136 Tablet marked with C. 136 Tablet marked with NL. ibid.
Tablet marked with UR. 129 TACITUS (Emper.) 24 Talent 368 Tali 242 Talio 139
Tarentine War 8 TARQVINIVS PRISCVS 4 TARQVIN the Proud 4, 6 Titus TATIVS 30
Templum 38 Temple of Janus 41 Temple of Saturn ibid. Teruncius 366, 367 (...)
236 Tessera 203, 207 Tesserae, and tesserarum ludus 242 Tesserarius 207 Testudo
230 (...) 235 Teutones 13 Thalassius 322 Theaters 43, etc. Theater of Scaurus
44 Theater of Pompey ibid. THEODORIC the Goth 28 Thensae 288 THEODOSIUS 27
Thracian Gladiators 268 Tiara 313, 314 TIBERIUS 17 Tibiae 284, etc. -- Dextrae
285 -- impares 285, 286 -- Lydiae ibid. -- pares ibid. -- Phrygiae ibid. --
sarranae ibid. -- sinistrae ibid. Tibialia 310 TIGRANES 13, 14. Tirones 209
TITUS (Emper.) 20 Toga 297, etc. -- alba 298 -- candida ibid. -- libera 302 --
paimata 106, 303, 304 -- picta 106, 303 -- Praetexta 300 -- pulla 303 -- pu^a
302 -- purpurea 303 -- sord^da ibid -- virilis 301, 302 T^gata (sort of Plays)
279 T^gatus ( opposed to Palliatus) 300 Toralia 361 Torniamenta 256 Torques 215
Trabea 303, 304 Trabea of the Augurs 309 Trabeatae (sort of Plays) 279 Tragedy
279, etc. TRAJAN 21 Trajan 's Pillar. 53 T^ansai^ia 132 (...) 236 Triarii 384
Tribu movere 110 Tribes of the City 34 Tribunal 205 Tribunes (Junior) 179
Tribunes (Senior) ibid. Tribunes of the People 112, 113 Tribunes of the
Soldiers 179, 188 Tribuni angusticlavii 190 -- comitiati ibid. -- aerarii 212
-- laticlavii 190 -- militam consulari potestate 116, 117 -- rufuli 190
Tribunus, ( or Praesectus) celerum 117 Tribunitia potestate donati 113 Tribus
rusticae 129 -- urbanae ibid. Tributa 227, 228 Triclinium 359 Triens 366
Trierarchus 237 (...) 235 Tripudium 68 -- sollistimum ibid. -- sonivium ibid.
Triremis 235 Triumph 218, etc. Triumviri A. A. AE. F. F. 119 -- capitales 118
-- Monetales 119 -- nocturni ibid. Triuncis 366 Trochus 244, 245 TROJA, or
Ludus Trojae 252, etc. Trophies 55 Tuba 202 Tubicines ibid. Tullianum 139
TVLLVS HOSTILIVS 4 Tumuli inanes, or honorarii 352, 353 Tunica 305, etc. --
angusticlavia ibid. -- laticlavin ibid. -- palmata ibid. -- recta 321 -- Tunica
talares 305 Turmae 187 Turres mobiles 230 Turris (way of drawing up an Army)
200 Tutulus 312
U.
Vadari reum 132 VALENTINIAN the first 26 -- the second 27 -- the third ibid.
VALERIAN 23 VALERIVS POPLICOLA 7 Vallum 206 Varronian Satire 276 VATICANVS or
VAGITANVS 33 Vectigales 227 VEII 7, 8 Velites 185 Venatio direptionis 258
Ventilatio 270 Venus (throw on the Dice) 242 Verbera 139 Versura 167 Vertere
arma 270 VESPASIAN 18, 20 Vespillones 333, 337, 341 Vestal Virgins 77, 78
Vestis convivalis, or coenatoria 361 -- forensis. 297 VETVRIVS MAMVRIVS 74
Vexilla 215 Vexillarii 189 Via Appia 58 Viator 113 Viatores 120 Vicesimatio 213
Victima 84 Victimarii 86 Victoriatus 366 Vigiliae 206 Vigintiviratus 119 Vilis
arca 342 Villa publica 47 Vincula 139 Vindicta 98 Vineae 230, 231 VIRGINIA 115
Visceratio 355 VITELLIVS 19, 20 Vitis 189 Vitem poscere ibid. Vites 213 Vittae
84, 311 Umbo of the Shield 195 -- of the Gown 298 Vncia 366 Volsci 7 Vstrina
348
W.
War (how declared) 223 Watchword 203 Ways 58
X.
XANTIPPVS XERXES 23 Xysti 46
Y.
Of the Roman Year 87, 88
Z.
ZENOBIA 24
ERRATA.
PAge 4. Line 10. for an read the. p. 13. l. 23. r. Piraeus. p. 29. l. 3. after
Singularity add of the Custom. p. 42. l. 7. for Cedet r. Sedet. p. 44. l. 1.
for Hill called r. still called. p. 45. l. 13. for pondering r. wondering. p.
62. l. 9. after of r. such. p. 67. l. 15. after Augustus add as. ibid. l. 16.
after Neroneus add so. p. 92. l. 11. for the Ninth of the Kalends of March r.
the Third of the Ides. p. 110. in Margin, for Tribunum r. Tribu. p. 129. l. 30.
for Picinius r. Sicinius. p. 159. l. 18. for CASSIUS r. CASSIA. p. 170. l. 21.
p. 172. l. 7. and 14. p. 173. l. 15. for aqua and igni r. aquae and ignis. p.
213. l. 3, for beaten, r. beating. p. 251. l. 30. for Curse r. Course. p. 277.
l 1. for Pantomini r. Pantomimi. p. 286. l. 24. dele self. p. 302. l. 38. for
would r. could. p. 315. l. 4. for showed r. worn. p. 318. l. 3. for Tiraguel r.
Tiraquel.


