A Testimony against Gaming, Music, Dancing, Singing, Swearing, and Peoples
calling upon GOD to DAMN them. As also against Drinking to Excess, Whoring,
Lying and Cheating. Commended to the Consciences of all People in the Sight of
God, but more especially to those, who keep Public Houses.
First, SEE that you suffer none to play at any sort of Game in your Houses,
Dr. Ames, de Consc. lib. 4 c. 23.. 5. says, Plays which depend merely or
principally of Fortune, are of their own nature Unlawful.
viz. Cards, Dice, Tables, Shuffle-board, and the like; for in so doing you
will displease the Lord, and may cause him to bring a blast upon all your
Undertakings: But on the contrary, Reprove and Admonish such in God's Fear. For
it never was the Practice of God's People in the Primitive Times to Game away
their precious Time, which the Lord gave them to work out their own Salvation
in; neither is it the Practice of them that are Christians in deed, in this
day, though the Nominal Christians may plead for it.

Therefore you that know the Life of true Christianity, bear your Testimonies
faithfully agianst Gaming, for it is as it were a piece of Witchcraft: for when
Men's Hearts and Minds are exercised in it, they are even overcome by the same,
and so are serving the Enemy of their own Immortal Souls with all their
strength, and the Fear of the Lord is not before their Eye^; for when the
Hearts and Minds are exercised in their Games, it is, as it were, their God,
and often times tends to Quarrelling, Fighting and Bloodshed. It is therefore
good for all that are Christians in deed and in truth, to bear your Testimonies
against Gaming; for this is certainly true, that the Lord and his Truth is
dishonored by admitting People to Game in your Houses: Therefore be careful in
bringing Honor to God by bearing your Testimonies for him and his Truth,
against that that is displeasing unto the Lord, and hurtful unto your own poor
Souls.

Prove. 14.13. Even in Laughter the Heart is made sorrowful; and the end of that
Mirth is heaviness.
Secondly, See that you suffer none to Play upon any sort of Music, nor any to
Dance, Sing or Swear in your Houses; but bear your Testimonies against such
things, both by reproving them in God's Fear and Love, and in obstructing the
same: for they are all displeasing in the sight of the Lord; and may cause his
Judgments to come upon your Houses and Families. Therefore to prevent the same
from coming upon you, live up to that Gift which the Lord has given you, that
you may stand in your places, and bear a Testimony for the Lord and his Truth
in your Day, Age and Generation; then will the Lord Bless and Prosper you, both
inwardly and outwardly, and in all that you undertake; and all that do Rejoice,
Let them Rejoice in the Lord.

Music is a thing, that steals the Hearts of them that play upon it, or
adhere unto it, from the Lord, (and tends to raise up a light, airy, frothy,
wanton Mind; for they that live in Pleasure, are dead while they live; and they
that live wantonly, kill the Just) for when Men's Hearts and Minds are exercised
by it, they remember not the Lord that made them and all Mankind for a purpose
of his own Glory; but spend away their precious time in that which the Lord by
his Prophet Amos bore Testimony against, as you may read in the 6th Chapter of
the Prophecy of that Prophet, in which he pronounces a Do unto them that
chaunt unto the Viol, and invent unto themselves Instruments of Music, like
unto David. Do such Remember their Creator in the days of their Youth? No; they
have rather forgotten their Maker, which would be their Savior, if they would
come to be saved by him, from their perishing fading Vanities, which God and
his People are against.

Eccles. 7.4. The heart of the Wise, is in the house of Mourning; but the heart
of Fools is in the house of Mirth.
Singing and Dancing are of the same Root and Ground with Gaming and Music,
etc. all which proceed from that Seed, which the Enemy of Man and Woman's
Salvation has sown in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, which Enemy
is the Devil, who walks about, seeking whom he may devour. And such who let
loose their Hearts, Minds and Affections after those things, pursuing and
following with greediness after the same, are making an Idol of them, and do
desire more after them, than they do after the Knowledge of God, whom to know
is Life Eternal: and so hereby God, who alone ought to be sought after and
bowed down unto, is robbed of that which is his Right, even the Praise, the
Honor and the Glory of his Name, which ought to be given unto him from every
reasonable Creature, that he (...) Mankind to serve the Lord above all things,
even with all their Souls, and all (...) and not run into fading Vanities,
which perish in the using, and which bring Tribulation, Anguish and Wrath upon
all that are found in them: for God will not be mocked; such as every Man sows,
such they must reap from Divine Justice, who renders unto every Man according
unto his Deeds, without respect of Persons.

Some that delight in Music may object, That David and others of the People of
God, did play upon Instruments of Music.

Answer, David and others, who were faithful to God, did not play upon
Instruments of Music to stir up, raise and elevate a vain, sinful, unclean
Mind in themselves or any others; Isa. 24.9. They shall not drink Wine with a
S^ng; strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.

Amos 8.10. And I will turn your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation


but their playing upon and use of Instruments of Music, being under the
Shadowy Dispensation of the Law, what they did herein, they did it unto the
Lord. The Priests under the Law had a command to sound Trumpets, which was a
sort of Music; and David and others made use of other Instruments, as the
Flute, Harp, and Cymbal; and this they did in Honor and Praise to the Lord,
and not to stir up a vain, wanton, light, airy fleshly and ungodly Mind, as it
may be seen in the Scriptures of Truth.

Again, Some may plead for Dancing, because David danced before the Ark.

Answ. This Dancing was in the time of the Law, and was a token of his
rejoicing because of the Ark of God, which was brought back out of the
Philistians Land, who were Enemies to God and his People: This Dancing was not
like the Dancing of the vain, wanton and profane Persons of our Age, nor yet
like the Dancing of Herodi^'s (...), who Danced before Kings (...) who after
she had Danced, demanded the Head of the Man of God, John the Baptist, and had
it, being thereunto instructed by her malicious Mother.

As concerning Singing and Rejoicing; true Singing and Rejoicing the Lord God
did own under the Law, which was Shadowy, and stood in many Carnal Ordinances,
which were to continue until the time of Reformation, as says the Apostle,
Heb. 9.10. which time is the time of the Gospel, which is come.

Job 21.13. They spend their days in Wealth, and in a moment go down to the
Grave.
Again, God did and does own Singing in the Spirit under the dispensation of the
Gospel; but the Singers that God does own under the Gospel Dispensation, are
those who are first taught by him to mourn for, repent of, and forsake their
Sins; such who are led by the Spirit of the Lord to Mourn for, Repent of, and
forsake their Sins, in the same Spirit they may Sing, as it moves and leads
them. The Apostle Paul said, I will Sing with the Spirit and with
Understanding, 1. Cor. 14.15. And it is written, Isa. 35.10. The Redeemed of
the Lord shall return to Sion with Songs of Deliverance. And it is written,
Rev. 15.3. They that were Redeemed from the Earth, sang the ^ong of Moses and
the Lamb. And wise Solomon said, ( Eccles. 7.3, 2. Bellarmine Conc. 6.33.13.
etc. says Holydays are in our Agee celebrated in a Diabolical manner, like
Baccanaels, Devils Festivals; most Sins then committed, most Feast-Songs,
Bowlings, Tavernings, Scurrilities, Dances with Women, as Straw with Fire.

As a further Testimony against Debauchery, he cites Niceph lib. 19. viz.

Herodias her Daughters Head danced upon the Ice.

Ambros de Virg. lib. 3. Jerome. Epist. 10.4. Christ. hom. 56. on Mat. 49. Basil
on Drunkenness and Riot.

Cicero a Heathen Promur^^n^ says, No Sober Man Danceth, and objects it as a
Crime to A^onius 6.


) Sorrow is better than Laughter; and it is better to go into the House of
Mourning than into the House of Mirth: Mourning, in the Unregenerate, in the
sense of their Sins, is better than Laughter and Singing. And God will turn the
Songs of the Wicked into Mourning, Amos 8.10. And Christ said, Mat. 12.36.
Every Idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the
day of Judgment. And the Apostle James says, Who among you seem to be
Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, this Man's
Religion is vain, James 1.26.

Observe, that Nebuchadnezar, the Heathen King, and his Company of Idolaters,
had Music, (viz.) the Sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sacbut, Psaltery and
Dulcimer, and all kinds of Music, when they Worshipped the Golden Image, that
he had set up: These were they which cast the three Children into the Fiery
Furnace. This their Music and Rejoicing was Wicked and Ungodly.

Again, Observe, the Apostle said unto the true Christians, Be ye not drunk
with Wine, wherein is Excess, but be filled by the Spirit; speaking to your
selves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing and making Melody in your
Hearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.

Also Swearing and calling upon God to Damn them, and Blaspheming the Pure Holy
and Undefiled Name of God, proceeds even from the same Root, that Gaming,
Music, Singing and Dancing do arise and spring from: Therefore let none who
are found in any of those things (to wit, in Swearing, Damning, Cursing and
Blaspheming the Name of the Lord) think to escape God's Righteous Judgments;
for it is written, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in
vain. And the Lord complains by the Prophet Jeremiah, Because of Swearing the
Land Mourns, Jer. 23.10.

Therefore all you that are concerned as Witnesses for God, see, that you bear
your Testimonies against these things, that the Lord may bless you and prosper
you in all your Undertakings, that the Praise and Honor, which is his due, he
may receive from you, and you from him a Crown of Glory, which fades not away,
when time here shall be no more.

John Kelsall.

In the late King's Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched and Profane
Persons, etc. Dated May the 30th 1660. in the Twelfth Year of his Reign, are
these Remarkable Passages following.

There is a sort of Men, of whom We are sufficiently ashamed, who spend their
time in Taverns, Tippling-Houses, and Debaucheries, giving no other Evidence of
their Affection to us, but in Drinking Our Health, and inveighing against all
others, who are not of their own dissolute temper, and who in Truth have more
discredited our Cause, by the Licentiousness of their Manners and Lives, than
they could ever advance it by their Affection and Courage -- We reasonably
hope, these Men will cordially renounce all that Licenciousness, Profaneness
and Impiety, with which they have been corrupted, and endeavored to corrupt
others; and that they will hereafter become Examples of Sobriety and Virtue --
We will not exercise just severity against any Malefactors, sooner than against
Men of Dissolute, Debauched and Profane Lives, with what parts soever they may
be otherwise qualified and endowed. -- And we hope, all Persons of Honor, or
in Place and Authority, will so far assist Us in discountenancing such Men,
that their Discretion and Shame will persuade them to Reform, what their
Consciences would not. -- Which may by the Example and Severity of Virtuous Men
be easily discountenanced, and by degrees suppressed.

However for the more effectual reforming these Men, who are a discredit to the
Nation, and unto any Cause they pretend to favor and to wish well to; We
require all Mayors and Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, to be very vigilant
and strict in the Discovery and Prosecution of all Dissolute and Profane
Swearing and Cursing.

This was Reinforced by a Second Proclamation of the King, the 13th of August,
1660. Charging all Ministers to read it once each Month, for six Months
ensuing, and stir up their Auditors to observe the said Duties, and avoid the
said Vices.

Also in the Late Proclamation by the King and Queen, against ^^c^^^, Debauched
and Profane Persons, Who has W^? who has Sorrow? who has Contentions? who
has Wounds, withoue cause? Who has redness of Eye? they that tarry long at
the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine; at the last it biteth like a Serpent.
and slingeth like an Adder, See Prove. 23.27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. See also Deuteronomy.
29.18.19.20. Whose Heart turns away this day from the Lord our God, to add
Drunkenness unto Thirst the Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord
and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man, and the Lord shall blot out his
Name from under Heaven.
Given at White Hall the 21 st of January, 1691/2.

BEcause that Impiety and Vice do still abound in this Kingdom, the King and
Queen Declare (as bound in Duty to God, and Care for the People.) Thus, viz. We
have thought fit to Issue this our Royal Proclamation: And do declare our
Princely Intention and Resolution, To Discountenance all manner of Vice and
Immorality in all Persons, from the Highest to the Lowest Degree, in this our
Realm; And We do hereby for that purpose straightly Require, Charge and Command
all and singular our Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all
other our Officers, etc. in their respective Stations, to Execute the Laws
against Blasphemy, Profane Swearing, Drunkenness, Lewdness, Profanation of
the Lord's Day or any other Dissolute, Immoral or Disorderly Practices, as they
will answer it to Almighty God, and upon Pain of our Highest Displeasure.

ANd at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, held for the County of
Middlesex at Hicks's- Hall, the 10 th Day of July, 1691. An Order was thence
Issued out Pursuant to the Queens Letter, bearing Date the 9 th of July
aforesaid, recommending unto the Justices the putting in Execution those Laws,
which have been made, and are still in Force, against the Profanation of the
Lord's Day, Drunkenness, Profane Swearing, and Cursing, and all other Lewd
Enormous and Disorderly Practices, which have spread to the Dishonor of God,
and the Scandal of our Holy Religion; and to apply themselves with all possible
Care for the Suppressing of the same, and all other Sins and Vices,
particularly those which are now prevailing in this Realm, for preventing those
Judgments, which are solemnly Denounced against the Sins abovementioned. And in
Compliance with the said Letter from the Queen, the said Justices unanimously
Resolved and Declared, that they would put all the Laws in Execution against
Profane Swearing, and Cursing, and also against the odious and loathsome Sin of
Drunkenness, and against all Houses of Debauchery, and Evil-Fame, being Vices
hateful to God and all Good Men [as they also Declare.]

ALso the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen for the City of London, gave out an
Order the 6 th. Day of August, 1691.

Wherein they take into their serious Consideration, the great Profanation of
the Lords Day, and (...) too common Practice of Cursing and Swearing, Excess of
Drinking, and the Impudent comnitting of Lewdness and Debauchery, and the late
Increase of these Vices, and Enormities; and as being sensible, that the severe
Judgments of God have usually fallen upon Nations and Cities persisting in such
Impieties. Do therefore require all Persons entrusted with the Offices of
Magistracy and Administration of Justice within the said City and Liberties
thereof, impartially to Execute their several and respective Authorities to
suppress and prevent the aforesaid Scandalous Ofences and Impieties, by
punishing the Offenders therein, as the Laws and Statutes of this Realm have
provided, with Directions thereunto severally.

ANd Anno Sexto and Septimo Guilielmi Textii Regis: There is a Penal Act of
Parliament made and Entitled.

In Act for the more effectual suppressing Profane Cursing, and Swearing:
wherein Pophane Swearing and Cursing are called detestable Sins, and therefore
ordered to be punis^ed by certain Fines, and corporal Punishments.

LEt all consider Israel of old, Mat. 5.6 But he that shall Blaspheme, is in
danger of Eternal Damnation
who when they forgot God (who had wrought mighty Deliverances for them) how
they ran in Feasting, Dancing and Idolatry; as it is written, They sat down to
Eat and Drink, and rose up to Play, and Danced about the Golden Calf, which
they had set up. But it was a dismal Da^e unto them; for several Thousands of
them were destroyed in one day, Exodus 32.6, 19, 27. (...) and every one that
Swears, shall be cut off, etc. Zach. 5.3.

(...) Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery,
they break out, and Blood touches Blood, Hoseae 4.2.

and if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and the sinner
appear? 1 Pet. 4.18.

London,, Printed by T. Sa^le, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane,
Shoreditch; and are tbe Sold near the Meeting House in White-Hart-Court in
Grace Church Street, 1696.


