A Testimony against Gaming, Music, Dancing, Singing, Swearing, and Peoples
calling upon GOD to DAMN them. Commended to the Consciences of all People in
the sight of God, but more especially to those who keep public Houses.
Dr. Ames, de Consc. lib. 4. c. 23. 5. says, Plays which depend merely or
principally of Fortune, are of their own nature Unlawful.
First, SEE that you suffer none to play at any sort of Game in your Houses,
viz. Cards, Dice, Tables, Shuffle-board, and the like, for in so doing you will
displease the Lord, and may cause him to bring a blast upon all your
Undertakings: But on the contrary, reprove and admonish such in Gods fear; For
it never was the Practice of Gods People in the Primitive times to game away
their precious time, which the Lord gave them to work out their own Salvation
in; neither is it the practice of them that are Christians in deed in this day,
though the Nominal Christians may plead for it.

Therefore you that know the Life of true Christianity, bear your Testimonies
faithfully against Gaming, for it is as it were a piece of Witchcraft; for when
Men's hearts and minds are exercised in it, they are even overcome by the same,
and so are serving the Enemy of their own immortal Souls with all their
strength, and the fear of the Lord is not before their Eyes; for when their
hearts and minds are exercised in their Games, it is as it were their God, and
oftentimes tends to Quarrelling, Fighting and Bloodshed. It is therefore good
for all that are Christians in deed and in truth, to bear your Testimonies
against Gaming; for this is certainly true, that the Lord and his truth is
dishonored by admitting People to Game in your Houses: Therefore be careful in
bringing Honor to God by bearing your Testimonies for him and his Truth,
against that that is displeasing unto the Lord, and hurtful unto your own poor
Souls.

P^ov. 14.^3. Even in Laughter the Heart is made sorrowful: and (...) and of
(...) Mirth (...).
Secondly, See that you suffer none to play upon any sort of Music, nor any to
Dance, Sing or Swear in your Houses; but bear your Testimonies against such
things, both by reproving them in Gods fear and love, and in obstructing the
same; for they are all displeasing in the sight of the Lord, and may cause his
Judgments to come upon your Houses and Families. Therefore to prevent the same
from coming upon you, live up to that gift which the Lord has given you, that
you may stand in your places, and bear a Testimony for the Lord and his Truth
in your Day, Age and Generation; then will the Lord bless and prosper you,
Eccles. 7.4. The heart of the Wise, is in the house of Mourning; but the heart
of Fo^ls is in the house of Mirth.
both inwardly and outwardly, and in all that you undertake; and all that do
rejoice, let them Rejoice in the Lord.

Music is a thing that steals the hearts of them that play upon it, or
adhere unto it, from the Lord (and tends to raise up a light, airy, frothy,
wanton Mind; for they that live in Pleasures, are dead while they live; and
they that live wantonly, kill the just) for when Men's hearts and minds are
exercised by it, they remember not the Lord that made them and all Mankind, for
a purpose of his own Glory; but spend away their precious time in that which
the Lord by his Prophet Amos bore Testimony against, as you may read in the 6th
Chap. of the Prophecy of that Prophet; in which he pronounces a Woe unto them
that chaunt unto the Viol, and invent unto themselves Instruments of Music,
like unto David. Do such Remember their Creator in the days of their Youth? No;
they have rather forgotten their Maker, which would be their Savior, if they
would come to be saved by him, from their perishing fading Vanities, which God
and his People are against.

Singing and Dancing are of the same Root and Ground with Gaming and Music,
Isa. 24.9. They shall not drink Wine with a Song; strong drink shall be bitter
to them that drink it.

Amos 8.10. And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation.


etc. all which proceed from that seed which the Enemy of Man and Woman's
Salvation has sown in the hearts of the Children of Disobedience, which Enemy
is the Devil, who walks about, seeking whom he may devour. and such who let
loose their hearts, minds and affections after those things, pursuing and
following with greediness after the same, are making an Idol of them, and do
desire more after them than they do after the knowledge of God, whom to know is
Life Eternal; and so hereby God, who alone ought to be sought after and bowed
down unto, is robbed of that which is his right, even the Praise, the Honor
and the Glory of his Name, which ought to be given unto him from every
reasonable Creature that he has made by his mighty Power; for it is the
incumbent duty of all Mankind to serve the Lord above all things, even with all
their Souls and all their Might, and not run into fading Vanities, which perish
in the using, and which bring Tribulation, Anguish and Wrath upon all that are
found in them; for God will not be mocked; such as every Man sows, such they
must reap from divine Justice, who renders unto every Man according unto his
deeds, without respect of Persons.

Some that delight in Music may object, That David and others of the People of
God, did play upon Instruments of Music.

Job 21.13. They spend their days in Wealth, and in a moment go down to the
Grave.
Answ. David and others who were faithful to God, did not play upon Instruments
of Music to stir up, raise and elivate a vain, sinful, unclean Mind in
themselves or any others; but their playing upon and use of Instruments of
Music being under the Shadowy dispensation of the Law, what they did herein,
they did it unto the Lord, The Priests under the Law had a command to sound
Trumpets, which was a sort of Music; and David and others made use of other
Instruments, as the Flute, Harp and Cymbal; and this they did in honor and
praise to the Lord, and not to stir up a vain, wanton, Light, airy, fleshly and
ungodly Mind, as it may be seen in the Scriptures of Truth.

Again, some may plead for Dancing, because David danced before the Ark.

Answ. This Dancing was in the time of the Law, and was a token of his
rejoicing, because of the Ark of God, which was brought back out of the
Philistines Land, who were Enemies to God and his People: This Dancing was not
like the Dancing of the vain, wanton and profane Persons of our Age, nor yet
like the Dancing of Herodias's Daughter, who danced before King Herod, who
after she had danced, demanded the Head of the Man of God, John the Baptist,
and had it, being thereunto instructed by her malicious Mother.

As concerning Singing and Rejoicing; true Singing and in Rejoicing the Lord
God did own under the Law, which was Shadowy, and stood in many carnal
Ordinances, which were to continue until the time of Reformation, as says the
Apostle, Heb. 9.10. which time is the Time of the Gospel, which is come.

Again, God did and does own Singing in the Spirit under the dispensation of
the Gospel; but the Singers that God does own under the Gospel dispensation,
are those who are first taught by him to mourn for, repent of, and forsake
their Sins; such who are led by the Spirit of the Lord to mourn for, repent of,
and forsake their Sins, in the same Spirit they may Sing, as it moves and leads
them. The Apostle Paul said, I will Sing with the Spirit, and with
Understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. And it is written, Isa. 35.10. The Redeemed of the
Lord shall return to Sion with Songs of Deliverance. And it is written, Rev.
15.3. They that were Redeemed from the Earth, sang the Song of Moses and the
Lamb. And Wise Solomon said, ( Eccles. 7.2, 3.) Sorrow is better then Laughter;
and it is better to go into the House of Mourning then into the House of Mirth:
Mourning in the unregenerate, in the sense of their Sins; is better then
Laughter and Singing. And God will turn the Songs of the wicked into Mourning,
Amos 8.10. And Christ said, Mat. 12.36. Every Idle Word that Men shall speak,
they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment. And the Apostle
James says, Who among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,
but deceives his own Heart, this man's Religion is vain, James 1.26.

Observe that Nebuchadnezar, the Heathen King, and his company of Idolaters had
Music; ( viz.) the Sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sacbut Psaltery and
Dulcimer, and all kinds of Music, when they Worshipped the Golden Image that
he had set up: These were they which cast the three Children into the fiery
Furnace. This their Music and Rejoicing was Wicked and Ungodly.

Again, observe, the Apostle said unto the true Christians, Bellerum conc.
6.3.13. etc. says, Holidays are in our A^ celebrated in a Diabolical manner,
li^ bachanals Devils, Festivals most Sins then committed, most Feast Songs,
Bowlings, Tavernings, Scurrilitys, Dances with Women, as Straw with Fire.

As a f^rter testimony against Debaunchery he cites.

Neceph. lib. 19. Herodias her Daughters Head danced upon the Ice. Ambros de
virg l. 3. Jerome epist. 10.4. Christ hom. 56. on Matthew. 49. Basil. on
Drunkness and Riot.

Cicero a Heathen promuraena says No Sober Man danceth, and objects it as a
Crime to Amenius 6.


Be ye not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, but be filled with the Spirit;
speaking to your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Singing and
making Melody in your Hearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19.

Also Swearing and calling upon God to Damn them, and Blaspheming the pure,
holy and undefiled Name of God, proceeds even from the same Root that Gaming,
Music, Singing and Dancing do arise and spring from: Therefore let none who
are found in any of those things, (to wit, in Swearing, Damning Cursing and
Blaspheming the Name of the Lord) think to escape Gods Righteous Judgments; for
it is written, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in
Vain. And the Lord complains by the Prophet Jeremiah, Because of Swearing the
Land Mourns, Jer. 23.10.

Therefore all you that are concerned, as Witnesses for God, see that you bear
your Testimonies against these things, that the Lord may bless you and prosper
you in all your Undertakings, that the Praise and Honor, which is his due, he
may receive from you, and you from him a Crown of Glory, which fades not away
when time here shall be no more.

John Kelsall.

In the Kings Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched and Profane Persons,
etc. dated May the 30th 1660. in the Twelvth Year of his Reign; are these
Remarkable Passages following.
THere is a sort of Men of whom we are sufficiently ashamed, who spend their
time in Tavernes, Tippleing-houses and Debauchees, giving no other Evidence of
their affection to us, but in Drinking our Health, and inveighing against all
others who are not of their own dissolute temper, and who in Truth have more
discredited our Cause, by the license of their Manners and Lives, then they
could ever advance it by their Affection and Courage. -- We reasonably hope
these Men will cordially renounce all that Licenciousness, Profaneness and
Impiety with which they have been corrupted, and endeavored to corrupt others;
and that they will hereafter become Examples of Sobriety and Virtue. -- We will
not exercise just severity against any Malefactors, sooner then against Men of
Dissolute, Debauched and Profane Lives, with what parts soever they may be
otherwise qualified and endowed. -- And We hope all Persons of Honor, or in
Place and Authority, will so far assist Us in discountenancing such Men, that
their Discretion and Shame will persuade them to reform what their Consciences
would not. -- Which may by the Example and Severity of Virtuous Men be easily
discountenanced, and by degrees suppressed.

However for the more effectual reforming these Men, who are a discredit to the
Nation, and unto any Cause they pretend to favor and to wish well to. We
require all Mayors, and Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, to be very
vigilent and strict in the discovery and prosecution of all Dissolute and
Profane Swearing and Cursing.

THis was Reinforced by a second Proclamation of the King, the 13th of August,
1660. charging all Ministers to read it once each Month, for six Months
ensuing, and Stir Up their Auditors to observe the said Duties, and avoid the
said Vices.

LEt all consider Israel of old, Mat. 5.9. But he that shall Blaspheme is in
danger of eter(...) nation.
who when they forgot God (who had wrought mighty Deliverance for them) how
they ran in Feasting Dancing, and Idolatry; as it is written, They sat down to
Eat and Drink and rose up to play, and danced about the Golden Calf which they
had set up. But it was a dismal dance unto them; for several Thousands of them
were destroyed in one day, Ex. 32.6, 19, 27. And everyone that Swears shall
be cut off, etc. Zach. 5.3. By Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing,
and committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood touches Blood, Hosea 4.2.
If the Righteous scarcely shall be saved, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly
appear? 1 Pet. 4.18 LONDON, Reprinted with Additions, by John Bringhurst,


