A True Gentlewomans DELIGHT. Wherein is contained all manner of COOKERY:
Together with Preserving, Conserving, Drying, and Candying. Very necessary for
all Ladies and Gentlewomen. Published by W. I. GENT.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. and are to be sold by William Shears, at the Sign of
the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

To the Virtuous and most Hopeful Gentlewoman, Mis. Anne Pile, Eldest Daughter
of the Honorable Sr. Francis Pile Baronet, deceased.
Most accomplished LADY,
THe many singular favors, which I have received, not only from your worthy
self, but also from your thrice noble progenitors, justly oblige me by all the
due ties of gratitude, to tender a just acknowledgement: I wish the same heart,
that for many and just causes truly honors you, had any present worthy your
acceptance. Now shall it be your singular goodness to patronage this small
Treatise, which (if I mistake not) carries with it two parts, Delight, and
Utility. I doubt not then, but that it will find a general acceptance among
all those, who are any way the least lovers of such pleasing and all
delightful studies. I intend not to paraphrase upon its worth, its use, and
singular profit, which abundantly speaks it second unto none that has been
published of the like nature: so hoping you will accordingly esteem ^f it, I
beg pardon for my boldness, and rest ever,

A true and faithful honourer of your transparent Virtues, W. J.

To the Virtuous and most Noble Lady, Latitia Popham* Wife of the Honorable and
truly Valiant Colonel Alexander Popham.
Thrice Noble and truly Virtuous Lady.
AFter mature deliberation, what to tender unto your acceptance worthy your
Patronage, nothing occurred more probable, than this small Manual; which was
once esteemed a rich Cabinet of knowledge, by a person truly Honorable. May
it auspitiously procure but your Honors like friendly Estimation, and then I
doubt not, but it will find a universal acceptance amongst persons of greatest
Eminency. Sure I am, it may be justly deemed as a rich magaz^ne of experience,
having long since taught the world its approved excellency, yea, even in many
dangerous exigencies. All I humbly crave for the present is my boldness might
be favorably excused, since 'twas my lawful ambition, thereby to avoid
ingratitude for the many singular favors I have already received from your
endeared truly Honorable Husband, my always true noble friend, and most happy
Countryman. God multiply his blessings upon all your noble Family, and make
you no less honorable here on Earth, than Eternally happy hereafter: which
shall be the daily prayer of him, whose highest Emulation is

In all due ways abundantly to Honor and Serve you, W. J.

TO THE READER.
FRIENDLY READER*
Here thou have a small Treatise entitled, A true Gentlewomans Delight,
presented to thy view: be so courteous as to read before thou censure it. If
then the effect be answerable to its name, I shall be right glad: If there be
any Errors, it will be no error, but a singular token of thy exemplar humanity
to pass i^ by, and sign it with thy pardon; for which I engage my self,

Thine on the like occasion, W. I.

A Table of the Contents.
A
TO make Apple Cream. 3 To fry Apple Pies. 16 To make ^n Arterchoke Pie. 17 To
make Angellets. 21 To preserve Apricocks 43, 56 To make Apricock Cakes. 44 To
candy Apricocks. 50 To make Cakes of Almonds. 60 To preserve Angelica roots. 68
To make Almond Butter. 75 To make flesh of Apricocks. 76 Lady o^ Arundels
Manchet. 118
B
To bake Beef like red Dear. 19 To make stewed Broth. 30 To pickle Broom-buds.
35 To make biscuit Bread. 48 To make paste of Barberries or English Currants. 5^
To make Papp of Barley. 5^ A Broth to drink. 71, 7^ A Broth to eat on fasting
days. ibid* To stew Beef. 7^ To boil Brawn. 8^ To boil a gammon of Bacon. ibid
To bake a gammon of Bacon. 9 To bake fillets of Beef, etc. 9^ To souce Brawn.
10^ To make Bonny Clutter. 10^ To draw Butter. 11^
C
To make a Crystal Jelly. 2 To make clouted Cream. 4 To make Quince Cream. 5
To make a fresh Cheese. ibid To make Codlin Cream. 6 To make Cheesecakes. 6 To
make a slipcoat Cheese. 11 To make Cheese-loaves. 12 To make Curd-cakes. 16 To
make a Chicken Pie, 18 A good way to stew Chickens. 31 To pickle Cowcembers. 33
To do Clove* Gillyfloures up for ^alletting all the year. 34 To preserve
Currants. 41 To make a Calfes-foot Pie. 66 To boil a Capon with Brewis. 68 To
make a Spice Cake. 69 To boil a Chicken, etc. 72 To make a Caudle. 74 To dry
Cherries. 79 To boil a Capon in white Broth 81 To boil Chicken, and ^orrel^
ops. ^4 To stew Calves feet. 87 To stew cold Chickens. 90 To make Paste for a
Custard. 91 To bake Calfes-feet. 94, 123 To bake a Chicken Pie. 96, 120 To fry
Chickens. 104, 105 To make a Tart of Cherries. 112 To boil Cream. 117 A Calfes
Head Pie for Supper. 124 A Frigasie of Chickens. 131 To make a Cake. 133 To
souce a Calfes-head. 137
D
To make a made Dish. 15 To make a forced Dish of any cold meat. 2^ To make a
forced Dish of a Leg of Mutton or Lamb. 27 To boil a Duck. 28, 139 To preserve
white Damsons. 45 To preserve Damsons. 47, 57 To make fine Diet-Bread. 55 To
boil a Duck with Turnips. 84
E
To make Essings. 65 To souce Eeles. 107 To souce an Eele. 136
F
To make a white Fool. 7 To make a Fool. 8 To make Furmenty. 16 To candy all
kind of Fruitrages, as Oranges. etc. 64 To candy all kind of Flowers. ibid* To
boil Flounders, etc. 76 To boil diverse kinds of Fishes* 86 To bake a
Florentine. 98 To make Fritters. 106 To marble Fish. 110
G.
To make a Goosberry Fool. 6 To make a Goosberry Custard. 7 To make Grout. 36
To make Goosberry Tarts. 40 To preserve Goosberries. 41 To make Goosberry
Cakes. 42 To do Goosberries like Hops. 43 To preserve Grapes. 47 To preserve
Grapes to look clear and gr^en 50 To make Paste of Goosberries. 51 To souce a
Carp or Gurnet. 70
H
To bake a Hare. 95 To roast a Hare. 99 To make a Tart of Hips. 1^3 A
Hartechoak Pie. 123
I
To make an excellent Jelly. 1 To make a Jelly of Marmalet. 37 To make a
Junket. 114
K
A Florendine of Kidneys. 119
L
To make Leach. 11 To make yellow Leach. ibid. To fry a Coast of Lamb. 28 To
make Cakes of Lemons. 47 To candy Lemons and Oranges. 59 To make white Lemon
Cakes 61 A Lamb Pie. 120, 121 A Lark Pie. 126 A Frigasie of Lamb. 131
M.
To make sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton. 15, 120 To roast a Shoulder of Mutton
with Thyme. 20 To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters. ibid. To boil a Leg
of Mutton. 32 To preserve Medlers. 41 To make Mackaroons. 44 To preserve
Mulberries. 45 To boil a Mallard, etc. 84 To s^ew a Mallard. 88 To roast a
Shoulder of Mutton. 10, 140 To roast a Leg of Mutton. 102 To roast a Neck of
Mutton. ibid. To roast a Chine of Mutton. 103 To ro^st a Giggit of Mutton. 104
To make a Tart of Medlers. 112 To scald Milk after the Western fashion. 114 To
harsh a Shoulder of Mutton. 133 To make a Leg of Mutton three or four dishes.
134
N
To make Broth for a Neats-tongue. 70 To roast a Neats-tongue. 100 A hot Neats
tongue for Supper. 127 A cold Neats-tongue Pie. ibid.
O
To pickle Oy^^^rs. 36 To make Paste of Oranges and of Lemons. 52 To preserve
Oranges. 78 An Oyster Pie. 122
P
To make a Sack Posset. 10 To make black Puddings. 21 To make white Puddings.
22 To make Almond Puddings. 23 To make a Pudding to bake. ibid. To make a
boiled Pudding. 24 To make a Cream Pudding to be boiled. 25 To pickle Purslain.
34 To make a Jelly of Pippins. 38 To preserve Pippins white. 46 To make Paste
Royal in Spice. 53 To candie Pears, Plums, etc. 54 To make Paste Royal
white, etc. ib. To preserve Pomecitron. 62 To make a very good Pie. 67 To make
a fine Padding. 71 To make a Ponado. 74 To Souce a young Pig. 76 To dry
Peaches. 79 To boil a Pike in white Broth. 85 To stew a Pullet or Capon. 90 To
make Paste for a Pasty of Venison. ibid. To make Paste for a Pie to keep long
91 To make Paste for buttered loaves. 92 To make Paste for Dumplins. ibid. To
make Puffe-paste. 93, 129 To make an Italian Pudding. 98 To roast a Pig with a
Pudding in the belly. 101 To souce a Pig. 107 To make a Tart of green Pease.
111 To make a Pippin Tart. 113 To make a Pudding in haste. 116 To make a
Pudding in a dish. ibid. To boil Pigeons. 118 A Pork Pie. 119 A Potato Pie for
Supper. 128 Pigeon or Rabbet Pie. ibid. To make a Pudding. 130
Q
To keep Quinces all the year. 32 To preserve white Quinces. 40 To make Quince
Cakes. 46 To preserve Quinces red. 48 To make flesh of Quinces. 77 To bake
Quinces or Wardens* etc. 95
R
To preserve Resberries. 40 To candy Ringus Roots. 63 To boil a Rabbet. 83, 139
To stew a Rabbet. 89, 137 To make a Tart of Rice. 111 A Frigasie of Rabbets.
134
S
To stew Saucesedges. 28 To make Sugar Cakes. 66 To make Simbals. 67 To make
Sallet of all manner of Herbs. 87 To stew Steakes between two dishes. ibid. To
stew Smelts or Flounders. 89 To bake a Steak Pie. 97 To make a Tart of
Strawberries. 112 A Skerret Pie. 124
T
To make a Tan^ie. 13 To make black Tart stuff. 14 To make yellow Tart stuff.
ibid. To make gallendine sauce for a Turkey. 31 To stew Trouts. 88 To bake a
Turkey. 94 To fry Tongues 106 To souce a Tench or Barbell. 108
V
To make Cakes of Violets. 47 To make Oil of Violets. 61 To boil Veal, 80 To
bake Chucks of Veal. 96 To roast a Breast of Veal. 99 To roast a Haunch of
Venison. 103 To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal. ibid. To souce a Breast of
Veal. 108 To souce a Fillet of Veal. 109 To marble Beef, Mutton, or Venison.
ibid. A Frigasie of Veal. 131
W
To make a Whitepot. 26, 115 To make white broth with a Capon. 29 To preserve
green Walnuts. 39 To make a Tart of Wardens. 111
A TRUE GENTLEWOMANS DELIGHT.
To make an Excellent Jelly.
TAke three gallons of fair water, boil in it a knuckle of Veal, and two Calves
feet flit in two, with all the fat clear taken from between the claws, so let
them boil to a very tender Jelly, keeping it clean scummed, and the edges of
the pot always wiped with a clean cloth, that none of the scum may boil in,
then strain it from the meat, and let it stand all night, the next morning take
away the top and the bottom, and take to every quar^ of this Jelly, half a
pint of Sherry Sack, half an ounce of Cinnamon, and as much Sugar as will
season it, six whites of Eggs very well beaten, mingle all these together, then
boil it half an hour, and let it run through your Jelly Bag.

To make a Crystal Ielly.
Take two Calves feet, fley them, and lay them in fair spring water with a
knuckle of Veal, shift it in half a dozen waters, take out the fat betwixt the
claws, but do not break the bones, for if you do, the marrow of the bones will
stain the Jelly, when they are soft and picked very clean, boil them very tender
in spring Water, when they be boiled tender, take them up, and use them at your
pleasure to eat, let the broth stand in an earthen pot or Pipkin till it be
cold, then take away the bottom and the top, and put the clear into a fair
Pipkin, put into it half a pound of fair Sugar Candy, or other Sugar, three
drops of oil the di^h you mean to serve it in.

To make a Quince Cream.
Take the Quinces and put them into boiling water unpared, and let them boil
very fast uncovered that they may not color, and when they are very tender,
take them off and peel them and beat the pap very small with Sugar, and then
take raw cream and mix with it, till it be of fit thicknes to eat like a cream,
but if you boil the cream with a stick of Cinnamon, I think it the better, but
it must stand till it be cold before you put it to the Qui^ces.

To make a fresh Cheese.
Take a pint of fresh Cream, set it on the fire, then take the white of six
eggs, beat them very well, and wring in the juice of a good Lemon into the
whites, when the cream seeths up, put in the whites, and stir it about till it
be turned, and then take it off, and put it into the cheesecloth, and let the
whay be drawn from it, then take the curd and pound it in a Stone mortar with a
little Rose Water and Sugar, and put it into an earthen Cullender, and so let
it stand till you send it to the table, then put it into a dish, put a little
sweet cream to it, and so serve it in.

To make a Codling Cream.
After your Coolings be thoroughly cooled and yielded, put them into a silver
dish, and fill the dish almost half full with Rose Water, and half a pound of
Sugar, boil all this liquor together, until half be consumed, and keep it
sti^ring till it be ready, then fill up your dish with sweet cream, and stir it
till it be well mingled, and when it has boiled round about the dish, take it
up, sweeten it with Sugar and serve it cold.

How to make a Goosberrie Fool.
Take your Goosberries and pick them, and put them into clean water, and boil
them till they be all as of Nutmeg, three drops of oil of Mace, and a grain of
Musk, and so let i^ boil leasurely a quarter of an hour, then let it run
through a Jellie bag into a gallie pot, when it is cold you may serve it in
little careless lumps being taken out with a child's spoon, and this is the
best way to make your Crystal Jelly.

To make Apple Cream at any time.
Take twelve Pippins pare and slit them, then put them in a skillet, and some
Claret Wine, and a race of Ginger shred thin, and a little Lemon pill cut
small, and a little Sugar, let all these stand together till they be soft, then
take them off, and put them in a dish till they be cold, then take a quart of
Cream boiled with a little Nutmeg a while, then put in as much of the apple
stuff, to make it of what thickness you please, and so serve it up.

To make a Trifle Cream.
Take some Cream and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, and Lemon pill a while, then
take it off, cool it a little, and season it with a little Rose Water and Sugar
to your taste, let this be put in the thing you serve it in, then put in a
little Runnet to make it come, then it is fit to eat.

To make clouted Cream.
Take three gallons of new Milk, set it on the fire till it boileth, make a
hole in the middle of the Cream of the Milk, then take a pottle or three pints
of very good cream, put it into the hole you made in the middle of the Milk, as
it boileth, and let it boil together half an hour, then put it into three or
four milkpans, so let it stand two days, if the weather be not to hot, then
take it up in clouts with a scummer or slice, and put it in that which you will
serve it, if you like it seasoned, you may put some Rose Water between every
clout as you lay one upon another, with your slice in thick that you cannot
discern what it is to the value of a quart, take six yolks of Eggs well beaten
with Rose Water, and before you put in your Eggs season it well with Sugar,
then strain your Eggs, and let them boil a little while, then take it up, put
it in a broad dish, and let it stand till it be cold, thus it must be eaten.

How to make a white Fool.
Take a quart of Cream, and set it over the fire, and boil it with whole
Cinnamon, and sliced Nutmeg, and Sugar, then when it is almost ready take the
whites of six Eggs well beaten with Rose Water, and skum off the ^roth from
them, and put it into the Cream, and boil it together a pretty while, then
season it, and take the whole spice out of it, and put it up in a broad dish,
and when it is cold then it must be eaten.

To make a Goosberry Custard.
Take as many Goosberries as you please, boil them till they be soft, then take
them out, and let them stand and cool, and drain them, draw them with your hand
through a canvas Strainer, then put in a little Rose Water, Sugar, and three
Whites, and stir them altogether, put them in a Skillet, and stir them apace
else they will burn, let them stand and cool a little while, and take them off,
and put them in a glass.

To make a Fool.
Take two quarts of Cream, set it over the fire, and let it boil, then take the
yolks of twelve Eggs, and beat them very well with three or four spoonfuls of
cold Cream, before you put the Eggs into the hot Cream, take three or four
spoonfuls of the Cream out of the Skillet, and put it into the Eggs, and stir
it together, and then strain the Eggs into the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring
it all the time to keep it from turning, then set it on the fire, and let it
boil a little while, but keep it with stirring for fear of burning, the^ take
it ^ff, and let it stand and cool, then take two or three spoonfuls of Sack,
and put it in the dish, and some four or five Sippits, and put them in the
dish, set the dish and Sippits a drying, and when they be dry that they hang to
the dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour it in the dish softly because the Sippits
shall not rise up, this will make three dishes, when it is cold it is fit to be
eaten.

To make Cheese-cakes.
For the crust take half a pint of flower, and four spoonfuls of cold water,
and three parts of a quarter of a pound of butter, beat and knead these
together, and put the past asunder several times, then roll it square and turn
it over, then take a pint of Cream, and seven Eggs, and a quarter of a pound of
Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Currants plump before you put them in, and a
whole Nutmeg grated on a knife, the Pepper must be beaten, but not too much, it
must be gently boiled and stirred as you do buttered Eggs, the stuff must be
cold, and then put in the coffin, and so bake it.

To make a Sack Posset.
Take two quarts of pure good Cream, a quarter of a pound of the best Almonds,
stamp them in the Cream, and boil Amber and Musk therein, then take a pint of
Sack in a Basin, and set it on a chafingdish till it be blood warm, then take
the yolks of twelve Eggs, with four whites, and beat them very well together,
and so put the Eggs into the Sack, and make it good and hot, let the Cream cool
a little before you put it into the Sack, then stir all together over the
coals till it be as thick as you would have it, if you take some Amber and
Musk, and grind it small with Sugar, and strew it on the top of the Posset, it
will give it a most delicate and pleasant taste*

To make Leach.
Make your Jelly for your Leach with Calves feet, as you do your ordinary
Jelly, but a little stiffer, and when it is cold, take off the top and bottom,
and set it over the fire with some Cinnamon and Sugar, then take your Turnsele,
being well steept in Sack, and crush it, and so strain it into your Leach, and
let it boil to such a thickness, that when it is cold you may slice it.

To make yellow Leach.
Your yellow Leach is just the same, but in steed of Turnsele you must color
it with Saffron, and when it is boiled enough, then put in your Saffron and not
before, it must not boil in it.

To make a slipcoat Cheese.
Take five quarts of new Milk from the Cow, and one quart of Water, and one
spoonful of Runnet, and stir it together, and let it stand till it does come,
then lay your Cheese-cloth into the Vate, and take up your Curd as fast as you
can without breaking, and put into your Vate, and let the Whay soak out of it
self; when you have taken it all up, lay a cloth on the top of it, and one
pound weight for one hour, then lay two pound weight for one hour more, then
turn him when he has stood two hours lay three pound on him for an hour more,
then take him out of the Vate, and let him lie two or three hours, and then
salt him on both sides, when he is salt enough, take a clean cloth and wipe him
dry, then let him lie a day or a night, then put Nettles under and upon him,
and change them once a day, the Cheese will come to his eating in eight or nine
days.

To make Cheese-loaves.
Take the Curds of a tender new milk Cheese, and let them be well pressed from
the Whay, and then break them as small as you can possible, then take Crumbs of
Manchet, and yolks of Eggs, with half the whites, and some sweet Cream, and a
little fine flower, mingle all these together, and make a paste of it, but not
too stiff, then make them into little loaves and bake them, when they be
baked, cut off the tops and butter them, with Sugar, Nutmeg, and melted Butter,
and put it in with a spoon, and stir it altogether, then lay on the tops, and
sear them with scraped Sugar.

How to make a very good Tansie.
Take fifteen Eggs, and six of the whites, beat them very well, then put in
some Sugar, and a little Sack, beat them again, then put about a pint or a
little more of Cram^, then beat them again, then put in the juice of Spinnage
or of Primrose leaves, to make it green, then put in some more Sugar if it be
not sweet enough, then beat it again a little, and so let it stand till you
fry it, when the first course is in, then fry it with a little sweet Butter, it
must be stirred and fried very tender when it is fried enough, then put i^ in a
dish, and strew some Sugar upon it, and serve it in.

To make black Tart stuff.
To a dozen pound of Prune take half a dozen of Maligo Raisins, wash and pick
them clean, and put them into a pot of water, se^ them over the fire till all
these ar^ like pulpe, and stir them often leas^ they burn too, then take them
off and let them be rubbed through ^ hair Sive hard with your hands, b^ little
and little till all be through then season them to your taste wit^ searced
Ginger.

To make yellow Tart stuff.
Take four and twenty Eggs, an^ beat them with Salt together, an^ put it into a
quart of seething Milk stirring it until it caudles, then tak^ it off, and put
in into a napkin, hanging it up till all the Whay be ru^ through, when it is
cold, take i^ and grind it in a stone Mortar wit^ Sack and Sugar, to your
taste; and otherwise to make it look white, leave the yolks, and instead of
Sack put in Rosewater.

To make a made Dish.
Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds, beat them small and ^n the beatin of
them put in a little Rosewater to keep them from oyling, strain them into
Cream, then take Arterchoak bottomes, and Marrow, and boil the redness of the
Marrow out, then take a quart of Cream, and boil it with Dates, Ro^e-water, and
Sugar, and when it is boiled to a convenient thickness, take it off, and take
your Arterchoak and pare off the leaves, and lay them into the dish, and some
Marrow upon them, then pour some Cream upon them, then set it on coals til you
serveit in. To make Sauce for a shoulder of Mutton.

Take a few Oysters, and some sweet herbs, and an Onyon, and a pint of white
Wine, and a little beaten Nutmeg, a little Salt, and a large Mace* a little
Lemon pild, and a little Sugar, a little leaker poss^t* i^ you have no Oysters
take Capers in the room of them, and some gravie of the Mutton*

To fry Appl^ pies.
Take Apples and pare them, and chop them very small, beat in a little
Cinnamon, a little Ginger, some Sugar, and a little Rose Water, take your
paste, roll it thin, and make them up as big Pasties as you please, to hold a
spoonful or a little less of your Apples, and so stir them with Butter not to
hastily least they be burned.

To make Curd-Cakes.
Take a pint of Curds, four Eggs, take out two of the whites put in some Sugar,
a little Nutmeg, and a little flower, stir them well together, and drop them
in, and fry them with a little Butter.

To make Furmenti^.
Take a quart of sweet Cream, two or three sprigs of Mace, and a Nutmeg cut in
half put into your Cream, so let it boil, then take your French Barley or Rice,
being first washed clean in fair water three times, and picked clean, then boil
it in sweet milk till it be tender, then put it into your cream, and boil it
well, and when it has boiled a good while, take the yolks of six or seven
eggs, beat them very well, and thicken on a soft fire, boil it, and stir it,
for it will quickly burn, when you think it is boiled enough, sweeten it to
your taste, and so serve it in with Rose Water and Musk Sugar, in the same
manner you may make it with wheat.

To make an Arterchoak Pie.
Take the bottom of six Arterchoaks, being boiled very tender, put them in a
dish, and put some vinegar over them, season them with Ginger and Sugar, a
little Mace whole, putting them into a Pie, and when you lay them in, lay some
marrow, and Dates sliced in, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with
good store of Butter, so close the Pie, when it is half baked, take a dish of
Sack, being boiled first with Sugar, and a pill of Orange, put it in your Pie,
and set it in the Oven again, till you use it.

To make a Chicken Pie.
Make your paste with good store of Butter, and yolks of Eggs and Sugar, then
take six chickens small, taking out the breast bone, and trussing them round,
take two Nutmegs, and a good quantity of Cinnamon, and put it in in little
pieces, take two yolks of eggs, and beat them wirh six spoonfuls of verjuice,
then take your juice and verjuyce, and a little salt, stir them well together,
take a good deal of butter, and wet it in the verjuyce, and put it in the
bellies of the Chikens, so lay them in the pie with butter under them, then
take half a pound of Currants washed and dried, so lay them on the top of the
Chickens, with a piece of Marrow, Barberries, Grapes, and good store of Butter
and Sugar, as will season it, a little before you draw out your Pie, put in
Verjuyce and Sugar boiled together.

To bake Beef like red Deer.
Take a pound of Beef, and slice it thi^, and half a pint of good wine Vinegar,
some three Cloves, and Mace above an ounce, three Nutmegs, pound them
altogether, Pepper and Salt according to your discretion, and a little Sugar,
mix these together, take a pound and half of Suet, shred and beat it small in a
Mortar, then lay a row of suet, a row of Beef, strew your spices between every
lain, then your Vinegar, so do till you have laid in all, then make it up, but
first beat it close with a rolling pin, then press it a day before you put it
in your paste.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Thyme.
Draw yout shoulder of Mutton; and when it is half roasted, save the gravy, and
cut a good deal of the inside of it, and mince it gross, and boil it in a
dish with the gravy, and Thyme, Claret wine, and sliced Nutmeg, and when your
shoulder is roasted, lay it in the dish with sliced Lemon, but remember to
scorch your Mutton in roasting, as you do when you boil it.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
When you open the Oyster save the liquor, then season them with Pepper, and a
little Cloves, and Mace, and Herbs finely chopped, and the yolk of two or
three Eggs chopped small, and some Currants parboyled a little, then stuff your
Shoulder of Mutton thick with your Oysters, then season it, and lay it to the
fire, and roast it, then take the rest of your Cysters, and boil them with a
little white Wine and some Butter, this is sauce for your Shoulder of Mutton,
when your Oysters are opened, you may parboyle them in their own liquor, then
take them out, and season them.

To make Angellets.
Take a quart of new Milk, and a pint of Cream, and put them together with a
little Runnet, when it is come well, take it up with a spoon, and put it into
the vate softly, and let it stand two days, till it is pretty stiff, then
slip it out, and salt it a little at both ends, and when you think it is salt
enough, set it a drying, and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they
will be ready to eat.

To make black Puddings,
Take your blood when it is warm, put in some salt, and when it is thoroughly
cold put in your groats well picked, and let it stand soking a night, then put
in Herbs, which must be Rosemary, large Savory, Pennyroyall, Thyme, and
Fennel, then make it soft, with putting of good Cream hot until the blood
look pale, then beat four or five Eggs whites and all, and mingle it* then
season it with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Fennel seeds, then put good store of Beef
suet in your stuff, and mince your fat not too small.

To make white Puddings.
After the humbles are very tender boiled, take some of the lights, with the
hearts, and all the flesh and fat about them, picking from them all the sinews
and skin, then chop the meat small as can be, then put to it a little of the
Liver very finely searced, some grated bread searced, four or five yolks of
Eggs, a pint of very good Cream, a spoonful or two of Sack, a little Sugar,
Cinnamon, Cloves, and Mace, a little Nutmeg, a few Canary seeds, a little
Rosewater mingled with a good deal of Swines fat, a little Salt, roll it in
roules two hours before you go about it, let the fat side of the skin be
turned and steeped in Rosewater till you fill them.

To make Almond Puddings.
Take a Pound of Almonds blanched, and beat them very small with a little
Rosewater, boil good Milk with a flake of Mace, and a little sliced N^tmeg,
when it is boiled, take it clean ^^om the Spice, then take the quantity of a
penny loaf, grate it, and searce it through a Cullender, and then put it into
the Milk, and let it stand till it be pretty cool, then put in the Almonds, and
five or six yolks of Eggs, and a little Salt and Sugar, what you think ^it, and
good store of B^ef suet, and Marrow very finely ^hred.

To make a Pudding to bake.
Take a penny loaf, pare it, slice it in a quart of Cream, with a little
Rosewater, and break it very small, take three ounces of Jordan Almonds
blanched, and beaten small with a little Sugar, put in some eight Eggs beaten,
a Marrow bone, and two or three Pippins sliced thin, or any way, mingle these
together, and put in a little Ambergriece if you please.

To make a boyld Pudding.
Take a pint o^ Cream or Milk, boil it with a stick of Ciunamon a little
while, and take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, put in six Eggs, take
out three whites, beat your Eggs a little before you put them into the Milk,
then stir them together, then take a penny roll, and slice it very thin* and
let it lie and soke, and then braid it very small, then put in some Sugar, and
butter your cloth before you put it in, it will take but a little while
seething, and when you take it up, melt a little fresh Butter, and a little
Sa^, and Sugar, beat all these together, and put it into tke dish with your
Pudding to be served in.

To make a Cream Pudding to be boiled.
Take a pint and a half of thick Cream, and boil it with Mace, Ginger, and
Nutmeg quartered, then put to it eight Eggs, with four whites beaten, and
Almonds blancht a pound, and strained in with the Cream, a little Rosewater and
Sugar, and a spoonful of flower searted very fine, then take a thick napkin,
wet it, and rub it with flower, and tie the pudding up in it, where Mutton is
boiled, or in the Beefpot, remember to take out the whole Spice out of the
Cream when it is boiled, the sauce for this pudding is a little Sack, and
Sugar, a pretty piece of Butter, you must blanch some Almonds, when they are
blanched, cut every Almond in three or four pieces the long way, and stick them
up an end upon the pudding very thick.

To make a White-pot.
Take a pint and a half of Cream a quarter of a pound of Sugar, little
Rosewater, a few Dates sliced a few Raisins of the Sun, six o^ seven Eggs,
and a little large Mace a sliced Pippin, or Lemon, cu^ sippet fashion for your
dishes yo^ bake in, and dip them in Sack o^ Rosewater.

To make a forced dish of any col^ meat.
Take any cold meat and shre^ it small, a little Cloves, and Mace, and Nutmeg,
and two yolks of Eggs, a spoonful or two of Rosewater, a little grated bread,
a little Beef suet shred small, make it up into balls or any fashion you
please, and boil them in fried suet between two earthen dishes, your suet must
boil before you put in your meat for sauce, a little Butter, Verjuyce, and
Sugar.

To make a forced dish of a Leg of Mutton, or Lamb.
Take a Leg of Mutton, or Lamb, cut out the flesh, and take heed you break not
the skin of it, then parboyle it, and mince it with a little Beef suet* put
into it a little sweet Herbs shred, three or four Dates sliced, a little
beaten Nutmeg, Cloves, and Mace, a few Currants, a little Sugar, a little
Verjuyce, three or four Eggs, mix them together, and put them in the skin, and
set it in a dish, and bake it.

To boil a Calves head with Oysters.
Take the head, and boil it with Water and Salt, and a little white Wine or
Verjuyce* and when it is almost enough then cut some Oysters, and mingle them
together, and a blade or two of Mace, a little Pepper, and Salt, and a little
liquor of the Oysters, then put it together, and put it to the Calves head, and
the largest Oysterr upon it, and a slit Lemon, and Barberries, so serve it in.

To fry a Coast of Lamb.
Take a coast of Lamb, and parboyle it, take out all the bones as near as you
can, and take some four or five yolks of Eggs beaten, a little Thyme, and
sweet Majoram, and Parsley minced very small, and beat it with the Eggs, and cut
your Lamb into square pieces, and dip them into the Eggs and Herbs, and fry
them with Butter, then take a little Butter, white Wine, and Sugar for sauce.

To st^w Saucesedges.
Boil them in fair Water and Salt a little, for sauce boil some Cur^ans
alone, when they be almost tender, then pour out the water, and put in a little
white Wine, Butter, and Sugar.

To boil Ducks.
When they be half boiled, take a quart of the liquour and strain it, and put a
quart of white Wine, and some whole Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs sliced, and
Cinnamon, and a few Onions shred, a bundle of sweet Herbs, a few Capers, and a
little Sampire, when it is boiled put some Sugar to season it withal. To make
white Broth with a Capon.

Trusse your Capons, and boil them in fair water, and when they are half
boiled, take out three pints of the liquor, and put it to a quart of Sack, and
as much white Wine, and slice two ounces of Dates half or quarter wise as you
please, a little whole Mace, Cloves, and Cinnamon, a Nutmeg shred, of each a
little quantity, boil the broth in a pipkin by it self, until the Dates begin
to be tender, then put in the marrow of two bones, and let it boil a little,
not too much for fear, then when your Capons be near ready, break twenty Eggs,
save the yolks from the whites, and beat the yolks until you may take up a
spoonful and it will not run beside the spoon, then you must put a little cold
broth to them, and so strain them through a cloth, then take up some of the hot
broth to heat your Eggs, because else it will turn, let it have a walm or two
after your Eggs be in, but not sees too much for fear it turns, then dish your
Capons, and pour your broth on them, and garnish your dish as you please.

To make stewed Broth.
Take a neck of Mutton, or a rump of Beef, let it boil, and scum your pot
clean, thicken your pot with grated bread, and put in some beaten Spice, as
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and a little Pepper, put in a pound of Currants, a
pound and a half of Raisins of the Sun, two pound of Prunes last of all, then
when it is stewed, to season it put in a quart of Claret, and a pint of Sack,
and some Saunders to color it, and a pound of Sugar to sweeten it, or more if
need be, you must sees some whole Spice to garnish your dish withal, and a
few whole Prunes out of your pot.

To make gallendine Sau^e for a Turkey.
Take some Claret Wine, and some grated bread, and a sprig of Rosemary, a
little beaten Cloves, a little beaten Cinnamon, and some Sugar.

An exceeding good way to stew Chickens.
Take Chickens, fley them, and cut them in pieces cross way, then put them in
a Pipkin or Skillet, and cover them almost with Pepper, and Mace, and Water, so
let them stew softly with a whole Onion in it till part of that Liquor be
consumed, then put in as much white Wine as will cover them again, take
Parsley, sweet Majoram, Winter Savory, with a little Thyme, and shred them very
small, and put them in, and let them boil till they are almost enough, then put
in a good piece of Butter.

To boil a leg of Mutton.
Take a leg of Mutton and stuff^ it, for the stuffing take a little Bee^ suet,
and a few sweet herbs, cho^ them small, and stuff it, and the^ boil it, and
put in a handful o^ sweet herbs, cut them small, mingl^ a hard Egg amongst
the herbs, an^ strew it upon the Mutton, melt little Butter and Vinegar, and
pou^ it into the dish, and send it in.

To keep Quinces all the year.
First you must core them, an^ take out the kernels clean, and kee^ the cores
and kernels, then set ove^ some water to boil them, then pu^ them in when you
set over the water then let them boil till they be a little soft, and then take
them up, an^ set them down till they be cold, the^ take the kernels and stamp
the^ and put them into the same wat^ they were boiled in, and l^ them boil till
they be thick see you have as much liquor as w^ cover the Quinces, and if you
have not enough, take of the smallest Quinces and stamp them to make more
liquor, and when it is boiled good and thick, you must strain it through a
course cloth, and when the Quinces be cold, then put them into a pot, and the
liquor also, and be sure the liquor cover them, you must lay some weight upon
them to keep them under, so cover them close, let them stand fourteen days,
and they will work of their own accord, and they will have a thick rind upon
them, and when they wax hoa^y or thick, then take it from the liquor, for it
will have a skin on it within a month or six weeks.

To pickle Cowcumbers.
Take the Cowcumbers, and wash them clean, and dry them clean in a cloth, then
take some Water, Vinegar, Salt, Fennel tops, and some Dill tops, and a little
Mace, make it fast enough, and sharp enough to the taste, then boil it a while,
and then take it off, and let it stand and be cold, and then put in the
Cowcumbers, and lay a board on the top to keep them down, and tie them close,
and within a week they will be fit to ^at.

To pickl^ Purslain.
Take the Pursl^in, and pick it in little piec^s, and put it into a pot o^
ba^re^* then take a little Water, Vinegar, and Salt to your taste, it must be
pr^t^y strong of the Vineg^^ and Salt, and a little Mace, and b^il all these
together, and pour this liquor in s^ thing hot into the ^urs^aine, and when it
is cold tie it close, but put a little board on the to^ to keep it down, and
within a week or two it is fit to eat.

To do Clove-gillifloures up for Sall^ting all the year.
Take as many Clove-gillifloures as you please, and slip off the leaves, then
strew some Sugar in the bottom of the gallipot that you^ do them in, and then
a lane of Gillifloures, and then a lane of Sugar, and so do till all the
Gillifloures be done, then pour some Claret Wine into them as much as will
cover them, then cut a piece of a thin board, and lay it to them to keep them
down, then tie them close, and set them in the Sun, and let them stand a month
or thereabouts, but keep them from any rain or wet.

To pickle Broom-buds.
Take as many Broom-buds as you please, make linen bags, and put them in, and
tie them close, then make some brine with Water and Salt, and boil it a little,
let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in
it, and lay some weight upon them, let it lie there ti^l it look black, then
s^ift it again, so you must do as long as it looks black, you must boil them
in a little caldron, and put them in vinegar a week or two, and then they be
fit to eat.

To pickle Oysters.
Take your Oysters and pick them out of the shells, and save the liquor that
comes from them, then take your Oysters one by one, and wash them clean out
of grist, then strain the liquor, then take a quantity of white Wine, and a
larg^ Mace or two, and two or three slice^ of Nutmeg, and Pepper grossly beaten,
and salt them, boil it together, then put in your Oysterr and boil them, then
take the yolk^ of an Egg, and beat it well wit^ wine Vinegar, then take up you
Oysters, and let them cool, the^ put in your Egg and let it boil take it off,
and let it cool, and p^ it up together.

To make grout.
Take some Wheat and Beane^ and when you have made it in^ Malt, then rittle it,
then take some Water, or some small Wort, an^ heat it scalding hot, and put it
in^ a pail, then stir in the Malt, the take a piece of sower leaven, then stir
it about and cover it, and let it stand till it will cream, then put in some
Orange pills, then put it over the fire and boil it, keeping it stirring till
all the white be gone.

To make jelly of Marmalet.
Take Quinces and pa^e them, cut them into water in little pieces, and when you
have done all, then take them ^ut of the water and weigh them, and to every
pound of Quinces, take five quarters of a pound of Sugar, and half a quarter*
then put it into the skillet, and put as much water as will make it pretty
thin, then set it on the fire and clarify it with the white of an Egg, and
scum it off clear, then put in your Quinces, and let it boil a pretty pace, and
cover it close, till it is pretty thick, then leave stirring it ^ill it is
thick enough for Marmalet, ^hen take it off, and put it in your glass, and do
it with your ^nife in little works, when you have done, let it stand, your
costly must boil all the while, you must put it as much water as will ma^e it
pretty thin, when it is boiled to a pretty good color, then stir it and wei^^
it, then take of loaf Sugar as much as it weighs, and boil it altogethe^ to a
Jellie, then pour it into your Marmalet glass, then put it in ^ stove, and put
some ^ire in every day.

To make jelly of Pippins.
Take Pippins and pare them* and quarter them, and c^ar them lay them in water,
and when yo^ set them on the fire, shift them i^ another water, and put them i^
a skillet, and put as much water ^ will cover them and a little more set them
over the fire, and man them boil as fast as you can, when the Apples are soft,
and the liqu^ taste strong of the Apples, then ta^ them off, and strain them
throu^ a pi^ce of canvas gently; take to pound of juice a pound of Suga^ then
set it on the fire, when it is melted, strain it into a Basin, and rince your
skillet again, set it on the fire, and when it is boiled up then scum it, and
make it boil as fast as you can, and when it is almost boiled, put in the juice
of three Lem^ns strained through a cloth, if you will have Orange pill pare it
thin* that the while be not seen, and then l^y it in the water all night, then
boil the^ in the water till the pill be soft, then cut them in long pieces,
then put it into the Sirrupe and ^ti^ it about and fill your glasses, and let
it stand till it be cold, and then it is ready to eat.

To preserve green VValnuts.
Take Walnuts, and boil them till the water do taste bitter, then take them off
and put them in cold water, and pill off the bark, and weigh as much Sugar as
they weigh, and a little more water than will wet the Sugar, set them on the
fire, and when they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two days, and
boil them again once more.

To preserve white Quinces.
Take a pound of Quinces, boil them with the skins on, but core them and pare
them, take a quarter of a p^u^d of Sugar, with water, no more then will wet the
Sugar, put the Quinces into it presently, boil them as fast as may be, and skin
them, when the Sirupe is thick take it up.

To make Goosberry Tarts.
Take a pint of Goosberries, and put them into a quarter of a pound of Sugar,
and two spoonfuls of water, and put them on the fire, and stir them as you did
the former.

To preserve Resberries.
Take as many as you please, a lay of Sugar, and a lay of Resberries, and so
lay them into the ^ki^let, and as much Sugar as you think will make Sirrupe
enough, and boil them, and put two spoonfuls of water in, boscom it, take it
off, and let it stand.

To preserve Currants.
Part them in the tops, lay a lain of Cur^ans, and a lain of Sugar, and so boil
them as fast as you do Resberries, do not put in the spoon, but scum them, boil
them till the Sirrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and let them stand
till they be cold, and then put them in a glass.

To preserve Medlers.
Take the just weight of Sugar as they weigh, to a pound of Sugar put a pint
and a half of water, scald them as long as the ski^s will come off, stone them
at the head* put the water to the Sugar, and b^il it and strain it, put in the
Medlers, boil them apace, let them stand till they be thick, then take them off.

To preserve Goosberries.
Take the fairest Goosber^ies you can get with the stalks on, prick three or
four holes in every one of them, then take the weight of them in Sugar, lay the
best part of the Sugar in the bottom of a silver or peuter dish, then lay your
Goosberries one by one upon it, strew some of the rest of the Sugar upon them,
and put two spoonfuls of the water, into half a pound, then set the Go^sb^r^i^s
on a cha^ingdish of coals, and let them stand uncovered, scal^ing upon the
fire a pretty while before they boil, but not too long, for then they will grow
red, and when they b^ b^iled, let them not boil too f^st when they be enough
put them up* you must put the rest of the Sugar on them as they boil, and that
w^ll harden them, and keep them from breaking.

To make Goosberry Cakes.
Prick as ^^ny Goosbe^ries as you please, and put them into an earthen p^^h^r,
and ^et it in a kettle of water till they be soft, and then put them into a
sive, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and as
much Sugar, as sirrup; first boil the sugar to a Candy, and take it off, and
put i^ the juice, and set it on again till it be hot, and take it ^ff, and set
them in a press till they be dry, then they are r^^dy.

To do Goosberries like Hops.
Take pricks of black Thorn, then take Goosberries, and cut them a little a
cross, t^ke out the stones, put them upon the pricks, weigh as much sugar, as
they weigh and take a quart or a pint of water and put into the sugar and let
it boil a while, then put in the hops, let them stand and scald two hours upon
^he coals till they be so^t, then take out the Hops, and boil the sirrupe a
while, then take it off, and put in the Hops.

To preserve Apricocks.
First stone them and weigh them, and take as much sugar as Apricocks, put it
in a Basin, some in the bottom, and some on the top, let them stand all night,
set them on the fire till they* be scalding hot, then heat them twice more.

To make Apricock Cakes.
Take as many Apricocks as you please, and pare them, put as much Sugar as they
weigh, take more water than will melt the Sugar, then boil the Sugar and it
together, till they be pretty stiff, then take them off, and put them in
Saucers.

To make Mackeroons
Take half a pound of Almonds, put them in water, stamp them small, put in some
Rose Water, a good spoonful of flower, four Eggs, half a pound of Sugar, in the
beating of the Eggs, put in the Almonds, heat the oven hot enough to bake a
Custard, put them in, when you have taken them out, let them stand till they be
cold, they must be baked in earthen pa^s round, and buttered very thin.

How to preserve White Damsons green.
Take white Damsons, scald them in water till they be hard, then take them off,
and pick as many as you please, take as much sugar as they weigh, strew a
little in the bottom, put two or three spoonfuls of water, then put in the
Damsons and the sugar, and boil them, take them off, then let them stand a day
or two, then boil them again, take them off, and let them stand till they be
cold.

To preserve Mulberries.
Take as many Mulberries as you please and as much sugar as they weigh: First
wet the sugar with some juice of Mulberries* stir your sugar together, then put
in your Mulberies, then boil them apace: till you think they are boiled enough,
then take them off, and boil the sirupe a while, and put it into the
Mulberries, let them stand till they be cold.

To preserve Pippens white.
Take some Pippens and pare them, and cut them the cross way, and weigh them,
and to a pound of sugar, a pint of water, then put the sugar to the water, and
then let it boil a while, and then put in the Pippens, and let them boil till
they be clear at the Core, take them off, and put them up.

To make while Quince Cakes.
Take Quinces and let them stand till they be cold, but not seethed till they
be tender enough, then take them off, and pare them, then scrape off the
softest, and do it through a sieve, and then weigh as much sugar as it does
weigh, and b^at it, and sift it into the Quinces, and stir it altogether, and
set it on the coals, and stir it about, but let it not boil at all, but let it
stand and cool, till it be pretty thick, then take it off, and put it in glass
sancers.

To preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them, let it settle awhile, before you wet a pound of sugar,
or grapes with the juice, stone the grapes, save the liquor, in the stoning
take of the stalks, give them a boiling, take them off, and put them up

To preserve Damsons.
Take as many as you please, and weigh, as much Sugar as they weigh* and strew
some in the bottom and some on the top* and you may w^t the sugar with some
sirrup, of Damsons, or a little water, then set them upon the fire and let them
stand and soke softly about an hour, then take them off, and let them stand a
day or two, then boil them up till you think they be enough, take them off, and
put them up.

How to make Cake of Lemons or Violets.
Take ^f the ^^st double refined sugar, beaten very fine and searced through
fine Tiffen^e, and to half a silver porringer of Sugar, put to it two spoonfuls
of water, and boil it till it be almost Sugar again, then grate of the hardest
rinded Lemon, then stir it into your sugar, put it into your Coffins of Paper,
and when they be cold take them off.

To preserve Quinces red.
Take your Quinces and weigh them, to a pound put a pound of sugar, and half a
pint of water, put your water to your Sugar, and let it stand, your Quinces
must be scalded till they be tender, take them off, pare them, and core them,
but not too much, then put them in the skillet where the sugar is, then set
them on the fire, and let them boil two hours, if it be not enough, boil it a
little more, pour it to the Quinces, and stop it close.

To make Biscuit Bread.
Take a pound and a half of white loaf sugar, and so much flower, as much
Anni^ested, Coliander seed, and Car^a^^y seed as you please, and twelve Eggs,
three whites left out, take the sugar and sift it fine, and the flower also,
and beat your eggs a little, then mingle them well together with four spoonfuls
of damask Rose Water, beat them well together, and put in two spoonfuls more,
and beat it again about an hour and a half in all, then butter plate
trenchers, and fit them with stuff, scrape some Sugar on them, and blow it off
again, heat your oven hot enough to bake a Pie, and let the lid stand up a
little while, to draw down the heat from the top, then take the lid down again
and let it stand till it be cool, that you may suffer your hand in the bottom,
then set in the Plates, and set up the lid again until, they rise, then take
them out and loose them from the plates, and scrape the bottoms, and let them
stand four hours, then they be fit to eat.

To preserve Grapes to look clea^ and green.
Take a pound of Grapes wit^ no stalk^ on them, when they d^ begin to be ripe,
then weigh as much double r^^ine^ sugar beaten small then t^ke the grapes that
were weighed, stone the^ at the place wh^r^ the stalks are, pull off the sk^ns*
an^ strain some Sugar in the bottom of the thing you do them in* and s^ lay
them in the sugar you did weigh till you have stoned and pilled the and so
strew the sugar upon them then set them on the fire, and le^ them boil as fast
as can be, till ^h^ syrup be pretty thick, then take then off, and put them up
till they b^ cold.

To Candie Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks the fairest and scald them, and pill them, between two
clothes crush the wate softly out of them as dry as you can without too much
flatting them then take of searced sugar almos^ as much as they weigh, and boil
it altogether to a Candy height, then take it off the fire, and lay the
Apricocks in it one by one, with a feather anoint them over, then set them on
a chafing-di^h of coals, and let them be through ^od but not boil, then take
them off he fire, and set it in a stone or bloud-warm oven, and twice a day set
them on a fire, and turn them once at every heating, anointing them with a
feather, and the same syrup every time you take them off the fire, this do
until you see the syrrup begin to sparkle, and full of eyes, then take them
out of the syrup, and lay them on glass plates, and dry them in a stove or
oven* turning them a day or two till they be dry, white Pear plums may be done
thus.

To make Paste of Goosberries, or Barberies, or English Currants.
Take any of these tender fruits, and boil them softly on a chafingdish of
coals, then strain them with the pap of a rotten Apple, then take as much
sugar as it weighes, and boil it to a Candy height, with as much Rose Water,
as will melt the sugar, then put in the pap of your fruit into the hot sugar,
and so let it boil leasurely, till you see it reasonable stiff, almost as
thick as for Marmalet, then fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so put it into
the Oven upon two Billets* that the glass may not touch the bottom of the
Oven, for if it do, it will make the paste tough, and so let it dry leasurely,
and when it is dry, you may box it, and keep it all the year.

To make Paste of Oranges and Lemons.
Take your Oranges and Lemons, and set on the fire two vessels of fair water
at once, boil them, and then shift the water seven times, that the bitterness
may be taken from them, and they very tender, then cut them through the midst,
and take out the kernels; and wring out all the water from them, then beat them
in an Alabaster mortar, with the papps of three or four Pippens, then strain it
through a fine strainer, then take as much sugar as that pap does weigh, being
boiled to a Candy height; with as much Rose Water as will melt the sugar, then
put the pap of your Oranges and Lemons into the hot sugar, and so let it boil
leasurely with stirring, and when you see it stiff as for* Manchet, then
fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so set it in a Stove or Oven, and when it
is thoroughly dry, box it for all the year.

To make Paste Royal in Spice.
Take Sugar the quantity of four ounces, very finely beaten and searced, and
put into it an ounce of Cinnamon, and Ginger, and a grain of Musk, and so beat
it into paste, with a little Gum-Dragon steeped in Rose Water, and when you
have beaten it into paste in a stone mortar, then ^oul it thin, and print it
with your moulders, then dry it before the ^ire, and when it is dry, box and
keep it all the year.

To candie Pears, Plums, or Apricocks, that shall look as clear as Amber.
Take your Apricocks and Plums, and give every one a cut to the stone in the
notch, and then cast Sugar on them, and bake them in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet close stopped, bake them in an earthen psatter, let them stand half an
hour* then take them out of the dish, and lay them one by one upon glass
plates, and so dry them, if you can get glasses made like Marmalet boxes to
layover them they will be sooner candi'd, this is the manner to candie any such
fruit.

To make paste Royal white, that you may make Court Bouls, or Caps, or Gloves,
Shoes, or any pretty thing Printed in M^ulds.
Take half a pound of double refined Sugar, and beat it well, and searce it
through a fine lawn, then put it into a fine Alabaster mortar, with a little
Gum-dragon steeped in a little Rosewater, and a grain of Musk, so beat them in
a mo^ter till it come to a pretty paste, then roll it thin with a rouling pin,
and print it with your moulders* like Gloves, Shoes, or any thing else, and
some you may ^oul very thin with a r^uling pin, and let dry in an Ashen dish,
otherwise called a Court cap, and let it stand in the dish till it be dry, and
it will be like a saucer, you must dry them on a board far from the fire, but
you must not put them in an Oven, they will be dry in two or three hours; and
be as white as snow, then you may guilt Box and Cap.

Ta make fine Diet Bread.
Take a pound of fine Flower twice or thrice dressed, and one pound and a quarter
of hard Sugar finely beaten, and take seven new laid Eggs, and put away the
yolks o^ one of them, then beat them very well, and put four or five spoonfuls
of Rosewater amongst them, and then put them into an Alabaster or Marble
mortar, and then put in the Flower and Sugar by degrees and beat it or pound it
for the space of two hours, until it be perfectly white, and then put in an
ounce of Canary seeds, then butter your Plates or Saucers; and put into every
one, and so put them into the Oven; if you will have it gloss and Icie on the
top, you must wast it with a feather, and then strew Sugar very finely beaten
on the top before you put it into the Oven.

To preserve Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks, and put them into a skillet of fair water and put them
over the fire until they be something tender, then take them up out of the
water, and take a bodkin and thrust out the stone at the top, and then peel off
their skins, and when you have so done, put them into a silver dish or basin,
and lay Sugar very finely beaten over and under them, then put a spoonful or
two of water unto them, and set them over a ver^ soft fire until they be
ready, then take them up, and lay them (...) another dish a cooling, and if you
see good boil the sirrup a litt^e more, when they are cold, and the sirrup
almost cold, put them up in a gallypot or glass altogether.

To preserve Damsons.
Take a pound or something more of pure Sugar finely beaten, and then take a
pound of Dams^ns, and cut one scotch in the side of each of them, then put a
r^w of Sugar in a silver dish or bas^n, and then lay in a row of Plums, and
then cover it with Sugar, and so lay it in till they be all in, and then take
two spoonfuls of clean water, and make a hole in the middle of them, and set it
over a very soft fire, and look to it carefully, for fear the Sugar should
burn, and when the Sugar is all dissolved, shake them together, and stir them
gently, and then set them down, and cover them till they be cold, and when they
are cold, set them upon the coals again, and then let them boil gently till
they be ready, and when they are ready take them down, and take them every one
by its stem, and cover them with the skins as well as you can, and then put
them all one by one ^n a dish, and if the sirrup be not boiled enough, set it
over, and let it boil a little longer, and when* the Plums be cold, put them
in a gally pot or glass, and pour the sirrup to them while it is a little
warm, you must not forget to take away the skin of the Plums as it rises.

To make Papp of Barley.
Take Barley, and boil it in fair water softly until it begin to break, then
put that liquour out, then put as much hot water to it as you put forth, and so
let it boil till it be very soft, then put it into a Cullender and strain it,
then take a handful of Almonds, and grind them very well with your Barley and
some of the liquour, so season it with Sugar, and a little Rosewater, a little
whole Mace, and Cinnamon, and boil them well together.

To candy Lemons and Oranges.
Take the peels of your Oranges and Lemons, the white cut away, then lay them
in water five or six days, shifting them twice every day, then sees them till
they be very tender, then take them out of the water, and let them lie till
they be cold, then cut them in small pieces square, the bigness of a penny or
less, then take to every three two ounces of Sugar, put to it a quantity of
fair Water, and a less quantity of Rosewater, and make a sirrup thereof, then
skum it very clean, and put in your peels, and let them boil for the space of
an hour or longer, if you find your liquour wanting, you may put in more water
at your pleasure, then boil them a little space after with a little sharp
fire, stirring it always for burning, then take it off the fire three or four
times, stirring them all the while, and set them on again until they be
candied.

To m^ke Cakes of Almonds.
Take one pound and a half of fine Flower, of Sugar twelve ounces beaten very
fine, mingle them well together, then take half a pound of Almonds, blanch
them, and grind them ^ine in a Mortar, then strain them with as much Sack as
will mingle the Flower, Sugar, and Almonds together, make a paste, bake them in
an Oven not too hot.

To make white Lemon Cakes.
Take half a dozen of yellow Lemons the best you can get, then cut and pare
them, leave none of the yellow behind, then take away the sour meat of it, and
reserve all the white, and lay it in water two days, then sees it in fair
water till it be soft, then take it out* and set it by till he water be gone
from it, then weigh it, and take twice the weight in Sugar, mince the white
stuff very fine, then take an earthen pipkin, and put therein some fair Water,
and some Rosewater, if you have a pound of Sugar, you must have half a pint of
Water, of both sorts alike, let your Water and Sugar boil together, then skum
it, and put in the stuff, and so let them boil together, always stirring it
till it be thick, it will show very thin, and when it is cold it will be thick
enough.

To make Oil of Violets.
Set the Violets in Sallade oil, and strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets, and let them lie twenty days, then strain them again, and put in
other fresh Violets, and let them stand all the year.

To preserve Pomecitron.
Take Pomecitron and grate off the upper skin, then slightly cut them in pieces
as you think good, lay them in water four and twenty hours, then set over a
posnet with fair water, and when it boyles put them in, and so shift till you
find the water be not bitter, then take them up and weigh them, and to every
pound of Pomecitron put ^ pound and quarter of Sugar, the^ take of your last
water a pint and quarter, set your water and Sugar over the fire, then take two
white of Eggs and beat them with a little fair water, and when your sirru^
begins to boil, cast in the sam^ that rises from the Eggs, and s^ let it
boil, then let it run through a clean fine cloth, then put it in* clean
Posnet, and when your sirrup begins to boil, put in your Pomecitron, and let
it boil softly three or four hours, until you find your sirrup thick enough;
be sure you keep them always under sirrup, and never turn them, take them up,
and put them into your glass, and when they be cold cover them.

To candy Ringus Roots.
Take your Ringus Roots and boil them reasonable tender, then peel them, and
pith them, then lay them together, then take so much Sugar as they weigh, and
put it into a posnet with as much Rosewater as will melt it, then put in your
Roots, and so let it boil very softly, until the Sugar be consumed into the
Roots, then take them and turn them, and shake them till the Sugar be dried up,
and then lay them a drying upon a lattice of wire until they be cold, in like
sort you may candy any other Roots, which you please.

To candie all kind of Fruitrages, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Lettice
stocks, the Sugar Candy, such as the Comfet-makers do candy the Fruits with.
Take one pound of refined Sugar, and put it into a posnet with as much water
as will wet it, and so boil it until it come to a candy height, then take all
your fruit being preserved and d^yed, then draw them through your hot Sugar,
and then lay them on your hardle, and in one quarter of an hour they will be
finely candied.

To candie all kind of Flowers in ways of the Spanish Candie.
Take double refined Sugar, put it in to a posnet with as much Rosewater as
will melt it, and put into it the papp of half a roasted Apple, and a grain of
Musk, then let it boil till it come to a candy height, then put in your
Flowers being picked, and so let it boil, then cast them on a fine plate, and
cut it in waves with your knife, then you may spot it with Gold and keep it.

To make Essings.
Take one peck of Oatmeal grots, the greatest you can get and the whitest, pick
it clean from the black, and searce out all the smallest, then take as much
evening Milk as will cover it and something more, boil it, and cool it again
till it be bloud-warm, then put it to the Oatmeal and let it soak all night,
the next morning strain it from your Milk as dry as you can through a cloth,
then take three pints of good Cream, boil it with a Mace and the yolks of
eight Eggs, when it is boiled put it into your stuff, then put in six Eggs
more whites and yolks, season it with a good quantity of Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and
Ginger, and a less quantity of Cloves and Mace, put in as much Sugar as you
think will sweeten it, have a good store of Suet shred small, and forget not
Salt, so boil them.

To make Sugar Cakes.
Take one pound of fine Flower, one pound of Sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take seven or eight yolks of Eggs, and if your Flower
be good, take one white or two as you shall think good, take two Cloves, and a
pretty piece of Cinnamon, and lay it in a spoonful of Rosewater all night, and
heat it almost bloudwarm, temper it with the rest of your stuff, when the
paste is made, make it up with as much haste as you can, bake them in a soft
Oven.

To make a Galfes-foot Pie.
Take your Calfes-feet, boil them, and blanch them, then boil them again till
they be tender, then take out all the bones, season it with Cloves, Mace,
Ginger, and Cinnamon, as much as you shall think good, then put in a good
quantity of Currants and Butter, bake your Pie in a soft oven, and when it is
baked, take half a pint of white Wine Vinegar, beat three yolks of Eggs, and
put to the coals, season it with Sugar and a little Rosewater, always
stirring it, then put it into your Pie, and let it stand half a quarter of an
hour.

To make a very good Pie.
Take the backs of four white Herrings watered, the bones and skin taken away,
then take so much Wardens in quantity pared and cored, half a pound of Rasins
of the Sun stoned, mince all these together, and season it with Cinnamon and
Ginger, and when the Pie is baked put in a little Rosewater, and scrape Sugar
on it, if you put in Butter, then put in a handful of grated bread.

To make Simbals.
Take fine Flower dried, and as much Sugar as Flower, then take as much whites
of Eggs as will make it a paste, and put in a little Rosewater, then put in a
quantity of Co^iander seed, and Annise seed, then mould it up in that fas^ion
you will bake it in.

To preserve Angelica roots.
Take the roots and wash them, then slice them very thin, and lay them in water
three or four days, change the water every day* then p^^ the roots in a pot of
water, and set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the water,
then take to a pound of roots four pints of water, and two pound of Sugar, let
it boil, and skum it clean, then put in the roots, they will be boiled before
the sirrup, then take them up, and boil the sirrup after, they will ask you a
whole days work, for they must boil very softly; at St. Andrews time is the
best time to do them in all the year.

To boil a Capon with Brewis.
Take a Capon, and trusse him to boil, set him on the fire in a good quantity
of water, skum it very clean, before you set on your Capon put a little winter
Savory and Thyme into the belly of it, and a little Salt and gross Pepper,
when you have skummed it clean, cover it close to boil, then take a g^od
handful of Herbs, as Marigolds, Violet leaves, or any such green Herbs as
you shall think fit, wa^^ them, and set them on the fire with some of the
uppermost of the broth that boyles the Capon, then put into it good store of
Mace, and boil it with the Capon, when the herbs be boiled, and the broth
very green, and almost consumed away, take the uppermost of your ^apon and
strain it together, and scald your Brewis, and put it into a dish, and lay the
Capon on them.

To make a Spice Cake.
Take one bushel of Flower, six pound of Butter, eight pound of Currants, two
pints of Cream, a pottle of Milk, half a pint of good Sack, two pound of Sugar,
two ounces of Mace, one ounce of Nutmegs, one ounce of Ginger, twelve yolks,
two whites, take the Milk and Cream, and stir it all the time that it boyles,
put your Butter into a basin, and put your hot seething Milk to it, and melt
all the Butter in it, and when it is bloudwarm temper the Cake, put not your
Currants in till you have made the paste, you must have some Ale yest, and
forget not Salt.

To make Broth for a Neats-tongue.
Take Claret Wine, grated Bread, Currants, sweet Butter, Sugar, Cinnamon,
Ginger, boil them altogether, then take the Neats-tongue, and slice it, and
lay it in a dish upon sippets, and so serve it.

To souce a Carp or Gurnet.
Take fair Water and Vinegar, so that it may be sharp, then take Parsley, Thyme,
Fennel, and boil them in the broth a good while, then put in a good quantity
of Salt, and then put in your Fish, and when it is well boiled put the broth
into a vessel, and let it stand.

To make a fine Pudding.
Take Crumbs of white Bread, and so much fine Flower, then take the yolks of
four Eggs, and one white, a good quantity of Sugar, take so much good Cream as
will temper it as thick as you would make Pancake batter, then butter your pan,
and bake it, so serve it, casting some Sugar upon it, you must shred suet very
small, and put into it.

To make a Broth to drink,
Take a Chicken, and a little of the neck of Mutton, and set them on, and scum
it well, then put in a large Mace, and so let it boil while the Chicken be
tender, then take the Chicken out; and beat it all to pieces in a stone mortar,
and put it in again, and so let it boil from four pints to a little more than
half a pint, then cast it through a strainer, and season it.

To boil a Chicken, Partridge, or Pyton.
Take your Chicken; and set it a boiling with a little of the neck of Mutton,
and scum it well, then put in a Mace, and so let it boil down, and when it it
almost boiled, have some few herbs parboyled, as Lettice, Endive, Spinach,
Marigold leaves, for note these herbs are usually used to be boiled, which by
course will hold their color in boiling, and put some of these aforesaid
herbs to the Chicken and Mutton, if you think your br^th strong enough, take
out your Mutton, then you may put a little piece of sweet Butter, and a little
Verjuyce, and a very little Sugar, and Salt, so serve it in with sippets,

A Broth to drink.
Take a Chicken and set it on, and when it boyles scum it, then put in a Mace,
and a very little Oatm^al, and such herbs as the party requires, and boil it
well down, and bruise the Chicken, and put it in again, and it is a pretty
broth, and to alter it you may put in half a dozen Prunes, and leave out the
herbs, or put them in, so when it is well boiled, strain it, and season it.

A Broth to eat on fasting days.
Take fair Water, and set it a boiling, and when it boyleth, put to it so much
strained Oatmeal as you think will thicken it, and a large Mace, a handful of
Raisins of the Sun, as many Prunes, and as many Currants, if your quantity
require it, so boil it, and when it is boiled, season it with Salt and Sugar,
and a piece of sweet Butter if the time will allow it, and for an alteration,
when this broth is boiled, put in a quantity of Cream, and it will do well.

To make Ponado.
The quantity you will make set on in a posnet of fair water, and when it
boyles put a Mace in, and a little piece of Cinnamon, and a handful of
Currants, and so much Bread as you think meet, so boil it, and season it with
Salt and Sugar, and Rosewater, and so serve it.

To make a Caudle.
Take Ale, the quantity that you mean to make, and set it on the fire, and when
it is ready to boil, scum it very well, then cast in a large Mace, and take
the yolks of two Eggs for one mess, or one draught, and beat them well, and
take away the skin of the yolks, and then put them into the Ale, when it
seethes, be sure to stir them well till it sees again for a youngling, then
let it boil a while, and put in your Sugar, and if it be to eat, cut three or
four tosts of bread thin, and toste them dry, but not brown, and put them to
the caudle, if to drink, put none.

To make Almond Butter.
Blanch your Almonds, and beat them as fine as you can with fair water two or
three hours, then strain them through a linen cloth, boil them with
Rose Water, whole Mace, and Annise seeds till the substance be thick, spread it
upon a fair cloth draining the whey from it, after let it hang in the same
cloth some few hours, then strain it, and season it with Rose Water and Sugar.

To stew Beef.
Take a good Rump of Beef cut from the bones, shred Turnips and Carroots small,
and Spinnage and Lettice, put all in a pan, and let it stew four hours with so
much water, and a quart of white Wine* as will cover it, when it is stewed
enough, then put in a wine glass full of Elder vinegar, and serve it in with
sippets.

To Souce a young Pig.
Take a young Pig being scalded, boil it in fair water, and white Wine, put
thereto Bay leaves, whole Ginger, and Nutmegs quartered, a few whole Cloves,
boil it thoroughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen pot.

To boil Flounders or Pickrels after the Frencb Fashion.
Take a pint of white Wine, the tops of young Thyme and Rosemary, a little
whole Mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Verjuice, Salt, and a piece of
sweet Butter, and so serve it; this broth will serve to boil fish twice or
thrice in, or four times.

To make flesh of Apricocks.
Take Apricocks when they are green, and pare them and slice them, and take
half their weight in Sugar, put it to them, so put them in a skillet, and as
much water as you think will melt the Sugar, so let them boil and keep them
stirring till they be tender, and so take them off, and scum them very clean,
so put them forth of the skillet and let them stand, take as much Sugar as you
had before, and boil them to a Candy height, and then put in your Apricoks,
and set them over a soft fire, but let them not boil, so keep them with often
stirring, till the Sirupe begin to jelly, then put them in glasses, and keep
them for your use.

To make flesh of Quinces.
Take Quinces, pare them, and core them, and cut them in halfs, boil them in a
thin sirupe till they be tender, then take them off, and let them lie in
sirrupe, then take Quinces, pare them, and quarter them, take out the cores,
put as much water to them as will cover them, then boil them till they be very
tender, and then strain out the liquor clean from them, and take unto a pint of
that liquor a pound of Sugar put as much water to the Sugar as will melt it,
then boil it to a Candy height, then stir the Quinces that are in the sirupe
as thin as you can: when your sugar is at a full Candy height, put in a pint of
the liquor, then set it over a soft fire stirring it leasurely till the Sugar
be dissolved, then put in half a pound of your slices, keeping it still
stirring but not to boil, you must take the jelly of Quince kernels, that have
lai^ in water two or three hours, take two good spoonfuls of it and put it to
the flesh, so keep it stirring leasurely till it begin to jelly upon the spoon,
then put it into thin glasses, and keep it in a stove.

To preserve Oranges.
Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of Sugar, pill the outward rind, and
inward white skin off take juice of Oranges, put them in to the juice, boil
them half an hour and take them off.

To dry Cherries.
Take the fairest Cherries, stone them, take to six pound of Cherries a pound
of Sugar, put them into a skillet, straining the Sugar amongst them as you put
them in, then put as much water to them as will boil them, then set them upon a
quick fire, let them boil up, then take them off, and strain them very clean,
put them into an earthen pan or pot, let them stand in the liquor four days,
then take them up and lay them severally one by one upon silver dishes, or
earthen dishes, set them into an oven after the bread being taken out, and so
shift them every day upon dry dishes, and so till they be dry.

To dry Peaches.
Take Peaches and coddle them, take off the skins, stone them; take to four
pound of Peaches, a pound of Sugar, then take a gallie pot and lay a laier of
Peaches, and a laier of Sugar, till all be laid out, then put in half a pint of
water, so cover them close and set them in embers to keep warm, so let them
stand ^ night and a day, put them in a skillet, and set them on the fire to be
scalding hot, then put them into your pot again, and let them stand four and
twenty hours, then scald them again, then take them out of your sirupe, and
lay them on silver dishes to dry, you may dry them in an Oven when the bread is
taken out, but to dry them in the Sun is butter, you must turn them every day
into clear Dishes.

To boil Veal,
Take Veal and cut in thin slices, and put it into a Pipkin with as much water
as will cover it, then wash a handful of Currants, and as much Pruins, then take
a Court roll, and cut it in long slices like a Butchers skiver, then put in a
little Mace, Pepper, and Salt, a piece of Butter, a little Vinegar, some crumbs
of Bread, and when it has stewed two hours, take it up and serve it.

To boil a Capon in white Broth
Trusse a Capon to boil, and put it into a Pipkin of water, and let it boil two
hours, and when it is boiled, take up a little of the broth, then take the
yolks of Eggs, and beat them very fair with your broth that you take up, then
set it by the fire to keep warm, season it with grated Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt,
then take up your Capon, and pour this broth on it with a little Sack, if you
have it, garnish it with sippets, and serve it, remember to boil whole Mace
with your Capon, and Marrow, if you have it.

To boil a Capon or Chicken in white Broth with Almonds.
Boil your Capon as in the other, then take Almonds, and blanch them, and beat
them very small, putting in sometimes some of your broth to keep them from
oyling, when they are beaten small enough, put as much of the uppermost broth
to them as will serve to cover the Capon, then strain it, and wring out the
substance clear, then season it as before, and serve it with marrow on it.

To boil Brawn.
Water your Brawn four and twenty hours, and wash and scrape it four or five
times, then take it out of the water, and lay it on a fair table, then throw a
handful of Salt on every collar, then bind them up as fast as you can, with
Hemp, Bass, or Incle, then put them into your kettle when the water boileth,
and when it boileth, scum it clean, let it boil until it be so tender that you
may thrust a straw through it, then let it cool until the next morning, by the
souced meats you may know how to souce it.

To boil a gammon of Bacon.
Water your Gammon of Bacon twenty four hours, then put it into a deep kettle
with some sweet hay, let it boil softly six or seven hours, then take it up
with a scummer and a plate, and take off the skin whole, then stick your Gammon
full of Cloves, strew on some gross Pepper, then cut your skin like sippets,
and garnish your Gammon, and when you serve it, stick it with Bays.

To boil a Rabbet.
Fley and wash a Rabbet, and slit the hinder legs on both sides of the
backbone, from the forward, and trusse them to the body, set the head right up
with a skiver, right down in the neck, then put it to boiling with as much
water as will cover it, when it boils, scum it, season it with Mace, Ginger,
Salt, and Butter, then take a handful of Parsley, and a little Thyme, boil it
by it self, then take it up, beat it with a back of a knife, then take up your
Rabbet, and put it in a dish, then put your herbs to your broth, and scrape in
a Carret root, let your broth boil a little while, put in salt, pour it on your
Rabbet and serve it

To boil a Mallard with a Cabbage.
Half roast your fowl, then take it off, and case it down, then put it into a
Pipkin with the gravie, then pick and wash some Cabbage, and put to your
Mallard with as much fair water as will cover it, then put in a good piece of
Butter, and let it boil an hour, season it with Pepper and Salt, and serve it
upon sops,

To boil a Duck with Turnips.
Half roast her, then cover it with liquor, boil your Turnips by themselves half
an hour, then cut them in Cakes and put them to your Duck, with butter and
pa^sley chopped small, and when it has boiled half an hour season it with Pepper
and Salt, and serve them upon sops.

To boil Chicken, and Sorrel Sops.
Trusse your Chickens, and boil them in water and salt very tender, then take a
good handful of Sorrel, and beat it stalks and all, then strain it, and take a
Manchet, and cut it in sippets and dry them before the fire, then put your
green broth upon the coals, season it with Sugar, and grated Nutmeg, and let
it stand until it be hot, then put your sippets into a dish, put your
Chickens, upon them, and pour sauce upon it, and serve it.

To boil a Pike in white Broth.
Cut your* Pike in three Pieces, and boil it with water and salt, and sweet
herbs, let it boil until it stain, then take the yolks of half a dozen Eggs,
and beat them with a little Sack, Sugar, melted Butter, and some of the Pikes
broth, then put it on the fire to keep warm, but stir it often least it curdle,
then take up your Pike, and put the head and tail together, then cleave the
other pieces in two, take out the back bone, and put the one piece on the one
side, and the other piece on the other side, but blanch all, then pour on your
white broth, garnish your dish with sippets and boiled Parsley, and strew on
powder of Ginger, and wipe the edge of the dish round, and serve it.

To boil diverse kinds of Fishes.
Bat, Conger, Thornback, Plaice, Salmon, Trout, or Mullet, boil any of these
with Water, Salt, and sweet herbs, when they boil skum it very clean, then put
in Vinegar and let it boil till you think it is enough, your liquor must be
very hot of the Salt, then take it off, you may let it stand five or six days
in the liquor, then if you would keep it longer, pour that liquor away, and put
Water and Salt to it, or soucing drink, you must remember to let your Mullets
boil softly, and your Thornback and other fish very fast, you must blanch your
Thornback while it is warm, and when you serve any of these fishes, strew on
some green herbs.

To make Sallet of all manner of Herbs.
Take your herbs and pick them clean, and the flowers, wash them clean, and
swing them in a strainer, then put them into a dish, and mingle them with
Cowcumbers, and Lemons, sliced very thin, then scrape on Sugar, and put in
Vinegar and Oil, then spread the flowers on the top, garnish your dish with
hard Eggs, and all sorts of your flowers, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

To stew Steakes between two dishes.
You must put Parsley, Currants, Butter, Verjuyce, and two or three yolks of
Eggs, Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, and so let them boil together, and serve them
upon sops, likewise you may do steakes of Mutton or Beef.

To stew Calves feet.
Boil them and blanch them, cut them in two, and put them into a Pipkin with
strong broth, then put in a little powder of Saffron, and sweet Butter, Pepper,
Sugar, and some sweet herbs finely minced, let the ^^st^w an hour, put in salt
and serve them.

To stew a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough* then take it up, and cut it in little pieces,
then put it into a dish with the gravie, and a piece of fresh Butter, and a
handful of Parsley ch^pt small, with two or three Onions, and a
Cabbage-lettice, le^ them stew one hour, then season i^ with Pepper and Salt,
and a little Verjuyce, then serve it.

To stew Trouts.
Draw your Trouts, and wash them, and then put them into a dish with white Wine
and water and a piece of fresh Butter, then take a handful of Parsley, a
little Thyme and a little Savo^ie, mince these small, and put to your Tr^uts
with a little Sugar, let them stew hal^ an hour, then mingle the yolks of two
or three hard Eggs, and strew them on your Trouts with Pepper and Salt, then
let them stew a quarter of an hour, and serve them.

To stew Smelts or Flounders.
Put your Smelts or Flounders into a deep dish with white Wine and Water, a
little Rosemary and Thyme, a piece of fresh Butter and some large Mace, and
salt, let them stew half an hour, then take a handful of Parsley, and boil it,
then beat it with the back of a knite, then take the yolks of three or four
Eggs, and beat them with some of your fish broth, then dish up your fish upon
sippets, pour on your sauce, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

To stew a Rabbet.
Half roast it, then take it off the spit, and cut it in little pieces, and put
it into a dish with the gravie, and as much liquor as will cover it* then put
in a piece of fresh butter* and some powder of Ginger, some Pepper and Salt,
two or three Pippins minced small, let these stew an hour, then dish them upon
sippets

To stew a Pullet or Capon.
Half roast it, then cut it into pieces, and put it into a dish with the gravie,
and put in a little Clove and Mace, with a few Barbe^ berries or Grapes, put
these to you Pullet with a pint of Claret, and piece of Butter, let these stew
a^ hour, dish them upon sippets, an^ serve it.

To stew cold Chickens.
Cut them up in pieces, put then into a Pipkin of strong broth, an^ a piece of
Butter, then grate some bread, and a Nutmeg, thicken yo^ broth with it, season
your meat wi^ gross Pepper, and Salt, dish it up on sippets, and serve it.

To make Paste for a Pasty of Venison.
Take almost a peck of flower wet it with two pound of butter, an^ as much
suet, then wet your Past^* put in the yolks of eight or ten Eggs, make it
reasonable lithe paste, then roll it out, and lay on suet; First lay a paper
under your paste, then lay on your Venison, close it, pinke it, baste it with
butter, and bake it, when you draw it out, baste it with butter again.

To make Paste for a Pie to keep long.
Your flower must be of Rye, and your liquor nothing but boiling water, make
your paste as stiff as you can, raise your Coffin very high, let your bottom
and sides be very thick, and your lid also.

To make Paste for a Custard.
Your Liquor must be boiling water, make your paste very stiff, then roll out
your paste, and if you would make a great Tart, then raise it, and when you
have done, cut out the bottom a little from the side, then roll out a thin
sheet of paste, lay a paper under it, strew flower that it may not stick to it,
then set your coffin on it of what fashion you will, then dry it, and f^ it,
and bake it.

To make Paste for buttered Loaves.
Take a pottle of flower, put there to Ginger, and Nutme^s, the wet it with
Milk, yolks of Eggs Y^st, and Salt, then make ^ up into little loaves, then
butte^ a paper, and put the loaves on it* then bake them, and when they are
baked draw them forth, and cut them in cakes, butter them, then se^ them as
they were, scrape on Sugar and serve them.

To make Paste for Dumplins.
Season your flower with Pepper Salt, and Y^st* let your water be more than
warm, then make the^ up like Manchets, but let them b^ somewhat little,* then
put them into your water when it boileth, and le^ them boil an hour, then
butter them.

To make Puffe-paste.
Take a quart of flower, and a pound and a half of butter, and work the half
pound of butter dry into the flower, then put three or four Eggs to it, and as
much cold water as will make it lithe paste, then work it in a piece of a foot
long then strew a little flower on the table, and take it by the end, beat it
until it stretch long, then put the two ends together, and beat it again and
so do five or six times, then work it up round, and roll it up broad, then beat
your pound of butter with a rouling pin, that it may be lithe, then take little
bits of your butter, and stick it all over the paste, then fold up your paste
close, and coast it down with your rolling pin, and roll it out again, and so
do five or six times, then use it as you will.

To bake a gammon of Bacon.
You must first boil it two hours, before you stuff it, stuff it with sweet
herbs, and hard Eggs chopped together with Parsley.

To bake fillets of Beef, or clods, in stead of red Deer.
First take your Beef, and lard it very thick, then season it with Pepper and
Salt, Ginger, Cloves and Mace good store, with a great deal more Pepper and
Salt than you would do to a piece of Venison, then close it, and when it is
baked put in some Vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger, and shake it well, then
stop the vent-hole, and let it stand three weeks before you spend it.

To bake Calves Feet.
Season them with Pepper, Salt, and Currants, when they be baked* take the yolks
of three or four Eggs, and beat them with Verjuyce or Vinegar, Sugar, and
grated Nutmeg, put it into your pie, scrape on sugar and serve it.

To bake a Turkey.
Take out his bones and guts, then wash him, then prick his back together
again, then perboil him, season him with Pepper and Salt, stick some Cloves in
the breast of him, then lard him, and put him into your Coffin with butter, in
this sort you may bake a Goose, Pheasant, or Capon.

To bake a Hare.
Take out his bones, and beat the flesh in a mor^er with the Liver, then season
it with all sorts of spices, then work it up with three or four yolks of Eggs,
then lay some of it all over the bottom of your pie, then lay on some Lard,
and so do until you have laid on all, then bake it well with good store of
sweet Butter.

To bake Quinces or Wardens, so as the fruit look red, and the crust white.
Your Wardens must be stewed in a Pipk in with Claret Wine, Sugar, Cinnamon,
and Cloves, then cover your Pipkin with a sheet of paste, and let it stand in
the oven five or six hours, then raise a Coffin of short paste, put in your
Wardens with sugar, and put it into the Oven, when it has stood an hour, take
it out and wash it with Rose Water and Butter, then scrape on sugar, and put it
in a quarter of an hour more, and it will be red upon the top, then scrape on
sugar and serve it.

To bake Chucks of Veal.
Perboil two pound of the lean flesh of a leg of Veal, so it may be eaten,
mince it as small as grated bread, with four pound of Beef Suet, then season it
with Biskay Dates, and Carraways, Rose Water, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun and
Currants, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, then mingle them all together,
fill your pies, and bake them.

To bake a Chicken Pie.
Season your Chicken with Nutmeg, Salt, and Pepper, and Sugar, then put him
into your coffin, then take some Marrow and season with the same Spice, then
roll it in yolks of Eggs, and lay it on your Chicken with minced Dates, and
good store of Butter, then bake it, and put in a little Sack, or Muscadine, or
white Wine and Sugar, then shake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To bake a Steak Pie.
Cut a neck of Mutton in steaks, beat them with a cleaver, season them with
Pepper, and Salt, and Nutmeg, then lay them on your Coffin with Butter and
large Mace, then bake it, then take a good quantity of Parsley, and boil it,
beat it as soft as the pulp of an Apple, put in a quarter of a pint of Vinegar,
and as much white Wine with a little Sugar, warm it well, and pour it over your
steaks, then shake it, that the gravy and the liquour may mingle together,
scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make an Italian Pudding.
Take a ^^anchet, and cut it in square pieces like a Die, then put to it half a
pound of Beef suet minced small, Raisins of the Sun the stones picked out,
Cloves, Mace, minced, Dates, Sugar, Marrow, Rosewater, Eggs, and Cream, mingle
all these together, and put it into a dish fit for your stuff, in less than
an hour it will be baked, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To bake a Florentine.
Take the kidney of a loin of Veal, or the wing of a Capon, or the leg of a
Rabbet, mince any of these small with the Kidney of a loin of Mutton, if it be
not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, and Sugar, Cream,
Currants, Eggs, and Rosewater, mingle these four together, and put them into a
dish between two sheets of paste, then close it, and cut the paste round by the
brim of the dish, then cut round about like Virginal keys, then turn up one,
and let the other lie, then pink it, cake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To roast a Breast of Veal.
Take Parsley, and Thyme, wash them, and chop them small, then take the yolks
of five or six Eggs, grated Bread, and Cream, mingle them together with Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, Currants, and Sugar, then raise up the skin of the Breast of Veal,
and put in your stuff, prick it up close with a skiver, then roast it, and
baste it with Butter, when it is roasted, wring on the juice of Lemon, and
serve it.

To roast a Hare.
Case your Hare, but cut not off her ears, nor her legs, then wash her, and
dry her with a cloth, then make a pudding and put into her belly, then sow it
up close, then trusse her as if she were running, then spit her, then take some
Claret Wine, and grated Bread, Suga^ and Ginger, Barberries, a^ Butter, boil
these together for yo^ sauce.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton.
Roast it with a quick fire, the the fat may drop away* and wh^ you think it is
half roasted set a dis^ under it, and slash it with a kni^ acrosse as you do
Pork, but y^ must cut it down to the bone o^ both the sides, till the gravy ru^
into the dish, baste it no more afte^ you have cut it, put unto the gra^ half a
pint of white Wine Vinega^ a handful of Capers and Olives five or six blades
of Mace, and ^ handful of Sugar, and stew a^ these together, and pour it on
you^ meat.

To roast a Neats-tongue.
Boil him, and blanch him, cu^ out the meat at the butt end, an^ mingle it
with Beef suet as much as an Egg, then season it with Nutmeg, and Sugar, Dates,
Currants, and yolks of raw Eggs, then put your meat to your Tongue, and ^ind it
with a Caul of Veal or Mutton, then roast it, baste it with Butter, save the
gravy, and put hereto a little Sack or Muscaline, let it stew a little while,
^hen pour it on your Tongue, and ^erve it.

To roast a Pig with a Pudding in his belly.
Fley a fat Pig, trusse his head ^ooking over his back, then temper ^s much
stuff as you think will ^ll his belly, then put it into your Pig, and prick it
up close, when it ^s almost roasted wring on the ^uyce of a Lemon, when you are
ready to take it up, take four or five yolks of Eggs, and wash your Pig ^ll
over, mingle your bread with a ^ittle Nutmeg and Ginger, then ^ry it, and take
it up as fast as you ^an, let your sauce be Vinegar, Butter, and Sugar, the
yolk of a ^ard Egg minced, and serve it hot.

To roast a Leg of Mutton.
Cut holes in a Leg of Mutton with a knife, then thrust in slices o^ Kidney
suet, and stick it with Cloves, roast it with a quick fire when it is half
roasted cut off ^ piece underneath, and cut it into thin slices, then take a
pint of great Oysters with the liquour, three or four blades of Mace, a little
Vinegar and Sugar* stew these till the liquour be half consumed, then dish up
your Mutton, pour on the sauc^ and serve it.

To roast a Neck of Mutton.
Cut away the swag, and roast i^ with a quick fire, but scorch it not, baste it
with Butter a quarter of an hour, after wring on the juice of half a Lemon,
save the gravy then baste it with Butter again wring on the other half of the
Lemon, when it is roasted, dry it with Manchet and grated Nutmeg then dish it,
and pour on you^ sauce.

To roast a Shoulder or Haunch of Venison, or a Chine of Mutton.
Take any of the meats and lard them, prick them with Rosemary, ^aste them with
Butter, then take half a pint of Claret Wine, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and
grated Bread, Rosemary, and Butter, let all boil together until it be as
thick as Watergruel, then put in a little Rosewater and Musk, it will make your
Gallintine taste very pleasantly, put it on a fitting dish, draw off your meat,
and lay it into that dish, strew it with Salt.

To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal
Take Parsley, winter Savory, and Thyme, mince these small with hard Eggs,
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Currants, work these together with raw yolks of
Eggs, then stuff your meat with this, roast it with a quick fire, baste it
with Butter, when it is roasted, take the gravy and put thereto Vinegar, Sugar,
and Butter, let it boil, when your meat is roasted pour this sauce on it, and
serve it.

To roast a Giggit of Mutton.
Take your Giggit, with Cloves and Rosemary, and lard it, roast it, baste it
with Butter, and save the gravy, put thereto some Claret Wine, with a handful
of Capers, season it with Ginger and Sugar, when it is boiled well, dish up
your Giggit, and pour on your sauce.

To fry Chickens.
Boil your Chickens in Water and Salt, then quarter them into a pan with sweet
Butter, and let them fry leisurely, then put thereto a little Verjuyce, and
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Ginger, the yolks of two or three raw Eggs, stir these
well together, and dish up your Chickens, pour the sauce upon them.

To fry Calfes-feet.
Boil them, and blanch them, then cut them in two, then take good store of
Parsley, put thereto some yolks of Eggs, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Pepper,
and Salt, and then roll your Calfes-feet in them, and fry them with sweet
Butter, then boil some Parsley and beat it very tender, put to it Vinegar,
Butter, and Sugar, heat it hot, then dish up your Feet upon sippits, pour on
your sauce, scrape on some Sugar, and serve it hot.

To fry Tongues.
Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in thin slices, season them with Nutmeg,
Sugar Cinnamon, and Salt, then put thereto the yolks of raw Eggs, the core of
a Lemon cut in square pieces like a Die, then fry them in spoonfuls with sweet
Butter, let your sauce be white Wine, Sugar, and Butter, heat it hot, and pour
it on your Tongues, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make Fritters.
Make your Batter with Ale, and Eggs, and Yest, season it with Milk, Cloves,
Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Salt, cut your Apples like Beans, then put your
Apples and Butter together, fry them in boiling Lard, strew on Sugar, and serve
them.

To souce Brawn.
Take up your Brawn while it be hot out of your boyler, then cover it with
Salt, when it has stood an hour, turn the end that was under upward, then
strew on Salt upon that, then boil your soucing drink, and put thereto a good
deal of Salt, when it is cold, put in your Brawn with the Salt that is about
it, and let it stand ten days, then change your soucing drink, and as you
change your soucing drink put in Salt, when you spend it, if it be too salt,
change it in fresh drink.

To souce a Pig.
Cut off the head, and cut your Pig into two fleikes, and take out the bones,
then take a handful of sweet Herbs. and mince them small, then season your
Pig and Herbs with Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and Salt, then strew your
Herbs in the inside of your Pig, then roll them up like two Collers of Brawn,
then bind them in a cloth fast, then put them a boiling in the boiling pot, put
in some Vinegar and Salt, when they are boiled very tender, take them off, let
them stand in the same liquour two or three days, then put them into soucing
drink, and serve it with Mustard and Sugar.

To souce Eeles.
Take two fair Eeles and fley them, cut them down the back, and take out the
bones, and take good store of Parsley, Thyme, and sweet Majoram, mince them
small, season them with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, and Salt, strew your Herbs in
the inside of your Eeles* then roll them up like a Collar of Brawn, put them
into a cloth, and boil them tender with Salt and Vinegar, when they are
boiled, then take them up, let it be in the pickle two or three days, and then
spend them.

To souce a Breast of Veal.
Take out the bones of a Breast of Veal, and lay it in water ten or twelve
hours, then take all manner of sweet Herbs and mince them small, then take a
Lemon and cut it in thin slices, then lay it with your Herbs in the inside of
your Breast of Veal, then roll it up like a Collar, and bind it in a cloth, and
boil it very tender, then put it into soucing drink and spend it.

To souce a Tench or Barbell.
First cut them down the back, then wash them, then put them a buyling with no
more water then will cover them, when they boil, put in some Salt and Vinegar,
scum it very clean, when it is boiled enough take it up, and put it into a dish
fit for the Fish, then take out the bones, pour on as much liquour as will
cover it, with grated Nutmeg, and powder of Cinnamon, when it is cold serve it.

To souce a Fillet of Veal.
Take a fair Fillet of Veal, and lard it very thick, but take out the bones,
season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, and Salt, then roll it up hard, let your
liquour be the one half white Wine, the other half Water, when your liquour
boyleth put in your meat, with Salt, and Vinegar, and the peel of a Lemon, then
scum it very clean, let it boil until it be tender, then take it not up
until it be cold, and souce it in the same liquour.

To marble Beef, Mutton, or Venison.
Stick any of these with Rosemary and Cloves, then roast it, being first
joynted very well, then baste it often with Water and Salt, and when it is
thoroughly roasted, take it up and let it cool, then take Claret Wine, and
Vinegar, and as much Water, boil it with Rosemary, Bays, good store of
Pepper, Cloves, Salt, when it has boiled an hour take it off, and let it cool,
then put your meat into a Vessel, and cover it with this liquour and Herbs,
then stop it up close, the closer you stop it, the longer it will keep.

To marble Fish.
Take Flounders, Trouts, Smelts, or Salmons, Mullets, Makrels, or any kind of
shell Fish, wash them, and dry them with a cloth, then fry them with Sallade
Oil, or clarified Butter, fry them very crispe, then make your pickle with
Claret Wine, and fair Water, some Rosemary, and Thyme, with Nutmegs cut in
slices, and Pepper, and Salt, when it has boiled half an hour take it off, and
let it cool, then put your Fish into a vessel, cover it with liquour and
Spice, and stop it close.

To make a Tart of Wardens.
You must first bake your Wardens in a pot, then cut them in quarters and core
them, then put them into your Tart, with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, then
close up your Tart, and when it is almost baked do it as your Warden Pie,
scrape on Sugar and serve it.

To make a Tart of green Pease.
Take green Pease and sees them tender, then pour them out into a Cullender,
season them with Saffron, Salt, and sweet Butter, and Sugar, then close it,
then bake it almost an hour, then draw it forth and ice it, put in a little
Verjuyce, and shake it well, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Rice.
Boil your Rice, and pour it into a Cullender, then season it with Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Ginger, and Pepper, and Sugar, the yolks of three or four Eggs, then
put it into your Tart with the juice of an Orange, then close it, bake it, and
ice it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Medlers.
Take Medlers that are rotten, then scrape them, then set them upon a Chafing
dish of coals, season them with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Ginger, let it boil well, and lay it on paste, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Cherries.
Take out the stones, and lay the Cherri^s into your Tart, with Sugar, Ginger,
and Cinnamon, then close your Tart, bake it, and ice it, then make a sirrup of
Muskadine and Damask-water, and pour this into your Tart, scrape on Sugar, and
serve it.

To make a Tart of Strawberries.
Wash your Strawberries, and put them into your Tart, season them with Sugar,
Cinnamon, Ginger, and a little red Wine, then close it, and bake it half an
hour, ice it, scrape on sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Hips.
Take Hips, and cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash them,
season them with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, then close your Tart, bake it,
ice it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Pippin Tart.
Take fair Pippins and pare them, then cut them in quarters and core them, then
stew them with Claret Wine, Cinnamon, and Ginger, let them stew half an hour,
then pour them out into a Cullender, but break them not, when they are cold,
lay them one by one into the Tart, then lay on Sugar, bake it, ice it, scrape
on sugar, and serve it.

To scald Milk after the Western fashion.
When you bring your Milk from the Cow strain it into an earthen pan, and let
it stand two hours, then set it over the fire until it begin to heave in the
middle, then take it off, but jog it as little as you can, then put it in a
room where it may cool, and no dust fall into it, this Milk or Cream you may
keep two or three days.

To make a Junket.
Take Ewes or Goats Milk, if you have neither of these, then take Cowes Milk,
and put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it, then pour
it out into a dish, and let it cool, then strew on Cinnamon and Sugar, then
take some of your aforesaid Cream and lay on it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make Bonny Clutter.
Take Milk, and put it into a clean earthen pot, and put thereto Runnet, let it
stand two days, i will be all in a curd, then season it with some Sugar,
Cinnamon, and Cream, then serve it, this is best in the hottest of the summer.

To make a Whitepot.
Take a quart of Cream, and put it over the fire to boil, season it with
Sugar, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, Sack, and Rosewater, the yolks of seven or eight
Eggs, beat your Eggs with Sack and Rosewater, then put it into your Cream,
stir it that it curdle not, then pare two or three Pippins, core and quarter
them, and boil them with a handful of Raisins of the Sun, boil them tender,
and pour them into a Cullender, then cut some sippets very thin, and lay some
of them in the bottom of the dish, and lay on half your Apples and Currants,
then pour in half your Milk, then lay on more sippits, and the rest of your
Apples and Raisins, then pour on the rest of your Milk, bake it, scrape on
Sugar, and serve i^.

To make a Pudding in haste.
Take a pint of Milk, and put thereto a handful of Raisins of the Sun, and as
much Currants, and a piece of Butter, then grate a Manchet, and a Nutmeg also,
and put thereto a little Flower, when your Milk boyleth put in your bread, let
it boil a quarter of an hour, and put in a piece of Butter in the boiling of
it, and stir it always, then dish it up, pour on Butter, and serve it.

To make a Pudding in a dish.
Take a quart of Cream, put thereto a pound of Beef suet minced small, put it
to your Milk, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, and Rosewater, and Cinnamon, then
take some seven or eight Eggs, and beat them very well, then take a c^st of
Manchets, and grate them, and put unto it, then mingle these together well,
then put it into a dish, and bake it, when it is baked, scrape on sugar, and
serve it.

To boil Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, and set it a boiling with Mace, whilst your cream is
boiling, cut some thin sippets, then take seven or eight yolks of Eggs, beat
them with Rosewater, and Sugar, and a little of your cream, when your cream
boyleth, take it off the fire, and put in your Eggs, and stir it very fast
that it curdle not, then put your sippets into the dish, pour in your cream and
let it cool when it is cold, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To draw Butter.
Take your Butter and cut it into thin slices, put it into a dish, then put it
upon the coals where it may melt leisurely, stir it often, and when it is
melted put in two or three spoonfuls of Water, or Vinegar, which you will, then
stir and beat it until it be thick.

Lady os Arundels Manchet
Take a bushel of fine Wheat flower, twenty Eggs, three pound of fresh Butter,
then take as much Salt and Barme as to the ordinary Manchet, temper it together
with new Milk pretty hot, then let it lie the space of half an hour to rise, so
you may work it up into bread, and bake it, let not your Oven be too hot.

To boil Pigeons.
Boil them in water and salt, take a handful of Parsley, as much Thyme stripped,
two spoonfuls of Capers minced altogether, and boil it in a pint of the same
liquour a quarter of an hour, then put in two or three spoonfuls of Verjuy^e,
two Eggs beaten, let it boil a little, and put too a little Butter, when you
have taken it off the fire, stir this altogether, and pour it upon the Pigeons,
with sippets round the dish.

A Florendine of Sweet-breads or Kidneys.
Parboyle three or four Kidneys, and mince them small, season them with Nutmeg,
one stick of Cinnamon, beat as much Sugar as will sweeten it, and a penny loaf
grated, and the Marrow of three bones in good pieces, and a quarter of a pound
of Almond paste, a glass of Mallego Sack, two spoonfus of Rosewater, a grain
of Musk, and one grain of Ambergriece, and a quarter of a pint of Cream, three
or four Eggs, and mix it altogether, and make it up in puff paste, and bake it
three quarters of an hour.

A Pork Pie.
Boil your leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, and Pepper, and Salt, bake it
five hours in a high round Pie

A Chicken Pie.
Scald and season your Chickens with Nutmegs, as much Sugar as Cinnamon,
Pepper, and Salt, then put them into your Pie, then put three quarters of
quartered Lettice, and six Dates quartered, and a handful of Goosberries, and
half a sliced Lemon, and three or four branches of Barberries, and a little
Butter, you may use to four Chickens three Marrow bones rould in yolks of
Eggs, and Ringo roots, and some preserved Lettice; make a caudle and put in
when the Pie comes out of the oven, an hour and a half is enough to stand in
the oven.

A Lamb Pie.
Take the same Ingredients you did for the Chicken Pie, only leave out the
Marrow, the Ringo roots, and the preserved Lettice, make your caudle of white
Wine, Verjuyce, and Butter, put it in when your Pie comes out of the oven.

Sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton.
Take a spoonful of Herbs, and as many Capers, half a pint of white Wine,
half a Nutmeg, and two Eggs, when it is boiled put a piece of butter to the
gravy, when it is boiled, take it off, and put the butter in.

A Lumber Pie.
Take three or four sweet-breads of Veal, parboyle and mince them very small,
then take the curd of a quart of Milk, turned with three Eggs, and half a pound
of Almond paste, and a penny loaf grated, mingle these together, then take a
spoonful of sweet Herbs minced very small, also six ounces of Oringado and
mince it, then season all this with a quartern of Sugar, and three Nutmegs,
then take five Dates, and a quarter of a pint of Cream, four yolks of Eggs,
three spoonfuls of Rosewater, three or four Marrow bones* mingle all this
together, except the Marrow, then make it up in long boles about the bigness
of an Egg, and in every bole put a good piece of Marrow, put these into the
Pie, then put in a quarter of a pound of butter, and half a sliced Lemon, then
make a caudle of white Wine, Sugar, and Verjuyce, put it in when you take your
Pie out of the Oven, you may use a grain of Musk and Ambergriece*

An Oyster Pie.
Season your Oysters with Nutmegs, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet Herbs, your
Oysters being first thrown into scalding water and parboyled, season them, and
put them into the Pie, put two or three blades of Mace, and half a sliced
Lemon, and the marrow of two bones rouled in the yolks of Eggs, and some
butter, then let your Pie stand almost an hour in the Oven, then make a caudle
of verjuyce, butter, and sugar, put it into your Pie when you take it out of
the oven; you may use two Nutmegs to one quart of Oysters, and as much Pepper
as the quantity of three Nutmegs, but less salt, and one spoonful of sweet
Herbs.

A Hartechoak Pie.
Take the bottomes of boiled Hartechoaks, and quarter them, and take the meat
from the leaves, season it with half an ounce of Cinnamon, and half an ounce of
beaten Nutmegs, and two ounces of Sugar, and put them into your Pie, and boild
marrow rould in yolks of Eggs, and six blades of large Mace, Lemon sliced, six
quartered Dates, and a quarter of a pound of Ringo roots, half a pound of fresh
butter, then let it stand in the Oven one hour, and when you take it out put a
caudle into your pie, made of white Wine, Sugar, and Verjuyce.

A Calfes-foot Pie.
Mince your Caltes-feet very small, then season them with two Nutmegs, and
three quarters of an ounce of Cinnamon, one quarter of a pound of Sugar, half a
pound of Currants, two Lemon peels minced, ten Dates minced, three spoonfuls of
Rosewater, and half a pound of fresh butter, bake it an hour, and put a caudle
into it, made of white Wine, Sugar, and Verjuyce.

A Skerret Pie.
Take a quarter of a peck of Skerrets blanched, and sliced, season them with
three Nurmegs, and an ounce of Cinnamon, and three ounces of Sugar, and ten
quartered Dates, and the marrow of three bones rouled in yolks of Eggs, and
one quarter of a pound of Ringo roots, and preserved Lettice, a sliced Lemon,
sour blades of Mace, three or four branches of preserved Barberries, and half a
pound of Butter, then let it stand one hour in the oven, then put a caudle made
of white Wine, Verjuyce, Butter, and Sugar, put it into the pie when it comes
out of the oven.

A Calfes-Head Pie for Supper.
Boil your Calfes-head almost enough, cut it in thin slices all from the bone,
season it with three beaten Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of Pepper, and as
much Salt as there is seasoning, then take a spoonful of sweet Herbs minced
small, and two spoonfuls of Sugar, and two or three Hartechoak bottomes boiled,
and cut them in thin slices, and the Marrow of two bones rouled in yolks of
Eggs, a quarter of a pound of Ringo roots, and a quarter of a pound of Currants,
then put it into your pie, and put a quarter of a pound of butter, and a sliced
Lemon, three or four blades of Mace, three or four quartered Dates, let it
stand an hour or more in the oven, then when you take it out, put into it a
caudle, made of Sugar, white Wine, Verjuyce, and Butter.

A Lark Pie.
Take three dozen of Larks, season them with four Nutmegs, and half an ounce of
Pepper, a quarter of an ounce of Mace beaten, then take the Lumber pie meat,
and fill their bellies if you will, if not, take half a pound of Suet, and one
pound of Mutton minced, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, and six Apples
minced altogether very small, then season it with a Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt,
and one spoonful of sweet Herbs, and a Lemon peel minced, one penny loaf
grated, a quarter of a pint of Cream, two or three spoonfuls of Rosewater,
three spoonfuls of Sugar, one or two spoonfuls of Verjuyce, then make this in
boles, and put it into their bellies, and put your Larks in your pie, then put
your marrow rould in yolks of Eggs upon the Larks, and large mace, and sliced
Lemon, and fresh Butter, let it stand in the oven an hour, when you take it
out, make your caudle of Butter, Sugar, and white Wine Vinegar, put it into the
pie.

A hot Neats tongue for Supper.
Boil your tongue till it be tender, blanch it, and cut it in thin pieces
season it with a Nutmeg, and a quarter of an ounce of Pepper, and as much Salt
as seasoning, then take six ounces of Currants, season all together, and put it
into the pie, then put a Lemon sliced and Dates, and butrer, then bake it, and
let it stand one hour and a half, then make a Caudle of white wine, and
verjuice, sugar, and eggs, and put it in when you take it out of the Oven.

A cold Neats-tongue Pie.
Your tongue being boild, blanched, and larded with Pork or Bacon, season it
with the same ingredients the Deer has, that is three Nutmegs, three races of
Ginger, half an ounce of Cloves and Mace together, and half an ounce of pepper,
beat your spices altogether, more salt then seasoning, and likewise lay in the
liquor, bake it two hours, but put one pound of butter in your pie before you
lid it.

A Potato Pie for Supper.
Take three pound of boiled and blanched Potatoes, and three Nutmegs, and half
an ounce of Cinnamon beaten together, and three ounces of Sugar, season your
Potatoes, and put them in your pie, then take the marrow of three bones, rould
in yolks of Eggs, and sliced Lemon, and large Mace and half a pound of butter,
six Dates quartered, put this into your pie, and let it stand an hour in the
Oven; then make a sharp Caudle of Butter, Sugar, Verjuice and white Wine, put
it in when you take your pie out of the oven.

Pigeon or Rabbet Pie.
Take one ounce of Pepper and more Salt, then season your Pigeons or Rabbets,
and take two Nutmegs grated with your seasoning, then lay your Rabbet in the
Pie, and one pound of butter, if you heat the pie hot, then put in two or three
slices of Lemon, and two or three blades of Mace, and as many branches of
Barberies, and a good piece of fresh butter melted, then take it, and let it
stand an hour and half* but put not in the fresh butter till it comes out of
the oven.

To make a puffe-^aste.
Break two Eggs in three pints of flower, make it with cold water, then roll it
out pretty thick and square, then take so much Butter as paste, and lay it in
rank, and divide your butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at five
several times, roll your paste very broad, and take one part of the same
Butter in little pieces all over your paste then throw a handful of flower
slightly on, then fold up your paste and beat it with a rouling pin, so roll it
out again, thus do five times and make it up.

A Pudding.
Tak a quart of Cream, and two Eggs, beat them, and strain them them into the
Cream, and grate in a Nutmeg and half, take six spoonfuls of flower, beat half
a pound of Almonds with some cream, and put it into the cream, and mix this
together, boil your pudding an hour and no more, first flower the bag you put
it in, then melt fresh butter and take Sugar and Rose Water, beat it thick, and
pour it on the pudding, you may put to a little Milk, and stick blanched
Almonds, and Waters in it; add to the same pudding, if you will, a penny loaf
grated, a quartern of Sugar, two Marrow bones, one glass of Mallago Sack, six
dates minced, a grain of Amber-greice, a grain of Musk, two or three spoonfuls
of Rose Water, bake this pudding in little wood dishes, but first butter them,
your Marrow must be stuck to and again, then bake it half an hour, five or
seven at a time, and so set them in order in the dish, and garnish them with a
sprig in the middle, and wafers about it, strew Sugar about the branch, and
sliced Lemon, set four round, and one in the top.

Frigasie of Veal.
Cut your meat in thin slices, beat it well with a rouling pin, season it with
Nutmeg, Lemon and Thy^e* ^ry it slightly in the pan, beat two eggs, and one
spoonful of Verjuice, and put it into the pan, and stir it together and dish it.

Frigasie of Lamb.
Cut your Lamb in thin slices, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and salt, mince
some Thyme, and Lemon, and throw it upon your meat, then fry it slightly in a
pan, then throw in two Eggs beaten in Verjuyce and Sugar into the p^n, also a
handful of Goosberries, shake it together and dish it.

Frigasie of Chickens.
Kill your Chickens, pull skin and feathers off together, cut them in thin
slices, season them with Thyme and Lemon minced, Nutmeg and Salt, a handful of
Sorrel minced, and then fry it well with six spoonfuls of water, and some fresh
butter, when its tender, take three spoonfuls of Verjuice, one spoonful of
Sugar, beat it together, so dish it with sippets about.

Another Frigasie of Chickens.
Take the former ingredience, and add to it boiled Hartechoak bottomes, with
the meat of the leaves, and a handful of scalded Goosberies, and boiled
Skerrets and Lettice tossed in Butter when they are boiled, add two spoonfuls
of sugar, two Eggs and Verjuice beaten together, and lay your Lettice upon your
Chickens, as before, and sliced Lemon upon it, and sippets upon the dish.

A Frigasie of Rabbets.
Cut your Rabbets in small pieces, and mince a handful of Thyme and Parsley
together, and a Nutmeg, Pepper and salt, season your Rabbets, then take two
Eggs, and verjuice beaten together, and throw it in the pan, stick it, and dish
it up in sippets.

To harsh a shoulder of Mutton.
Half roast your Mutton at a quick fire, cut it in thin slices, stew it with
Gravie, sweet Majoram, and Capers, and Onyons, three Anchovies, two Oysters,
half a Nutmeg, half a sliced Lemon, stir this altogether with the meat, let it
stew till it be tender in a dish, then break 3 or 4 yolks of Eggs, and throw it
in the dish with some butter, toss it well together, and dish it with sippets.

To make a Cake.
Take half a peck of flower, two pound and a half of Currants, three or four
Nutmegs, one pound of Almond paste, two pound of Butter, and one pint of Cream,
three spoonfuls of Rose Water, three quarters of a pound of Sugar, half a pint
of Sack, a quarter of a pint of Y^st, and six Eggs, so make it, and bake it.

To make a Leg of Mutton three or four dishes.
Take a Leg of Mutton, cut out the flesh and the bone, but save the skin wh^le,
divide the meat in three pieces, and take the tenderest, and cut it in thin
slices, and beat it with a ^ouling pin, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and salt,
and mince Thyme and Lemon pill, fry it till it be tender, then beat two Eggs
with a spoonful of Verjuice, throw two Anch^veis into the pan, shake it
altogether, and put it into the dish with ^^ppe^s round the di^^, being dr^st
with Barberries scalded, Parsley and hard E^gs minced.

Another part of the same meat stew in a di^^, with a little white W^ne, a
little Butter, and sliced L^m^^* on^ Anch^vy two Oysters, tw^ (...) of Mace, a
little Thyme in a branch, and one whole Onion, take out the Thyme and the Onion
when it is stewed, do it altogether on a chafingdish of coals till it be
tender, then dish it, garnish your dish with hard Eggs, and Barberries, and
sliced Lemon, and sippets round the dish.

Take another part of the same meat, mince it small with Beef suet, and a
handful of Sage, to three quarters of a pound of suet add one pound of meat,
you may use a spoonful of Pepper and Salt, mix this altogether, and stuff the
skin of the Leg of Mutton, hard skiver it close, and spit it at a quick fire,
and well roast it in an hour.

Take another part of the same meat, then put in the Pepper and Salt, with a
grated Nutmeg, some sweet Herbs, and a Lemon peel minced, a penny loaf grated,
one spoonful of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Raisins, and a quartern of
Currants, mince altogether with the meat, and the suet, and the rest of the
ingredients, put to two spoonfuls of Rosewater, and as much Salt as Spice, then
make it up in little long boles or roules, and butter your dish, and lay them
in with a round bole in the midst, set them in an ^ven half an hour, then
pour out the liquour which will be in the the dish, and melt a little Butter,
Verjuyce, and Sugar, and pour upon it, garnish your dish, stick in every long
roll a flower of paste, and a branch in the middle.

To souce an Eele.
Scour your Eel with a handful of Salt, split it down the back, take ^ut the
chine bone, season the E^le with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet Herbs
minced, then lay a packthread at each end, and the middle roll up like a Col^er
of Brawn, then boil it in Water, and Salt, and Vinegar, and a blade or two of
Mace, and half a sliced Lemon, boil it half an hour, keep it in the same liquor
two or three days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay six or seven in a
dish, with parsley and barberries, and serve it with Vinegar in saucers.

To souce a Calfes head.
Boil your Calfes head in Water and Salt so much as will cover it, then put in
half a pint of Vinegar, a branch of sweet Herbs, a sliced Lemon, and half a
pint of white Wine, two or three blades of Mace, and one ounce or two of Ginger
sliced, boil it altogether till it be tender, keep it in the liquor two or
three days, serve it, the dish upright, and stick a branch in the mouth, and
in both the eyes, garnish the dish with Jelly or pickled Cowcumbers with
saucers of Vinegar, and Jelly, and Lemon minced.

A stewed Rabbet.
Cut your Rabbet in pieces, and season it with Pepper, and Salt, Thyme, Parsley
winter Savoury, and sweet Majoram, three Apples, and three Onions minced
altogether, st^w it till it be tender with vinegar and water, put a good piece
of butter in, sti^ it together in your Dish, put sippets in the bottom, then
serve it up with the head in the middle of the Dish with sippets in the mouth.

Lay your Pig in the same Ingredients you did for your Calfes head. use the
same for a Capon, and the same for a Leg of Mutton.

To boil Chickens.
Boil your Chickens in Water, and Salt, and Wine Vinegar, a blade of Mace, a
good handful of Endive, and as much Succory, two handfulls of Ske^rets boiled
and blan^h^d, when the Chickens and th^^e things are st^wed, take a pint of
liquor up, and put to a quarter of white Wine, and one ounce and half of Sugar,
and three Eggs to thicken it, a piece of butter, and lay them in the dish, and
pour it on.

To boil a Rabbet.
Boil them in Water and Salt, mince Thyme and Pa^sly together, a handful of
each, b^^ it in some of the same liquor, then take three or four spoonfuls of
Verjuice, a piece of Irish butter, two or three Eggs, stir the Eggs together in
the liquor, set it upon the fire till it be thick, then pour it upon the
Rabbet, so serve it in.

To boil a Duck.
Half roast your Duck with a quick fire, take as much Wine and Water as will
cover them, take some Thyme and Parsley, and one handful of sweet Majoram, two
blades of Mace, half a Lemon sliced, stew these together half an hour without
Onions, take some of your liquor and thicken it with three or four Eggs, two or
three spoonfuls of Verjuice, a piece of Butter, and as much Sugar as will lie
upon it, dish your Duck, and boil three or four slices of Lemon by it self, and
hard Eggs minced, put this upon your Duck, then pour your liquor upon it with
Barberries; so you may boil Pigeons with the same Ingredients, or Plover, or
Teale.

A roasted shoulder of Mutton.
When it is roasted* slash it, and ca^bonado it, take two spoonfuls of Capers,
and a litte Thyme, and Lemon ^n^^ced, half a Nutmeg, two Anch^vi^s, a quarter
of a peck of Oysters, mixed altogether, boil them one hour in strong broth and
white wire, then pour it upon the meat, with hard Eggs minced, and sippets
round the dish, throw first Salt on the meat, then the hard Eggs, and sliced
Lemon, and Barberries.

FINIS.

