All Glory be to God.
THOMAS Unworthy Bishop of Bath and Wells,
to the Minister of (...) wishes a Multiplication of Mercy, and Peace, and
Love.
Reverend Brother,
BLessed be God, who has put such a thing as this into the King's heart, in
imitation of the divine goodness, to receive into His Gracious Protection the
French Protestants, who have lately taken refuge in His Kingdom, and to grant
His Letters Patents, the second time, to license and authorize them to ask and
receive the alms and Charitable contributions of His loving Subjects, and to
require and command all Bishops to give a particular recommendation and command
to all Parsons, Vicars and Curates within their Dioceses, to advance this so
pious and Charitable a work.

Since then His Majesty is pleased, Chiefly to recommend the pursuit of these
His Letters Patents, to the Paternal care and Inspection of the Bishops, God
forbid that I, who am lifted up above my Betters, to the Pastoral Chair, should
fail, in fully answering the intentions of so Royal and God-like a Charity.

You well know the last time His Majesty's Letters Patents were sent down, in
behalf of these our Calamitous Neighbors, what unchristian reports were spread
about the Country concerning them, which made the Charity of many grow stark
Cold, and which carried in them two palpable Characters of the Devil that
invented them: the Liar was not only notorious in them, but the Murderer
also, Insomuch that when the poor and the needy cried for bread, the enemy of
mankind endeavored by this means, to withhold it from them. God give
Repentance to all persons, who did either raise, or propagate, or credit those
Diabolical reports; God avert from their Souls that woe which is threatened to
them who are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

I do therefore require you, deliberately and affectionately to publish and
declare, the tenor of His Majesty's Letters Patents in your Parish, and the
rather because they are so excellently Penned, that the deliberate and
affectionate publication of them, will furnish all people with very proper
motives and inducements to an Enlarged Charity, and will sufficiently confute
all those Murtherous lies, which have been forged in Hell to obstruct it. For
you will see that the persons commended to our tender regard, are French, who
have here taken Refuge, and in that respect are strangers in the land, and they
are Protestants too, such who profess the same Belief with us; you will see
that they are distressed, and reduced to extreme wants, both they and their
Families, that their Condition is deplorable, that a great many are still under
pressing necessities, that since the last Collection, Great numbers have, and
do still daily come over, that the public stock collected by the last Brief
has been faithfully expended, and that stock now failing, without farther
supplies they must inevitably perish; and what shall now be contributed, we
have all the Reason in the world to be assured, shall be as faithfully expended
as the former, and that too without any distinction.

Upon these and the like considerations, I require you, earnestly to persuade,
exhort and stir up the people committed to your care, to contribute freely and
cheerfully toward the Relief of these distressed Christians, and I beseech you
to enforce your exhortations with your own Example, and as far as your
Condition permits to give very liberal Alms your self. We are enjoined by God
to do good to all men, especially to those who are of the Household of Faith,
and when we see such great numbers of our Brethren, in so very great want,
Charity obliges all Christians to be fervent in their Prayers for them, and not
only to pray for them, but according to their abilities to be bountiful
toward them.

This is a duty which frequently occurs in holy Scripture: our Translation
calls it Hospitality; but the Original signifies love to Strangers: the
Primitive Christians were most Exemplary in this kind of Charity, and the
Apostle urges this powerful argument to encourage us to it. Be not forgetful
to entertain Strangers: for thereby some have Entertained Angels unawares.
Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them: and them which suffer
adversity as being your selves also in the body. It is a great honor to have
Angels, as Abraham had, for our Guests. But our Savior offers us a greater,
which is to Entertain distressed Christian Strangers, whom he calls His
Brethren. For in taking such Strangers into our houses, we take in our Savior
himself, who is God blessed for ever: so that were I put to my Choice, I had
much rather Entertain the Stranger than the Angel.

God of his Infinite mercy open all our bowels toward these distressed
Strangers, and Brethren of Christ, that in the great day of separation Christ
may set us at His right hand, and say those transporting words to us, Come ye
blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World, for I was a stranger and ye took me in.

Your affectionate Friend and Brother, Tho. Bath and Wells.
From the Palace in Wells. April 14th, 1688.
London, Printed for Charles Brom, at the West End of S. Paul's. 1688.


