MEDELA PESTILENTIAE: Wherein is contained several Theological Queries
CONCERNING THE PLAGUE, WITH Approved Antidotes, Signs, and Symptoms: ALSO, An
exact Method for curing that EPIDEMICAL DISTEMPER.

Humbly presented to the Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, the LORD MAYOR
and SHERIFFS of the City of London.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Samuel Speed, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the Rainbow, near the Temple, in Fleet Street, MDCLXV.

TO ^HE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Lawrence, Knight, LORD MAYOR of this
Honorable City of LONDON; AND THE Right Worshipful Sir GEORGE WATERMAN, and
Sir CHARLES DO, Knights, and Sheriffs thereof.
Right Honorable, And Right Worshipful:
FAME proclaiming everywhere your deserved worth, it reached my ear; and
hearing how careful your Honor and Worships have been in the preservation of
every individual person, but such more especially committed to your Tutelage
(wherein you have shown your selves indulgent Fathers, as well as prudent
Governors) I could do no less then step in amongst the crowd of your Honors
and Worships admirers, to make my grateful acknowledgement. I have but this
Mite to offer; but as much water as the palm of my Hand will hold, to east into
this new-kindled fire; and yet it may quench it ere it rise to a flame, if the
heavenly Physician see it good. The peaceful Dove has now got some few fick
feathers; let her not therefore be deserted. Some of late have forsaken her,
because fallen sick a little; which argues both their ingratitude and folly, in
flying that Mother which gave some breath, others benefit and profit, thinking
thereby they can shun the hand of Gods just judgment. In this Honorable City
I first drew my breath, and received the major part of my education: as your
Honors and Worships therefore, are our Fathers in general, so I hope you will
not deny me your particular Patronage. Let your noble favors then strengthen
this weak hand, which a Sons duty reaches forth to a Mothers support: grateful
pity commands me thus to do* and my knowledge in reading (with the experience
of others) justifies the act. Accept therefore of these my well-wishing
endeavors; and whilst some are using the means, let others join with them in
Prayers to Almighty God to be merciful to this City, and if it be his blessed
will to sheath his sword, and unbend his bow, that the dreadful Judgment of
the Plague may be averted from us. Pardon, I beseech you, this grand
presumption, and I shall glory in subscribing my self

Right Honorable, And Right Worshipful, Your most devoted and obedient
Servant, Richard Kephale.

POSTSCRIPT.
TWo most sovereign Antidotes against the Plague, found out first, and
experimented by the Author of the ensuing Treatise, to be the most infallible
Preservatives against pestilential Contagion. The one is in form of a Conserve,
to be taken first in the morning, the quantity of an Hazel-nut on the point of
a knife, fasting one hour after, and then you may both eat and drink what you
please. Take the same quantity also two hours before dinner, and about three or
four in the afternoon, and at night when you go to bed.

The other is a most admirable and pleasant Spirit, which you are to take as
the forementioned, four or five times a day. These two are to be sold, sealed,
by Mr. Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleet Street, near the Temple; where
also you may have the Spirit of Salt, which is excellent good to prevent
infection, causing a good appetite, and curing most diseases; most truly
prepared, according to the Method of Rhodocanasi. Take thereof (when you desire
to drink) two drops, in a middle-siz'd cup of Ale or Beer, provided it be not
stale.

Medela Pestilentiae. OR, Rules for the Prevention, and Cure OF THE PLAGUE.
How the Plagues began, 1603, 1609, 1625, 1630, 1636. For what sins, the
Divines of those times judged, they were inflicted, and with what Godly means
they were allayed.
1 OUt of Gods tender Goodness toward this Nation, after many warnings before
hand, by his Ministers, who observing what sins were impudently, and
impenitently committed, foresaw, and foretold, what God would bring upon this
People, and particularly a Plague throughout that year, before it came. He
began this sore Judgment by degrees in those times; Jan. 24. only one died,
Feb. 3. three died, Feb. 10. five, Feb. 17. three, Feb. 24. one, March 17. two,
March 24. eight, March 31. six, April 7. eight, April 14. eighteen, April 21.
eighteen; and after that the Bill increased every week more and more, till
August 18. when there died in one week, 4463. of the Plague, which began the
first time, by a surfeit in White Chapel, the second time, by Seamen, about
the same place, the third by reason of rotten Mutton at Stepney, the fourth
with a pack of Carpets from Turkey; the fifth with a Dog that came over from
Amsterdam.

2 Bishop Sandersons words, in a Sermon at an Assizes at Lincoln, Aug. 4.
1625. upon Psalm. 106.30. are these:

As God brought upon that people for their sins, a fearful destruction; So he
has in his just wrath sent his destroying Angel against us, for ours; the sins
that brought the Plague upon them were, Whoredom and Idolatry: I cannot say
the same sins have caused ours; for although the execution of good Laws,
against both Incontinent and Idolatrous persons has been of late years, and
yet is (we all know) to say no more, slack enough, yet (Gods Holy Name be
blessed for it) neither Idolatry nor Whoredom are at that height of shameless
impudence, and impunity among us, that they dare out-brave our Moseses, and
outface whole Congregations, as it was in Israel; But still, this is sure, no
Plague but for sin: nor National Plagues, but for National sins; So that
albeit, none of us may dare to take upon us, to be so far of Gods Counsel,
as to say for what very sins most this Plague is sent among us: yet none of us
can be ignorant, but that besides those secret, personal Corruptions which are
in every one of us, and whereunto every ones heart is privy, there are many
Public and National sins, whereof the people of this Land are generally
guilty, and is abundantly sufficient to justify God in his dealings toward
us, when he judges us.

1. Our wretched unthankfulness unto God, for the long continuance of his
Gospel, and our Peace, our carnal confidence, and security in the strength of
our wooden and watery walls: our riot and excess, (the noted and proper sins of
this Nation) and much intemperate abuse of the good Creatures of God, in our
meats, drinks, and disports, and other provisions and comforts of this life.
Our incompassion toward our Brethren miserably wasted with war and famine in
other parts of the World, our heavy oppression of our Brethren at home, in
racking the Rents, cracking the backs, and grinding the face of the poor: Our
cheap and irreverent regard to Gods Holy Ordinances, of his Word, Sacraments,
Sabbaths and Ministers, our wantonness and toyishness of understanding, in
corrupting the simplicity of our Christian Faith, and troubling the peace of
the Church, with a thousand niceties, novelties and unnecessary wranglings in
matters of Religion: and to reckon no more, that universal corruption in Courts
of Justice by sale of Offices, enhauncing Fees, devising new subtilties, for
delay and evasion, trucking for expedition; making traps of petty paenal
statutes, and but Cobwebs of the most weighty and material Laws.

I doubt not, but through the mercy of God, many of his servants in this Land,
are free from some, and some from all these common crimes in some good measure:
But I fear me, not the best of us all, not a man of us all, but are guilty of
all or some of them, at least thus far, that we have not mourned for the
Corruptions of the times so feelingly, nor endeavored the reformation of them
so faithfully, as we might, or ought to have done.

Doctor Gouge's words, in his plaster for the Plague are these:

That it may appear what just cause the Lord has to pour out the Vials of his
wrath among us, it will be a seasonable task to take a view of our own times,
and to observe, whether the forenamed sins may be found among us, for too
truly it may now be said of this Land, of this City there is wrath gone out
from the Lord, the Plague is begun; in prosecuting this task, I will follow
the order before propounded; and bring those sins which have been proved
formerly, to have provoked Gods wrath, to our times; 1. For Idolatry, though
the bright light of the Gospel has for many years dispelled the thick cloud of
Popery, a detestable Idolatry, yet in many places that cloud gathers and
thickeneth again; I pray God it increase not as that cloud which Eliah's
servant espied, which though at first it were but a little one, like a man's
hand, yet it grew to cover the whole Sky, and to cause much Rain; too many
seducers are among us; too great countenance is given to them, we Ministers
have need to inculcate this Apostolical prohibition, flee from Idolatry. 2 For
profanation of Holy things and times, he is blind that discerns it not; he
himself is too profane, that is not in his Righteous soul vexed thereat.
Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, are altogether neglected, or very carelessely
observed, as for the Lords day, it is in many places by many persons made the
Devils day; it is not only in act profaned, but the profanation thereof too
much countenanced, and justified.

3 For pollution of Profession, what advantage is thereby given to our
adversaries; thence they take occasion of upbraiding us with our reformation;
yea, the profane among us, are hereby justified, for many Professors are every
way as lewd and licentious as they, as vain in their attire, as corrupt in
their speeches, as wanton in their gestures, as deceitful in their dealings, as
uncharitable in their censures, as unmerciful to the poor.

4 For ungrateful vilifying Gods mercies, I think our people exceed therein the
Israelites, that dwelt in the Wilderness; Heavenly Mannah, the Word of Life,
that plentifully falls among us, is by superstitious, schismatical, and
profane persons loathed; superstitious persons wish for Queen Mary's days
again, Schismatics wish there had been no Reformation unless it had been
better, the profane, cry out of too much Preaching.

5 For Ministers perverting their Function, many among us exceed the false
prophets among the Jews, none greater discouragers of the upright, none greater
animaters of the Profane, the greatest zeal which they use to show, is in
their bitter invectives against such as make most conscience of sin, they are
too great companions with the baser and lewder sort.

6 For trampling upon such as are fallen, so inhumane are many, as they do not
only stretch themselves upon their Beds, and drink Wine in Bowls, while their
Brethren lie groaning under sore afflictions, (or like the Priest and Levite)
pass by without succouring such as are not able to help themselves, but as
Job's friends, charge them with hypocrisy, or like the Jews account them the
greatest sinners; or as Shimei, rail on them, and so give them instead of a cup
of Consolation, Vinegar and Gall to drink.

7 For conspiracy and consent in sin, when was there more then among us; great
ones, mean ones, old, young, male, female, Magistrates, subjects, ministers,
people, rich, poor, masters, servants, all of one mind, to disgrace integrity,
and to countenance impiety, and iniquity; insomuch, as the Prophets complaint
is too truly verified among us, he that refraineth from evil, makes himself a
prey.

8 For obstinacy in sin, who can open his mouth wide enough against men's
stubbornness, they are impudent, and stiff-necked, they have a whores forehead
and will not be ashamed; they bid a kind of defiance to God himself, as they
abuse his Mercies, so they despise his Judgments. What Swearer, what
Blasphemer, what Drunkard, what Adulterer, what Fornicator, what Oppressor,
what Extortioner, what Usurer, what Deceiver is reformed by this Plague: So
obstinate are people, as God had need to make the faces of the Ministers strong
against their foreheads.

9 For Infidelity, we Ministers have too great cause to cry out, who has
believed our report? were not this sin so fast fixed in men's hearts as it is,
much more comfort would be received from the Ministry of the Gospel, and much
better obedience yielded thereto.

10 For impenitency, it cannot be denied, but that many, yea, most are so
settled on their sins, as they hate to be reformed, where are the true fruits of
Repentance to be found? where shame, where sorrow for sin? where turning from
sin? Men rather grow worse and worse, Gods Judgments harden their hearts, as
they did the heart of Pharaoh, but he paid thoroughly for the abuse of so much
patience, if by any occasion their consciences be any whit rubbed, and they
brought through fear and anguish, to promise amendment, they quickly show that
no true repentance was wrought in them, but it is happened unto him according to
the true proverb, the Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that
was washed to her wallowing again.

11 Apostasy, if first, we consider inward Apostasy, (which is a decaying
inward in former love of truth) too just cause of complaint is given, many have
left their first Love, and become Lukewarm, as the Laodiceans. Thus, a ready
way is made to outward Apostasy, which is an open renouncing of very profession
of true Religion, as this whole Land did in Queen Mary's Reign; It is much to
be feared, that if the like occasion should be given, a like Apostasy would
follow.

If these, and other like provocations of Gods wrath among us, be duly
weighed, we shall see cause enough to confess, that Gods wrath is justly gone
out against us, and that we have deservedly pulled this Plague on our own
pates. It remains therefore that we thoroughly humble our selves, that we lay
open our sores before our merciful God, that we faithfully promise amendment,
that we give evidence of the entire purpose of our heart, in promising by
answerable performance; but above all, for the present, that we crave mercy of
God, through Jesus Christ, that he may offer up his sweet incense to pacify
his Father, and cause his destroying Angel to stay his hand.

Quest. What good Orders God has been pleased to bless, either for the
preventing, or, allaying of the Plague, in the fatal years, 1603, 1609, 1625,
1636. and are fit to be observed by all good people at this time.
1 FOur Doctors at least, two Apothecaries, and three Chirurgions, were
Pentioned for their own lives, and their Wives, to attend on persons troubled
with this disease.

2 Neither men nor goods came from other places, without a Certificate of
health, otherwise, they were either sent suddenly away, or put in the
Pesthouse, or some such place for forty days, till the certainty of their
soundness might be discovered.

3 All the Statutes and good Orders, against Beggars, Players, Bowling-Alleys,
Inmates, Tippling-houses, Leastals (whereby the Infection might spread and
disperse, by reason of the Sin, as well as the Commerce and throng of Idle sort
of Persons) and against the uttering of stinking Flesh or Fish, and musty Corn
or Beer.

4 The Scavengers in general, and every House-holder in particular, took care
for the due, and orderly cleansing of the Streets and Private houses, every
morning and night.

5 Dogs, Cats, Conies, tame-Pidgeons, and Swine, were destroyed about the
Town, or kept so carefully, that no offense might come thereby.

6 The Funnels in Church Vaults, Slaughter-houses, and the depth of Graves were
considered of.

7 The sweeping and filth of houses were daily carried away by the Rakers, and
the Raker gave notice of his coming, by the blowing of a horn; and the
Laystalls were removed as far as might be out of the City, and common
passages; and no Night-man or other, suffered to empty a vault, into any Garden
near about the City.

8 Two or more of the best in the Parish were sworn Examiners in their turns
for two months at least, to enquire and learn from time, to time, what houses
in every parish were visited, what persons sick, (and of what diseases) as near
as they could inform themselves, and upon suspicion, to command restraint of
access, until it appeared what the disease proved: and if any person were
found sick of the Infection, to give order to the Constable, that the House
should be shut up, and if the Constable were remiss, or negligent, to give
present notice thereof, to the Alderman, or to the next Justice of Peace
respectively.

9 To every infected house, there were two watchmen, one for the day till 10.
of the Clock at night, and another for the night till six in the morning,
having a special care, that no person went in and out of such Infected houses,
whereof they have the charge, upon pain of severe punishment.

10 Six Chirurgions were joined to the Searchers, (who were women of the best
reputation and skill that could be procured) and allowed twelve pence a body,
for all they searched, out of the sick man's estate, being enjoined to attend
the Examiners orders.

11 The Infected person was sequestered, and though he dyed not, the house
where he sickned was shut up for a month after, the use of due preservatives
taken by the rest; yea, the house of any person that visited any that were
Infected, was shut up for certain days.

12 All goods in Infected houses, were either to be burned, or if too good to
burn, aired, and perfumed, and not either removed or sold, for six months after
the Infection ceased in the House: All Brokers and Cryers of Apparel being
restrained in that behalf upon pain of having their Houses shut up for forty
days.

13 None were to go out of an Infected house (except into the Pesthouse, or a
Tent, or to a house which the man occupies either himself, or by Servants)
without security given, that they shall not wander about till they be sound,
and that the attendance and charge about the sick person should be observed in
all the particularities thereof, and if one man kept two houses, his sick
people shall not go into the house where the sound are, nor the sound, into the
house where the sick are; the persons removed were to go by night, and keep in
at least a week from all company, for fear of some Infection, at the first not
appearing.

14 The dead of the Plague were buried at convenient hours, always either
before Sunrising, or after Sunsetting, with the privity of the Churchwardens,
or Constables, and not otherwise; and no Neighbors or Friends were suffered to
accompany the Coarse to Church, or to enter the visited house, upon pain of
having their houses shut up, and being close imprisoned, only the Minister
might attend at a competent distance.

15 The Chirurgions, Searchers; Keepers and Buryers, were not to pass the
streets, without holding a red Rod, or wand, of three foot in length in their
hands, open and evident to be seen, being not to go into any house but their
own, or into that whereunto they were sent, or directed, forbearing all
company, especially, when they have been lately used in any such business or
attendance.

Quest. What course every Man and Woman should take particularly, to prevent
being infected, and what good orders God has been pleased to bless for the
preservation of every particular Man and Woman from the Plague, when it raged
in the places they lived in?
In the years, 1603, 1609, 1625, 1630, 1636. when there were great Plagues in
the City of London, these Directions given by the College of Physicians, did a
great deal of good.

1 For Correction of the Air.
FOr the Correcting of the Infectious Air, it were good, that often Bone-fires
were made in the streets, and that sometime, the Tower Ordnance might be shot
off, as also that there be good fires kept in and about the visited houses,
and their neighbors.

Take Rosemary dried, or Juniper, Bay Leaves, or Frankincense, cast the same
upon a Chafing Dish, and receive the fume or smoke thereof.

And to make fires rather in Pans, to remove about the Chamber, than in
Chimneys, shall better correct the air of the houses, adding a piece of old
Iron to the fire.

Take a quantity of Vinegar, very strong, and put to it some small quantity of
Rose Water, ten branches of Rosemary, put them all into a Basin, and take five
or six Flint stones, heated in the fire, till they be burning hot, cast them
into the same Vinegar, and so let the fumes be received from place, to place,
of your house.

That the House be often perfumed with Rue, Angelica; Gentian, Zedoary,
Set-wel, Juniper wood or berries burnt upon embers, either simply, or they may
be steeped in Wine Vinegar, and so burnt.

Perfume the house and all therein with this:
Slake Lime in Vinegar and air the house therewith, burn much Tar, Rosen,
Frankincense, Turpentine, both in the private houses, and in the Churches
before Prayers.

By Perfuming of Apparel.
Such apparel as you commonly wear, let it be very clean, and perfume it
often, either with some Virginia Caedar burned, or with Juniper, and if any
shall happen to be with them that are Visited, let such persons, as soon as
they shall come home, shift themselves, and air their Clothes, in the open
air for a time.

By carrying about of Perfumes.
Such as are to go abroad, shall do well, to carry Rue, Angelica, or Zedoary in
their hands to smell to, and of those, they may chew a little in their mouths,
as they go in the street, especially, if they be afraid of any place; It is
not good to be over fearful, but it cannot be but bad, to be over presumptuous
and bold.

Take Rue one handful, stamp it in a Mortar, put thereto Wine Vinegar enough to
moisten it, mix them well, then strain out the juice with a piece of sponge,
put a toast of brown bread therein, tie it in a thin cloth, bear it about to
smell to.

Take the Root of Angellica, beaten grossly, the weight of six pence, of Rue and
Worm wood, of each the weight of four pence, Setwel the weight of three pence,
bruise these, then steep them in a little Wine vinegar, tie them in a linen
cloth, which they may carry in their hands, or put it into a Juniper box full
of holes to smell to.

Or they may use this Pomander.
Take Angellica, Rue, Zedoary, of each half a dram, Myrrh two drams, Camphire
six grains, wax, and Labdanum, of each two drams, more or less as shall be
thought fit to mix with the other things, make hereof a ball to carry about
you, you may easily make a hole in it, and so wear it about your neck with a
string.

The Richer sort may make use of this Pomander.
Take Citron-pills, Angelica seeds, Zedoary, red-Rose leaves, of each half a
dram, yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes, of each one scruple, Galliae Moschatae four
scruples, Storax, Calamint, Beusoni, of each one dram, Camphire, six grains,
Labdanum, three drams, Gum Tragaranth dissolved in Rose Water, enough to make
it up into a Pomander, put thereto six drops of spirit of Roses, enclose it in
an Ivory box, or wear it about your neck.

By inward Medicines.
Let none go fasting forth, every one according to their fortunes, let them eat
some such things as may resist putrefaction, some may eat Garlic with butter,
a clove, two, or three, according to the ability of their bodies, some may eat
fasting, some of the electuary with figs and Rue, hereafter expressed: Some may
use London Treacle, the weight of eight pence in the morning, taking more or
less, according to the age of the party, after one hour, let them eat some
other breakfast, as bread and butter, with some leaves of Rue or Sage, and in
the heat of Summer, of Sorrel, or Wood Sorrel.

Of the Physicians.
To steep Rue, wormwood, or Sage, all night in their drink, and to drink a good
draught in the morning fasting, is very wholesome, or to drink a draught of such
drink after the taking of any of the preservatives, will be very good.

In all Summer-Plagues it shall be good to use Sorrel sauce to be eaten in
the morning with bread, and in the fall of the leaf to use the juice of
Barberries with bread also.

Mithridate's Medicine of Figs.
Take of good Figs and Walnut-kernels, of each twenty four, Rue picked two good
handfuls, of Salt, half an ounce, or somewhat better; first stamp your Figs and
Wall-nuts well together in a stone Mortar, then add your Rue, and last of all
your salt, mix them exceeding well: take of this mixture every morning
fasting, the weight of sixteen pence, to children and weak bodies, less.

Or, Take twenty Wal-nuts pilled, fifteen Figs, a handful of Rue, three drams
of Tormentil roots, two drams of Juniper Berries, a dram and a half of
Bole-Armoniack; first stamp your Roots, then your Figs, and seeds, then add
your Wal-nuts, then put to your Rue and Bole-Armoniack, and with them put
thereto six drams of London Treacle, and two or three spoonfuls of Wine
Vinegar, mixing them well in a stone Mortar, and take of this every morning,
the quantity of a good Nutmeg fasting, they that have cause to go much abroad,
may take as much more, in the evening two hours before supper.

It is very good to take Tobacco, to eat Raisens of the Sun fasting, or to
drink a pint of Maligo in a morning against the Infection.

For Women with Child, and Children, and such as cannot take the bitter things
before prescribed.
Take Conserve of Roses, Conserve of Wood Sorrel, of each two ounces, Conserve
of Borrage, of Sage flowers, of each six drams, Bole-Armoniack, shavings of
Hartshorn, Sorrel-seeds, of each two drams, yellow, or white Sanders half a
dram, Safferon one scruple, sirrop of Wood Sorrel enough to make it a moist
Electuary, mix them well, take as much as a Ches-nut at a time, once or twice
a day, as you shall find cause.

For the Richer sort.
Take the shavings of Hartshorn, of Pearl, of Coral, Tormentil-roots,
Zedoarie, true Terra-Sigillata, of each a dram, Citorn-pills, yellow, white and
red Sanders, of each half a Dram, white Amber, Hyacinth stone prepared, of each
two scruples, Bezoar-stone, of the East Unicorns horn, of each twenty four
grains, Citron and Orange pills candied, of each three drams, Lignum Aloes one
scruple, white Sugar-candie, twice the weight of all the rest, mix them well;
being made into a dredg-powder; Take the weight of twelve pence at a time,
every morning fasting, and also in the evening, about five of the clock, or an
hour before supper.

With these Powders and Sugar there may be made Lozenges, and with convenient
Conserves they may be made into Electuaries.
Bezoar-water or Treacle-water, is good both alone and in composition with
these Antidotes.

London-Treacle is good to preserve from the sickness, as also to cure the
sick, being taken upon the first apprehension, in a greater quantity, as, to a
man two drams, and less to a weak body, or a Child, in Cardus or Dragon-water.

Or, Take the finest clear Aloes you can buy, in color like a Liver, and
therefore called Hepatica, of both Cinnamon and Myrrh, the weight of three
French Crowns, or of two and twenty pence of our money; of Cloves, Mace,
Lignum-Aloes, of Mastick, of Bole-Oriental, of each of these half an ounce,
mingle them together, and beat them into a very fine Powder: of the which, take
every morning fa^^ng the weight of a groat in White Wind and Water. Or,

Take a dry Fig, and open it, and put the kernel of a Wal-nut into the same,
being cut very small, three or four leaves of Rue, commonly called herb-grace,
a corn of salt, then roast the Fig, and eat it warm, fast three or four hours
after it, and use this twice a week. Or,

Take the powder of Tormentil, the weight of six pence, with sorrel, or
scabious water in Summer, and in the Winter with the water of Valerian, or
common drink, wherein has been infused the forenamed herbs. Or,

One day you may take a little Wormwood, and Valerian, with a grain of Salt:
Another you may take seven or eight berries of Juniper, dried and powdered,
with common drink, or with drink wherein Wormwood and Rue, has been steeped
all night. Or,

Take the Treacle called Diatessarum, of light price, easy to be had. Or,

The Root of Ennula Campana taken in powder, with drink. Or,

A piece of Arras root, kept in the mouth, as men pass the streets. Or,

Take six leaves of Sorrel, wash them with water, and Vinegar, letting them lie
in the said water and Vinegar a while, then eat them fasting, and keep in your
mouth, and chew now and then, either Set-wall, or the root of Angelica, or a
little Cinnamon, or four grains of Myrrh, or so much of Rattle-snake root.

Of Medicines purgative.
It is good for prevention, to keep the body open, especially, with such things
as are easy of operation, and good to resist putrefaction, as Pestilential
Pills, etc.

Take Alloes two ounces, Myrrh and Saffron of each an ounce, Ammoniacum half a
ounce, make them up into a mash with the juice of Lemmons, or White Wind
Vinegar, to keep the body open, a small pill or two will be enough, taken
before Supper, or before Dinner.

But to purge the body, take the weight of a dram made into five, or six, or
more Pills in the morning fasting, and that day keep your Chamber.

If you be costive and bound in body, you may take a Glister made with a
little boiled honey, and a little fine powder of salt, and so taken in at the
fundament, and kept till it move a stool. Or,

If you are poor, take Aloes the weight of six pence, put in the pap of an
Apple, and if able to buy them, pills of Ruffus, to be had in every shop.

Such as are tied to necessary attendance on the Infected, as also such as live
in visited houses shall do well to cause Issues to be made in their left Arms,
or right Legs, or both.

Blood Letting.
If the Patient be full of blood and strong, let him be let blood upon the
Liver Vein, in the right arm, or in the Median Vein of the said arm, but
bleeding and purging must be used, the first day the Patient is sick, both to
be forborne, in case any sores or spots appear.

Vomits.
To provoke a Vomit, take two ounces of zant oil, or Wal-nut-oyle, a spoonful
of the juice of Celandine, and half a spoonful of the juice of Radish-roots, or
two spoonfuls of Oxymel of Squills, with posset drink, and oil.

Expulsive Medicines.
The Plague is best expelled by sweating, caused by posset-Ale, made with
Fennel, and Marigolds, in Winter, and with Sorrel, Bugloss, and Borrage, in
Summer, with which at both times, London Treacle to the weight of two drams
must be mixed; and so lay themselves with all quietness to sweat one half
hour, or an hour, if they be strong.

For the cure of the Infected, upon the first apprehension; Bur-seeds,
Cucheneely, powder of Hartshorn, Citron-seeds, one or more of them, with a few
grains of Camphire, are good to be given in Cardus, or Dragon Water, or with
some Treacle Water. Or,

Take Bur-seeds and Cucheneely, of each half a dram, or to a weak body, of each
one scruple, Camphire five grains, mix these with two ounces of Cardus or
Dragon water, half an ounce of Treacle water, sirrop of wood sorrel a spoonful,
mix these; give it to the Patient warm, cover him to sweat; you may give him
a second draught after twelve hours, let him drink no cold drink; this posset
drink or the like will be good to give the Visited liberally. Or,

Take wood sorrel half a handful, Marigold flowers half so much, shavings of
Hartshorn three drams, a Fig or two sliced, boil them well in clear posset
drink, let them drink thereof freely, you may put thereto a little Sugar. Or,

Take Citron-seeds six or eight, shavings of Harts-hornes half a dram, London
Treacle a dram, mix them with two ounces of Cardus water, or with three ounces
of the prescribed posset-drinke, drink it warm, and so lie to sweat. Or,

Take Sorrel-water five or six spoonfuls, Treacle water a spoonful, London
Treacle a dram and a half, mix them well, give it warm, and so lay the
patient to sweat. Or,

Take Tormentil and Celandine-roots, of each four ounces, Scabious and Rue, of
each a handful and a half, London Treacle a dram and a half, Bole-Armoniack
half a scruple, put thereto a little Sugar, mix them well, let the party drink
it warm, and cover him to sweat.

In Summer.
Take the juice of Wood Sorrel two ounces, the juice of Lemmons an ounce,
Diascordium a dram, Cinnamon six grains, Vinegar half an ounce, give it warm,
and lay the Patient to sweat; in case of fluxes of the belly or want of rest.
Or,

Take an Egg, and make an hole in the top of it, take out the white and yolk,
fill the shell with the weight of two French Crowns of Saffron, roast the said
Egg, thus filled with Saffron, under the embers, until the shell wax yellow;
then take it from the fire, and beat the shell and Saffron in a Mortar with
half a spoonful of Mustard Seed. Take of this powder, a French Crown weight,
and as soon as you suspect your self Infected, dissolve it into ten spoonfuls
of posset Ale, and drink it Lukewarm: then go to bed, and provoke your self to
sweating. Or,

Take one dram of the Electuarium de Ovo. Or,

Take five or six handful of Sorrel that grows in the field, or a greater
quantity, according as you will distill, more or less of the water thereof,
and let it lie steeped in good Vinegar four and twenty hours, then take it off,
and dry it with a Linen cloth, and put it into a Limbeck, and distill the
water thereof, and as soon as you find your self touched with the sickness,
drink four spoonfuls of the said water, with a little Sugar, and if you be
able, walk upon it till you sweat, if not, keep your bed, and being well
covered, provoke your self to sweating. Or,

Take of the Root Butter-burre, otherwise, called Pestilent-wort, one ounce, of
the Root of great Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrel an handful, boil
all these in a quart of water, to a pint, then strain it, and put thereto two
spoonfuls of Vinegar, two ounces of good Sugar, boil all these together till
they be well mingled: Let the Infected drink of this so hot as he may suffer
it, a good draught, and if he chance to cast it up again, let him take the
same quantity straight way upon it and provoke himself to sweat. Or,

Take Sugar of Roses four ounces, Ginger two ounces, Camphire an ounce, make
these into fine powder kept in Butts with Wine, taking a dram at a time. Or,

Take of the powder of good Bayberries, the husk taken away from them before
they be dried, a spoonful; Let the Patient drink this, well mingled in a
draught of good stale Ale, or Beer, or with a draught of white Wine, and go to
bed, and cast himself into a sweat, forbearing sleep. Or,

Take of the inward Bark of the Ash-tree one pound, of Wal-nuts with the green
outward shells to the number of fifty, cut these small, of scabious and
Vervain, each a handful, Saffron two drams, pour on the strongest Vinegar you
can get, four pints, let them a little boil together, upon a very soft fire and
then stand in a close pot well stopped all night upon the embers, after distill
them with a soft fire, and receive the water close kept, give to the Patient
laid in Bed, and well covered with clothes, two ounces of this water to drink,
and let him be provoked to sweat, and every eight hours, during the space of
twenty four, give him the same quantity to drink.

Care must be taken in the use of these sweating Cordials, that the party
Infected sweat two or three hours, if he have strength, and sleep not till the
sweat be over, and that he has been well wiped with warm Linen, and when
he has been dried, let him wash his mouth with Water and Vinegar warm, and
let his face and hands be washed with the same: When these things are done,
give him a good draught of broth, made with a Chicken, or Mutton, with
Rose-mary, Thime, Sorrel, succory, and Marigolds.

Or else Water Gruel, with Rosemary and Winter-savory, or Thyme, Pomado
seasoned with Verjuyce, or juice of Wood Sorrel; For their drink, let it be
small beer warmed with a toast, or water boiled with Carraway-seed, Cardus-seed
and a Crust of bread, or such Posset Drink as is mentioned before in the second
medicine; after some nutriment let them sleep, or rest, often washing their
mouth with water and vinegar.

These Cordials must be repeated once in eight, ten, or twelve hours at the
furthest.

If the party Infected vomit up his Medicine, then repeat it presently, or else
give him two or three spoonfuls of Vinegar of Squills, or Oxymel of Squils,
with posset drink, and then after proceed.

External Medicines.
Veficatores applied to the Arms, the inside of the thighs, or about the
bottom of the Calf of the Leg will draw forth the venom.

For the swelling under the ears, armpits, or in the groines, they must be
always drawn forth, and ripened, and broke with all speed.
Pull off the feathers from the tails of living Cocks, Hens, Pigeons or
Chickens, and holding their bills, hold them hard to the Botch or swelling, and
so keep them at that part, until they dye, and by this means draw out the
poison; It is good to apply a Cupping-glass or embers in a dish, with a handful
of Sorrel upon the Embers.

To break the Humors.
Take a great Onion, hollow it, put into it a Fig, Rue cut small, and a dram of
Venice Treacle, put it close stopped in a wet paper, and roast it in the Embers.

Apply it hot unto the humor, lay three or four one after another, let one lie
three hours. Or,

Scabious and Sorrel roste in the Embers, mixed with a little strong leaven,
and some Barrows grease, and a little salt, will draw it and break it. Or,

Take two or three roasted Onions, a Lilly root, or two roasted, a handful of
scabious roasted, four or five figs, a piece of leaven, and a little Rue, stamp
all these together, if it be too dry, put to it two ounces of oil of
Lillies, or so much salt-butter, make a poultess, apply it hot, after it has
been three or four hours, take it off, and burn it, and apply a fresh
poultesse of the same, if it prove hard to break, add a little burnt Coperass
to the Poultess. Or,

Take the Flowers of Elders two handfuls, Rochet seed bruised one ounce,
Pigeons dung three drams, stamp these together, put to them a little Oil of
Lillys, make thereof a poultess, apply it, and change it, as you did the former.

To Draw.
When it is broken, to draw it, and heal it, take the yolk of an Egg, one
ounce of honey of Roses, Turpentine half an ounce, Wheat flower a little, London
Treacle a dram and a half, mix these well, spread it upon Leather, change it
twice a day, or take Diachylon cum Gummis.

For the Carbuncle.
Apply an actual or potential Cautery, laying a defensative of Bole-Armoniack,
or Terra Sigillata, mixed with Vinegar and the white of an Egg, round about
the tumor, but not upon it.

Take three or four Cloves of Garlic, Rue half a handful, four figs, strong
leaven, and the soot of a Chimney in which Wood has been burnt, of each half
an ounce, Mustard Seed two drams, Salt a dram and a half, stamp these well
together, and apply it hot to the sore, you may put thereto a little
Salt-butter, if it be to dry. Or this,

Take Leaven half an ounce, Radish roots, the bigger the better, an ounce and
an half, Mustardseed two drams, Onions and Garlic roasted, of each two drams
and a half, Venice Treacle, Mithridatum three drams, mix these in a Mortar,
apply it hot thrice a day to the sore.

But these sores cannot be well ordered and cured, without the personal care
of a discreet Surgeon.

Take of Scabious two handfuls, stamp it in a stone Mortar with a Pestel of
stone, if you can get any such, then put into it of old swines grease salted,
two ounces, and the yolk of an Egg, stamp them well together and lay part of
this warm to the sore.

Take of the leaves of Mallows, of Cammomel-flowers, or either of them, a
handful, of Lin-seed beaten into a powder two ounces, boil the Mallowleaves
first cut, and the flowers of Cammomel in fair water, standing about a fingers
breadth, boil all them together, till the water be almost spent: Then put
thereunto the Lin-seed, of Wheat flower half a handful, of Swines-greace, the
skins taken away, three ounces, of Oil of Lillies two ounces. Stir them still
with a stick, and let them all boil together on a soft fire without smoke,
until the water be utterly spent, beat them all together in a Mortar until
they be well incorporated, and in feeling smooth, and not rough, then take
part thereof hot in a dish, set upon a Chafingdish of coals, and lay it thick
upon a linen cloth, applying it to the sore.

Take a white Onion cut in pieces, of fresh butter three ounces, of Leaven the
weight of twelve pence, of Mallows one handful, of Scabious, if it may be had,
one handful, of cloves of Garlic the weight of twentipence, boil them on the
fire in sufficient water, and make a poultesse of it, and lay it warm to the
sore.

Another.
Take two handfuls of Valerian, three roots of Dane-wort, an handful of
Smallage or Lovage, sees them all in butter and water, and a few crumbs of
bread, and make a poultess thereof, and lay it warm to the sore till it break.

Another.
If you cannot have these Herbs, it is good to lay a loaf of bread to it, hot,
as it comes out of the Oven, (which afterward shall be burnt, or buried in
the earth,) or the leaves of Scabious or Sorrel roasted, or two or three Lilly
roots Roasted under embers, beaten and applied.

Quest. Is it lawful to depart from our own place, and habitation in time of
Plague?
Ans. Provided a man be not tied by the Relation of a Husband to a Wife, a
Father to his Children, a Master to his Family, a Governor and Over-seer of
good Order in the place he lives in, and be otherwise free, he may fly. For,

1 THe departure of some may be a means in an Infectious air, to keep the
Infection from violence; much fuel where fire is kindled increases the fervor
and violence of the fire, multitudes of people to an Infected place, are as
fuel to the fire of Pestilence.

2 Such by escaping, provide for their own safety, without prejudice to others;
for what prejudice can it be, that such as are not by any particular Bond tied
to them that tarry, to leave those that are Infected?

3 The departure of some, may make much to the benefit and advantage of such as
tarry, for they have the better opportunity of sending succor to them, this
was one Reason why the people would not have David go into the field, that he
might succor them out of the City.

4 It is permitted to such, in time of Persecution to fly; yea, and in time of
War, why not in time of Plague? the Plague is an immediate stroke of God,
whereby such as he has appointed to death are stricken.

Answ. I grant it to be an extraordinary disease, but not immediate; The kind
of the disease, and the effects thereof on man's body, do show, that it is no
more immediate than many other diseases; if because such as are appointed to
death, are stricken with it, means of escaping it might not be used, no means
for avoiding any Judgment might be used; For the Infection of it, let
experience determine that case.

Object. 2. Is it a fruit of faithlesseness to shun the Plague.

Answ. No more then to shun other dangers; men may indeed upon distrust fly,
but that shows the frailty of the person, not the unlawfulness of the action.

Object. 3. If some fly, all may fly, and so the sick left without succor.

Answ. 1. Some are more bound to venture the hazard than others; as
Magistrates, for keeping good orders, Ministers for feeding the soul, near of
kindred for looking to their bodies; such as are under command, as Children and
Servants.

2 Others are not so subject to Infection: as Aged.

3 Others are not of such use, but may better be spared: as the poorer and
meaner sort.

A discourse of fleeing or stay in the time of Pestilence, whether lawful for
Ministers or People? By Bishop Hall.
HOw many has a seduced conscience led untimely to the Grave? I speak of this
sad occasion of Pestilence? The Angel of God follows you, and you doubt,
whether you shall fly, if a Lion out of the Forest should pursue you, you
would make no question, yet could he do it unsent; what is the difference?
Both instruments of Divine Revenge; both threaten death, one by spilling the
blood, the other by Infecting it; who knows whether he has not appointed your
Zoan out of the lists of this destruction, you say it is Gods visitation; What
evil is not? If war have wasted the confines of your Country, you save your
throats by flight, why are you more favorable to Gods immediate Sword of
Pestilence; every Leprosy by Gods Law, requires a separation, yet no mortal
sickness, when you see a noted Leper proclaim his uncleanness in the street;
will you embrace him for his sake that has stricken him, or avoid him for his
sake, that has forbidden you? If you honor his Rod, much more will you regard
his Precept; if you mislike not the affliction, because he sends it, then love
the life, which you have of his sending; Fear the Judgment which he will send,
if you love it not, he that bids us fly when we are persecuted, has neither
excepted Angel nor Man; Whether soever I fear, our guiltiness, if wilfully we
fly not; But whither shall we fly from God, say you? where shall he not both
find and lead us? whither shall not our destiny follow us? Vain men, we may
run from our home, not from our graves; Death is subtle, our time is set; we
cannot, God will not alter it; alas, how wise we are to wrong our selves?
because death will over take us, shall we run and meet him, because Gods decree
is sure, shall we be desperate, shall we presume, because God changes not;
Why do not we try every knife and cord, since our time is neither capable of
prevention, nor delay: our end is set, not without our means, in matter of
danger, where the end is not known, the means must be suspected, in matter of
hope, where the end is not known, means must be used: Use then freely the
means of your flight, suspect the danger of your stay; and since there is no
particular necessity of your presence, know, that God bids you depart and live:
You urge the instance of your Minister, how unequally, there is not more
lawfulness in your flight, then sin in ours; you are your own we our peoples,
you are charged with a body which you may not willingly lose, nor hazard by
staying; we with all their souls, which to hazard by absence is to lose our
own; we must love our lives; but not when they are Rivals with our souls, or
with others. How much better is it to be dead, then negligent, then
faithless: If some bodies be contagiously sick, shall all souls be wilfully
neglected? there can be no time wherein good counsel can be so seasonable, so
needful, every threatening finds impression, where the mind is prepared by
sensible Judgments.

When will the Iron hearts of men bow, if not when they are heat in the flame
of Gods affliction, now then to run away from a necessary and public good, to
avoid a doubtful and private evil, is to run into a worse evil then we would
avoid, he that will thus run from Ninive to Tarshish, shall find a tempest,
and a Whale in his way, not that I dare be an author to any of the private
visitation of Infected beds.

I dare not without better warrant, no, whoever said, we were bound to close
up the dying eyes, of every departing Christian, and upon whatever conditions
to hear their last groans; if we had a word, I would not dilate of the success,
then that there were cowardliness, which now is wisdom; is it no service that
we publicly teach and exhort, that we privately prepare men for death, and
arm them against it? that our comfortable Letters, and Messages stir up their
fainting hearts, that our loud voices pierce their ears afar; unless we feel
their pulses, and lean upon their Pillows, and whisper in their ears: Daniel is
in the Lions den; is it nothing that Darius speaks comfort to him through the
Grates, unless he go in to salute him, amongst those fierce companions? a
good Minister is the common good, he cannot make his life peculiar to one,
without injury to many, in the common cause of the Church, he must be no
niggard of his life, in the private cause of a Neighbors bodily sickness, he
may soon be Prodigal, a good Father may not spend his substance on one Child,
and leave the rest Beggars. If any man be resolute in the contrary, I had
rather praise his courage, then Imitate his practice. I confess, I fear not so
much Death, as want of warrant for Death.

Quest. How far public persons are bound to visit particular men under the
Infection.
Ans. I Find no ground in sacred Scriptures to bind public persons to hazard
their life in particular men's cases, they are set over a society, not over one
or two particular persons: Indeed every particular member of a Society, belongs
to their charge, and they ought to do what they can to the good of every
particular Member under their charge, so far as may stand with the good of the
whole body, and prove no prejudice thereto. But if by visiting particular
persons, they should be Infected, and by that Infection their life taken away,
would not this prove a prejudice and damage to the whole body; Is it the way,
is it the Calling, of a public person to go into a particular man's House that
is Infected? Private persons may every where be found out competently enabled
to do such duties as are requisite to be done to such as are Visited with the
sickness; or at least fit persons, that have not public employments may be
chosen out, and set apart to visit the sick, in contagious places, to comfort
them, and to see all things meet for them, duly performed.

Quest. And whether they may substitute others in their places?
Ans. QUestionless difference may be put betwixt persons, some Magistrates are
of such use in a Commonwealth, as it is meet they be, as as much as lies in
man, preserved from danger, on this ground, When David the King would have gone
out with his Soldiers to battle, the people answered: Thou shall not go forth,
thou art worth ten thousand of us. Wherefore eminent, excellent persons may be
exempted from abiding in dangerous places, and others substituted in their name
and stead, to preserve peace, keep good order, and provide necessaries;
Provided, that they who are substituted be able, and willing, to perform the
duties whereunto they be deputed: The like may be said of Ministers, yea, of
Husbands, Parents, Masters, and the like: to leave a Wife, a Child, a Servant,
Infected with an Infectious Disease, to the tendance of others that are fit and
willing to do that duty, and faithful in what they undertake, is not to forsake
wife, child, or servant.

Quest. How bold Christians ought to be in dangers in the time of a Plague,
when they have a good calling.
A Good calling is that way wherein God by his Divine Providence sets a man,
and wherein he has appointed him to walk, in that way he has given his
Angels charge over him to keep him; where we have the Angels to Minister for
us, and to encamp round about us; what need we to fear? they will either keep
us safe from danger in this world, or if it seem good to God, to take us out of
this world, they will carry our souls into Heaven, as they did the soul of
Lazarus.

For Application of this point, it is requisite that we be well instructed by
Gods Word, in the kind of our Calling, whether it be lawful and warrantable,
or no, as for extraordinary Callings, they must be warranted by an
extraordinary spirit, which is rare, if at all in these days, but ordinary
Callings, have their express warrant in Gods Word. As the Callings of
Magistrates, Ministers, Soldiers, Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, Nurses, and Helpers in all kind of necessities; these
may, these must in their place and calling expose themselves to danger, for
performing the work which by virtue of their place belongs unto them;
Captains and Soldiers, must stand against Enemies, though thereby they
endanger their lives; Magistrates must abide in Cities, and other places
diseased or Infected with contagious Diseases, to see good order kept, to take
order for supply of such necessaries as are fit for all sorts, though by
abiding there, they be in danger. So Ministers must abide in such places, to
instruct, direct, comfort and encourage the people under their charge. So
Husbands and Wives, being one flesh, must have such a tender respect each of
other, as not to forsake one another for fear of Infection, or other like
danger; Servants also, Nurses and others, that in such cases take upon them, or
by public authority, are appointed to be helpers, to such as are Infected
with the Plague, or any other contagious and infectious Disease, are bound to
attend such persons, and abide by them, yea, though it be with danger of their
own lives; For it is necessary that such persons be looked unto: to forsake
and leave them, that are not able to help themselves, is more than barbarous
inhumanity; it is necessary that some abide by them, who are more bound than
they that have an especial Calling thereto? they with greatest confidence may
depend on Gods special providence for protection from Infection, if they be
infected and dye, they with greatest comfort may yield up their souls into Gods
hands, as dying in that place wherein God has set them, in these cases, God
has called them to venture their lives for their brethren* and thereby to give
evidence of their true brotherly love.

Of old, Christians were so charitable in relieving such as were visited with
the plague, as willingly they hazarded their own lives; for proof whereof, I
will here set down, what Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria reports, in an
Epistle to the Brethren in Egypt.

Many of our Brethren by Reason of their great love, Eusebius. Hist. Eccle. l. 7.
c. 11.
and Brotherly Charity, sparing not themselves, cleaved one to another, visited
the sick of the Plague, and attended upon them diligently, cured them in
Christ, which cost them their lives; and being full of other men's Maladies,
took the Infection of their Neighbors, and translated of their own accord, the
sorrows of their Neighbors, upon themselves, fulfilling indeed the Common
saying: That Friendship, is always to be retained; and departing this life,
they seemed the off scouring of others.

In this sort, the best of our Brethren departed this life, whereof some were
Ministers, some Deacons, in great reverence among the common people; So that
this kind of Death for their great piety and strength of Faith, may seem to
differ nothing from Martyrdom, for they took the dead bodies of the Saints,
whose breasts, and faces, and hands, lay upwards, and closed their eyes, shut
their mouths, and jointly with one accord, being like affectioned, embraced
them, washed them, and prepared their Funerals, their own being a little while
afterward; in all likelihood prepared by others, For the living continually
traced the steps of the dead, the wicked on the contrary, scarce had the
Pestilence among them, but they diverted themselves, and fled from their most
loving and dearest friends, throwing them half dead in the streets; the dead
they left unburied, to be devoured of Dogs, to the end, they might avoid
death, which they could not escape.

Quest. How men are to fly into the Country, or from one place unto another, in
a time of Infection.
1 NO man should (according to the Physicians advice, 1603.) depart his house,
except it were an house not inhabited, and to an house of such distance, as
that he may conveniently travel thither without lying by the way, much less
that he send his Children or servants; and this with the approbation of the
Overseers, under their hands.

2 Such as removed into the Country, before their houses were Visited, had
Certificates from the Overseers of the Parish, under their hands and seals,
testifying that they were not Visited before their removal; by virtue whereof,
they traveled the more freely into the Country, and were the more readily
entertained.

3 Whosoever refused to stay within, when shut up, were to be proceeded
against as felons, if the sores were upon them uncured; and as Vagabonds, if
they were not upon them.

4 The Master of each Family whereinto an Infectious person is privately
received, and where-from he privately steals, was severely punished.

King James his Proclamation and Order, against all such as held, a man should
not fly from the Plague, because if it were decreed, a man should dye of the
Plague, he could not escape it, and if not, he need not fear it.
ITem, If there be any person Ecclesiastical, or Lay, that shall hold or
publish any Opinions (as in some places report is made) that it is a vain thing
to forbear resorting to the Infected; or that it is not charitable, to forbid
the same; pretending, that no persons shall dye, but at their time prefixed:
Such persons shall not only be reprehended, but by Order of the Bishop, (if
they be Ecclesiastical) shall be forbidden to Preach, or being Lay, shall be
also enjoined to forbear to utter, such dangerous Opinions, upon pain of
imprisonment, which shall be executed, if they shall persevere in that Error:
And yet, it shall appear manifestly by these Orders, that according to
Christian Charity, no persons of the meanest degree, shall be left without
succor and relief.

Quest. In what cases are the Godly involved in Common Calamities with the
Wicked?
Answ. The Godly are involved in the same Judgments with the Wicked,
1 WHen they make themselves accessory to the Common Provocations, that pull
down Common Judgments, Rev. 18.4. Nay, the sins of Gods People, do (especially
in this case) more provoke him unto outward Judgments, than the sins of his
professed Enemies; because they expose his Name to the more contempt, 2 Samuel
12.8. And are committed against the greater love, Amos 3.2. And God has future
Judgments for the wicked; and therefore usually begins here at his own
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.17.

2 When the wise God knows, that greater evils would befall them, if they
should then escape; see 2 King. 23.29. 2 King. 22.20.

3 When the just Lord will show the fierceness of his Wrath, how far the Wicked
has provoked him, to aggravate the Judgment, he takes away therewith, who
are as Chariots and Horsemen, while they remain, thus was good Jonathan taken
away, who if he had lived, might have been a means of preserving the House of
Saul from utter ruin; Though David had been King, the death of Righteous
Jonathan much aggravated the sin of Saul, and the Judgment that followed
thereupon.

4 When the Lord to whom vengeance belongs, will give the wicked an occasion
to expect sure and sore vengeance, then he makes his Saints a sign, and an
example unto them; thus he caused a Lion to slay the man of God, that was
seduced by a lying Prophet, to transgress the Word of God. In this case says
the Apostle, Judgment must begin at the house of God; and if he first begin
at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

5 When good men who have preserved themselves from public sins, do yet fall
by public Judgments, yet there is a great difference in this seeming equality,
the same affliction having like the Pillar that went before Israel, a light
side toward Gods People, and a dark side toward the Egyptians; God usually
recompencing the outward evils of his people, with more plentiful evidences of
inward and Spiritual joy, a good man may be in great darkness as well as a
wicked man, but in that case, he has the Name of God to stay himself upon,
which no wicked man in the world has; Isa. 50.10. The Metal and the Dross go
both into the fire together, but the Dross is consumed, the Metal refined, so
it is with Godly and Wicked Men in their sufferings, Zach. 3.3.9. Eccles. 8.12,
13.

Quest. How the Godly may avoid the Judgments brought upon the Wicked.
THey that would avoid the Judgments that fall on the Wicked, must avoid
communion with them; For this end, did God cause an Ark to be made for Noah
and his Family to go into, from the old World, that so they might be preserved
from the general Deluge, and sent his Angels, to bring Lot, and such as
belonged to him, out of Sodom; to this purpose, the People of God were advised
to remove out of the midst of Babylon, and to deliver every man his soul, which
advise is also given, in regard of Spiritual Babylon to come out of her, and
that on this ground, that they receive not her Plagues; Saints by separating
themselves from the Wicked in time of Judgment, show their care to use what
means they can for preventing mischief, which is a point of wisdom, commended
by the Holy Ghost, who gives this note of a Wise man, A prudent man foreseeth
the evil, and hides himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished. This
care of using means for safety, and in the use of means, to depend on God for
his blessing, is well pleasing to God. God had promised that none in the Ship
with Paul should be lost; yet when some of the ship-men were about to leave the
Ship. Paul said, Except these men abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. All
lawful and warrantable means are the visible hand of God's invisible
Providence: to reject or neglect means, is to refuse to take God by the hand
when he reaches it out unto us, and to follow his visible direction.

It is therefore foolish presumption, rather than a prudent resolution, either
to accompany those that are as it were in the fire of God's judgment, or not
to go from them when a fair and warrantable opportunity is offered. This is
taxed as a point of folly in Lot's sons in Law. Jehosaphat too much failed
herein; he heard the Prophet say that Ahab should fall at Ramoth Gilead, and
yet he would accompany him thither; it had almost cost him his life: yet has
God his ways and means to deliver the righteous, in the forementioned cases,
and all other cases whatsoever. As,

1. By visible preservations of them from external judgments: as Ebed-melech
was preserved.

2. By taking them from the evil to come. This was before exemplified in good
Josiah.

3. By ordering the judgment so, as it proves a means to them to honor God
the more, and to do more good to such as are better prepared to accept the good
which they do. Thus was Ezekiel carried away to Babel in the first Captivity,
that he might prophecy in Babylon to the Jews there, who were counted good
Figgs in comparison of the Jews that were at Jerusalem, who were as evil Figgs.

4. By making the judgment a means of their peace, honor, and eternal
prosperity in this world. Thus the captivity of Daniel, and his three
companions; and of Esther and Mordecai, was a means of higher honor, and
greater advancement, than they could in all probable conjectures have attained
unto in their own land: They were also thereby special Instruments of doing
much good to the Church; and their names by that means are more honorable to
this day in the Church of God.

5. By taking them by an external judgment from earth to heaven, where they
live being dead; yea, by making the judgment a means to free them from eternal
damnation, of such as by some extraordinary judgment dyed (for it is said of
them, many sleep) the Apostle says, When we are judged, we are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. Blessed be that
sword, though it be the sword of a mortal enemy, that opens a passage in the
body for the soul to enter into heaven. And blessed be that sickness, though it
be the Plague, that thrusts the soul out of the bodies prison, to celestial
glory and eternal life: and they may say, we had perished, if we had not
perished.

Be not affrighted, O ye righteous ones, be not affrighted overmuch at the
judgments, though they be terrible judgments, which fall out in the world;
though by reason of the multitudes of wicked ones among whom ye live in this
world, ye be every one forced to complain and cry, Woe is me that I sojourn in
Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar: and to wish and say, O that I had
in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my
people: yet can the Lord single you out, and when he comes to sweep with the
beesome of destruction, set you aside, and as a few precious Jewels in the
midst of a great heap of rubbish, sift them out, and preserve them safe to
himself, when the rubbish is cast away. It is said of Christ, that he will
thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner, but will burn
up the chaff with unquenchable fire. Men when they fan their corn cannot do it
so thoroughly clean, but that some chafe or tares will remain with the wheat,
and some wheat be cast out with the chafe: witness the offal that remains
after the best fanning that men can make: but God's fanning is a through
fanning; not a grain, not a Saint shall be over-slipt. This is indeed most
properly meant of the last fanning of the world at the day of Judgment: yet in
the mean time does the Lord take notice of every one of his, to provide for
them, and in the most common and general judgments does that which in his
wisdom he sees to be fit for them. When Elijah thought he had been left alone
in Israel, God knew many more, yea he could tell the just number of them: Thou
may therefore, O faithful one, say of the Lord, He is my refuge and
fortress, my God, in him will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the
snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome pestilence, etc.

In the midst of Judgments pronounced against sinners that are obstinate, God
does reserve and proclaim Mercy unto sinners that are penitent. When a
consumption is decreed, yet a remnant is reserved to return, Isa. 10.22, 23.
The Lord will keep his Vineyard, when he will burn up the Thorns and the Briars
together: Isa. 27.3, 4. When a day of fierce anger is determined, the meek of
the earth are called upon to seek the Lord, Zeph. 2.3. When the Lord is coming
out of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, he
calls upon his people to hide themselves in their chambers, until the
indignation be over-past; Isa. 26.20, 21. the Angel which was sent to destroy
Sodom, had withal a Commission to deliver Lot, Genesis 19.15. God made full
provision for those who mourned for public abominations, before he gave order
to destroy the rest, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6. men in their wrath will many times rather
strike a friend, than spare a foe; but God's proceedings are without disorder;
he will rather spare his foes, than strike his servants; as he showed himself
willing to have done in the case of Sodom, Genesis 18.26. Moses stood in the gap,
and diverted judgments from Israel, Psalm. 106.23. Yea God seeks for such,
Ezekiel. 22.30. and complains when they cannot be found, Ezekiel. 13.15. And if he
deliver others for them, certainly he will not destroy them for others. However
it go with the world, and with wicked men, it shall go well with the righteous;
there shall be a sanctuary for them when others stumble, and they shall pass
through the fire when others shall be consumed by it, Psalm. 3.10, 11. Isa.
8.14, 15, 16. Zech. 13.8, 9.

Reasons hereof are, God's Justice; He will not punish the righteous with the
wicked; he will have it appear that there is a difference between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not, Genesis 8.23. Mal. 3.18. Gods love unto
his people, he has Book of remembrance written before him, for them that fear
him, and think upon his Name; And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts;
In that day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares
his own Son that serves him, Mal. 3.16, 17. Here is a climax and gradation of
Arguments, drawn from love in a great fire, and devouring trouble, (such as is
threatened, Chap. 4.1.)

Property alone is a ground of care, a man would willingly save and secure that
which is his own, and of any use unto him. But if you add to this,
preciousness; that Increases the care; A man will make a hard shift to deliver
a rich Cabinet of Jewels, though all his ordinary goods and utensils should
perish, but of all Jewels, those that come out of the body are more precious
than those that only adorn it; who would not rather snatch his Child, than
either his Kasket or his purse out of the flame? Relation works not only upon
the affection, but upon the bowels; Jer. 31.20. And lastly, the same excellency
that the word Jewel does add unto the word mine; the same esteem does service,
add unto the Word, Son; A man has much conflict in himself to take off his
heart from an undutiful Child, but if any be more a Jewel than others,
certainly, it is a dutiful Child, who has not only an Interest in our love,
by Nature, but by Obedience.

All these grounds of care and Protection for Gods People in trouble are here
expressed, property, they are mine, in preciousnesse, they are Jewels, in
relation, they are Sons, usefulness, they are Sons that serve.

Lastly, Gods Name and Glory: he has spared his people in the midst of their
provocations for his Names sake, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27. Jos. 7.9. how much more, when
they repent and seek his face? he will never let it be said, that any seeks
his face in vain. Isa. 45.19.

The way to be safe in times of trouble, is to get the blood of the Lamb upon
our doors: All troubles have their Commission and Instruction from God, what to
do, whither to go, whom to touch, whom to pass over. Be Gold, though the fire
come upon you, you shall keep your Nature, and your Purity still. It should be
every man's chief business to clear up the evidences of his particular title
and relation unto this great Governor of the world: and this will be the
surest means to set us above the fear, or hurt of all outward changes.

We see with what artifice and compliance men will insinuate themselves, into
the affection of those, (who according to the several revolutions) are advanced
into places of power. Of how much greater advantage would it be, to get an
interest in his favor, who does, and shall always, Rule over the Sons of men,
having all times at his disposal, out of whose hands, no strength or policy,
shall ever be able to wrest the sway and dominion of things?

It cannot but afford strong consolation, unto every true Believer, to
consider, that he who has the chief influence in all these great changes, and
variety of events in the world, is both his God, and his Father. How would it
compose men's minds and thoughts otherwise disquieted, and dejected, either by
want of this evidence, or by the neglect of applying it to enjoy such an
assurance of an Interest in God, as to have him for their strength and refuge,
though the Earth be removed, and the Mountains be carried into the midst of
the Sea, though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, and the Mountains
shake with the swellings thereof, so that there can be no distress, against
which there was not a refuge and an escape for them, when Penitent, unto some
promise or other. Against Captivity, when they be in the Land of their Enemies,
I will not cast them away, nor abhor them; Levit. 26.44. Against Famine and
Pestilence; If I shut up Heaven that there be no Rain, or if I Command Locusts
to devour the Land, or if I send Pestilence among my People; If my People which
are called by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and
turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from Heaven, and will forgive
their sin, and will heal their Land, 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. Against sickness, the
Lord will strengthen them upon the bed of languishing, and make all his bed in
his sickness; Psalm. 41.3. Against poverty, when the poor and needy seek water
and there is none; I the Lord will hear them, Isa. 41.17. Psalm. 68.10. Against
want of Friends, when my Father and Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take
me up, Psalm. 127.10. Psalm. 72.12. Against Oppression and Imprisonment; he
executes Judgment for the Oppressed, he loses the Prisoners, Psalm. 146.7.
Against whatsoever Plague or trouble, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. He is the God of
all consolation, how disconsolate soever a man's condition is in any kind,
there cannot but within the compass of all consolation, be some one, or other
Remedy at hand, to comfort and relieve him.

Mixture of the godly with the wicked is a stay of Judgment. When God was
about to destroy Sodom, he says to Lot, haste thee; I can do nothing till thou
be gone. Good Josiah was a stay of those judgments which God had threatened to
bring upon Jerusalem for the sins of Manasseh. Had there been but ten righteous
men in Sodom, surely it had not been then destroyed when it was: Abraham
intimates the reason hereof in this Rhetorical communication with God, VVilt
thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? That be far from thee: Shall not
the Judge of all the world do right? The supreme Lord of all has such respect
to his faithful ones, as he will rather spare many wicked ones for a few
righteous ones, than destroy a few righteous ones with many wicked ones.

Behold here a means of God's patience and long-suffering in the world: which
is that mixture of holy ones with the elect, and were such as are sanctified
taken out of the world, soon would there be an end of all. Many Nations,
Cities, Towns, and other Societies are spared for some faithful Saints therein.
This surely is the reason of God's much forbearance toward this Land, this
City of London, and other places in this Kingdom. There is a remnant of
righteous persons, these hold up their hands to God ordinarily and
extraordinarily: to their persons, to their prayers has the Lord such respect,
as they do in a manner hold him, as Moses held God when it was in his mind
utterly to destroy all the children of Israel that came out of Egypt. God gave
to Paul all them that sailed with him. It is said that a little before
Heidelberg in the Upper Palatinate was taken, their faithful Ministers were all
taken away.

O the ungratefulness of the wicked in the world, through God's favor to the
Saints here and there dispersed in the world; they that live and enjoy any
comforts in the world, are beholding to those Saints for their peace, plenty,
safety, honors, wealth, liberties, livings, and life it self: yet in the world
who more hated, scorned, reproached, evilly entreated, and persecuted in the
world? Is not this more then monstrous ingratitude?

But how beholding to God are these Saints, to whom the Lord (who is beholding
to none) bears such respect, as not only to spare them, but, for their
sakes, those among whom they live?

The several names the Greeks and Latins gave the Plague: describing also two
sorts of this contagious Sickness.
THat which we call in English the Plague, is known in Latin by Pestis or
Pestilentia, in Greek (...) or (...), Pernities seu exitium, a deadly fretting.
Our English word signifies, a sharp Punishment of what kind soever. In that
sense, we read many were the Plagues inflicted on the Egyptians: We are apt,
when offended by any, to say, Well, I will plague you for this. Hippocrates
calls this distemper, (...), Morbus epidemicus, an universal or popular
Disease. Thus much for the name: in the next place take notice, there are two
sorts of Plagues; the one simple, the other putrid. The simple Plague is the
very influence of the striking Angel, executing the vengeance of God on the
bodies of men. This kind of Plague arises from no distemper of blood,
putrefaction of humors, or influence of Stars, but falls merely from the
stroke of God's punishing Angel (such were the Plagues of old, as you may read
in Exodus 12. and Numb. 11.16, 25. also 2 Samuel 24. 2 Kings 19.) whereof some
die suddenly, without any precedent or foregoing complaint, or conceit of
infection. Others again, though they be sick before they die, yet their first
taking has been after an extraordinary manner. Some whereof I have talked with,
who have ingenuously confessed, they at their first infection felt themselves
manifestly stricken, being sensible of a blow suddenly given them; some on the
head and neck; others on the back and side, etc. sometimes so violently, that
they have been as it were knocked down to the ground, remaining for a time
senseless, whereof some have died instantly, others in a short time after; and
those that did recover, escaped without humane help or means. For this kind of
Plague, as it is rare, so it is by all art of man incurable. Therefore no
method but Repentance, no medicine but Prayer can avert or heal this stroke. Of
all Antidotes for the body, that Triacle is the best esteemed which is made of
the flesh of earthly Serpents: but for the soul, that only which is made of the
blood of the brazen Serpent, which was lifted up on the Cross for our sins. He
that by a lively faith applies the benefit of our blessed Saviors sufferings
to the Plague Sore of his soul, shall undoubtedly recover, (if not health here,
yet) heaven hereafter. The putrid Plague is a popular Fever, venomous and
infectious, striking chiefly (when first seizing the body) at the very heart,
and for the most part is accompanied with some swelling, which is either called
a Blain, a Botch or Carbuncle; or else with spots, called Gods Tokens. This
comes of putrefaction of blood and humors in the body, which it pleases God
sometimes to make the instrument of his punishing justice, mixing it with the
simple Plague beforementioned. This putrefaction may be caused by the
influence of the Stars, who do undoubtedly work upon all sublunary bodies. For
Astrologers are of opinion, that if Saturn and Mars have dominion (especially
under Aries, S^gittarius, and Capricorn) a Plague or Pestilence is shortly to
be expected: Or, if these two (before-named) most malevolent Planets be in
opposition to Jupiter, according to the Poet: Coelitus imbuitur tabe
difflatilis aura,
Mars quando objicitur falcitonensque Jovi.
When Mars in opposition is to Jove,
The Air will be infected from above.


The winds likewise are led into their motions by the Starry-course; the
Planets (especially the Sun) by extracting the earths exhalations (which are
the substance of the winds) do set them so on work: And the winds, some are
naturally wholesome, others unwholesom. The South-winde blowing from the
Meridian, is of nature hot and moist, and full of showers. Now when by the
influence of the Stars this wind blows long, and brings continual rain, it
causes much moisture in all airy and earthly bodies; and so much the more, by
how much the milder it is. This moisture being in such abundance, cannot be
digested nor attenuated by the Suns beams or heat, and therefore settling
together, it must needs putrify; and that so much the sooner, because the heat
of the Sun (not being able to extract all) does inflame what remains; by which
inflammation the putrefaction becomes the greater. In this manner are the
winds in cause: and moreover, they do sometimes transfer the contagion from
one Region to another; as Hippocrates affirms the Plague to be brought over
the Sea from Aethiopia into Greece by the South-winde. Now if the Stars be
pestilentially bent against us, neither Arts nor Arms, Perfumes nor Prayers,
can prevail with them; who have neither pity, sense, nor power to alter their
motions appointed them by the Omnipotent Creator. But he that commands their
course, and alters them at his pleasure; he that made the Sun and Moon stand
still for Joshua, and drew the Sun ten degrees back for Hezekiah, and caused
the Stars to fight in their courses against Sisera; he, and he alone is able to
heal all infections that can arise from their influences. Other causes there
are also of this putrid Plague; namely, corrupt and unwholesom feeding, all
sorts of unsavory stenches, proceeding either from Carrion, Ditches, rotten
Dunghils, Vaults, Sinks, nasty Kennels and Streets (strewed with all manner of
filth) seldom cleansed. Wherefore I cannot but justly applaud the prudence of
the right Honorable the present Lord Mayor, in taking so much care, and giving
such strict order, that the kennels and streets be very frequently swept and
kept sweet, every one throwing fair water before his own door thrice a day, to
cool as well as cleanse: A good primary way for prevention of any ensuing
general infection: he wisely advised that said, Principiis obsta, Hinder
beginnings. These foetid smells (as I said) are the maintaining causes of the
contagion after it is begun.

Corpora foeda jacent, vitiantur odoribus aurae.
If stinking bodies lie, then hence I see,
The Air will with their stench corrupted be.
So likewise the unseasonableness of the weather, Quum tempestiva intempestive
redduntur, says Hippocrates; When the weather is unseasonable for the season
of the year, being hot when it should be cold, (very hot one day, and in the
like measure cold the next) moist when it should be dry, and so on the
contrary. Now this kind of Plague is by Art curable, in as many as God pleases
to bless the means to: For this therefore I intend to prescribe a course of
Physic, such as both my much reading, and also my practice and manifest
experience in this Sickness has preferred to my best approbation; wherein I
will first open the way of preservation; after that, show the signs of being
infected; and lastly, the course of cure.

Who are most subject to infection.
IN the way of preservation, it is first necessary to be considered, Whether
the Plague be infectious or not; and then, who are most or least subject
(according to natural reason) to receive this infection. This putrid Plague is
(as I have said in the definition) venomous and infectious, best known by
experience. By venom or poison, the Reader is to understand something that has
in it a dangerous subtle quality, that is able to corrupt the substance of a
living body, to the destruction or hazard of the life thereof. This working is
apparent in this Sickness, by his secret and insensible insinuation of himself
into the vital Spirits; to which, as soon as he is gotten, he shows himself a
mortal enemy, offering with sudden violence to extinguish them. His subtle
entrance, sly cruelty, and swift destroying; the unfaithfulness of his Crisis,
and the other Prognostic signs, with the vehemence, grievousness and ill
behavior of his symptoms, do all declare by manifest proofs his venomous
quality: For in this disease the Urine and sweat have a loathsome and
abominable savor, the breath stinks and is noisome; ill colored spots,
pustles, blisters, swellings, and ulcers full of filthy matter arise in the
outward parts of the body; such, as no superfluity or sharpness of humors, nor
any putrefaction of matter (without a venomous quality joined with it) can
possibly produce. Now though this Disease may be acknowledged by the Learned to
be venomous, yet some ignorant persons may say it is not infectious. To
satisfy such, I define Infection or Contagion to be that which infecteth
another with his own quality by touching it; whether the Medium of the touch be
corporeal, spiritual, or an airy breath. Of this kind there are diverse
Diseases that are infectious, though not so deadly as the Plague: As the Itch
and scabbiness, Warts, Measels, Smallpox, and that which is venereal too,
called Morbus Gallicus; these by rubbing and corporeal touches do infect: Also
sore eyes do by their spirituous beams infect others eyes; and the Ptisick or
putrified Lungs, do by their corrupt breath infect others that are sound. But
the Plague infects by all these ways; and such sick bodies infect the outward
Air, and that Air again infects other bodies: for there is a seminary tincture
full of a venomous quality, that being very thin and spirituous, mixeth it self
with the Air; and piercing the Pores of the body, enters with the same Air,
and mixeth it self with the humors and spirits of the same body also: For
proof of this, experience gives us to understand, that Garments, Coffers, nay
walls of Chambers will a long time retain any strong scent wherewith they have
been fumed. Now the scent is merely a quality, and his substance is the Air,
which is also the vehiculum wherein it is seated and conveyed. So does the
Pestilent infection take hold, though not sensibly (for the strongest poisons
have little taste or smell) yet certainly, as experience testifies; for
garments and household stuff have been infected, and have infected others. As
Fracastinus tells of a furred Gown, that was the death of twenty five men in
Verona (when that City was visited) who one after another wore it, thinking
still they had aired it sufficiently. And if Alexander Benedictus may be
believed, feather-beds will keep the Contagion seven years. Other experiences
we have also of living Poultry, which being applied to the sores, were taken
away dead, though no ways crushed or hurt in the least. But say some, Then why
is not one infected as well as another? I have eaten in the same dish, drank in
the same cup, and have lain in the same beds with infected persons, and then
too, whilst their sores were running; yet never had the Plague in my life. By
way of answer, there may be two special causes for this: The first and
principal cause, is the protection of the Almighty, which preserves some as
miraculously, as his justice strikes others dreadfully. Thus through his mercy
he often preserves those that with faithful and conscionable care do their
duties like Christians about the sick, being warrantably called thereunto, and
not thrusting themselves either presumptuously or rashly into the business,
without a just and reason-rendring cause: for God has given his Angels charge
over us, to keep us in all our ways, such as may be esteemed lawful. In the
next place, every pestilential Contagion is not of the same nature, nor has
equal conformity with every constitution, Age, or manner of live: for some
Contagion is apt only to infect the sanguine complexion, some the choleric,
some the phlegmatic only; some children, some youths, some those of ripe age,
some ancient people; and where the seminary tincture has no analogy, there
will be none or very little infection. And first, those are most apt to be
infected that have thin bodies and large open Pores, and whose hearts are so
hot, that they need much attraction of Air to cool them; also they whose veins
and vessels are full of gross humors, the venomous matter being thick, and
therefore unapt to breath through the Pores, their putrefaction is increased by
the inward heat, and so driven to malignity, and thence on-ward to a pestilent
quality. Hence those bodies that are moist and full of phlegmatic humors,
whose veins are straight (and therefore apter to intercept then entertain those
well-concocted juices that would make the purest blood) and the thickness of
whose skin denies the transpiration of excrements; these are easily polluted
and infected. And such are women, especially women with child; for their bodies
are full of excrementitious humors, and much heat withal, which is as oil and
flame put together. Also Virgins, that are ripe for marriage, are apt to
receive infection; and being stricken, seldom or never escape without great
means: Quia spirituosum semen in motu eum sit facile succenditur; vel quia
intus detentum facile corrumpitur, and in veneni perniciem abit. Their blood
being hot, and their seed retained for want of copulation, the one will soon be
inflamed, the other corrupted; from thence infection. Also young children, in
regard of their soft, tender, and moist bodies; and likewise, because as their
meats are moister, so they feed with more appetite then judgment. Likewise,
the more pure and delicate complexions, whose blood is finer and thinner then
others, is so much the more apt to receive mutation; and the Contagion
insinuates it self with more facility into all the humors; but first and most
easily into blood, choler next, more slowly into phlegm, but very seldom into
melancholy. Those that are very costive, and have not a frequent propensity to
make water; for the noisome vapors that are by these excrements engendered, make
the body apt to infection. Those that fast too long (their bodies being empty)
receive more Air in then they let out; and (their spirits being weakened for
want of due nourishment) they have less strength to resist the Contagion. On
the other side, gluttons and drunkards (let them argue what they will for the
filling of the veins, as they use to say, to keep out the evil Air) can never
be free from crudities and distempered blood, which easily takes infection, as
Hippocrates testifies; Corpora impura quo magis aluntur, eo magis laeduntur;
impure bodies, the more they are nourished, the more they are endangered. Poor
people, by reason of their great want, living sluttishly, and feeding nastily
and unwholesomly on any food they can with least cost purchase, have corrupted
bodies; and of all others, are therefore most subject to this Sickness. At this
present, most of those houses which are infected, are the habitations of
poverty, in some obscure close place in the Suburbs; as toward St. Giles's,
etc. One house I know more especially by Curfitors-Alley, where the Man, his
Wife and Child lived in a Room that looked more like, for bigness, a great
Chest then any thing else: They had not space enough (according to the vulgar
saying) to swing a Cat in; so hot by reason of the closeness, and so nastily
kept besides, that it even took away a man's breath to put his head but within
the doors. In this house, all this little family died lately, in two days. The
child dying suddenly, the neighbors were afraid to come near them. The man
having languished a long time, for want of Air, as well as money, and he not
able to stir out, and none coming to his relief, dyed quickly after. The woman
being as big with child as she could tumble, seeing her child dead on the one
side, and her husband in his clothes on the other, and forsaken by all, fell in
labor and dyed too, instantly. A very true and sad accident, which doubtless
was occasioned by their loathsome living, but perfected by the cruelty of those
that lived near them. Furthermore, nearness of blood and kindred, by sympathy
of nature, is another aptness. But old folks, whose bodies are cold and dry;
confident spirits, whose very courage is an Antidote, if they keep their bodies
clean by a regular course of life; and those that have the Gout, in whom the
nobler parts of the body do expel the noxious humors to the ignobler, have the
same benefit of non-infection; as Milch-nurses have, because their children
suck the evil juices from them with their milk. These are in the way likely to
escape; but if the Nurse be infected, the child cannot recover it. Lastly,
they who keep themselves private, or have Issues, Ulcers, Haemorrhoids, or
women that have their courses abundantly, are least subject to infection;
because the hurtful humors are by those means drained away.

What things are to be observed by every man that is desirous to preserve
himself from the infection of the Plague.
BY discovering to you the six strings of Apollo's Viol, I shall show wherein
consists the whole harmony of Health; which are Air, Meat and Drink,
Repletion and Evacuation, Exercise and Rest, Sleep and Watching: and lastly,
the passions of the Mind. If these be in tune, the body is sound; but any of
these too high wrested, or too much slackned (that is, immoderately used) makes
a discord in Nature, and puts the whole body a jarring.

Aer, Esca, Quies, Repletio, Gaudia, Somnus;
Haec moderata juvant, immoderata nocent.
Air, Meat and Rest, Repletion, Joys and Sleep;
As they are used, an healthful body keep.
Or thus:

Sleep, Joys, Repletion, Resting, Air and Food;
Immoderate are bad, if moderate good.
Air we shall first begin with, since it is that we draw in with our breath
continually, and we cannot live without it one minute; for it is the food of
our spirits, and therefore we had need take heed that the Air we draw be pure
and wholesome. The whole stream of opinion runs upon a cold and dry air; so
commending the North and East winds as most wholesome, and condemning the hot
and moist air engendered by the South and West winds, as the fittest matter for
infection, because most apt to putrefaction. So Galen affirms, saying, That
the hot and moist constitution of the Air does most of all breed pestilential
diseases. From his mouth many modern Authors have learned to speak the same
thing: yet we know, that the hot and dry weather also may cause a contagious
air. Titus Livius mentions in his Decades, that Rome was so infected by an
hot and dry distemper of the Air. It is not out of my remembrance, that the
Summer 1624. preceding the great Sickness, was an extreme dry and parching
Summer: I pray God this Summer prove not a Mother to a like Contagion. Now to
avoid the mischiefs of an unwholesome air, take Hippocrates his counsel (in his
Treatise of humane Nature) walk abroad as little as may be, and as much as may
be shun passing by any place infected; but by no means would I advise any to
fly, though the Sickness should spread all over the City: For, in the last
great Visitation, many with Daedalus did put on wings, that with Icarus dropped
down by the way. Only my counsel is this: Should the Sickness increase, let
every one keep himself as private as he may; shun throngs of people, and all
wet, close, and stinking places; walk not abroad before, not after Sun; keep
moderation between heat and cold in all things: yet rather incline to heat a
little, because of drying up superfluous moistures. Let not your houses be
pestered with many Lodgers; and it is best for those that are able, to have
change of Beds and Chambers to lie in, that the air in them may be kept free
and sweet. Keep every Room daily very clean, and let there be no sluts corners;
let not water stand so long in any vessel as to putrify, which in hot weather
it will soon do. Make fires every day in every room, in quantity according to
the largeness of the room, and the temperature of the weather: perfume them in
cold and moist weather with Frankincense, Storax, Benjamin, Pitch, Rozin,
Lignum-Aloes, Lignum Rhodium, Juniper-wood, or the Berries; in hot and dry
weather, with Rose Water on a hot fire-shovel, or some such like cool fume, in
a perfuming-pot: strew the windows and ledges with Rue, Wormwood, Lavender,
Marjoram, Peniroyal, Costmary, and such like, in cold weather; but in hot, with
Primroses, Violets, Rose-leafs, Borage, Bugloss, and such cooling scents. For
garments, avoid as much as may be, all leather, woollen and furr; also velvets,
plush, and shag; but choose such as may be watered, as chamlets, grograms, etc.
for their gumminess excludes infectious air best: shift your shirt often, and
clothes also; and before you put them on again, perfume them well: be sure you
take care that you buy not old clothes, bedding, or such like stuff; for the
garments of infectious persons deceased, are usually put to sale, which
oftentimes prove very dangerous to the buyer. Carry in your mouth a piece of
the Pill of Citron or Lemmon; a Clove is of excellent use to that purpose:
forget not to carry in your hand a Lemmon stuck with Cloves, sweet Marjoram,
Lavender, Balm, Rue, or Wormwood, and thereunto smell frequently: I should
commend for your use Camphire, because it is accounted an excellent cool fume
for ill airs; but I would have those that have cold and weak stomachs to beware
thereof, since such are very much weakened by the use of it. Though Dioscorides
and Cardan commend Galbanum, burning of leather, and smelling to horse-dung;
yet my advice is to eschew unsavory smells and stinking odours; judging what
are sweet and pleasant more proper, because they dilate, restore, and comfort
the spirits, whereas the contrary do contract, and by repugning them, weaken
the faculties.

What manner of Diet is to be observed for self-preservation.
THe next thing which we shall handle for preservation, is the due observation
of diet for meat and drink. Let your meat be always good and sweet, temperate,
betwixt hot and cold, and not too moist or flashy, easy of digestion, and such
as makes the best blood: if your purse cannot purchase Turkey, Capon, Pullet,
Partridge, Pheasant, Pigeons, Larks, Black-birds, Thrushes, Finches, etc. (all
which afford as much wholesome nourishment to the body, as pleasure to the
taste) feed then on Beef, Mutton, Lamb, Kid, and Rabbits, etc. Of Fish, which
should be eaten but seldom, although of the best kind, those I approve, are
fresh Salmon, Trout, Barbel, Shrimps, Plaice and Flounders, (when they are
firm) Smelts, Mackerel, Gudgeon, Mullet, Soal, Gurnard both gray and red,
Lobster and Cray-fish: but Eeles and Lampreyes, and all such as delight in mud,
are to be avoided. Turkeys and Hens-eggs are very good. Oil and Butter are
kinds of Antidotes against venom. Let those who have hot constitutions, drink
sometimes Butter-milk or Whay; but more especially if it be clarified with cool
herbs: eat not fruits at any time, sparingly; and then too, those which are,
as Cherries, Plumbs, and Goosberries, before they be full ripe; also Peaches,
Quinces, Pomegranads, Oranges, Lemmons, Medlars, Cervices, Mulberries, Rasps,
Strawberries and Currants, which being not ripe, are astringent, but at full
maturity do loosen the body. But of Wall-nuts, Filberts, and Small-nuts, the
elder are the better: dried fruits are also good, and so are Pease, Beans and
Artichoaks, which may be used sometimes by lean and spare bodies. The best
roots, are Onyons, Leeks and Radishes, for in these is great power and virtue
against venom, yet offensive to hot heads and weak eyes. Of herbs, Mints,
Rosemary, Sage, and Thime, and Rue, with those herbs aforementioned. For
sallets and sauces, Burrage and Bugloss, Violets, Fennel, and especially
Sorrel, Olives also and Capers. As a Plant, let me not forget to mention the
inexpressible virtues of Tobacco, the fume whereof has been approved the most
sovereign Antidote against pestilential Contagion: The truth hereof is in a
great measure of late confirmed by the practice of the most eminent, now taken
for this very reason, by the advice of the best of Physicians now extant,
though not long since slighted and prohibited: a pipe taken fasting in the
morning is the best time. These following likewise have an excellent property
in them for this purpose: Vinegar, Verjuice, juice of Lemmons and Oranges,
which for their dryness resist putrefaction; and for their coolness, Fevers.
Beware of Cabbages, Coleworts, Lettice, Pompions, Musk-mellons and Cucumbers;
for they are very dangerous meats in contagious times: neither can I approve of
any other roots then Garlic for rustic bodies; and for others, only Onyons,
Leeks and Radishes, as I said before. Let your flesh be roasted, for that is
the wholesomest way of dressing it. Either fry or boil your fish: as for drink,
you must take but as little as may well be born, of the best and purest. Wine
is the best liquor for weak stomachs and aged people: but let not youth meddle
therewith, lest it breed in them inflammations, after which follows
putrefaction, which is a fit host to entertain such an ill guest as the
Pestilence. Wheaten bread of a day old, and a little leavened, is absolutely
the best for healthy people: light biskets also with anise-seeds are very good.
I cannot prescribe the strict quantity of eating and drinking, since I know not
how to stint every man's stomach; wherefore I shall let season, place, and
custom bear some sway in these things; only beware of cramming satiety, since
meat and drink immoderately taken, cause sickness; for from thence arise
crudities, which breed new diseases. Therefore let Avicen advise you in these
words: Rise always from meat with some remaining appetite; for within a little
time, as soon as the meat first eaten begins to digest, hunger will then
cease. And hence it is, that some greedily following the sense of their
appetite only, over-charge their stomachs, even to vomiting, before they feel
themselves satisfied; because though the vessel be over-full, yet appetite is
not appeased, till concoction has begun her work upon that which is already
received. Others may be taxed for the like immoderate drinking, so excessive
therein, that it may be said of them, as Valerius Aurelianus the Emperor was
wont to say of Bonosus a Spaniard; Such are born not to live, but to drink. The
Dutch may yield up their Seas of drinking, and strike sail to the English,
acknowledging themselves inferior to us in every thing. Men now adays care
not, though they lose their own good names, provided they may get new ones; as
Dam-me Blades and Hectors, who rise to drink, then drink to fall: after this,
sleep of necessity, and ere they are half sober, fall a drinking, and be drunk
again. If any of that luxurious Sect be at this time sober, let them but listen
to the testimonies of learned experience, and they will tell them into what
bodily dangers they do plunge themselves, by this detestable disorder: For of
all Diseases, as Paulus Egineta affirms, the overcharging of the vessels is
the worst. Wine moderately taken, increases natural heat, as being its proper
aliment; and so the best meats taken in the same manner, afford the purest
nourishment. But hear what Avicen says, laying down the dangers that follow
over-Repletion, in these words; Eating much nourishes not, but fills the body
with crudities and raw humors; stops the Pores, weakens the powers of nature,
causes putrefaction, mixed Fevers, short breath, Sciatica of joint aches. Of
drinking thus he speaks: Much drinking of wine in sanguine and choleric
complexions, over-heats the blood, and causes choler to super-abound; and by
too much Repletion of the veins and vessels, there may follow a hot Apoplexy
and sudden death. A tragical example whereof we lately had, of two, who having
drunk a very large quantity of Sack, would notwithstanding go to the Alehouse;
where out of a bravado they drank, in Beer, thirty Cans apiece: coming home,
they both instantly dyed. The suddenness of their death, made some suspect that
they died of the Plague; and thereupon the house was shut up; whereas it was no
otherwise then a mere misprision of the true cause. What Avicen has said of
wine, may be applied to all other strong drinks. I hope these lines will keep
such men the soberer in this dangerous time; and in that sober tune, the time
may touch their heart strings so, that sobriety may let in religious
meditations (which continual drunkenness has locked out of doors) and then
repentance may draw them to God, and him nearer to them, and at last become new
creatures: which the Father for his Sons sake grant. In the mean time, let
those which are well, eat the afore-prescribed flesh; but the sick, the juices
of them rather, because aliment must be made more easy and quick for their
supply. Let the flesh be boiled till all the virtue of the meat be boiled out,
and then the broth to be strained hard, that the flesh may be left juiceless,
so will all the strength of the meat be in the broth; which you may spice with
some of these powders following.

Take of red Saunders, half an ounce; Cinnamon, three drams and half; Saffron,
half a dram: make them into a fine powder.

Or else make a powder thus: Take of Cinnamon, half an ounce; Cloves and
Saffron, of each half a dram; red Coral, two scruples: and the weight of all in
Sugar.

Let all be more sparing in diet now, then at other times; eat little, and
drink less; but never go out of doors fasting: But first, take an Antidote, of
which there are several; some whereof, for their excellency, I shall here
nominate.

Theriaca Andromachi. Venice-Triacle. Theriaca Londinensis. London-Triacle.
Mithridatium Damocratis. Mithridate. Electuarium de ovo Imperatoris. Antidotus
magna Matthioli. Confectio liberans. Diascordium.
Of any of these take the quantity of a Nutmeg; and of Confectio Alkermes, and
Confectio de Hiacyntho, the quantity of an hazel-nut: Or, you may take a
powder, called Pulvis contra Pestem Montagnanae, half a dram at a time; or,
half an ounce of Angelica-water, or aqua Theriacalis, either with white wind,
and a few drops of the juice of a Lemmon; or, aqua Bezoartica Langii. Aqua
coelestis Matthioli, for the richer sort, with a drop of oil of Vitriol, in
half an ounce of either. But for such as love not the taste of physic, and had
rather take their Antidote in form of Pills then otherwise, let a skilful
Apothecary make this Mass of Pills following.

Recip. Zadoarie, Ligni Aloes, Agrimonie, Croci, Aristolochie rotunde,
Dictamni, Gentiane, cort. Citri, semp. Citri, ana scrup. 1. Coriandri prepar.
Tormentille, Santali ru^b. Corallii rub. Spodii, Myrobalan. Emblic. ana drach.
2. Terrae sigillat. drach. 2. Boli-Armeni, drach. 3. cum syrupo ex Acetositate
Citri fiat Massa.
Of which 10, 15, 20. or two shillings grains may be taken at once, in one, or
two, or three Pills, as the person can swallow them in bigness. Those that are
offended with the heat of Triacle, or other of the hot Antidotes
abovementioned, may use this Opiate of Palmarius; which is excellent for hot
complexions.

Recip. Flor. Bugloss. Boraginis, Cariophillorum, Ros. rub. horum separatim
conditorum, ana unc. 1. Terre Lemnie, Boli-Armeni, Scobis Cornu Cervicis, ana
drach. 2. Margarit. prepar. drach. 1. Ambari grisci, scrup. ss. surup. de succo
Bugloss. q. s. fiat Opiata. S. A.
The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg.

An especial care must be had, that women with child be not overheated with
common Antidotes; therefore theirs must be only of Terra Lemnia,
Bole-Armoniack, Hartshorn, Conserves and syrrups of Roses, Violets and Betony,
or a little Mithridate, with twice as much conserve of Burrage or Bugloss;
likewise the species de gemmis frig. or of Diamargar. frig. in Burrage,
Bugloss, and Carduus-water: Or else such may have this Antidote made for them.

Recip. Cornu Cervi, Cinamoni, nucis Mosch. Santalorum omnium, ana drach. 1.
Rad. Angelice, Tormentille, Enulecamp. ana drach. ss. f. pull. subt.
Then take Conserves of Burrage and Bugloss, each three drams, with the like
quantity of syrrup of Lemmons and dried Roses, f. conditum s. a.

There is nothing fitter or better for young children then Bole-Armoniack, or
Terra Lemnia, with a little of the root of Tormentil, or Citron-Pills, made
into fine powder, and mixed with their meats, butter and broths for their
breakfast. And because they are not much to be tampered with by internal
Medicines, anoint the region of their hearts with the oil of Hypericon every
morning and evening, or with oil of Scorpions, or oil of (...) or else let them
commonly wear next their skin, over their heart, such a Quilt as this:

Take of red Roses two drams, red Saunders, red Coral, and Spodium, of each one
dram; Zedoary, Lignum-Aloes, Cinnamon, Cloves, Citron-Pill, Saffron, of each
half a dram.

Sew it up in a piece of red Sarcenet, or Callico; moisten it with a little
Rose-vinegar, so heat it, and apply it warm; and when it begins to be dry,
moisten it, and after the same manner heat it again.

Always observing this following direction.

When you suspect a child to have the worms in a contagious time, use not
worm-seed, nor those common trifles, but order it as in danger of infection;
for that disease coming of so much putrefaction as it does, is as apt to
receive contagion, as tinder to take fire; give it therefore 10 or 20 grains of
this powder following.

Take of Hartshorn one dram, Citron-Pill, roots of Angelica, and Tormentil,
Rheubarb, and Coralline, of each half a dram.

Make all into a fine powder, and give the aforesaid quantity in a little
Carduus-water, sweetened with some sugar.

But you must be sure to abstain from all meat and drink for two or three hours
after the taking of any of these Antidotes; and then eat a piece of bread and
butter, strewed with a piece of grated Nutmeg, or bread and Sallet-oyl spiced
with the powder of Tormentil-roots, or a piece of bread sopped in white wind,
allayed with a little vinegar.

Let your dinner be about high Noon; and then eat not of above two or three
several dishes: Let your supper be about five or six in the evening, and then
let one dish suffice; for it is a pretty saying, and worthy of observation: In
the morning, a little is enough; at noon, enough is but a little: but at night,
a little may be too much.

Go not to bed till three or four hours after supper, lest sleeping upon a full
stomach, you hinder digestion. And so I bid good night to the second point of
Diet.

The third Point, is Repletion and Evacuation. When you rise in the morning,
rub your sides, arms, thighs and legs downwards gently; your clothes being on,
comb your head and rub it, hake, spit, and blow your nose, to evacuate the
excrements of your head and stomach; then assay to make water, and to go to
stool, and labor to bring your body to this daily custom; for the body ought
especially to be kept free from superfluities, says Galen, lib. 1. de differ.
treb. cap. 4. therefore if you be costive, use some Suppository or Clister, and
suffer not two whole days to pass without such evacuation.

It is necessary for every one (who has so much understanding) that he learn
to know whether he be Phlethorick or Cachochimick: if Phlethorick (that is,
full of blood, as those that live in high feeding) it will appear by his high
color, full veins, pulse greater and more frequent then it used ordinarily to
be, pursiness, heaviness and dullness of body, and such like signs: if you be
costive, take a common Clister first; then be let blood according to the
appointment of some skilful Physician, and so ordered afterward according to
Art.

If Cacochimick, that is, full of gross and corrupt humors (which will appear
by the paleness and ill color of the face, defective strength, and the like)
he must be well purged; which none but a Physician can safely prescribe, and
that upon examination of his body and urine.

But as a general Rule, all do appoint some purging Medicines twice or thrice
in a week, to keep the body free from the increase of superfluous humors; to
which purpose the Pills of Ruffus (which may be had commonly in any
Apothecaries shop) are very apt and good. But those that cannot take Pills, may
have this syrrup made for them; which for its excellent virtue in this case, is
called, The divine Syrrup.

Recip. Cort. Citri, Rad. Cappar. Berber. Santal. Rub. and Citrin, Spodii, ana
drach. 1. Carriophil. Borrag. Bugloss. Mellissa, Cichorei, ana unc. 1.
Acetosae, Hepaticae, Marrubii, ana unc. ss. Thymi, Epithymi, Scariolae,
Rhabarb. fol. Senae, Rad. Polypodii, ana drach. 1. Succorum Absynthii,
Fumariae, Ebuli, Plantaginis Myrobalanorum, Chebul and Citrin, ana drach. 6.
cum Sacchari li. 2. ss. fiat syrupus s. a. and cum Aceti succi Cydoniorum q. s.
reddatur dulce acidus*
Take two or three spoonfuls of this, more or less, as it works; but keep very
warm, for it causes sweat as well as seidge. In an old Manuscript, I find
this called St. Ambrose his Syrrup; the same a little altered, is in Rhenodaeus
his Dispensatory; and he has added two drams of Diagridium. Let men of
judgment do as they please, I like it best as I have set it down. Rhenodaeus
gives it this title, (not acknowledging any Author) Syrupus qui, etc. It is a
syrrup that cleanses the body from superfluities, and by consequence does
strengthen and comfort the heart, brain, liver, and all other members.

Always observing, that you must forbear to take this syrrup that morning that
you take your purging Medicine.

Women with child must be kept soluble, only with mild Suppositories and
gentle Clisters, wherein a little new-drawn Cassia is to be used; or else a
mild Potion, made with some pectoral decoction, and a little Cassia; for
stronger Purgatives will endanger abortion: but these ought to be directed by a
good Physician.

Young children also with a Violet-comfit (for a Suppository) dipped in sweet
sallet-oyl, or else a little Cassia newly drawn, dissolved in a small draught
of chicken-broth; or a little Manna in the like broth, or in posset drink.
Beware of bathings, especially in open standing waters, within the Region of
the air infected.

If Urine or Menstrua stop, repair speedily to the Physician for counsel: fly
Venus as far as you may; for in these times she has but an ill name.

Sweat coming easily of it self, and within doors, (the house being well aired)
is good, so it exceed not: but abroad it is dangerous.

Lastly, it is good to keep open all issues and running sores; because nature
will labor to expel any venom to such a Common-sewer.

The fourth Point is Exercise and Rest. As it is not good for us to addict our
selves to laziness, lest we thereby increase those superfluous humors which
are never wanting in bodies to foment diseases; so neither must we use (as
little as may be) too great a violence in our labors or exercise, because it
consumes the best juices we have in our bodies, and spoileth our radical
moisture: whereas moderate and convenient exercise ( ad ruborem tantum, non ad
sudorem) if used in times and places, and seasonable, does stir up, nourish and
preserve the greatest and best assistant to life, natural heats, helping
concoction and evacuation.

The best Exercise is walking, with a little stirring of the arms; the time, in
the morning; and the place, either in a pure air abroad, or in a purified air
at home, in some large room, where is little or no company, by the heats of
their bodies and breaths to distemper and corrupt the air. But at all times
beware of taking cold; for great colds and rheums do easily turn to putrid
Fevers, and they as easily prove Pestilent.

The fifth Point, is Sleep and Watching. Sleep, either immoderate or
unseasonable, hinders digestion, and causes crudities, quells the vital, and
dulls the animal spirits: Watching also overmuch, dryes up and inflames the
good blood, and weakens all the powers of nature.

Let your sleep therefore be seasonable, and not superfluous; not upon your
dinner, unless custom commands it; and then take it but napping, for half an
hour or so, sitting in a chair upright.

Three hours at least after a light supper go to bed; where let five or six
hours suffice for sleep; lie conveniently warm, the chamber-doors and windows
being shut to exclude the night-air: but beware of sleeping or lying on the
ground or grass; for the nearer the earth, the more deadly is the air. And the
immediate stroke of the cold vapors rising from the ground, is very dangerous
at all times.

The sixth Point of Diet, is passions of the mind. All kinds of passion, if
they be vehement, do offer violence to the spirits; yea, though they be of the
better and more natural sort.

As laughter (if unbridled) does run even life out of breath, and greatly
perplexeth the body; insomuch as the breast and sides are pained, the breath is
straightened, and sometimes the soul it self is (as I may say) laughed out of her
skin.

For so it is recorded of Chrysippus, that only upon the sight of an Ass eating
figgs, he brake into such an unmeasurable laughter, that he fell down and died.

And Zeuxis that excellent Painter (who made a most curious beautiful picture
of the Spartan Hellen) upon the sight of a very ill-favored old woman, burst
out into such a profuse laughter, that he laughed himself to death.

Now this is a disease of the Spleen, called Risus Sardonius, with which there
be many of my acquaintance not long since grieved.

But sometimes immoderate joy lives not to the age of laughter, when it binds
the vital spirits so close together, that it choaks the heart instantly; for so
Sophocles the Tragedian, receiving a wonderful applause of the people for the
last tragedy he wrote, was so overjoyed at it, that he became a Tragedy
himself, and died upon it.

The like is recorded of one Rhodias Diagoras, who when he saw his three sons
all at one time crowned with victory at the Olympian games, ran to meet them;
and while he embraced them in his arms, and they planted their garlands on his
head, he was so overcome with joy, that he turned their Ensigns of victory
into the Penons of his Funeral.

On the other side, sorrow afflicts the heart, disturbs the faculties, melts
the brain, vitiates the humors, and so weakens all the principal parts; yea,
sometimes sinks the body into the grave.

As Adrastus King of the Argyves, being told of the death of his son, was taken
with so violent sorrow, that he fell down and died immediately.

Anger is also so furious a passion, that it violently disturbs the spirits and
faculties, as appears by the shaking and tossing of the body to and fro, the
fiery sparkling of the eyes, the color coming and going, now red, now pale; so
that all the humors appear to be enflamed (especially choler) and the spirits
hurried this way and that way; sometimes thrust outward, and presently haled in
again: by which violent motions, an unnatural heat in the spirits, and
corruption in the humors are ingendered. Hereupon many times follow burning
Fevers, Palsies, violent Bleedings, loss of Speech; and sometimes Death it
self.

Nerva the Emperor being highly displeased with one Regulus, fell into such
fury against him, that he was stricken therewith into a Fever; whereof he died
within a few days after.

Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, in a rage conceived against his Cup Bearer, would
needs kill him presently with his own hand; but his endeavor was his own
deaths-man, striking him with a Palsy, that shook him shortly after into ashes.

Valentinianus the Emperor, in a fierce fury, would needs destroy the whole
Country of Sarmatia; but his unruly rage brake a vein within, and his own
lifeblood ended his bloody design.

Fear likewise gathers the heat and spirits to the heart, and dissolves the
brain, making the moisture thereof shed and slide down into the external parts,
causing a chilness and shaking over all the body; and falling upon the gullet,
makes one to swallow when they should speak: It abuses the fancy and senses,
brings a Lethargy upon the organs of motion, and condemns the heart to deadly
sufferings.

As Cassander the son of Antipater, upon the sight of Alexander the Great's
Statue, was stricken with such a terror, that he could hardly make his legs
leave trembling, so much as to carry him out of the place. This Fear has in it
a very strange operation, having bereaved several of their senses, on others
diseases; as a Fever, etc. which Fever has afterward turned into the
Plague; so that this Fear, though it does not arise from danger of infection,
yet it will draw it on: how much more then does the fear of the same cause work
it? Instead of bringing Examples for the proof hereof, I shall only give you a
Reason for it Fear, of all Passions, is the most pestilently pernicious; for it
enforces the vital spirits to retire inward to the heart; by which retiring,
they leave the outward parts infirm: as appears by the paleness and trembling
of one in great fear. So that the Walls being forsaken (which are continually
besieged by the outward air) in comes the Enemy boldly; the best spirits that
should expel them, having cowardly sounded a retreat: In which withdrawing,
they draw in with them such evil vapors as hang about the outward Pores, even
as the Sun draws toward it the vapors of the Earth. And hence it is, that
fear brings infection sooner then any other occasion. This therefore, and all
other passions, by a wise watching over our selves, be beaten off, whenever
they but offer to set upon us. But these are diseases of the soul, whose
Physicians are Divines. They must purge out the love of this world, and the
distrust of Gods providence; minister the Cordials of Faith, Hope, Patience and
Contentedness; and ordain the strict Diet of holy Exercises. We that are
Physicians to the Body, are but Chyrurgions to the Soul; we can but talk of
Topical Remedies.

Thus have I run through the first part of my Method, which is the way of
Preservation; now shall I discourse on the second part, which is as follows.

The Manner, Signs and Symptoms, of such that are infected by the Plague.
ITs usual manner is, at the first infection, to strike at the heart, which is
apparent by the sinking and languishing of the vital faculties; the whole
strength of the body is likewise suddenly turned into weakness, the vital
spirits being greatly oppressed and discouraged: whereas the animal faculty
commonly remains (for a while) in good plight, and perfect in the use of Sense,
Understanding, Judgment, Memory, and Motion. The Natural faculty also is not
so presently hurt, but there is concoction and all other functions performed by
the Liver, Stomach, Guts, Reins, Bladder, and other parts, as nature requires:
though indeed in a little time (the venom being very strong) these and the
brain are also overcome; as appears by the symptoms that follow, as Lethargies,
Frenzies, Vomitings, Fluxes, etc. Take notice therefore, that as soon as the
venomous matter strikes to the heart, the Contagion has now found out the
Prince of the vital parts, who, if he want armor of proof to resist (either of
natural strength, or forged out by Arts Cyclops, the Physician) is presently
taken Prisoner by his venomous enemy; who soon after, takes possession of the
arteries and veins. In this conflict, the Pulse (which uses to be the truest
intelligences of the heart's well or ill fare) becomes now languishing, little,
frequent, and unequal. Languishing, by reason that native heat lessens, and a
heat contrary to nature increases; little, because oppressed; frequent, from
natures strife; unequal, partly from the Fever, and partly from the malignant
vapor that besieges the heart. Concerning the Pulse, thus writes Rodericus a
Castro, concerning the Plague that was at Hambrough: Manus duns Medico
porrigunt Pulsum, quodam modo retrahuntur cum tremore; quod a veneno sit cor
ipsum pungente, and signum mihi diutina experientia indubitatum est, ut eo solo
saepissime pestilentem affectum cognoverim; That he observed the sick
stretching out their hands to the Physician to feel their Pulse, they would
after a certain manner pull them back again with trembling, which might be from
the venom pricking the very heart; which was an undoubted sign (he says) by
daily experience, by which alone he oftentimes knew a person infected
pestilentially. From this ground did I find another that never failed me: If
in reaching out the hand the former sign appeared not, then if I suspected it
to be the Plague, I would touch the Pulse something hard; and if it were the
Plague, the hand would not fail to tremble and twitch back. The reason is, the
stopping of the course of the pulse, drives the venom something back to the
heart, by which is caused a kind of sudden Passion. The next sign, is the
enemies Ensign hung out at the windows, the eyes I mean; for then they will be
various in turning, and sometimes fiery shining; the looks sad, and the face
changing color: which show that the radical humors begin to vaste, and the
spirits to wax dry and enflamed. Then follows lightness or giddiness of the
head; drowth, and bitter taste in the mouth, which proceed from the superfluity
of choler, aggravated by the mixture of the venomous vapors: vomiting likewise
of vicious matter, being (according to the redency of any of the humors) of
phlegm, sometimes waterish; of choler, sometimes yellow or greenish; of
melancholy, leaden or blackish. But this is from the virulency of the venom,
vexing the veins and fibers in the coat of the stomach; not from any strength
of nature to expel the poison, as it appears, in that no ease, but increase
of accidents succeeds the exoneration: after which follows a painful convulsion
or hicket, by the progress of the venom working convulsively on the fibers of
the stomach; shortness of breath also, and often sighing, show the heart is
inflamed, and would fain exchange the overheated air within the body, for that
which is cool without: then the spirits begin to faint and sink through the
fierce gripe of the venomous vapor that now insults over the yielding heart.
The external parts become cold and chill, while the internal are all over-hot
with the inflammation of the bowels. By By this time the venom is gotten up
into the watrish humouts of the brain, and infecting them, causes headache,
whiles the hot vapors (getting between the two mother-membranes) cause painful
prickings there: whereupon follows restlessness of the body, and lack of
sleep; and upon these frenzy, except the brain be full of moisture; and the
head is over-heavy and Lethargick; sometimes also the venom works it self from
the substance of the brain into the sinews, causing cramps and convulsions. The
urine is altogether untrue, therefore unworthy the fellowship of faithful
signs; and the most faithful, are the sores and spots (if they be right)
called Gods Tokens. But before we proceed to describe them, give me leave to
express my sorrow, for what I had daily observation of abroad amongst unskilful
Physicians, who frequently undertook the cure of the Plague, who knew no more
then to sweat the Patient, and apply outward drawing Medicines to the sores,
without knowing these symptoms here specified, absolutely material to the
cure; without the knowledge of which, many a poor soul does perish: All which I
shall here reckon up, to see if I can deter impudent Practitioners, who dare
without learning to enrich themselves, by filling graves and fatning
Churchyards.

There is commonly, 1. A trembling of the heart, fainting or swooning. 2. A
Fever, though not easily discerned at first. 3. Cardialga, commonly called
heart-ach. 4. Vomiting and loathing in the stomach. 5. Extreme thirst, and vile
taste in the mouth. 6. Headache, and pricking pains there. 7. Swimming or
Vertigo. 8. Loss of memory, and foolish behavior. 9. Want of sleep. 10.
Delirium or Frenzy. 11. Convulsions or Cramps. 12. Lethargy, or extreme
drowsiness. 13. Sharp pains in the ears. 14. Ophthalmia, or inflammation of the
eyes. 15. Bleeding at the nose. 16. The tongue and mouth inflamed and furred.
17. Spitting of blood. 18. Squinansy. 19. Pleurisy. 20. Very short breath, and
continual sighing. 21. Dry Cough. 22. Jaundise. 23. Swelling of the Belly, with
external pain. 24. Cholick and Iliack passions. 25. Extreme costiveness. 26.
Worms. 27. Flux of the Belly, either Lienteria or Diarrhaea. 28. Bloody Flux.
29. Swelling of the Testicles very painfully. 30. Suppression of Urine. 31.
Extreme heat, and pain in the back. 32. Swelling of the feet and legs with
intolerable pain. 33. And sometimes such immoderate sweat, horribly stinking,
that it does affrighten the Physician from his course of sweating the Patient;
and yet for all this sweat, the deadly danger increases.


And not one of these symptoms can be cured by the common Method of such cases,
because of the venomous quality is mixed with them. But when I had well
informed my self of these things, and saw how little they were regarded by
others, I was much amazed to see, with what peaceable consciences some men went
a killing: And I began to doubt, whether it were not better for a man to be at
peace with ignorance, then to carry his trembling heart in his hand, as I did
all that time: yet still it pleased God to bless my labors and counsels; so
that in what place soever I came into, which was infected, a very small number
failed under my advice. But to go forward. I must enlarge my self a little in
the discovery of the faithfullest and most apparent signs (which are the
Botch, the Blain, the Carbuncle, and the Spots, called Gods Tokens) because the
Searchers do sometimes mistake. The Botch is a hard tumor, rising in the
glandulous parts, called the Emunctories; which are in three places on each
side of the body, viz. under each ear (or sometimes under the jaws or chin) in
the armpits, and in the groynes. This tumor lies sometimes very deep in the
flesh, only to be found by feeling; nay, sometimes also scarcely to be felt:
but if you touch the place, there is pain. But for the most part, it swells
out to the bigness of a Nutmeg or Wall-nut; yea, even to the size of a man's
fist: also sometimes it is round, sometimes oval, sometimes long and slender as
ones finger. I have seen a Lad of ten years old, that had one risen in his left
arm-pit, which ran from thence backward to the shoulder blade, making a
semicircle thereon; and so turning downward toward the backbone, as if under
the skin had been laid a good big cord, in the form almost of a circle; the
youth was not heart-sick but at the first taking: and it so pleased God to
bless the means I applied, that this tumor sunk again, and vanished without
any suppuration. But some again, are flat, broad, and spreading, even over half
the breast, which I have seen; they are of color various, according the humor
predominant at the first; it is commonly moveable, but grows afterward more
moderate and fixed: it rises for the most part with a pricking pain; and as it
grows greater, is more dully painful, and seems to the Patient as a weight or
burden. It comes of a venomous matter, putrefying and poisoning the blood,
which is thick, gross, and excrementitious of it self, and something
phlegmatic: Nature therefore strives to drive forth this venom into the
Emunctories, which are the sinks and receptacles of excrementitious humors.
When they rise under the jaws, they show the strength of the brain; the
armpits, of the heart; and in the groynes, of the Liver. According to the
quantity of the humor infected, so the Botches are bigger or lesser, and more
or fewer in number: and according to the malignancy of the humor, are their
colors whiter, redder, more bluish or blackish; whereof the later are still
the worse. The Blain is a kind of Blister, somewhat like one of the Swine-pox,
of a straw-colour for the most part, but sometimes of a bluish or leaden
color, but then it is apt to turn to a Carbuncle; and when it runs, affords
filthy matter of the like complexion. Round about the Blister there is a red
fiery circle (yet nothing so fiery as that of the Carbuncle) the whole taking
up the breadth of a groat or sixpence: I have seen of the breadth of a large
shilling, but very rarely. These will rise in any part of the body or limbs,
sometimes one, two, or three, but never many: when the matter is run out, the
skin falls, and dries up to a rusty scab, and so falls off. These show, that
Nature is strong to expel the venom speedily, and that the humors infected are
not superabundant; for many that have these are not sick at all, and the most
recover by good looking to. The Carbuncle is a little venomous pustle, with a
broad compass of a deep redness upon it, wonderful angry, and burning like a
fire-coal; thence comes his name, Carbunculus. It rises like a Blister,
producing an ash-colored, or else a blackish crust; sometimes it rises in many
pustles like burnt blisters on the outward skin, which being broken, and the
matter run out, the like crusty escar grows over it till it falls off. It
appears in any part of the body or limbs, many times on the breast, and
sometimes in the face: with it always go these evil companions, itching,
inflammation and erosion; for it is so full of burning poison, that it consumes
the flesh, and will in a short time, if it be not well looked to, eat so deep
and large a hole, as if the flesh were hollowed with an hot iron. It rises
from the same cause in the Botch, but the blood is more hot, black, thick, and
feculent, proceeding from burnt choler, or adust melancholy. The Spots,
otherwise called Gods Tokens, are commonly of the bigness of a flea-bitten
spot, sometimes much bigger; their color is according to the predominancy of
the humor in the body; red or reddish, if choler; pale blue, or dark blue, if
phlegm; leaden or blackish* if melancholy abound; but, they have ever a circle
about them: The red ones a purplish circle, and the others a reddish circle:
they appear most commonly on the breast and back, and sometimes on the neck,
arms and thighs; on the breast and back, because the vital spirits strive to
breath out the venom the nearest way. In some bodies there will be very many;
in some, but one or two, or very few, according to the quantity of the venom,
and the strength to drive them out. They usually show themselves on the third,
fourth, fifth, or seventh day; sometimes not till death, the venom yet
tyrannizing over the dead carcass: sometimes they appear together with the
sores, but for the most part without: the cause is, the venomous matter
condensed and hardened in the act of penetrating the Pores of the skin: if they
be skilfully dissected in the dead body, you may find some half way, deep in
the flesh; and some in the muscles of the breast have been followed with the
Incision-knife, even to the ribbones. The reason why they are thus congealed
is, the thickness of the venomous matter, and the coldness of it; for it is the
most phlegmatic part of the blood, yet mixed also with the other humors
according to the colors. They appear in dead bodies most, because nature
fainting in her labor to thrust out the venom through the skin, life's hear
going out, the privation thereof, and the nearness of the outward air do
congeal them presently: and because many times at the last gasp Nature gives
the stoutest struggle, it comes to pass they are not so far thrust forth as to
appear till death. All these symptoms must be looked to very diligently and
skilfully.

How to know whether the dead body died of the Plague, though neither sore or
Token appear.
HEnricius says, those that die of the Plague, are known from others by these
marks: The nose looks blue, sometimes blackish blue, as if it had been beaten
bruised; the like color is in the ears and nails: and their bodies are ever
worse colored then other dead bodies be. But add to this one sign more,
approved by experience, and standing with good reason, viz. That whereas other
dead bodies must be laid out strait while they are warm, or else when they are
cold they will be too stiff to be straightened; in those of the Plague (or
poisoned either) the flesh is soft, and the joints limber and flexible, after
the body is cold; which shows the vileness of putrefaction in all the humors
and moist parts of the body.

How to know whether the person infected at the first, or soon after, be likely
to be recovered or no.
IF one be taken with the first signs, of sinking of his spirits, causless
sadness, shortness of breath, on the sudden, that he cannot forbear sighing,
yet knows no cause why; sick-heartedness, etc. If this happen at his meat, or
presently after, let him if he can, vomit: if he offer and cannot, help him
with a little warm water and oil; or, dip a feather in Linseed-oyl, or oil of
Scorpions, and thrust it into his throat. Then, or if he be taken betwixt
meals, or fasting, make this draught for him.

Take of Bole-Armoniack, one dram, powdered; juice of Oranges, half an ounce;
white wind, an ounce; Rose Water, two ounces.

If he vomit it up again, it is a sign the venom is abundant, and has gotten
great power over the vital parts: therefore wash his mouth with a little
white wind, and give him the same Potion again. If he again cast it up, repeat
the wine-Lotion, and this Potion again, three times. This is taken out of the
second Canon of Avicen, by Guanerius; who testifies upon his own knowledge,
that never any that at first kept it, without casting it up again, dyed of that
Sickness. Let the infected take this following Medicine, which has been
approved the best Remedy against the Plague: Take three pints of Muskadine, and
boil therein a handful of Sage, and a handful of Rhue, till a pint be wasted;
then strain it, and set it over the fire again; then put thereto a penyworth of
long-pepper, half an ounce of ginger, and a quarter of an ounce of Nutmegs, all
beaten together; then let it boil a little, and put thereto three peniworth of
Triacle, and a quarter of a pint of the best Angelica-water you can get. Take
of it always warm, both morning and evening, if infected, two spoonfuls, and
sweat thereupon; if not, a spoonful a day is sufficient, half in the morning,
the rest in the evening. Keep this as your most estimable treasure; for under
God, in the Plague-time, you may safely trust to this, since it never deceived
any.

AN Excellent Preservative against the Plague, Pestilence, and all Infectious
Diseases, Noisome Smells, and Corrupt Air, Sea-fogs, Kentish and Essex-Agues,
Scurvy and Dropsies; prepared by R. Turner Med. Sold by Sam. Speed at the
Rainbow near the Inner Temple-gate, at 2 s. 6 d. per* Paper, sealed.

Directions for the use thereof.
TAke of it morning, and going to bed; and at any time going abroad hold a
piece in your mouth, letting it there dissolve. The quantity may be from the
bigness of an Hazel-nut, to a small Nutmeg.

FINIS.

