A CHOICE MANVAL OF Rare and Select SECRETS IN PHYSIC AND CHYRURGERY;
Collected, and Practiced by the Right Honorable, the Countess of KENT, late
deceased. As also most Exquisite ways of Preserving, Conserving, Candying, etc.

Published by W. I. GENT.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. and are to be sold by William Shears, at the Sign of
the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

To the Virtuous and most Noble Lady, LETITIA POPHAM, Wife of the Honorable and
truly Valiant Colonel ALEXANDER POPHAM.
Thrice Noble and truly Virtuous Lady,
AFter mature deliberation, what to tender unto your acceptance worthy your
Patronage, nothing occurred more probable, than this small Manual; which was
once esteemed as a rich Cabinet of knowledge, by a person truly Honorable. May
it auspitiously procure but your Honors like friendly Estimation, and then I
doubt not, but it will find a universal acceptance amongst persons of greatest
Eminency. Sure I am, it may be justly deemed as a rich magazene of experience,
having long since taught the world its approved excellency, yea, even in many
dangerous exigencies. All I humbly crave for tht present is, my boldness
might be favourablely excused, since it was my lawful ambition, thereby to avoid
ingratitude for the many singular favors I have already received from your
endeared truly Honorable Husband, my always true noble friend, and most happy
Countryman. God multiply his blessings on all your noble Family, and make you
no less honorable here on Earth, than Eternally happy hereafter: which shall
be the daily prayer of him, whose highest Emulation is,

In all due ways abundantly to Honor and Serve you. W. J.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS READER.
WEll remembering, that we are all born for the weal-publique good: I here
tender to thy perusal this small, and yet most excellent Treatise, Entitled,
A choice Manual of rare and Select Secrets in Physic. If thereby thou suck
abundance of Profit, I shall be superlatively glad, but if any, or perchance
many unlooked for mistaks, for want of a due application, bids thee entertain
contrary thoughts, the effect not answering thy curious expectation, upon a
more serious reflex, know, that nothing is absolutely perfect, and withal,
that the richest and most sovereign Antidote may be often missapplied:
wherefore the fault not being mine, excuse and cease to censure: For which
just, and but reasonable favor, thou shall deservedly oblige me,

Thine, W. J.

A Table of the Contents.
AQua Mirabilis, and the virtues thereof, 4, 5. Another way to make the same
Water, ibid. For an Ague, 26 131 139 147 For an Ach, 27 38 57 59 121 123 141
155 For an Ague in the Breast, 34 116 To cure the Bone-Ach, 60 For the sting of
an Adder, 148 Mr. Ashleys Ointment, 153
B.
For a Bruise under the Rib, 10 29 51 55 74 100 106 142 A restoring Broth, 18 A
Cordial Breakfast, 20 A restoring Breakfast, 21 For gripings of the Belly,
ibid. To keep the Belly Lapintine, 22 For Boiles. 25 124 To clear the Blood, 30
For burning in the Back, 32 For weakness in the Back, 33 75 76 99 111 A
Plaster for a sore Breast, 37 For a stinking Breath, 38 A Water to preserve
the health of the body, 43 For spitting of Blood, 45 69 70 71 For one that
pisseth Blood, 46 Against the biting of venomous Beasts, 67 For a Burning
caused by Lightning, 80 To stanck Blood inwardly, 82 To comfort the Brain, 99
For a Burning or Scald, 120 To make Balm water, 137 For a Blast, 159
C
For a Consumption, 1 19 24 94 For a Cold or Cough, 11 13 158 168 China broth
for the Consumption, 22 To make Cammomill oil, 25 A Water for a Consumption
and Cough of the Lungs, 28 To make pectorall Roules for a Cold, 33 For Corns,
49 To make a strong water for the Canker, 51 991 45 For Convulsions, 54 To Cure
Wounds that be Cankered, and do burn, 60 For Cods swollen, 65 To cure them
that have pain after their Childbearing, 65 For the Colic, 78 98 For a dead
Child in a Woman's body, 87 149 Aqua Composita, 110 121 130 A Water for the
Canker, 113 For the dry Cough and Ptisick, 116 To prevent a Consumption, 127 To
cool Choler, 130 For the Colic passion, 131 For Children that are troubled
with a great Cough, 141 A Sear-cloth against Carbunkles 156 The Powder of Crabs
Claws, 174
D
How to make Horseradish Drink, 7 For the Dropsy, 3 To cure the biting of a
mad Dog, 61 70 148 To deliver a Child in danger, 127
E
An Eye-water for all the Infirmities and Diseases of the Eyes, 29 31 48 105
162 164 165 For a Pin and Web, and redness in the Eyes, 35 72 104 For the
Emeroids, 92 122 144. To prevent Rheum running into the Eyes, ibid. A Powder
for sore Eyes, 125 For sore Eyes caused by heat, 140 142
F
For the Falling sickness, 3 54 162 Cordials and Restoratives for the same,
ibid. Against Phlegm that stops the throat and stomach, 11 How to know whether
he that has the Flux shall live or die, 46 A Fomentation, 54 To cure the
bloody Flux, ibid. 132 163. Flos Unguentorum, 55 To break or kill the Felon, 62
117 One bruised with a Fall, 91 Oil of Foxes or Badgers, with the virtues of
them, 100 For a Felon of the Finger, 124 Jelly of Frogs, 167 For a red Face.
171
G.
To make a Glister, 14 For the Gout, 42 88 89 To cure the Garget in the throat,
86 For one burned with Gunpowder, 92 To make Gascoin Powder, 172 The
Apothecaries Gascoin Powder, 173
H.
To take away Hoarsnesse 13 To take away Headache, ibid. To make a Jelly of
Hears-horn, 14 A Cordial to cheer the Heart 15 To make a cap for the pain and
coldness in the Head, 33 For such as cannot Hear, 43 Heads of Children
breaking out cured, 53 For bunches and Knots in the Head, 67 For a new Hurt, 69
To cleanse the Head, 71 To drive infectious diseases from the Heart, 84 For the
Hearing, 87 117 For rheum in the Head, 91 For a singing in the Head 94 To make
Oil of Hypericon. 160 For Heat of the soles of the Feet, 172
I
For the Itch, 10 91 164 For the yellow Jaundies, 36 For the black Jaundies 85
A Felon in the Joints, 117 For Joints nummed, 124
K.
For Kibes, 25 162 The Countess of Kents Powder, 175
L
For the Liver, 11 29 109 For the Lask, 66 91 107 113 For grief in the Lungs,
70 127 To cause easy Labor, 174 To keep ones body-loose or soluble, 170
M.
Against Melancholy, 468 108 For such as are sick after meat, ibid. A Sirupe
against Melancholy, 8 A strengthening Meat, 19 To prevent Miscarrying, 25 For
the Mother, 114 145
P.
Against the Plague, 9 95 103 104 132 146 147 166 A Cordial for the same,
ibid. A gentle purge, 23 39 A Receipt for the Plurisie, 25 71 Pectorall Roules,
36 For the Palsy, 37 98 A Syrup to purge, 57 To make the Leaden Plaster,
with the virtue of it, 101 102 To break the Plague Sore, 104 146 To make the
best Paracelsus Salve, 149 Plague water for three several times, 157 A
defensive Plaster, 158 Lapis Prunellae, 162 To preserve against the Plague,
169
R.
Restoratives 16 17 For running of the Reins, 34 65 79 119 159 For the Reins
in the Back, 59 For one that has a Rupture, 96 112 For Rheum, 125
S.
Sir John Digbies Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneyes, 26 For a Stitch under
the Ribs, 10 59 95 For foul Scabs, ibid. For the Spleen, 27 143 To make a
Searcloth, ibid. For the Scurvy, 30 A Sirupe to strengthen the stomach, 31 For
Sunburned, 34 To preserve the Sight, 35 117 For Swellings, 38 50 51 69 110 For
one that has Surfeited, 47 38 106 165 For Sinews shrunk, 61 Doctor Stevens
his Water, 62 137 A Remedy for a fit of the Stone, and when that the water
stops, 72 85 90 108 109 A Syrup for pain in the Stomach, 73 A Cordial for the
sea, 75 Oil of St. John's Wort. 77 A salve for an old Sore. 77. 82. 86. 90. 97.
114 For the green sickness. 80. Oil of Sage good for any grief. 83 For a
Scald. 93. 118. 144. 163. Oil of Swallows. 111. For one that cannot sleep.
114. 118. For one that has a heat in his stomach. 115. Burning and pricking in
the Soles of the feet. 120. To break a Sore. 123. An electuary to comfort the
Stomach. 125. A powder for the Stone. 128. 129. For stiffnesse of Sinews. 131.
For a Strain in the Joints. 128. 152.
T
To distill Triacle water. 12. To cure a Tetter. 54. 94. 170. To keep the Teeth
clean. 82. For the Toothache. 84. 167. To heal a prick with a Thorn. 93. 103.
112. To quench or slack Thirst. 115. To make Teeth stand fast. 168. For one
that has lost his Taste. ibid.
V
To stay Vomiting. 32. To stanch bleeding of a Vein. 46. For a Vein that is
evil smitten. ibid. To cleanse Ulcers. 53. For the falling of the Uvula in the
throat. 172.
W
A Cordial for Wind in the stomach or any other part of the body. 16. 27. 40.
139. A Balm for green Wounds. 26. 52 104. 119. A Broth for one that is Weak.
38. 40. To stanch the bleeding of Wounds. 44. For a Woman travailing with
Child. 47. For a Wen. 53. Dr. Willoughbies Water. 63. To draw an Arrow head, or
iron out of a Wound. 66. A Plaster for a Wound. ibid. 68. 79. 126. For Women
that have had a mischance. 76. For a Woman that has her flowers too much. 88.
To cause a Woman to have her sickness. 90. To kill Worms. 91. 145. A Water for
one that is sick and weak. 107. To take away Warts. 116. Against Wind in any
part. 148. For to cause a young Child to make Water. 171.
A CHOICE MANUAL, OR, RARE AND SELECT SECRETS IN PHYSIC, By the Right
Honorable the Countess of Kent.
A very good Medicine for a Consumption, and Cough of the Lungs.
TAke a pound of the best Honey as you can get, and dissolve it in a Pipkin,
then take it off the fire, and put in two penniworth of flower of Brimstone,
and two penniworth of powder of Elecampana, and two penniworth of the flower of
Liquorice, and two penniworth of red Rosewater, and so stir them together, till
they be all compounded together, and put it into a gallie pot, and when you use
it, take a Liquorish stick beaten at one end, and take up with it as much
almost as half a Walnut, at night when you go to bed, and in the mornings
fasting, or at any time in the night when you are troubled with the Cough, and
so let it melt down in your mouth by degrees.

St. John Digbies Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take a pound of the finest Honey, and take seven quarts of Conduit water, set
them on the fire, and when it is ready to sees, scum it, and still as the
froth does rise scum it, and put in twenty whole Cloves, and let it sees
softly for the space of half an hour, and so bottle it up for your use, and
drink it morning and evening, and at your meat, and no other drink until you
are well.

A Medicine for the falling Sickness.
Take a penny weight of the powder of Gold, six penny weight of Pearl, six
penny weight of Amber, six penny weight of Corrall, eight grains of Bezar,
half an ounce of Pionie seeds; Also you must put some powder of dead man's scull
that has been an Anatomy, for a Woman, and the powder of a woman for a man,
compound all these together, and take as much of the powder of all these as
will lie upon a two pence for nine mornings together in Endive water, and drink
a good draught of Endive water after it.

For Cordials and Restoratives use these things following.
In any faintness take three drops of oil of Cinnamon, mixed with a spoonful
of Sirrup of Gillifloures, and as much Cinnamon water, drink this for a
Cordial.

Against Melancholy.
Take one spoonful of Gillifloures, the weight of seven Barlie corns of
Beverstone, bruise it as fine as flour, and so put it into two spoonfuls of
Sirrup of Gilliflours, and take it four hours after supper, or else four hours
after dinner, this will cheer the heart.

If you be sick after meat, use this.
Take of the best green Ginger is preserved in Sirrup, shred it in small
pieces, put it into a gallie pot, and put Cinnamon water to it, then after
dinner or supper, eat the quantity of two Nutmegs upon a knifes point.

Aqua mirabilis.
Take three pints of White wine, one pint of Aqua vitae, one pint of juice of
Salandine, one dram of Cardamer, a dram of Mellilot flours, a dram of
Cubebs, a dram of Galingal, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger and Cloves, of each a
dram, mingle all these together over night, the next morning set them a
stilling in a glass Limbeck.

The Virtues.
This Water dissolveth swelling of the Lungs, and being perished does help and
comfort them, it suffers not the blood to putrify, he shall not need to be
let blood that uses this water, it suffers not the heart burning, nor
Melancholy or Phlegm to have dominion, it expels urine, and profits the
stomach, it preserves a good color, the visage, memory, and youth, it
destroys the Palsy.

Take some three spoonfuls of it once or twice a week, or oftener, morning and
evening, first and last.

Another way to make Aqua Mirabilis.
Take Galingall, Cloves, Quibs, Ginger, Mellilip, Cardamonie, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each a dram, and of the juice of Salledine half a pint, adding the juice
Mints and Balm, of each half a pint more, and mingle all the said Spices being
beaten into powder with the juice, and with a pint of good Aqua vitae, and
three pints of good White wine, and put all these together into a pot, and let
it stand all night being close stopped, and in the morning still it with a soft
sire as can be, the still being close pasted, and a cold still.

A Medicine for the Stone in the Kidneys.
Take a good handful of Pellitorie of the wall, a handful of Mead Parsley, or
Saxifrage, a handful of wild Thime, a handful of garden Parsley, three
spoonfuls of Fennel Seeds, six Horse Raddish roots sliced, then shred all these
together, and put them in a gallon of new milk, and let them stand and steep in
a close pot one whole night, and then still them milk and all together, this
must be done in May or June, for then herbs are in their best state, and when
it is taken, you must put to two or three spoonfulls of this water as much
White wine, as Rennish, and if you please a little Sugar, and so take it two
days before the change, and two days after, and two days before the full,
and two days after, continuing taking the same all the year, and the Patient
undoubtedly shall find great ease, and void many stones, and much gravel with
little pain.

To make Horse Raddish drink.
Take half a pound of Horse Raddish, then wash and scrape them very clean, and
slice them very thin, cross ways on the root, then put them into six quarts
of small ale, such as is ready for drinking, which being put into a Pipkin
close covered, set on the Embers, keeping it little more then blood warm, for
twelve hours, then take it off the fire, and let it stand to cool until the
next morning, then pour the clear liquor into bottles, and keep it for your
use, drinking a good draught thereof in the morning, fasting two hours after,
and the like quantity at four in the afternoon, this drink is excellent good
against winds, as also for the scouring, and Dropsy being taken in time.

An excellent Sirrup against Melancholy.
Take four quarts of the juice of Pearmains, and twice as much of the juice of
Buglosse, and Borrage, if they be to begotten, a dram of the best English
Saffron, bruise it, and put it into the juice, then take two drachms of Kermes
small beaten to powder, mix it also with the juice, so being mixed, put them
into an earthen vessel, covered or stopped forty eight hours, then strain it,
and allow a pound of Sugar to every quart of juice, and so boil it to the
ordinary height of a sirrup; after it is boiled, take one dram of the Species
of Diamber, and two drachms of teh Species of Diamargariton frigidum, and so
few the same slenderly in a linen bag, that you may put the same easily into
the bottle of Sirrup, and so let it hang with a thread out at the mouth of the
bottle; the Species must be put into the Sirrup in the bag, so soon as the
Sirrup is off the fire, whilst it is hot, then afterward put it into the
bottle, and there let it hang: put but a spoonful or two of Honey amongst it
whilst it is boiling, and it will make the scum rise, and the Sirrup very clear.

You must add to it, the quantity of a quarter of a pint of the juice of Balm.

An excellent Receipt for the Plague.
Take one pound of green Walnuts, half an ounce of Saffron, and half an ounce
of London Triacle, beaten together in a mortar, and with a little Carduus, or
some such water, vapor it over the fire, till it come to an Electuary: keep
this in a pot, and take as much as a Walnut, it is good to cure a Fever,
Plague, and any infection.

An excellent Cordial.
Take the flowers of Marigolds, and lay them in small spirit of Wine, when the
tincture is fully taken out, pour it off from the flowers, and vapor it away,
till it come to a consistence as thick as an Electuary.

For a Bruise, or Stich, under the Ribs.
Take five or six handfuls of Cabbage, stamp it, and strain it, after it is
boiled in a quart of fair water, then sweeten it with Sugar, and drink of it a
wine Glass, in the morning, and at four in the afternoon, for five or six
days together: then take a Cabbage lease, and between two dishes stew it,
being wet first in Canary Wine, and that lay hot to your side evenings and
mornings.

An excellent Receipt for an Itch, or any foul Scabs.
Take Fox gloves, and boil a handful of them in posset drink, and drink of it
a draught at night, and in the morning, then boil a good quantity of the Fox
gloves in fair running water, and anoint the places that are sore with that
water.

A Receipt good for the Liver.
Take Turpentine, slice it thin, and lay it on a Silver, or Purslane Plate,
twice or thrice in the Oven with the bread till it be dry, and so make it into
powder, every day take as much as will lie on a sixpence in an Egg

For Phlegm, and stopping in the throat and stomach. D. T.
Take oil of Almonds, Linseed oil, buds of Orange flowers, boil all these in
Milk, and anoint the stomach well with it, and lay a Scarlet cloth next to it.

For an extreme Cold and a Cough.
Take of Hysop water six ounces, of red Poppy water four ounces, six Dates, ten
Figs, and slice them small, a handful of Raisins of the Sun, the weight of a
shilling of the powder of Licorice, put these into the aforesaid waters, and
let them stand five or six hours upon warm embers close covered, and not
boil, then strain forth the water, and put into it, as much Sugar of Roses as
will sweeten it, drink of this in the morning, and at four of the clock in the
afternoon, and when you go to bed.

To distill Triacle water.
Take one ounce of Hartshorn shaved, and boil it in three pints of Carduus
water till it come to a quart, then take the roots of Elecampane, Gentian,
Cipresse, Turmentill, and of Citron rindes, of each one ounce, Borrage,
Buglosse, Rosemary flowers, of each two ounces, then take a pound of the best
old Triacle, and dissolve it in six pints of white Wine, and three pints of
Rose Water, so infuse altogether, and distill it.

It is good to restore spirits, and speech, and good against swouning,
faintness, Agues, and Worms, and the small Pox.

Triacle water.
Take three ounces of Venice Triacle, and mingle it in a quart of spirit of
Wine, set it in horse-dung four or five days, then still it in ashes or sand
twice over, after take the bottom which is left in the Still, and put to it a
pint of spirit of Wine, and set it in the dung till the tincture be clean out
of it, and strain the clear tincture out of it, and set it on the fire till it
become to be a thick consistence, it must be kept with a soft fire.

And so the like with Saffron.

To take away a Hoarsnesse.
Take a Turnip, cut a hole in the top of it, and fill it up with brown
Sugar Candy, and so roast it in the embers, and eat it with Butter.

To take away the Headache.
Take the best Sallade oil, and the glass half full with the tops of Poppy
flowers which grows in the Corn, set this in the Sun a fortnight, and so keep
it all the year, and anoint the Temples of your head with it.

For a Cough.
Take Sallade oil, Aqua vitae, and Sack, of each an equal quantity, heat them
altogether, and before the fire rub the soles of your feet with it.

To make a Jelly of Hartshorn.
Take a quart of running water, and three ounces of Hartshorn scraped very
fine, then put it into a stone Jug, and set the Jug in a Kettle of water over
the fire, and let it boil two or three hours until it jelly, then put into
it three or four spoonfuls of Rose Water, or white Wine, then strain it: you
may put into it Musk, or Ambergreece, and season it as you please.

To make a Glister.
Take half a quart of new Milk, or three quarters, set it on the fire, and make
it scalding hot, then take it off, and put into it a yoalk of a new laid Egg
beaten, two ounces of brown Sugar Candy, or Black Sugar, give it the party
bloudwarm.

To make a Glister.
Take the bone of a neck of Mutton, or Veal clean washed, set it on the fire to
boil in three pints of fair water, and when it is clean scummed, then put in
the roots of Fennel and Parsely clean washed and scraped, of either of them the
Roots bruised, a handful of Cammomile, and Mallows a handful, let all these
boil together till half be wasted, then strein it, take three quarters of a
pint of this broth, brown Sugar Candy two ounces, of Oil of Flaxseed two
ounces, mingle all these together, and take it for a Glister bloud-warm, when
it is in your body keep it half an hour, or three quarters of an hour, or an
hour if you can.

A Comfortable Cordial to cheer the Heart.
Take one ounce of conserve of Gillifloures, four grains of the best Musk
bruised as fine as flower, then put it into alitle tin pot, and keep it till
you have need to make this Cordial following; Viz. Take the quantity of one
Nutmeg out of your tin pot, put to it one spoonful of Cinnamon water, and one
spoonful of the Sirrup of Gilliflours, Ambergris, mix all these together,
and drink them in the morning, fasting three or four hours, this is most
comfortable.

A Cordial for Wind in the Stomach, or any Part.
Take six or eight spoonfuls of Pennyroyall water, put into it four drops of
oil of Cinnamon, so drink it any time of the day, so you fast two hours
after.

Restoratives.
Take a well flesht Capon from the barn-door, and pluck out his Intrals, then
wash it within with a little white wind, then flea of all the skin, and take
out his bones, and take the flesh, only cut it in little pieces, and put it
into a little stone bottle, and put to it an ounce of white Sugarcandie, six
Dates slit, with the stones and piths taken out, one large Mace, then stop the
bottle up fast, and set it in a Chafer of water, and let it boil three hours,
then take it out, and pour the juice from the meat, and put to it one spoonful
of red Rose water, and take the better part for your breakfast four hours
before dinner, and the other part at three a clock in the afternoon, being
bloud-warm.

Another Restorative.
Take half a pint of Claret wine, and half a pint of ale, and make a caudle
with a new laid egg, put in half a Nutmeg, cut into two pieces, then take it
off the fire, and put in seven grains of Ambergreece, drink this for two
breakfasts, for it will increase blood and strength.

Another Restorative.
Take two new laid Eggs, and take the whites clean from them, and put the yolks
both in one shell, then put in two spoonfulls of Claret wine, seven grains of
Ambergris small bruised, and a little Sugar Candy, stir all these together,
and make them bloud-warm, and sup them up for a breakfast three or four hours
before dinner.

Another Restorative.
Take a young leg of Mutton, cut off the skin, and the fat, take the flesh
being cut into small pieces, and put it into a stone bottle, then put to it two
ounces of raisins of the Sun stoned, large Mace, an ounce and half of Sugar Candy, and stop the bottle very close, and let it boil in a Chafer three
hours, and so put the juice from the meat, and keep it in a clean glass, it
will serve for three breakfasts, or if he will, he may take some at three a
clock in the afternoon being made warm.

A restoring Broth.
Take two ounces of Chene roots, first slit very thin, then put it in a new
Pipkin with five pints of running water, being close covered, and so set it
upon embers all night long, where it may be very hot, but not sees, then put
to that water, a great cock Chicken, and when it is clean scummed, put into it
two spoonfuls of French Barley, six Dates slit, with the pithes and stones taken
out, two ounces of Raisins of the Sun stoned, large Mace, let all these boil
together till half be consumed, then take out the Cock, and beat the flesh of
it in a clean Mortar, and a little of the broth, then strain it altogether
throughout a hair Collender, then put in two spoonfuls of red Rose Water, and
sweeten it with white Sugar Candy, drink of this broth being made warm half a
pint in the morning early fasting, and sleep after it if you can, drink a good
draught at three of the clock in the afternoon; this broth is very good for a
Consumption, and the longer they taste it, it is the better.

A Strengthening Meat.
Take Potato roots, roste them, or bake them, then pill them, and slice them
into a dish, put to it lumps of raw marrow, and a few Currants, a little whole
Mace, and sweeten it with Sugar to your taste, and so eat it in stead of
buttered Parsnips.

Broth for a Consumption.
Take three Marrow bones, break them in pieces, and boil them in a gallon of
water till half be consumed, then strain the liquor through a Collender, and
let it stand (...) it be cold, then take off all the fat clean, and put the
broth into a Pipkin, and put to it a good Cock chicken, and a knuckle of Veal,
then put into it the bottom of a white loaf, a whole Mace, two ounces of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, six Dates slit, let all these boil together till
half be consumed, then strain it, instead of Almonds take a few Pistaties
kernels, and beat them, and strain them with your broths as you do Alum milk,
and so sweeten it with white Sugar, and drink half a pint early in the morning,
and at three a clock in the afternoon, and so continue a good while together,
or else it will do you no good.

Another Cordial.
Take a preserved Nutmeg, cut it in four quarters, eat a quarter at a
breakfast, and another in the afternoon, this is good for the head and stomach.

A Cordial for a Breakfast fasting.
Eat a good piece of a Pomecitron preserved, as big as your two fingers in
length and breadth, and so at three of the clock in the afternoon.

A Restoring Breakfast.
Take the brawn of a Capon, or Pullet, twelve Jordan Almonds blanched, beat
them together, and strain out the juice, with a draught of strong broth, and
take it for a breakfast, or to bedward.

A Medicine for any gripings of the Belly.
Take a pint of Claret wine, put to it a spoonful of Parseley seed, and a
spoonful of sweet Fennel seed, half a dosen Cloves, a branch of Rosemary, a
wild Mallow root clean washed and scrapt, and with the pith taken out, with a
good piece of Sugar; set this on the fire, and burn the Claret very well with
all these things in it, then drink a good draught of it in the morning
fasting, and at three a clock in the afternoon.

To keep the Body Lapintine.
Take half a pint of running water, put it in a new Pipkin with a cover, then
put into the water two ounces of Manna, and when it is dissolved, strain it,
and put to it four ounces of Damask Prunes, eight Cloves, a branch of Rosemary,
let all these stew together while they be very tender, then eat a dosen of them
with a little of the liquor an hour before dinner or supper, then take a
draught of broth and dine.

To make the China Broth for a Consumption.
Take China root thin sliced two ouncs, steep it twenty four hours in eight
pints of fair water, letting it stand warm all the time, being close covered in
an earthen Pipkin, or Iron pot, then put to it a good Cockrell, or two Chickens
clean dressed, and scum it well, then put in five leaved grass two handfuls,
Maidenhair, Hearts tongue, of either half a handful, twenty Dates sliced, two or
three Mace, and the bottom of a Manchet, let all these stew together, until
not above one quart remains, then strain it, and take all the flesh, and sweet
bones, beat them in a stone Mortar, and strain out all the juice with the
broth, then sweeten it with two ounces of white Sugar Candy in powder, and
take thereof half a pint at once, early in the morning warm, and sleep after it
if you can, and two hours before supper at your pleasure, when you steep the
root, slice two drachms of white Sanders, and as much red Sanders, and let them
boil in the broth.

A gentle Purge.
Take an ounce of Damask Roses, eat it all at one time, fast three quarters of
an hour after, then take a draught of Broth, and dine.

Another Purge.
Take the weight of four or five pence of Rubarb, cut it in little pieces, and
take a spoonful or two of good Currants washed very clean, so mingle them
together, and so eat them, fast an hour after, and begin that meal with broth,
you may take it an hour before if you will.

Broth for a Consumption.
Take a course Pullet, and sow up the belly, and an ounce of the conserves of
red Roses, of the conservs of Borage, and Bugloss flours, of each of them half
an ounce, Pine apple kernels, and Pistaties of each half an ounce bruised in a
mortar, two drachms of Amber powder, all mixed together, and put in the belly,
then boil it in three quarts of water, with Egrimonie, Endive, and Succorie,
of each one handful, Sparrowgrass roots, Fennel roots, Caper roots, and one
handful of Raisins of the Sun stoned, when it is almost boiled, take out the
Pullet, and beat it in a stone Mortar, then put it into the liquor again, and
give it three or four walmes more, then strain it, and put to it a little red
Rosewater, and half a pint of white wine, and so drink it in a morning, and
sleep after it.

To prevent Miscarrying.
Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on black brown paper, the breadth and length
of a hand, lay it to the small of her back, then give her to drink a Caudle
made of Muscadine, and put into it the husks of twenty three sweet Almonds
dried and finely poudred.

For Boils or Kibes, or to draw a Sore.
Take strong Ale, and boil it from a pint to four spoonfuls, and so keep it, it
will be an ointment.

To make Cammomile Oil.
Shred a pound of Cammomile, and knead it into a pound of sweet Butter, melt
it, and strain it.

A Receipt for the Plurisie.
Take three round Balls of Horse-dung, boil them in a pint of white Wine till
half be consumed, then strain it out, and sweeten it with a little Sugar, and
let the Patient go to bed and drink this, then lay him warm.

For an Ague.
Take a pint of Milk, and set it on the fire, and when it boils put in a pint
of Ale, then take off the curd, and put in nine heads of Carduus, let it boil
till half be wasted, then to every quarter of a pint, put a good spoonful of
wheat flour, and a quarter of a spoonful of gross Pepper, and an hour before
the fit, let the Patient drink a quarter of a pint, and be sure to lie in a
sweat before the fit.

An excellent Balm for a green Wound.
Take two good handfuls of English Tobacco, shred it small, and put it into a
pint of Sallet oil, and sees it on a soft fire to simper, till the oil
change green, then strain it, and in the cooling put in two ounces of Venice
Turpentine.

For an Ach.
Take of the best gall, white Wine Vinegar, and Aqua vitae, of each a like
quantity, and boil it gently on the fire, till it grow clammie, then put it in
a glass or pot, and when you use any of it, warm it against the fire, rub some
of it with your hand on the akeing place, and lay a linen cloth on it, do
this mornings and evenings.

To make a Searcloth.
Virosius Wax, Spermaceti, Venice Turpentine, oil of White Poppie, oil of
Ben, oil of sweet Almonds.

For Wind in the Stomach, and for the Spleen.
Take a handful of Broom, and boil it in a pint of Beer or Ale, till it be
half consumed, and drink it for the wind, and the stomach, and for the Spleen.

A most excellent Water for a Consumption, and Cough of the Lungs.
Take a running Cock, pull him alive, then kill him when he is almost cold, cut
him abroad by the back, and take out the Intrals, and wipe him clean, then cut
him in quarters, and break the bones, put him into such a Still as you still
Rosewater in, and with a pottle of Sack, a pound of Currants, a pound of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, a quarter of a pound of Dates the stones taken out,
and the Dates cut small, two handfulls of wild Thyme, two handfuls of Orgares,
two handfuls of Pimperball, and two handfuls of Rosemary, two handfuls of
Bugloss and Borage flours, a pottle of new Milk of a red Cow, still this with a
soft fire, put into the glass that the water does drop into, half a pound of
Sugar Candy beaten very small, one book of leaf gold cut small among the
Sugar, four grains of Amber greece, twelve grains of prepared Pearl, you must
mingle the strong water with the small, and drink four spoonfuls at a time in
the morning fasting, and an hour before supper, you must shake about the
glass when you drink it.

A Medicine good for the Liver.
Take Turpentine, slice it thin, and lay it on a silver or Purslane plate twice
or thrice into the Oven with the bread till it be dry, and so make it into
powder every day, take as much as will lie on a sixpence in an Egg.

For a Bruise.
Take six spoonfuls of Honey, a great handful of Linseed, bruise these in a
mortar, and boil them in a pint of Milk an hour, then strain it very hard and
anoint your breast and stomach with it every morning and evening, and lay a
red hose upon it.

The Eye-Water for all the Infirmities and Diseases of the Eye.
Take of the distilled water of the white wild Rose, half a pound of the
distilled water of Celendine, Fennel, Eyebright, and Rue, of each two ounces,
of Cloves one ounce and a half, of white Sugar Candy one dram, of Tutia
prepared four ounces, pulverise all these Ingredients each by themselves,
saving that you must bruise the Campihre with your Sugar Candy, for so it
breaks best, then mix all the Pouders together in a paper, put them in a
strong glass, pour the distilled waters upon them, and three pints of the best
French white Wine that can be had, shake it every day three or four times long
together for a month, and then you may use it; remember to keep it very close
stopped; this is verbatim, as it was had from the Lord Kelley.

A Medicine very good for the Dropsy, or the Scurvy, and to clear the blond.
Take four gallons of Ale, drawn from the tap into an earthen Stand, when the
Ale is two days old, then you must put in four handfuls of Brooklime, four
handfuls of Watercresses, four handfuls of water-Mints with red stalks, half a
peck of Scurvy-grasse, let all these be clean picked and washed, and dried with
a cloth, and ^hred with a knife, and then put into a ^ag, then put in the Ale,
and stop it close, so that it have no vent, stop it with rye ^aste; the best
Scurvy-grasse grows by the water side: it must be seven days after the
things be in before you drink it. Take two quarts of water, and put in four
ounces of Guaiacam, two ounces of Sarsaparilla, one ounce of Saxifrage, put it
into a Pipkin, and infuse it upon the embers for twelve hours, and then strain
it, and put it into the Ale as soon as it has done working, this being, added
makes the more Caudle.

For sore Eyes.
Take half a pint of red Rosewater, put therein four penny of Alloesuckatrinay,
as much Bole armoniack in quantity, let this lie four and twenty hours in
steep, then wash your eyes with it evenings and mornings with a feather, and it
will help them.

A Sirrup to strengthen the Stomach, and the Brain, and to make a sweet Breath.
Take rindes while they be new one pound, of running water the value of five
wine pints, then sees it unto three pints, then strain it, and with one pound
of Sugar sees it to a Sirupe, and when you take it from the fire, put to it
four grains of Musk.

For the burning in the Back.
Take the juice of Plantain, and woman's Milk, being of a woman Child, put
thereto a spoonful of Rosewater, and wet a fine cloth in the same, and so lay
it to your Back where the heat is.

A very good Medicine to stay the vomiting.
Take of spare Mince, Wormwood, and red Rose leaves dried, of each half a
handful, of Rye bread grated a good handful, boil all these in red
Rosewater, and Vinegar, till they be somewhat tender, then put it in a linen
cloth, and lay it to the stomach as hot as you can endure it, heating it two or
three times a day with such as it was boiled with.

For weakness in the Back.
Take Nixe, and Clary, and the Marrow of an Ox back, chop them very small,
then take the yolks of two or three Eggs, and strain them altogether, then fry
them, use this six or seven times together, and after it drink a good draught
of Bastard, or Muskadine.

To make a Cap for the pain and coldness in the Head.
Take of Storix, and Benjamine, of both some twelve pennyworth, and bruise it,
then quilt it in a brown paper, and wear it behind on your head.

To make Pectorall Roules for a Cold.
Take four ounces of Sugar finely beaten, and half an ounce of searsed
Licorice, two grains of Musk, and the weight of two pence of the sirupe of
Licorice, and so beat it up to a perfect paste, with a little sirupe of
Horehound, and a little Gumdragon being steeped in Rosewater, then toul them in
small rouls, and dry them, and so you may keep them all the whole year.

A proved Medicine for any one that have an Ague in their Breast.
Take the Patients own water, or any others that is very young, and set it over
the fire, put therein a good handful of Rosemary, and let it boil, then take
two red clothes and dip them in the water, then nip it hard, and lay it on the
breast as hot as it may be endured, and apply it till you see the breast
assuaged, then keep it very warm.

For the running of the Reins.
Take the Pith of an Ox that goes down the back, a pint of red Wine, and
strain them together through a cloth, then boil them a little with a good
quantity of Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg, and large Mace, a quantity of Ambergreece,
drink this first and last daily.

For Sunburned.
Take the juice of a Lemon, and a little Baysalt, and wash your hands with it,
and let them dry of themselves, wash them again, and you shall find all the
spots and stains gone.

For a Pin and Web, and redness in the eye.
Take a pint of white Rosewater, half a pint of white Wine, as much of Lapis
Calaminaris as a Walnut bruised, put all these in a glass, and set them in the
Sun one week, and shake the glass every day, then take it out of the Sun, and
use it as you shall need.

A special Medicine to preserve the sight.
Take of brown Fennel, Honeysuckles of the hedge, of wild Dasies roots picked,
and washed, and dried, of Pearl-wort, of Eyebright, of red Roses the white
clipped away, of each of these a handful dry gathered, then steep all these
Herbs in a quart, or three pints, of the best white Wine in an earthen pot,
and so let it lie in steep two or three days close covered, stirring it three
times a day, and so still it with a gentle fire, making two distillings, and so
keep it for your use.

A proved Medicine for the yellow Jaundies.
Take a pint of Muscadine, a pretty quantity of the inner bark of a Barberry
tree, three spoonfuls of the greenest goose dung you can get, and take away all
the white spots of it, lay them in steep all night, on the morrow strain it,
and put to it one grated Nutmeg, one penniworth of Saffron dried, and very fine
beaten, and give it to drink in the morning.

To make Pectorall Roules.
Take one pound of fine Sugar, of Licorice and Annise seeds two spoonfulls, of
Elicampane one spoonful, of Amber and Corrall of each a quarter of a spoonful,
all this must be very finely beaten and fearsed, and then the quantity that is
set down must be taken, mix all these pouders together well, then take the
white of one egg, and beat it with a pretty quantity of Musk, then take a
Brazen mortar very well scoured, and a spoonful on two of the Pouders, and drop
some of the Egg to it, so beat them to a paste, then make them in little
roules, and lay them on a Plate to dry.

A Plaster for a sore Breast.
Take crumbs of Whitebread, the tops of Mint chopped small, and boil them in
strong Ale, and make it like a Poultess, and when it is almost boiled, put in
the powder of Ginger, and oil of Thyme, so spread it upon a cloth, it will
both draw and heal.

A Medicine for the dead Palsy, and for them that have lost their speech.
Take Borage leaves, Marigold leaves or flours, of each a good handful, boil
it in a good Ale Posset, the Patient must drink a good draught of it in the
morning and sweat, if it be in the arms or legs, they must be chaffed for an
hour or two when they be grieved, and at meals they must drink of no other
drink till their speech come to them again, in Winter if the Herbs be not to
be had, the Seeds will serve.

An approved Medicine for an Ach or Swelling.
Take the flours of Cammomile, and Rose leaves, of each of them a like
quantity, and sees them in white Wine, and make a plaster thereof, and let
it be laid as hot as may be suffered to the place grieved, and this will ease
the pain, and assuage the swelling.

An approved Medicine for a stinking Breath.
Take a good quantity of Rosemary leaves and flours, and boil them in white
Wine, and with a little Cinnamon and Benjamin beaten in powder, and put
therein, and let the Patient use to wash his mouth very often therewith, and
this will presently help him.

A good Broth for one that is weak.
Take a part of the neck of Lamb, and a pretty running fowl, and set them on
the fire in fair Spring water, and when it boyleth scum it well, so done, put
in two large Mace, and a few Raisins of the Sun stoned, and a little Fennel
root, and a Parsley root, and let them boil, if the party be grieved with heat
or cold in the stomach; if heat, put in a handful of Barlie boiled before in
two waters, and some Violet leaves, Sorrel, Succorie, and a little Egrimonie;
if cold, put in Rose^^^y, Thyme, a Lilly, Marigold leaves, Bo^^ge, and
Bugloss, and boil this from lour pints to less then one.

A Receipt for Purging, D. T.
Take the leaves of new Seen six ounces, of chosen Rubarb one ounce and half,
leaves of Sage, red Dock roots of each an ounce, of Barberies half an ounce,
Cinnamon and Nutmegs of each an ounce, Anniseseeds and Fennel seeds of each six
drachms, of Tamarisk half an ounce, Cloves and Mace, of each half a dram,
beat them into a gross powder, and hang them in a linen Bag, in six gallons
of new Ale, so drink of it fasting in the morning, and at night.

To comfort the stomach, and help Windiness and Rheum.
Take of Ginger one penniworth, Cloves four penniworth, Mace seven penniworth,
Nutmegs four penniworth, Cinnamon four penniworth, and Galingale two
penniworth, of each one ounce, of Cubebs, Coral, and Amber, of each two
drachms, of Fennel seed, Dill seed, and Carraway seed, of each one ounce, of
Liquorice and Annise seeds of each an ounce, all beaten into fine powder, one
pound and a half of fine beaten Sugar, which must be set on a soft fire, and
being dissolved, the pouders being well mixed therewith till it be stiff,
then put thereunto half a pint of red Rosewater, and mix them well together and
put it into a gallie pot, and take thereof first in the morning, and last in
the evening, as much as a good Hasell Nut, with a spoonful or two of red Wine.

To make a Callice for a weak Person.
Take a good Chicken, and a piece of the neck end of Lamb or Veal, not so much
as the Chicken, and set them on the fire, and when they boil and are well
scummed cast in a large Mace, and the piece of the bottom of a Manchet, and
half a handful of French Barlie boiled in three waters before, and put it to
the Broth, and take such herbs as the party requires, and put them in when
the broth has boiled half an hour, so boil it from three and a half to one,
then cast it through a strainer, and scum off all the fat, so let it cool, then
take twenty good Jordan Almonds, or more, if they be small, and grind them in a
Mortar with some of the broth, or if you think your Broth too strong, grind
them with some fair water, and strain them with the broth, then set it upon a
few coals, and season it with some Sugar not so much, and when it is almost
boiled, take out the thickest, and beat it all to pieces in the mortar, and put
it in again, and it will do well, so there be not too much of the other flesh.

For the Gout.
Take six drachms of Cariacostine fasting in a morning, and fast two hours
after it, you may roll it up in a Wafer, and take it as Pills, or in Sack, as
you conceive is most agreeable for the stomach; this proportion is sufficient
for a woman, and eight drachms for a man, and take it every second day until
you find remedy for it, it is a gentle purge that works only upon winds and
water.

The Poultesse for the Gout.
Take a penny loaf of Whitebread, and slice it, and put it in fair water, two
Eggs beaten together, a handful of Redrose leaves, two penniworth of Saffron
dried to powder, then take the bread out of the water, and boil it in a
quantity of good Milk, with the rest of the Ingredients, and apply it to the
place grieved as warm as you can well endure.

For them that cannot hear.
Put into their ears good dried Suet.

A Sovereign Water good for many Cures and the health of Bodies.
Take a gallon of good Gascoign wine, White or Claret, then take Ginger,
Galingall, Cardomon, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Annise seeds, Fennel
seeds, Carraway seeds, of each of them three drachms, then take Sage, Mints,
red Rose leaves, Thyme, Pellitorie, Rosemary, wild Thyme, wild Majoram; Organy,
Pennymontain, Pennyroyall, Cammomile, Lavender, Avans of each of them a
handful, then beat the Spices small, and the herbs, and put all into the wine,
and let it stand for the space of twelve hours, stirring it diverse times: Then
still it in a Limbeck, and keep the first water by it self, for it is best,
then will there come a second water which is good, but not so good as the
first; The Virtues of this Water be these, It comfort the Spirit vital, and
preserves greatly the Spirit vital, and preserves greatly the youth of man,
and helps all inward diseases coming of cold, and against shaking of the
Palsy, it cures the contract of Sinnews, and helps the conception of the
barren, it kills the Worms in the Belly, it kills the Gout, it helps
Tooth ach, it comfort the stomach very much, it cures a cold Dropsy, it
breaks the stone in the back, and in the reins of the back, it cures the
Canker, it helps shortly the stinking Breath, and whosoever uses this water
often, it preserves them in good liking; This Water will be the better if it
stand in the Sun all the Summer, and you must draw of the first water but a
pint, and of the second as far as it will run, until the whole gallon of
Wine and Herbs be all done out, but the last water is very small, and not half
so good as the first; if you do draw above a pint of the best water, you must
have of all things more, as is before said.

To stanch the bleeding of a Wound.
Take a Hounds turd, and lay that on a hot coal, and bind it thereto, and that
shall stanch bleeding, or else bruise a long Worm, and make powder of it, and
cast it on the wound, or take the ear of a Hare, and make powder thereof, and
cast that on the wound, and that will stanch bleeding.

For spitting of Blood, after a Fall or Bruise.
Take Bittanie, Vervain, Nosebled, and five leaved grass, of each alike, and
stamp them in a Mortar, and wring out the juice of them, and put to the juice
as much Goats milk, and let them sees together, and let him that is hurt
drink of that liquor seven days together, till the waxing of the Moon, and
let him drink also Osmorie and Cumferie with stale Ale, and he shall be whole.

For to heal him that spitteth Blood.
Take the juice of Bittanie and temper that with good Milk, and give the sick
to drink four days, and he shall be whole.

For to know whether he that has the Flux shall live or die.
Take a penny weight of Trefoyle seed, and give it him to drink in Wine or
water, and do this three days, and if it cease, he shall live, with the help
of Medicine, if not, he shall die.

For to stanch the bleeding of a Vein.
Take Rue and sees it in water, and after stamp it in a Mortar, and lay it on
the Vein, then take Lambs wool that was never washed, and lay that thereon,
and that shall stanch bleeding.

For a Vein that is evil smitten.
Take Beans, and peel away the lack, and sees them well in Vinegar, and lay
them on the Vein hot in manner of a Plaster.

For one that pisseth Blood.
Take and sees Garlic in water, till the third part be wasted away, let him
drink of the water, and he shall be whole.

For a Woman traveling with child.
Take and give her Titany to drink in the morning, and she shall be delivered
without peril, or else give her Hysop with water that is hot, and she shall be
delivered of the child although the child be dead and rotten, and anon when
she is delivered give her the same without Wine, or bind the herb Argentine
to her nostrils, and she shall be soon delivered, or else Polipodie and stamp
it, and lay that on the woman's foot in manner of a Plaster, and she shall be
delivered quick or dead, or else give her Savorie with hot water, and she
shall be delivered.

For one that has surfeited, and cannot digest.
Take the bottom of a wheaten loaf, and tossed it at the fire, till that be
very brown and hard, and then take a good quantity of Aqua vitae, and put that
upon the same so tosted, and put that in a single linen cloth, and lay that at
the breast of the Patient all night, and with the help of God he shall recover,
and he shall vomit or purge soon after.

A Water to comfort weak eyes, and to preserve the sight.
Take a gallon and a half of old wheat fair and clean picked from all manner of
soil, and then still it in an ordinary still with a soft fire, and the water
that comes of it must be put in a glass, then take half a pound of white Sugar Candy, and bruise it in a mortar to powder, and after three days when the
water has been in a glass, then put in the powder Candie, then take an ounce
of Lapis Stewsie prepared, and put it into the glass to the rest of the
stuff, then take an ounce of Camphire, and break it between your fingers
small, and put it into the glass, then stop the glass close, and the longer
it stands, the better it will be.

For tender Eyes, or for Children.
Take a little piece of white Sugar Candy, as much as a Chestnut, and put it
into three or four spoonfulls of Whitewine to steep, then take it out again,
and dry it, and when it is dry bruise it in a clean Mortar that must taste of
no spice, then put it upon a piece of whitepaper, and so hold it to the fire
that it may be through dry, and then fearce it through a little sieve.

For hot Eyes and red.
Take slugs, such as when you touch them will turn like the pummel of swords, a
dozen or sixteen, shake them first in a clean cloth, and then in another, and
not wash them, then stamp them, and put three or four spoonfuls of Ale to them,
and strain it through a dry cloth, and give it the party morning and evening,
first and last.

For Corns.
Take fair water half a pint, Mercury sublimate, a penniworth, Alum as much
as a Bean, boil all these together in a glass Still, till a spoonful be
wasted, and always warm it when you use it, this water is also good for any
Itch, Tetter, Ringworm, or Wart.

A Searcloth for a Sore or Sprain, or any Swelling.
Take Vervain seven ounces, of Siros seven ounces, of Camphire three drachms,
of oil of Roses ten ounces, let the Wax and the Oil boil till the Wax be
melted, then put in your Siros tinely beaten, stirring it^ one the fire till it
look brown; Then put in the Camphire finely beaten, and let it boil two or
three walmes, and then dip in your cloths.

A Poultess for a Swelling.
Take a good handful of Violet leaves, and as much Groundsel, half a handful
of Mallows, and half a handful of Chickweed, cut all these with a knife, and so
sees them well in conduit water, and and thicken it with Barlie meal, being
finely sifted, and so roll it sure, and lay it to the swelled place, and shift
it twice a day.

To make a strong Water good for a Canker, or any old Sore, or to eat any lump
of flesh that grows.
Take of Celandine a handful, of red Sage a handful, and of Woodbind leaves a
handful, shred all these together very small, and steep them in a quart of
white Wine, and a pint of Water, letting it stand all night, and on the morrow
strain it, and put therein of Borex nine pennyworth, of Camphire nine
pennyworth, and of Mercury four pennyworth, and set them on a soft fire,
boiling softly for the space of an hour, and when you will use it warm a little
of it, dip it in a cloth, and lay it to the Sore, or in any Cotton.

To heal any Bruise, Sore, or Swelling.
Take two pound of Wax, and two pound of Rosin, and two pound and a half of
Butter, and four spoonfuls of Flower, and two good spoonfuls of Honey, put in
your Wax, Rosin, and your Butter altogether, boil all these together and
clarify it, then put in two ounces of Carmerick, and when it has thus boiled
a quarter of an hour, put a little water in a dish, and put it in, and let it
stand till it be cold, and when you will use it, you may melt it on a soft
fire, and put in your clothes and make Searcloth, and you may spread it
plaisterwise to heal any Wound.

A Medicine for any Wound old or new.
Take a pint of Sallade oil, and four ounces of Bees Wax, and two ounces of
Stone-pitch, and two ounces of Rosin, and two ounces of Venice Turpentine, and
one pennyworth of Frankincense, and a handful of Rosemary tops, and a handful
of Tutson leaves, and a handful of Plantain leaves; these Herbs must be
stamped, and the juice of them put to the things aforesaid, and let them boil
altogether about a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, this being done, put it
into an earthen pot, and when it is cold you may use it as you have occasion,
and keep it two year a most excellent Medicine.

A Medicine for a Wen.
Take black Soap, and unquencht Lime, of each a like quantity, and beat them
very small together, and spread it on a woollen cloth, and lay it on the Wen,
and it will consume it away.

For breaking out of Childrens heads.
Take of white Wine, and sweet Butter, a like, and boil them together till it
come to a Salve, and so anoint the head therewith.

For to mundifie, and gently to cleanse Ulcers, and to break new flesh.
Take Rosin eight ounces, Colophonia four ounces, Era, and Olia, ana. one
pound, Adipis ovini, Gum Amoniaci, Opoponaci, ana. one ounce, fine Eruginis
raris, boil your Wax, Colophony, and Rosin, with the Oil together, then strain
the Gums, being first dissolved in Vinegar, and boil it with a gentle fire,
then take it off, and put in your Verdigreece, and fine powder, and use it
according to Art.

A Fomentation.
Take the liquour wherein Neats feet have been boiled, with Butter, and new
Milk, and use it in manner of a Fomentation.

For the falling Sickness, or Convulsions.
Take the dung of a Peacock, make it into powder, and give so much of it to the
Patient as will lie upon a shilling, in Succory water fasting.

For a Tetter, proceeding of a salt humor, in the Breast and Paps.
Anoint the sore place with Tanners Owse.

For the bloody Flux.
Take the bone of a Gammon of Bacon, and set it up an end in the middle of a
Charcoal fire, and let it burn till it looks like Chalk, and that it will burn
no longer, then powder it, and give the powder thereof unto the sick.

A Plaster for all manner of Bruises.
Take one pound of mede Wax, and a quartern of Pitch, half a quartern of
Galbanum, and one pound of Sheeps Tallow, shred them, and sees them softly,
and put them to a little white Wine, or good Vinegar, and take of Frankincense,
and Mastick, of each half an ounce in powder, and put it to, and boil them
altogether, and still them till it be well relented, and spread this salve upon
a mighty Canvas that will overspread the Sore, and lay it thereon hot till it
be whole.

To make an Ointment, called Flos Unguentorum.
Take Rosin, Perrosin, and half a pound of Virgin Wax, Frankincense a quarter
of a pound, of Mastick half an ounce, of Sheeps Tallow a quarter of a pound, of
Camphire two drachms, melt that that is to melt, and powder that that is to
powder, and boil it over the fire, and strain it through a cloth into a pottle
of white Wine, and boil it altogether, and then let it cool a little, and then
put thereto a quartern of Turpentine, and stir all well together till it be
cold, and keep it well: This Ointment is good for Sores old and new; it
suffers no corruption in the Wound, nor no evil flesh to be gendered in it;
and it is good for headache, and for all manner of Imposthumes in the head, and
for wind in the brain, and for Imposthumes in the body, and for boiling ears
and cheeks, and for sauce-flegm in the face, and for Sinews that be knit, or
stiff, or sprung with travall; it does draw out a Thorn, or Iron, in what
place soever it be, and it is good for biting or stinging of venomous Beasts;
it rotteh and heals all manner of Botches without, and it is good for a
Fester, and Canker, and Noli me Tangere, and it draws out all manner of aching
of the Liver, and of the Spleen, and of the Mervis, and it is good for aching
and swelling of many Members, and for all Members, and it cease the Flux of
Menstrua, and of Emeroides, and it is a special thing to make a sumed cloth to
heal all manne of Sores, and it searches farthest inward of any Ointment.

An Ointment for all sort of Aches.
Take Bettany, Cammomil, Celendine, Rosemary, and Rue, of each of them a
handful, wash the Herbs and press out the water, and then chop, or stamp them
very small, and then take fresh Butter unwashed and unsalted a quart, and sees
it until half be wasted, and clarified, then scum it clean, and put in of oil
Olive one ounce, a piece of Virgins Wax for to harden the Ointment in the
summer time, and if you make it in the Winter, put into your Ointment a little
quantity of Footsenne instead of the Virgins Wax.

An excellent Syrup to purge.
Take Sena Alexandrina one pound, Polipodium of the Oak four ounces,
Sarsaparilla two ounces, Damask Prunes four ounces, Ginger seven drachms,
Anniseseeds one ounce, Cumminseeed half an ounce, Carraway seeds half an ounce,
Cinnomon ten drachms, Aristolochia rotunda, Peonia, of each five drachms,
Rubarb one ounce, Agarick six drachms, I amarisk two handfulls, Boil all these
in a gallon of fair water unto a pottle, and when the liquor is boiled half
away, strain it forth, and then put in your Rubarb and Agarick, in a clean thin
handkercher, and tie it up close, and put it into the said liquor and then put
in two pound of fine Sugar, and boil it to the height of a Sirrup, and take of
it the quantity of six spoonfulls or more, or less as you find it works in
you.

To make drink for all kind of Surfets.
Take a quart of Aqua, or small Aqua vitae, and put in that a good handful of
Couslip flours, Sage flours a good handful, and of Rosemary flours a handful,
sweet Majoram a little, Pellitorie of the wall, a little Bittanie and Balm of
each a pretty handful, Cinnamon half an ounce, Nutmegs a quarter of an ounce,
Fennelseed, Annise seed, Colliander seed, Carraway seed, Gromel seed, Juniper
berries, of each a dram, bruise your spices and seeds, and put them into your
Aqua or Aqua vitae, with your herbs together, and put to that three quarters
of a pound of very fine Sugar, stir them together, and put them in a glass,
and let it stand nine days in the Sun, and let it be stirred every day, it is
to be made in May, steeped in a wide mouthed glass, and strained out into a
narrow mouthed glass.

A Medicine for the Reins of the Back.
Take Housleek, and stamp, and strain it, then dip a fine linen cloth into it,
and lay it to the reins of the back, and that will heal it.

A Medicine for the Ache in the Back.
Take Egrimonie, and Mugwort, both leaves and roots, and stamp it with old
Bores grease, and temper it with Honey and Eysell, and lay it to the back.

For a Stitch.
Take Roses, and Cammomile, of each a handful, and oil of Roses, and oil of
Cammomile, of both together a saucerfull, and a quantity of Barlie flower, boil
all these together in milk, and then take a linen bag, and put it therein, and
lay the plaster as hot as may be suffered where the stitch is.

To make a Salve for Wounds that be cankered, and do Burn.
Take the Juice of Smallage, of Morrels of Waberd, of each alike, then take the
white of Eggs, and mingle them together, and put thereto a little Wheat flower,
and stir them together till it be thick, but let it come nigh no fire but all
cold, let it be laid on raw to the sore, and it shall cleanse the wound.

A Medicine for Bone-ach.
Take Brooklime, and Smallage, and Daises, with fresh Sheeps tallow, and fry
them together, and make thereof a Plaster, and lay it to the sore, all hot.

For Sinews that are shrunk.
Take young Swallows out of the nest, a dozen or sixteen, and Rosemarie,
Lavender, and rotten Strawberie leaves, strings and all, of each a handful,
after the quantity of the Swallows, the feathers, guts and all, bray them in a
mortar, and fry all them together, with May Butter, not too much, then put it
into an earthen pot, and stop it close nine days, then fry it again with May
Butter, and fry it well, and strain it well, when you shall use it chase it
against the fire.

A Water for the biting of a mad Dog.
Take Scabios, Matsiline, Yarrough, Nightshade, wild Sage, the leaves of white
Lillies, of each a like quantity, and still them in a common still, and give
the quantity of three or four spoonfulls of the Water mingled with half a
spoonful of Triacle, to any man or beast that is bitten, within three days
after the biting, and for lack of the water, take the juice of these Herbs
mingled with Triacle, it will keep the sore from rankling; take Dittanie,
Egrimonie, and rustie Bacon, and beat them fine together, and lay it unto the
wound, and it will keep it from rankling.

To kill a Fellon.
Take red Sage, white Soap and bruise them, and lay it to the Fellon, and that
will kill it,

To break a Felon.
Take the grounds of Ale, and as much Vinegar, the crumbs of leavened bread,
and a little Honey and boil them altogether till they be thick, and lay that
hot to the joint where the Felon is, and that will heal it.

Doctor Stevens Sovereign Water.
Take a gallon of good Gascoign wine, then take ^^^ger, Galingal, Cancel,
Nutmegs, grains, Gloves, Annise seeds, Carraway seeds, of each a dram, then
take Sage, Mints, red Roses, Thyme, Pellitorie, Rosemary, wild Thyme,
Cammomile, Lavender, of each one handful; then bray both the Spices and the
herbs, and put them all into the Wine, and let them stand for twelve hours,
diverse times stirring them, then still that in a Limbeck, but keep that which
you still first by it self, for that is the best, but the other is good also,
but not so good as the first.

The Virtues of this Water are these, It comfort the spirits Vital, and
helps the inward diseases which come of cold, and the shaking of the Palsy,
that dureth the contraction of sinnews, and helps the conception of women
that be barren, it kills worms in the body, it cures the cold cough, it
helps the toothach, it comfort the stomach, it cures the cold Dropsy, it
helps the stone, it cures shortly the stinking breath, and who so uses this
water enough, but not too much, it preserves him in good liking making him
young.

Doctor Willoughbies Water.
Take Galingal, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Melilot, Cardamome, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each a dram, and of the juice of Celendine half a pint, and mingle all these
made in powder with the said juice, and with a pint of good Aqua vitae, and
three pints of good white Wine, and put all these together in a still of
glass, and let it stand so all night, and on the morrow still it with an easy
fire as may be.

The Virtue is of secret nature, it dissolveth the swelling of the Lungs
without any grievance, and the same Lungs being wounded, or perished, it
helps and comfort, and it suffers not the blood to putrify, he shall
never need to be let blood that uses this Water, and it suffers not the
heart to be burnt, nor melancholy or phlegm to have dominion above Nature, it
also expels the Rheum, and purifieth the stomach, it preserves the visage,
and the memory, and destroys the Palsy, and if this water be given to a man
or woman laboring toward death, one spoonful relieveth: in the Summer time,
use once a week fasting the quantity of one spoonful, and in Winter two
spoonfuls.

A Medicine for them that have a pain after their child bed.
Take Tar and fresh Barrows grease, and boil it together, then take Pigeons
dung, and fry it in fresh grease, and put it in a bag.

For the drink, Take a pint of Malmsey and boil it, and put Bay berries in it,
and Sugar, the Bay berries must be of the whitest, and put therein some Sanders.

Take some fair water, and set it over the fire, and put some ground Malt in
it, when they use these things they must keep their bed.

For Running of the Reins.
Take Venice Turpentine rolled in Sugar and Rosewater, swallow it in pretty
rouls, and put a piece of Scarlet warm to your back.

For Codds that be swollen.
Stamp Rue, and lay thereto.

To draw an Arrow head, or other Iron out of a Wound.
Take the juice of Valerian, in the which you shall wet a Tent, and put it into
the wound, and lay the same Herb stamped upon it, then your band or binding as
appertains, and by this means you shall draw out the Iron, and after heal
the wound as it requires.

A Plaster for a green Wound.
Take Flower and Milk, and sees them together till it be thick, then take the
white of an Egg, and beat them together, and lay it to the Wound, and that will
keep it from rankling.

For a Laske.
Take an Egg, and Aqua vitae, and boil it with the Egg till it be dry; the^
take Cinnamon and Sugar, and eat it with the Egg.

For him that has a bunch or knot in his head, or that has his head swollen
with a fall.
Take one ounce of Bay Salt, raw Honey three ounces, Turpentine two ounces,
intermingle all this well upon the fire, then lay it abroad upon a linen
cloth, and thereof make a plaster, the which you shall lay hot to his head,
and it will altogether assuage the swelling, and heal it perfectly.

Against the biting ^f any venomous Beast.
As soon as the person feels himself bit with any venomous beast, or at
least, as soon as is possible, let him take green leaves of a Fig Tree, and
press the milk of them three or four times into the Wound: and for this also
serves Mustardseed mingled with Vinegar.

A perfect Remedy for him that is sore wounded with any Sword or Staff.
Take Taxus barbatus and stamp it, and take the juice of it, and if the Wound
bleed, wipe it and make it clean, washing it with white Wine or water, then lay
the said juice upon the Wound, and the herb, whereof you take the juice, upon
it, then make your band, and let it abide on a whole day, and you shall see a
wonderful effect.

A Bag to smell unto for Melancholy, or to cause one to sleep.
Take dry Rose leaves, keep them close in a glass which will keep them sweet,
then take powder of Mints, powder of Cloves in a gross powder, and put the
same to the Rose leaves, then put all these together in a bag, and take that to
bed with you, and it will cause you to sleep, and it is good to smell unto at
other times.

For spitting of Blood.
Take the juice of Bettony tempered with Goats Milk, and drink thereof three
or four mornings together.

An Ointment for all Sores, Cuts, Swellings and Heat.
Take a good quantity of Smallage, and Mallows, and put thereto two pound of
Bores grease, one pound of Butter, and oil of Neats foot a quantity, stamp
them well together, then fry them, and strain them into an earthen pot, and
keep it for your use.

A Salve for a new Hurt.
Take the whitest Virgins Wax you can get, and melt it in a pan, then put in a
quantity of Butter, and Honey, and sees them together, then strain them into a
dish of fair water, and work it in your hands, and make it in a round ball, and
so keep it, and when you will use it, work some of it between your hands, and
strike it upon a cloth, and lay it upon the Sore, and it will draw it and heal
it.

Against the biting of a mad Dog, and the rage or madness that follows a man
after he is bitten.
Take the Blossoms or Flowers of wild Thistles dried in the shade, and beaten
to powder, give him to drink of that powder in white Wine half a Walnut shell
full, and in thrice taking it, he shall be healed.

Against the grief in the Lungs, and spitting of Blood.
Take the Herb, called of the Apothecary Vngula Caballina, in English
Coltsfoot, incorporate it well with the Lard of a Hog chopped, and a new laid
Egg, boil it together in a pan, and give it the Patient to eat, doing this
nine mornings, you shall see a mavelous thing, this is also good to make a
man fat.

Against spitting of Blood by reason of some vein broken in the Breast.
Take Mise-dung beaten into powder as much as will lie upon a groat, and put it
in half a glasse-ful of the juice of Plantam with a little Sugar, and so give
the Patient to drink thereof in the morning before breakfast, and at night
before he go to bed, continuing the same, it will make him whole and sound.

For to cleanse the Head.
Take Pellitory of Spain, and chew the roots three days a good quantity, and
it will purge the head, and do away the ach, and Fasten the teeth in the
gummes.

A good Remedy against the Plurisie.
Open a white Loaf in the middle new baked, and spread it well with Triacle on
both the halfes on the crown side, and heat it at the fire, then lay one of the
halfes on the place of the disease, and the other half on the other side of the
body directly against it, and so bind them, that they loose not no^ stir,
leaving them so a day and a night, or until the Imposthume break, which I have
sometimes seen in two hours or less, than take away the bread, and
immediately the Patient will begin to spit and void the putrefaction of the
Imposthume, and after he has slept a little, ye shall give him meat, and with
the help of God he shall shortly heal.

For a Pin or Web in the Eye.
Take two or three Lice out of ones head, and put them alive into the eye that
is greived, and so close it up, and most assuredly the Lice will suck out the
Web in the eye, and will cure it, and come forth without any hurt.

A Remedy to be used in a Fit of the Stone, when the water stops.
Take the fresh shells of Snails, the newest will look of a reddish color, and
are best, take out the Snails, and dry the shells with a moderate heat in an
oven after the bread is drawn; likewise take Bees and dry them so, and beat
them severally into powder, then take twice so much of the Bees powder as the
Snails, and mix them well together, keep it close covered in a glass, and when
you use it, take as much of this powder as will lie upon a sixpence, and put it
into a quarter of a pint of the stilled water of Bean ^ ures, and drink it
fasting, or upon an empty stomach, and eat nor drink nothing for two or three
hours after.

This is good to cause the party to make urine, and bring away the gravel or
stone that causes the stopping, and has done very much good.

A Syrup for the pain in the stomach.
Take two good handfuls of young Rue, boil it in a quart of good white Wine
Vinegar till it be half consumed, so soon as it is thorough cold strain it, and
put to every pint of the liquor a pound and a quarter of loaf-Sugar, and boil
it till it come to a Syrup, when you use it, take a good spoonful of this in
the morning fasting, and eat nor drink nothing for two or three hours after,
it is good for pain in the stomach that proceeds of windy vapors, and is
excellent good for the Lungs, and obstructions of the breast.

Receipts for Bruises, approved by the Lady of Arundell.
Take black Jet, beat it to powder, and let the Patient drink it every morning
in beer till he be well.

Another for the same.
Take the sprigs of Oak trees, and put them in paper, roast them, and break
them, and drink as much of the powder as will lie upon a sixpence every
morning, until the Patient be well.

To cause easy Labor.
Take ten or twelve days before her looking six ounces of brown Sugar Candy
beaten to powder, a quarter of a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, two ounces
of Dates unstoned sliced, half an ounce of Annise-seeds bruised, a quarter of
an ounce of Cowslip Flowers, one dram of Rosemary flowers, put these in a
fine lawn bag with a flint stone, that it may sink into a pottle of white Wine,
let it steep four and twenty hours, and after take of it, in the morning, and
at four in the afternoon, and in the evening, the quantity of a wine glass
full.

A Cordial for the Sea.
Take one ounce of Syrup of Clove-Gill flowers, one dram of Confectio
alebernis, one ounce and a half of Borrage water, and the like of Mint water,
one ounce of Mr. Mountfords water, and as much of Cinnamon water, temper all
these together in a Cordial, and take a spoonful at a time when you are at
Sea.

A Plaster to strengthen the Back.
Take eight yolks of Eggs new laid, one ounce of I rankincense beaten into fine
powder, mingle them well together, put in as much Barley flower as will make it
thick for a plaster, spread it on leather, lay it to the small of the back,
letting it lie nine hours, use four plasters one after another, you must slit
the (...) in the midst, so as it may not lie (...) the b^ck bone.

A present Remedy for a woman with child, that has taken harm by fall, or
fright, or any mischance.
To stay the Child and strengthen it, take one ounce of Pickerell jaws, fine
beaten and searsed, of Dates stones, and Bole armoniack, of each one ounce, of
Sanguis draconis half an ounce, give of these, being well searsed and mingled
together, a French Crown weight in Muskadine or Malmsey, and let the woman keep
her very warm.

For a weak Back.
Take of red Lead half a pound, of white Lead half a pound, boil these in three
pints of Sallet oil in a Pipkin, stirring them continually with a piece of
Iron, until it be of a gray color, then roll it up in rouls and keep it for
your use.

Oil of Saint John's Wort.
Take a quart of Sallet oil, put thereto a quart of flour of S. John's wort
well picked, let them lie therein all the year till the seeds be ripe, the
glass must be kept warm, either in the Sun, or in water all the Summer until
the seeds be ripe; then put in a quart of S. John's Wort seeds whole, and so let
it stand twelve hours, then you must sees the oil eight hours, the glass
being kept open, and the water in the pot full as high as the oil is of height
in the glass, then when it is cold strain it, that the seeds may remain, not
in the oil, and then put up the oil for your use.

A green Salve for an old Sore.
Take a handful of Groundsell, as much Housleek, of Marigold leaves a
handful, pick and wipe these Herbs clean, but wash them not, then beat all
these Herbs in a wooden boul, as small as is possible, then strein out all the
juice, and put in a quantity of Hogs grease, as much as two eggs, beat all
these together again, and then put in the juice again, and put in 10 Eggs,
yolks and whites, and five spoonfuls of English honey, and as much wheat
flower, as will make all this as thick as a salve, and so stir it very well
together, and put it close up in a pot, that it take no air, and so keep it
for your use.

A most Excellent powder for the Colic and Stone.
You must take it morning and evening before you go to bed, Sperma ceti one
ounce and half, Cloves and Mace one quarter of an ounce, Annise seeds and
^^^stone of each two ounces, Cinnamon and small Pepper, of each one quarter of
an ounce, Date stones a quarter of an ounce, Liquorice, Fennel, Red Sage, Bay
berries, of each three quarters of an ounce, Acornes one quarter and half of an
ounce, Lilly roots two drachms, the white of Oyster shells burned in the fire
one quarter of an ounce; beat all these into fine powder, and drink as much
thereof in Ale or Beer, as will lie on a sixpence, and fast one hour or two
after it: If the part^e be so^e grieved, take one handful of Parsely, and
sees it in Ale until half be s^d away, with twenty or thirty Prunes therein
streined, and put thereto two spoonfulls of this powder, and drink it mornings
and evenings somewhat warm.

A present Remedy for the Running of the Reins.
Take an ounce of Nutmegs, half an ounce of Mastick, then slice the Nutmegs,
and put them in steep in Rose Vinegar all one night, then lay them in a dish to
dry before the fire, then take the Mastick and lay it in Papers, and beat it
with a hammer very small and put a little Corral well beaten unto it, and as
much Ambergreece, then mingle these things together with Sugar, and make it
pleasant to eat, and so take a good quantity morning and evening.

A Salve for a green Wound.
Take two handfuls of Water Dittanie, two handfuls of Rosemary shred very
small, a quarter of a pint of Turpentine, half a pound of yellow Wax, a quart
of Sallet oil, half a pint of white Wine, boil all these together, while the
white Wine be quite consumed, then it will be green, and come to the height of
a Salve.

A proved Medicine for a burning or scalding by lightning or otherwise.
Take Hogs grease, or Sheeps Treacles, and Alehoose, beat these very well
together, then take more Hogs grease, and boil it to a Salve.

To use it.
Anoint the place grieved with this ointment, and then lay upon the sore so
anointed Colewort leaves, which must be boiled very soft in water, and the
strings made smooth, with beating them with a Pestel.

A Powder for the green Sickness, approved with very good success upon many.
Take of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, of each one quarter of an ounce, beat them
severally, and then altogether very well, fine Sugar very small beaten one
quarter of a pound, and then mix and beat them all four together, Pearl the
fixed part of half an ounce very finely beaten, mingle it with the rest, and
beat them altogether again, the filing of Steel or Iron one ounce and a
quarter, sift it very fine, and mingle it with the rest, but if so small a
quantity will not serve, add a quarter more of the metal, let it be sifted
before you weigh it, but if all this will not serve the turn, put in a little
Rubarb, or a little Alexakatrina.

The manner of using this powder.
In the morning when you rise take half a spoonful of it, take as much at four
a clock in the afternoon, and as much when you go to bed, walk or stir much
after the first takings of it, I mean every morning and evening, fast one hour
after the taking of it, or more, and then eat some sugar sops or thin broth.

The Patients Diet.
She must forbear Oatmeal in broth or any other thing, Cheese, Eggs, Custards,
or any stopping meat. Take care that this be not given to any woman that has
conceived, or is with child.

A Drink to stanch blood inwardly.
Take the juice of one handful of Shepherds purse, of Parsley, and
Five-finger, of each as much, take five flips of Egrimony, strain all these
juyces into the milk of a red Cow, and drink thereof early and late warm.

A Powder to keep the Teeth clean, and from Worm-eaten.
Take Rosemary burned to ashes, Cuttles Bone, Hartshorn burned to powder, Sal
gemmae twelve penny weight, the flowers of Pomegranets, White Coral, of each
six penny weight, make all these in powder, and with a little Rosewater and a
Sage leaf rub the Teeth.

A Salve to heal all manner of Sores and Cuts.
Take one pint of Turpentine, one pint of Oil olive, a quarter of a pint of
running water, nine branches of Rosemary, one ounce of unwrought Wax, two
ounces of Roset, sees all these together in a little pan over the fire, let it
sees until there arise a little white scum upon it, then stir it with a
stick, suffering it to boil until one quarter be consumed, then take it from
the fire, strain it through a course cloth, but it must be done quickly after
it be taken from the fire for cooling, after you have strained it into an
earthen pot, let it cool, and keep it for your use.

To make Oil of Sage good for the grief in any joint, or for any ach.
Take Sage and Parsley, sees them in oil Olive, till it be thick and green.

A Medicine to purge and amend the Heart, Stomach, Spleen, Liver, Lungs, and
Brain.
Take Alexander, Watercresses, young Mallows, Borage, and Fennel roots pared,
Mercury, Hearts tongue, and Clarie, and make of these Pottage.

To drive infectious Diseases from the Heart.
Take of Mithridate, and Centurie, of each two ounces, eight spoonfuls of
Dragon water, one pint of White wine, seven spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, boil
altogether a little, strain it, then set it on the fire again a little while,
and drink of it morning and evening.

For the Toothache.
Take Pepper, and Grains, of each one ounce, bruise them, and compound them
with the water of the diseased, and make it of a good thickness, and lay it
outward on the cheek, against the place grieved, and it will help it for ever
after.

Another.
Take dried Sage, make powder of it burnt Alum, Bay Salt dried make all in
fine powder, and lay it to the tooth where the pain is, and also rub the gums
with it

For the Strangullion or the Stone.
Take the inner rind of a young ash, between two or three years of growth, dry
it to powder, and drink of it as much at once, as will lie on a sixpence in
Ale or White wine, and it will bring present remedy: The party must be kept
warm two hours after it.

For the Stone.
Take the stone that grows within the gall of an Ox, grate it, and drink of
it in White wine, as much as will lie upon a sixpence at once, for want of
white wine make a posset of Ale, and clarify the Ale from the curd, then boil
one handful of Pellitorie therein, and drink of the powder with it.

For the Black Jaundies.
Take earthen Worms, wash them in white Wine then dry them, and beat them into
powder, and put to a little Saffron, and drink it in beer.

A drawing Salve for an old Sore.
Take Rosin half a pound beaten to powder, Sheeps tallow, one quarter of a
pound, melt them together, and pour them into a Basin of water, and when they
begin to cool a little, work them well with your hands in the water, and out of
the water, drawing of it up and down the space of one hour till it be very
white, then make it up in rouls, and reserve it to strike thin Plasters upon
old Sores.

A Water to wash Sores withal.
Take Wormwood, Sage, Plantain leaves, of each one handful, Alum two ounces,
Honey two sawcers full, boil all these together in three pints of water, till
half be sod away, then strain it, and reserve that liquor to wash the sore
withal.

A Medicine to cure the Garget in the Throat.
Take a pint of May butter, and put it on the fire in a postnet, and put into
it of the inner bark of Elder one good handful, and some Daisie roots, sees it
to half the quantity, and strain it, and so keep it cool, take this Ointment,
and anoint your throat, then take the ointment, and strike a long plaster
with it very thick of the Ointment, then strike upon the Ointment the best Jane
Triacle, and upon that strew gross Pepper very thick, strike it on with a
knife, warm the plaster, and bind it round your throat t^ your ears, renew it
once a day with the Ointment, and the Triacle and Pepper, and lay it on again;
Before you use this Ointment, scour the mouth and throat with the powder of
Roch Allom burned, mix it with the powder of Madder or Pepper.

For the Hearing.
Take one Onyon, take the core out of it, fill it with Pepper, slice it in the
midst, being first wrapped in Paper, and roasted in the Embers, lay it to each ear.

For a dead Child in a Woman's Body.
Take the juice of Hysop, temper it in warm water, and give it to the Woman to
drink.

For a Woman that has her Flowers too much.
Take a Hares foot, and burn it, make powder of it, and let her drink it with
stale Ale.

A Medicine for the Gout.
Take Tetberrie roots, and wash and scrape them clean, and slice them thin,
then take the grease of a Barrow hog, the quantity of either alike, then take
an earthen pot, then lay a lane of grease in the bottom, then a lane of Roots,
then the grease again, and so Roots and grease till the pot be full, then stop
the pot very close, and set it in a dunghill one and twenty days, then beat it
altogether in a boul, then boil it a good while, then strain it, and put in a
penniworth of Aqua vitae, then anoint the place grieved, very warm against the
fire.

A Diet drink for the running Gout, ach in the joints, and for all infections.
Set seven quarts of Water on the fire, and when it boileth, put therein four
ounces of Sarsaparilla bruised, and let it boil two hours very softly, close
stopped, or covered, then put in four ounces of Seen, three ounces of Liquorice
bruised, of St^^ados, Hermodactill, Epithymum, and of Cammomile flours, of
every one half an ounce, and so boil all these two hours very softly, then
strain it, and keep it in a close vessel close stopped: when it is cold, then
boil again all the aforesaid Ingredients in seven quarts of Water, four hours
with a soft fire close covered, then strain it, and keep it as the other by it
self, and take of the first a good draught one hour before you arise in the
morning, and a draught at the beginning of dinner, and another at supper, and
going to bed, and and at all other times, drink of the latter when you lift,
and eat no meat but dry roasted Mutton, Capon, Rabbet, without Salt, and not
basted, but to your Breakfast, a poched Egg, no bread but Biscuit, or dried
crust, and at night Raisins of the Sun, and biscuit Bread, drink no other drink
but this.

A Plaster to heal any Sore.
Take of Sage, Herb-grace, of each a like quantity, Ribwort, Plantain, and
Dasie roots, more then half so much of each of them as of the other, with Wax,
fresh grease, and Rosin, make it a salve, if the flesh grow proud, then put
always upon the plaster, before you lay it to the sore, burnt Alum, and it
will correct the flesh.

To cause a woman to have her Sickness.
Take Egrimonie, Motherwort, Avens, and Parsley, shred them small with Oatmeal,
make Pottage of them with Pork, let her eat the Pottage, but not the Pork.

For the Stone.
Take the green Weed of the Sea, which is brought with Oysters, wash it, and
dry it to powder, drink it with Malmsey fasting.

To kill Worms.
Take Alexakatrina two ounces, let it stand in a quart of Malmsie eight hours,
drink of it morning and evening.

For a hot Rheum in the Head.
Take Rosewater, Vinegar, and Sallet Oil, mix them well together, and lay it
to the head warm.

For a Lask.
Take the nether jaw of a Pike, sees it to powder and drink it.

For an Itch or dry scurs of the Body.
Take Elecampane roots or leaves, stamp them and fry them with fresh grease,
strain it into a dish, and anoint the Patient.

For one that is bruised with a Fall.
Take Horse dung, and Sheeps suet, boil them together, and apply it to the same
place, being laid upon a cloth.

For the Emeroids.
Take Hops and Vinegar, fry them together, and put it into a little bag, and
lay it as hot as it may be endured to the Fundament, diverse bags one after
another, and let one continue at it.

For one that is burned with Gunpowder, or otherwise.
Take one handful of Groundsel, twelve heads of Housleek, one pint of
Goosedung, as much Chickens dung, of the newest that may be gotten, stamp the
Herbs as small as you can, then put the dung into a mortar, temper them
together with a pottle of Bores grease, labor them together half an hour, and
strain it through a Canvas bag with a cleft stick into an earthen pan, and use
it when need requires, it will last two year.

To heal a Prick with a Nail or a Thorn.
Take two handfuls of Salendine, as much Orpen, cut it small, and boil it with
oil Olive, and unwrought Wax, then strain it and use it.

To stop the Bleeding of a Cut or Wound.
Take Hop, stamp it, and put it into the wound, if hop will not do it, then
put to it Vinegar with the Hop.

For a Scald.
Take the leaves of ground ^^ie, three handfuls, Housleek one handful, wash
them, and stamp them in a stone mortar very small, and as you stamp them, put
in one pint of Cream by little and little, then strain it, and put it in a pot
with a feather, take of this and anoint the scalded place, and then wet a
linen cloth in the same Ointment, and lay it on the place, and over that roll
other clothes.

An Ointment for a Tetter.
Take Sal armoniack one ounce, beat it into fine powder, then mix it with Soap,
and fresh Grease, of each two ounces, make an Ointment, and anoint the place.

For the singing in the Head.
Take one Onyon, cut out the core, and fill that place with the powder of
Cummin, and the juice of Rue, set on the top again, and roast the Onyon in
embers, then put away the outside, and put in a cloth, wring out the Juice,
take black Woll and dip it in, put this in thine c^re where the singing is, and
if it be on both sides, then serve one after another.

A Drink for one that is weak, and misdoubting a Consumption.
Take three handfuls of Rosemary, bruise it a little, and close it in paste,
bake it in an Oven until it be well dried, then cut the paste, and take forth
the Rosemary, infuse it in two quarts of Claret Wine, with two ounces of good
Triacle, one ounce of Nutmegs, of Cinnamon, and Ginger, of each half an ounce
bruised, let them stand infused two nights and one day, then distill it in a
Limbeck, drink hereof one spoonful or two next your heart.

A Drink for the Plague.
Take red Sage, Hearb-grace, Elder leaves, red Briar leaves, of each one
handful, stamp them and strain them with a quart of white Wine, and then put to
it Aqua vitae and Ginger, drink hereof every morning one spoonful nine
mornings together, and it will preserve you.

For a Bruise or Stitch.
Take the kernels of Walnuts and smallnuts, Figs, Rue, of each one handful,
white Salt the quantity of one Walnut, one race of Ginger, one spoonful of
Honey, beat them altogether very fine, and eat of it three or four times every
day, make a plaster of it, and lay it to the place grieved.

A Drink for one that has a Rupture.
Take Comfery one good handful, wild Daisie roots as much, and the like of
knotted Grass, stamp all these together, and strain it with Malmsey, and give
it to the Patient to drink morning and evening nine days bloud-warm: If it be
a man that has been long so, he must lie nine days upon his back, and stir as
little as he can: If he be a child, he must be kept so much lying as you may
for nine days; if you think the drink too strong for the child, give it him
but five days in Malmsey, and the rest in stale Ale; have care that the party
have a good Trusse, and keep him trussed one whole year at the least.

A Plaster for a Rupture.
Take the juice of Comfery, wild Daisie roots, and knotted Grass, of each a
like quantity, fresh Butter, and unwrought Wax, of each a like quantity,
clarify them severally, then take of the root of Comfery, dry it, and make
powder of it; take the powder of Anniseseed, and Cumminseed, but twice as much
Cumminseed as Anniseseed, boil these pouders in the Butter and unwrought Wax
upon a soft fire a good while together, then put in your juice, and let it
boil one walm or two, then take it from the fire, and stir it altogether till
it be cold, take hereof, and spread it, and lay it to his Codds as hot as he
can suffer it, and use this till he be whole: this plaster is most excellent
for a Child that is burst at the Navill.

Gratiosa Cura. A Water for a Cut or a Sore.
Take Honeysuckles the knots nipt off, flowers of Celendine, flowers of red
Sage, of each three spoonfuls, Five-finger, Camphery such as is to knit bones,
Daisies with the roots thereon, Ladder of Heaven, blossoms of Rosemary,
Setwell, Hearbgrace, Smalledge, red Roses with the knots on, or else red
Rosecakes, Addertongue, of each of these one handful, sees all together in
six gallons of water that runs toward the East, until two gallons be sod
in, then strain them, and put to the water three quarts of English Honey, one
pound of Roch Alum, one pennyworth of Madder, one pennyworth of long Pepper,
sees all together until one gallon be consumed, then cleanse the water.

For the Wind Colic.
Take the flowers of Walnuts, and dry them to powder, and take of them in your
Ale, or Beer, or in your Broth, as you like best, and it will help you.

To make a sovereign Oil of a Fox, for the numme Palsy.
Take a Fox new killed, cased, and bowelled, then put into the body, of Dill,
Mugwort, Cammomil, Campits, Southernwood, red Sage, Origanum, Hop,, Staecad,
Rosemary, Costmary, Cowslip flowers, Balm, Bettony, sweet-Majoram, of each a
good handful, chop them small, and put thereto of the best Oil of Castor,
Dill, and Cammomill, of each four ounces, mix the Herbs and Oils together,
and strew over them Aphronitum a good handful, put them all into the Fox, and
sow up his belly close, and with a quick fire roast him, and the Oil that
droppeth out is a most singular Oil for all Palsies or numnesse. Approved.

To comfort the Brain, and procure sleep.
Take brown bread crumbs the quantity of one Walnut, one Nutmeg beaten to
powder, one dram of Cinnamon, put these into a Napkin, with two spoonfuls of
Vinegar, four spoonfuls of Rosewater, and one of woman's milk.

For the weakness in the Back.
Take the Pith of an Ox back, put it into a pottle of water, then sees it to
a quart, then take a handful of Comphelly, one handful of knotted Grass, one
handful of Shepherd spurse, put these into a quart of water, boil them unto a
pint, with six Dates boiled therein.

For a Canker in any part of the Body.
Take Filberd Nut leaves, Lavender-cotton, Southernwood, Wormwood, Sage,
Woodbine leaves, sweet-Bryar leaves, of each a like quantity, of Alum, and
Honey, a good quantity, sees all these till they be half sodden, wash the sore
with it.

For an old Bruise.
Take one spoonful of the juice of Tansie, and as much Nip, two pennyworth of
Sperma Ceti, put it into a little Ale, and drink it.

Oil of Foxes, or Badgers, for Ach in the Joints, the Sciatica, diseases of
the Sinews, and pains of the Reins and Back.
Take a live Fox, or Badger, of a middle age, of a full body, well fed, and
fat, kill him, bowell him, and skin him, some take not out his bowels, but
only his excrements in his guts, because his guts have much grease about them,
break his bones small that you may have all the marrow, this done, set him a
boiling in salt Brine, and Sea water, and salt water, of each a ^^nt and a
half, of Oil three pints, of salt three ounces, in the end of the decoction
put thereto the leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Dill, Origany, Majoram, and Juniper
Berries, and when he is so sodden as that his bones and flesh do part in
sunder, strain all through a strainer, and keep it in a vessel to make
Linaments for the ach in the joints, the Sciatica, diseases of the Sinnews, and
pains of the reins and back.

To make the Leaden Plaster.
Take two pound and four ounces of oil Olive of the best, of good red Lead one
pound, white Lead one pound very well beaten into dust, twelve ounces of
Spanish Soap, and incorporate all these well together in an earthen pot well
glased before you put them to boil, and when they are well incorporated that
the Soap comes upward, put it upon a small fire of coals, continuing the fire
for the space of one hour and a half, still stirring it with an Iron Ball upon
the end of a stick, then make the fire somewhat bigger, until the redness be
turned into a gray color, but you must not leave stirring it till the matter
be turned into the color of oil, or somewhat darker, then drop of it upon a
wooden trencher, and if it cleave not to the finger it is enough, then make it
up into rouls, it will keep 20 years, the older the better.

The Virtue of the Plaster.
The same being laid upon the stomach provokes appetite, it takes away any
grief in the stomach, being laid on the Belly is a present remedy for the
Colic, and laid unto the reins of the Back, it is good for the bloody Flux,
the running of the Reins, the heat of the Kidneys, and weakness of the back,
the same heals all swellings, bruises, and takes away ach, it breaks Felons,
pushes, and other Imposthumes, and heals them, the same draws out any
running humor without breaking the skin, and being applied to the fundament,
it heals any disease there growing, being laid on the head is good for the
Uvula, it helps the headake, and is good for the eyes.

For a pricking of a Thorn.
take fine Wheat flower boulted, temper it with Wine, and sees it thick, lay
it hot to the sore.

A Medicine for the Plague.
Take a pint of Malmsie, and burn it well, then take about six spoonfuls
thereof, and put to the quantity of a Nutmeg, of good Triacle, and so much
spice grains beaten, as you can take up with the tops of your two fingers, mix
it together and let the party sick drink it bloud-warm, if he be infected it
will procure him to cast, which if he do, give him as much more, and so still
again and again, observing still some quantity, till the party leave casting,
and so after he will be well, if he cast not at all, once taking is enough, and
probably it is not the sickness; after the party has left casting, it is good
to take a competent draught of burnt Malmsie alone with Triacle and grains, it
will comfort much.

Another Medicine for the Plague.
Take of Setwel grated one roo^ of Jane Triacle two spoonfuls, of wine Vinegar,
three spoonfuls, of fair water three spoonfuls, make all these more then luke
warm, and drink them off at once well steeped together, sweat after this six
or seven hours, and it will bring forth the Plague sore.

To break the Plague Sore.
Lay a roasted Onion, also sees a white Lilly root in milk, till it be as
thick as a (...), and lay it to the same, if these full, lance the sore, and so
draw it, and heal it with salves for Botches, or Biles.

To make a Salve to dress any Wound.
Take Rosin and Wax of each half a pound, of Deer Suet, and Frankincense, of
each one quarter of a pound, of Mastick in powder one ounce, boil all these in
a pint of white Wine half an hour with a soft fire, and stir it in the
boiling, that it run not over, then take it from the fire, and put thereto half
an ounce of Camphire in powder, when it is almost cold put there ^ one quarter
of a pound of Turpentine after all these be mingled together, then put it into
white Wine, and wash it as you wash butter, and then as it cools make it up in
rouls.

A most excellent Water for sore eyes.
Take a quart of spring water set it upon the fire in an earthen Pipkin, then
put into it three spoonfuls of White salt, and one spoonful of white Coperas,
then boil them a quarter of an hour, scum it as it does boil, then strain it
through a fine linen cloth, and keep it for your use.

When you take it you must lie down upon the bed, and drop two drops of it into
your eye, so rest one quarter of an hour, not wiping your eyes, and use it as
often as need shall require.

If the eye have any Perle or Film growing upon it, then take a handful of red
double Daisie leaves, and stamp them and strain them through a linen cloth,
and drop thereof one drop into your eye, using it three times.

A Plaster for one that is bruised.
Take half a pint of Sallet oil, or Neatsfoot oil, half a pint of English
Honey, two or three penniworth of Turpentine, a good quantity of Hogs grease,
two or three penniworth of Bole Armoniack, half a pint of strong wine Vinegar,
half a dosen of Eggshels, and all beaten very small, one handful of white
Salt, put all these together into an earthen pot, and stir and mingle them
together exceedingly well, then as much Bean flower, or Wheat flour as will
thicken it plaister-wise, then with your hand strike it on the grieved place
once a day, and by Gods help it will ease any sore that comes by means of
striking, wrinching, bruising, or other kind of swelling that proceeds of
evil humors.

Balm Water for a Surfeit.
Take two gallons of strong Ale, and one quart of Sack, take four pound of
young Balm leaves, and shred them, then take one pound of Annise seeds, and as
much Liquorice beaten to powder, put them all into the Ale and Sack, to steep
twelve hours, after put it into a Limbeck, and so still it, it is good for a
Surfeit of of choler, for to comfort the heart, and for an Ague.

A Restorative Water in Sickness, the Patient being weak.
Take three pints of very good new Milk, and put thereto one pint of very good
red Wine, the yolks of twenty four eggs, and beat them together, that done, put
in as much fine Manchet as shall suck up the Milk and Wine, then put the same
into a fair Stillatorie, and still it with a soking fire, and take a spoonful
of this water in your Pottage or drink, and this in one or two months will
prevent the Consumption.

To make a Candle to prevent the Lask.
Take half a pound of unblanched Almonds, stamp them, and strain it into a of
Ale, and set it on the fire, then take the yolks of four Eggs, and make it for
a candle, and so season it with a good quantity of Cinnamon and Sugar, and eat
it every morning at breakfast.

For one that cannot make Water, and to break the Stone.
Pare a Raddish root, and slice it thin, and put it into a pint of white Wine,
and let it infuse six or seven hours, then strain it, and set it one the fire,
and put thereto one Parsley root, and one spoonful of Parsley seed, and half a
handful of Pellitorie of the wall, and sees it until half be wasted, and give
it lukewarm to drink.

The Diet against Melancholy.
Take Seen eight ounces, Rubarb six drachms, Po^podie of the Oak, Sarsparilla,
and Madder roots of each four ounces, Annise seeds, Fennel seeds, Epithim^m, of
each one ounce, Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs, of each two ounces, Egrimonie,
Scabies, and red Dock roots, of each one handful, make them all small, and put
it into a long narrow bag of boulter, hang it in a vessel of Ale that
contains six gallons, when it is a week old, drink it morning and evening
for the space of one fortnight, keep you all that time warm, and a good diet.

A Sirrup to open the Liver.
Take Lungwort, Maidenhair, Egrimonie, Scabios, of each one handful,
Chamepitis, Hysop, of each a dosen Crops, Endive and Succorie, of each three or
four leaves, of young Fennel and Parsley, of each one root, one stick of
Liquorice, one spoonful of Barberies clean washed, one spoonful of Annise
seeds, twenty Raisins of the Sun stoned, boil all these in a pottle of water to
a quart, then strain it, and put thereto of the best Sugar one quarter of a
pound, conserve of Violets one ounce, and so boil it as long as any scunt
arises, then strain it again, and use this very warm.

For one that cannot make Water.
Take the seeds of Parsley, of red Fennel, of Saxifrage, of Carrawayes, of the
kernels of Hip Berries, of each a like quantity, put in some powder of Jet,
mingle these, being beaten to powder, well together, and drink it in stale Ale
lukewarm.

To make Aqua Composita.
Take of Anniseseeds, and Licorice bruised, of each half a pound, Thyme, and
Fennel, of each half a handful, Calamint two handfuls, Coriander, and
Carrawayseeds bruised, of each two ounces, Rosemary, and Sage, of each half a
handful, infuse these a whole night in three gallons of red Wine, or strong
Ale, then still it in a Limbeck with a soft fire,

An Ointment for any Swelling.
Take of marsh Mallows, of Wormwood, of Smallage, of each one handful, boil
it with one pound of the grease of a barrow Hog until it be very green, then
strain it, and keep it very close. Lady Pawlet.

A Plaster for the Back.
Take half a pint of Oil of Roses, four ounces of white Lead ground into fine
powder, put your Oil into a clean Posnet, and set it on the fire, and when it
is warm put in your white Lead, ever stirring it, then put into it of your Wax
one quarter, stir it until it be black, then take it from the fire, and in the
cooling put thereto two pennyworth of Camphire, of white Sanders, and yellow
Sanders, of each the weight of fourpence, fine Bole, and Terra sigillata, of
each two penny weight in fine powder all, still stirring it till it be almost
cold, and so make it up in roules: use it as need requires, for all weakness,
wasting, or heat in the Kidneyes. Cranish.

To make Oil of Swallows.
Take one handful of Mother-Thyme, of Lavender-cotton, and Strawberry leaves,
of each a like, four Swallows, feathers and altogether well bruised, three
ounces of Sallade Oil, beat the Herbs, and the Swallows, feathers, and
altogether, until they be so small that you can see no feathers, then put in
the Oil, and stir them well together, and sees them in a posnet, and strain
them through a canvas cloth, and so keep it for your use.

For a Thorn, Fellon, or Prick.
Take the juce of Fetherfew, of Smallage, of each one Saucer full, put to it as
much wheat of Flour as will make it somewhat thick, and put to it of good black
Soap the quantity of one Walnut, mingle them together, and lay them to the sore

A Drink for one that has a Rupture.
Take of Comfilli, otherwise called Bonesel, a pretty handful, of Woodbitten as
much, Bread, Plantain, and leaves, of Cammock somewhat more than a handful, of
Vervoin as much as of the Cammock, of Daisie roots a small quantity, of Elder
tops, or young buds, the least quantity, stamp all these together, and put unto
them, being stamped, one pint of pure white Wine, then strain it, and drink of
it morning and evening, one hour or more before breakfast or supper, a good
draught bloud-warm.

If it be a sucking Child, let the Nurse drink posset-ale of the aforesaid
drink, and let the Child suck immediately: If it be an old body, let him take
it lying in his bed nine days, if it may be conveniently, or otherwise to use
no straining.

For the Lask, or Flux.
Take one quart of red Wine, as much running water, one ounce of Cinnamon,
sees these half away, and give the Patient six spoonfuls to drink morning and
evening, if you think it be too harsh, put in a piece of Sugar.

A Lotion water for the Canker.
Take one gallon of pure Water, four handfuls of Woodbine, of Marigolds, and
Tetsal, of each two handfuls, of Celendine, Rue, Sage, and Egremony, of each
one handful, boil all these to a quart, then strain it, and put thereto two
great spoonfuls of the best English Honey, and one ounce of roch Alum, boil
them all again as long as any skum arises, then take it off, and put it in a
close bottle, and use it bloud-warm when need requires.

For the Mother.
Take three or four handfuls of Fern that grows upon a house, sees it in
Renish wine till it be well sodden, then put it in a linen cloth, and lay it
to her Navel, as hot as she may suffer it, four or five times.

A Water for an old Sore.
Take Honeysuckles, water Bettony, Rosemary, Sage, Violet leaves, Elder leaves,
cut them all small together, and sees them in a quart of running water, put
thereto two spoonfuls of Honey, and a little Alum.

For one that has a great heat in his Temples, or that cannot sleep.
Take the juice of Houseleeck, and of Lettice, of each one spoonful, of woman's
milk six spoonfuls, put them together, and set them upon a Chafingdish of
coals, and put thereto a piece of Rose-cake, and lay it to your Temples.

To quench or slack your thirst.
Take one quart of running Water out of the Brook, sees it, and skum it, put
thereto five or six spoonfuls of Vinegar, a good quantity of Sugar and
Cinnamon, three or four Cloves bruised, drink it lukewarm.

For one that has a great heat in his Hands and Stomach.
Take four Eggs, roast them hard, peel them, lay them in Vinegar three or four
hours, then let the sick man hold in either hand one of them, and after some
space change them and take the other, and it will allay the heat.

Against all Aches, and especially of a Woman's Breast.
Take Milk, and Rose leaves, and set them on the fire, put thereto Oatmeal, and
Oil of Roses, boil them till they be thick, and lay it hot under the sore,
and renew it so till it be always hot.

For the Ptisick and dry Cough.
Take the Lungs of a Fox, beat them to powder, take of Licorice, and
Sugar Candy, a good quantity, a small quantity of Cummin, mix these all well
together, and put them in a Bladder, and eat of it as often as you think good
in the day.

To take away Warts.
Take Snailes that have shells, pick them, and with the juice that comes from
them rub the Wart every day for the space of seven or eight days, and it will
destroy then.

A perfect Water for the sight.
Take Sage, Fennel, Vervin, Bettony, Eyebright, Pimpernel, Cinquefoil, and
Hearbgrace, lay all these in white Wine one night, still it in a Stillitory of
glass, this water will restore the sight of one that was blind three years
before.

To restore the Hearing.
Take Rue, Rosemary, Sage, Vervin, Majoram, of each one handful, of Cammomil
two handfuls, stamp them, and mould them in Rye dough, make thereof one loaf,
bake it as other bread, and when it is baked break it in the midst, and as hot
as may be suffered bind it to your ears, and keep them warm and close one day
or more, after it be taken away forbear ye to take cold.

For a Felon in the Joints.
Take Rue, Fetherfew, Bores grease, Leaven, Salt, Honey, six leaves of Sage,
shred them altogether small, then-beat them together, and lay it to the sore
place.

To comfort the Brains, and to procure sleep.
Take a red Rose cake, three spoonfuls of white wine Vinegar, the white of one
Egg, three spoonfuls of Woman's milk, set all these one a chafingdish of coals,
heat them, and lay the Rose cake upon the dish, and let them heat together,
then take one Nutmeg and show it on the Cake, then put it betwix^ two clothes,
and lay it to your forehead as warm as you may suffer it.

A Medicine for a sore head with a Scald.
Take one peck of Shoomakers shreds, set them over the fire in a Brass pan, put
water to them, and sees them so long as any Oil will arise, and evermore be
scumming off the Oil, then take Plantain, Ribwort, Housleek leaves, ground
Ivy, knotted grass, wild Borrage, Tutsan, herb Bennet, Smallage, Setwel
leaves, of every one a like quantity, and beat them in a mortar and strain
them, then take half a penniworth of Rosin, half a penniworth of Alum, a
little Virgins Wax, beat them, and put them into a pan, and set it over the
fire, put thereto the Herbs and the Oil, let them sees till all be melted,
then strain them into a pan, and stir them till they be cold, and put it into a
box for your use, when you dress your head, heat a little in a saucer, anoint
it every day twice, pull out the hairs that stand upright, and with linen
cloth wipe away the corruption.

A Salve for a green Wound, or old Sore.
Take the leaves of green Tobacco two pounds, of Valerian two pound, beat them
very small, then strain them, and take the juice thereof, put one pound of
yellow Wax, one pound of Rosin, one pound of Deer suet, boil them together till
they be very green, and when it is half cold, put to it a quarter of a pound of
Turpentine, and keep it for your use.

For the running of the Reins, Approved.
Take the Rows of red Herrings, dry them upon the coals, till they will beat to
powder, then give it to the Patient to drink in the morning fasting, as much
as will lve upon a shilling in five spoonfuls of Ale or Wine, be he never so
weak.

For the burning and pricking in the Soles of the Feet.
Take half a pound of Barrows grease, two good handfuls of Mugwort chopped very
small, boil it with the Barrows grease upon a soft fire, by the space of four
hours, then strain it from the Mugwort, and put it up in an earthen thing for
your use, and anoint your feet as you go to bed.

A Medicine for any Heat, Burning, or Scalding: Approved.
Take half a pint of the best cream you can get, and set it in a fair Posnet
upon the fire then take two good handfuls of Daisie roots, leaves and all clean
washed, and very finely shred, put them into the same Possnet, and boil it upon
the fire, until it be a clear ointment, then strain it through a cloth, and
keep it for your use.

To make Aqua composita to drink for a Surfeit, or a cold Stomach, and to avoid
phlegm, and glut from Stomach.
Take one handful of Rosemary, one good root of Elecampane, one handful of Hop,
half a handful of Thyme, half a handful of Sage, six good crops of red Mints,
and as much of Pennieroyal, half a handful of Horehound, six crops of Majoram,
two ounces of Licorice well bruised, and so much of Annise seeds, then take
three gallons of strong Ale, and put all the aforesaid things, Ale and Herbs
into a brass pot, then set them upon the fire, and set your Limbeck upon it,
and stop it close with paste, that there come no air out, and so keep it with a
soft fire, as other Aqua vitae.

For an ach in any Joint.
Take clarified Butter a quarter of a pound, of Cummin one pound, Black Soap a
quarter of a pound, one handful of Rue, Sheeps suet ii. Bay Salt one spoonful,
bray these together, then fry them with the gall of an Ox, spread it on a
Plaster, and lay it on as hot as you can, and let it lie seven days.

A Plaster to lay to the head, for a Rheum which runs at the Eyes.
Take the powder of Rose-leaves, Rosewater, and Betonie water, of each a like
quantity, and a little Vinegar, put your pouders into the Water and Vinegar,
stir them and temper them, and make them in a Plaster, and put to it a little
powder of Terra sigillata.

A Water to be used with the Plaster abovesaid for the same purpose.
Take one quart of new Milk, two pound of green Fennel, a quarter of a pound of
Eyebright, put the Herbs and Milk into a Stillatorie, cast half an ounce of
Camphire thereon, and with this Water, wash your eyes and temples.

For the Emeroids, Approved.
Take a piece of tawnie cloth, burn it in a frying pan to powder, then beat it
in a Mortar as fine as may be, searce it, then lay it on a brown Paper, and
with spittle make it Plaister-wise, and lay it to the place, and trusse it up
with clothes.

To break any Sore.
Take hot bread to the quantity of a farthing loaf, grate it, put thereto
Sallet oil three or four spoonfuls, and a pint of Milk, and sees them
together to a good thickness, spread it on a cloth and lay it to the sore, in
stead of Sallet oil, you may use Deer suet.

A Bath for an ach in the Back, and Limbs.
Take Mugwort, Vervin, Fetherfue, Dill, Rosemary, Burnet, ^unhoof, Horehound,
and white Mints, Senkil and Sage, of each one handful, sees all these in four
gallons of running water, and let it sees till one gallon be wasted, then bath
your legs with it five nights together.

A Medicine for any joint that is numme with any ach, Approved.
Take Virgin Wax one ounce, Verdigrease half a quarter of an ounce, Brimstone,
Soap, oil of Eggs, of Alum, of Honey, of each a like quantity, temper them
altogether, and lay it upon the place grieved somewhat warm.

A Medicine for a Felon of any Finger.
Take as much gray Salt as an Egg, wind it in gray Paper, lay it in the Embers
a quarter of an hour, then beat it in a mortar very fine, then take the yoalk
of a new laid egg, beat it with this powder, until it be very stiff, spread
it upon a cloth, lay it upon the joint grieved twenty four hours, and so
dress it three times.

For a Boil or Push.
Take the yolk of a new laid Egg, a little English Honey, put it into the shell
to the yolk, put in as much wheat meal as will make it to spread, then take one
branch of Rue, and one of Fetherfew, shred them very fine, and put it to the
same Medicine, stir them very well together, spread it upon a piece of leather,
and lay it to the place gieved.

An Electuarie to cause good digestion, and to comfort the Stomach.
Take Setwel, and Galingal, of each three slices, Nutmegs, Ginger, and
Cinnamon, of each two slices, three Berberries sliced fine and husked, three
slices of Liquorice, half a spoonful of Annise seeds clean dusted, one long
Pepper cut small, white Pepper six grains, as much black Pepper, beat them all
into a gross powder, then put thereto two grains of Musk, one grain of Amber
greece, then take Mint water and Sugar, boil them together, and when they are
come to the right perfection of thickness, put in those Pouders above
mentioned in the cooling, with a little conserve of Rosemary flowers, of this
cake the quantity of a Nutmeg, half an hour before you eat or drink at meals.

A Powder for the Rheum, or Sore Eyes.
Boil one pint of Hop-water, when the Hop is in the flower, till it be
scalding hot, then put into it half a pound of Licorice in very fine powder,
the Water being taken from the fire, for the Licorice must not boil in the
Water, stir them together till the Water be clean consumed, then add to
them, of Anniseseeds, and Fennelseeds, of each half a pound made into very fine
powder through a Searce, Angelica roots, Elicampane roots, and leaves, and
flowers, of Eyebright made into very fine powder, of each one ounce and a half,
mingle these together, and so keep it close, and when you eat of this Powder
weigh out of the whole quantity two ounces, whereunto add as much good Aqua
vitae as will moisten it, or Angelico-water, or Rosa solis, to keep it from
being musty, set it near the fire; eat of this Powder at any time as much as
you may take up with a groat, and it is special good for the rheum, for cold,
or for sore eyes. Mr. Bendlow.

A Salve for any Wound.
Take Rosin, Perrosin, Wax, of each eight ounces, of Sheeps Suet, and
Frankincense, of each four ounces, one ounce of Mastick made in powder, boil
all these in a pint of white Wine half an hour, then take it from the fire, and
put thereto half an ounce of Camphire in powder; when it is almost cold put
thereto four ounces of Turpentine, and make it up in roules, but before it be
rouled you must wash it up in running Water. A. T.

To deliver a Child in danger.
Take a Date stone, beat it into powder, let the Woman drink it with Wine, then
take Polipody and emplaister it to her feet, and the Child will come whether it
be quick or dead; then take Centory, green or dry, give it the Woman to drink
in Wine, give her also the Milk of another Woman.

A most singular Sirupe for the Lungs, and to prevent the Consumption.
Take Egrimony, Scabias, Borrage, Buglosse, of each twenty leaves, Folefoot,
Lungwort, Maidenhair, of each half a handful, Suckory, and Endive, of each six
leaves, of Carduus benedictus, Horehound, Nip, of each four crops unset, Hop
half a handful, Fennel roots, Parsley roots, Smalladge roots, of each three
roots sliced and the piths taken out, Elicampane four roots sliced, Iris roots
half an ounce sliced, Quinceseeds one ounce, Licorice three good sticks scraped
and sliced small, twenty Figs sliced, Raisins of the Sun one good handful
sliced, and the stones taken out, boil all these in a gallon of running Water
till half be consumed, then take it from the fire and let it settle, then
strain it, and boil it again with as much white Sugar as will make it thick as
sirupe, that it may last all the year.

A Powder for the Stone.
Take Hawes, and Hips, of each a good handful, Ashen keys half a handful,
three or four Acorns, the shells of three new laid Eggs, Grounwel seeds, Parsley
seeds, of each half an ounce, Perstone a good handful, Camock roots half a
handful, make all these in fine powder, then put thereto two ounces of
Sugar Candy beaten something small, take a sixpenny weight of this powder at a
time in the morning fasting, and drink not after it one hour.

For the Colic and Stone.
Take one handful of Philipendula, of Rosemary, of Saxafrage, of Ivy growing in
the wall, of Hart's-tongue, of Thyme, of Parsley, of Scabias, of each four
handfuls, of Marigolds one handful, of Majoram three handfuls, of brown Fennel,
of Longdebeefe, of Spernits, of Borage, of each two handfuls, of Maidenhair
three handfuls, still all these in May, keep it in a glass till you have need
of it, then take of it five spoonfuls, and three of white Wine, and of clean
powder of Ginger half a spoonful, put these together, and warm it lukewarm,
and let the Patient drink it in the morning two hours before he rise out of
his bed, let him lay more clothes upon him, for it will provoke him to sweat,
after the sweat is gone let him rise and walk whither he will.

A good Water to drink with Wine, or without to cool Choler.
Take Borage roots, and Succory roots, of each two, wash and scrape them fair
and clean, and take out their cores, then take an earthen pot of two gallons,
fill it with fair spring water, set it on a fire of charcoal, put the roots in
it, and eight pennyworth of Cinnamon; when it begins to sees, put into it
four ounces of fine Sugar, and let it sees half an hour, then take it off, let
it cool, and drink hereof at your pleasure.

To make Aqua Composita for the Colic and Stone.
Take of strong Ale one month old as many gallons as your pot will hold, and
for every gallon take two ounces of Licorice, and as much of Annise seeds, and
of these herbs following two handfuls of each to every gallon, of Birch
leaves, Burnet, Pasphere, Pellitory of the wall, Watercresses, Saxifrage,
Crumwel, Philiponula, Pennyroyal, Fennel, half a root of Elicampane; of Hawes,
of Hips, of Berries, and Brambles, and Berberries of each half a pint, distill
them as you do other Aqua vitae.

A Medicine for the Colic passion.
Take the smooth leaves of Holly, dry them, and make them into powder, of
Gromwel seed, and of Box seed, of each a little quantity, let the patient drink
hereof.

To take away the fervent shaking and burning of an Ague.
Take of the rind of the Wilding tree, with the leaves in summer, of each half
a handful, as much Bettony, three crops of Rosemary, sees them in a quart of
posset Ale to a pint, and let the sick drink of this as hot as he can, and so
within three times it will ease him.

For the hardness and stiffenesse of Sinews.
Take twelve fledgd Swallows out of the nest, kill them, beat them feathers
and all in a Mortar, with I hyme, Rosemary, and Hop, then sees them with May
Butter a good while, then strain them through a Strainer as hard as you can,
and it will be an Ointment, take the strings that grow out of the Strawberries
and beat them amongst the rest.

To stay the Flux.
Take white Starch made of Wheat two or three spoonfuls, and take also new Milk
from the Cow, stir these together, and let them be warmed a little, and give
it to the party grieved in manner of a glister: a present remedy.

An approved Medicine for the Plague, called the Philosophers Egg, it is a
most excellent Preservative against all Poisons, or dangerous Diseases that
draw toward the Heart.
Take a new laid Egg, and break a hole so broad as you may, take out the white
clean from the yolk, then take one ounce of Saffron and mingle it with the
yolk, but be careful you break not the shell, then cover it with another piece
of shell so close as is possible, then take an earthen pot with a close cover,
with warm embers, so that the shell be not burned, and as those embers do cool,
so put in more hot, and do so for the space of two days until you think it be
dry, for proof whereof you shall put in a Pen, and if it come out dry it is
well, then take the Egg and wipe it very clean, then pare the shell from the
Saffron, and set it before the fire, and let it be warm, then beat it in a
Mortar very fine, and put it in by it self, then take as much white Mustard
seed as the Egg and Saffron, and grind it as small as meal, then searse it
trough a fine Boulter, that you may save the quantity of the Egg so searced,
then take a quarter of an ounce of Dittany roots, as much of Turmentil, of
Nuces Vomicae one dram, let them be dried by the fire as aforesaid, then
stamp these three last severally very fine in a Mortar, then mix them three
well together, after that take, as a thing most needful, the root of Angelica,
and Pimpernel, of each the weight of sixpence, make them to powder, and mix
them with the rest, then compound therewith five or six simples of Unicorns
horn, or for want thereof of Hartshorn, and take as much weight, as all these
fine pouders come to, of fine Triacle, and stamp it with the pouders in a
Mortar until all be well mixed and hang to the Pestle, and then it is perfectly
made, then put the Electuary in a stone pot well nealed, and so it will
continue twenty or thirty years, and the longer the better.

How to use this Electuary.
First when one is infected with the Pestilence, let him take, so soon as he
can, or ever the disease infect the heart, one crown weight in gold of this
Electuary, and so much of fine Triacle, if it be for a man, but if it be for a
woman or child, take less, and let them be well mixed together, and if the
disease come with cold, then give him this Electuary with half a pint of white
Wine warm, and well mixed together; but if it come with heat, then give it him
with Plantain water, or Well water, and Vinegar, mixed altogether, and when he
has drunk the same, let him go into his naked bed, and put off his shirt, and
cover him warm, but let his bed be well warmed first, and a hot double sheet
wrapped about him, and so let him sweat seven, eight, or ten hours, as he is
able to endure, for the more he does sweat the better, because the disease
fades away with the sweat; but if he cannot sweat, then heat two or three
Bricks or Tiles, and wrap them in moist clothes wet with water and salt, and
lay them by his sides in the bed, and they will cause him to sweat, and as he
sweateth, let it be wiped from his body with dry hot clothes being conveyed
into the bed, and his sweat being ended, shift him into a warm bed with a warm
shirt, and all fresh new clothes, using him very warily for taking of cold, and
let his clothes that he did sweat in be well aired and washed, for they be
infectious; and let the keeper of the sick beware of the breath or air of the
party in the time of his sweating, therefore let her muffle her self with
double old cloth, wherein is Wormwood, Rue, Fetherfew, crumbs of sour bread,
and Vinegar, and a little Rosewater, beat all these together, and so put it
into the muffler, made new every day while you do keep him, and let the sick
party have of it bound in a cloth to smell on while he is in his sweat, then
after do it away and take a new, and because he shall be faint and distempered
after his sickness, he shall eat no flesh, nor drink Wine the space of nine
days, but let him use the Conservatives for his health, as Conserve of
Buglosse, Borage, and red Roses, and especially he shall drink three or four
days after he has sweat, morning and evening, three ounces of the juice of
Sorrel mixed with an ounce of Conserve of Sorrel, and so use to eat and drink
whatsoever is comfortable for the heart; also if one take the quantity of a Pea
of the said Electuary with some good Wine, it shall keep him from the
infection, therefore when one is sick in the house of the Plague, then so soon
as ye can, give all the whole household some of this Receipt to drink, and his
keeper also, and it shall preserve them from the infection, yet keep the whole
from the (...) as much as you can, beware of the clothes and bed that the sick
party did sweat in.

To make Balm water.
Take four gallons of strong Ale and stale, half a pound of Licorice, two pound
of Balm, two ounces of Figs, half a pound of Annise seeds, one ounce of
Nutmegs, shred the Balm and Figs very small, and let them stand steeping four
and twenty hours, and then put it in a Still as you use Aqua vitae.

To make Doctor Stephens Water.
Take one gallon of good Gascoign Wine, of Ginger, Galingal, Nutmegs, Grains,
Annise seeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds, then take Sage, Mints, red Roses,
garden Thyme, Pellitorie, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Penniroyall, Cammomill,
Lavender, of each one handful, bray your Spices small, and chop the herbs
before named, and put them with the spices into the Wine, and let it stand
twelve hours, stirring it very often, then still it in a Limbeck, closed up
with course paste, so that no air enter, keep the first water by it self, it is
good so long as it will burn.

An Ointment for any Strain in the Joints, or for any Sore.
Take three pound of fresh Butter unwashed, and set it in an Oven after the
bread be drawn out, and let it stand two or three hours, then take the
clearest of the butter and put it into a Posnet, then take the tops of Red
nettles as much as will be Moistened with the butter, and chop them very Small,
and put them in the butter, set it on the fire, and boil it softly five or six
hours, and when it is so boiled, put thereto half a pint of the best oil
Olive, and then boil it a very little, and take it off, and strain it into an
earthen pot, and keep it for your use.

If you think good instead of Nettles, only you may take these herbs,
Cammomile, Rosemary, Lavender, Tun-hoof, otherwise Ale-hoof, Five finger,
Vervain, and Nettle tops.

For an Ague.
Take the inner bark of a Walnut tree, a good quantity, boil it in beer until
the beer look black, and then take a good draught and put it into a pot, then
take six spoonfuls of Sallet Oil for an extreme Ague, brew it too and fro in
two pots, then drink it, and let the party labor to any exercise until he
sweat, then let him lie down upon a bed very warm until he has done sweating,
this do three times when the Ague comes upon him.

A Powder against the Wind in the Stomach.
Take Ginger, Cinnamon, and Gallingal, of each two ounces, Annise seeds,
Carraway, and Fennel seeds, of each one ounce, long Pepper, Grains, Mace, and
Nutmegs, of each half an ounce, Setwel half a dram, make all in powder, and
put thereto one pound of white Sugar, and use this after your meat or before at
your pleasure, at all times it comfort the stomach marvellously, carries
away wind, and causes good digestion.

For a Pin and Web in the Eye.
Take the white of an Egg, beat it to oil, put thereto a quarter of a spoonful
of English Honey, half a handful of Daisie leaves, and in winter the roots,
half a handful of the inner rind of a young Hazle not above one years growth,
beat them together in a Mortar, and put thereto one spoonful of Woman's Milk,
and let it stand infused two or three hours, and strain all through a cloth,
and with a feather drop it into the eye thrice a day.

For bloud-shotten, and sore Eyes, coming of heat.
Take Tutty of Alexandria, or Lapis Tutty one ounce, beat it into fine powder,
and temper it with a quart of white Wine, put thereto one ounce of dried Rose
leaves, and boil them altogether with a soft fire until one half be consumed,
then strain it through a fine linen cloth, and keep it in a glass, and use it
evening and morning, and put it into the sore eyes with a feather or your
finger.

If the Tutty be prepared it is the better, which is thus done, steep the Tutty
in Rosewater, and let it lie half an hour, then take it forth, and lay it on a
white paper to dry, then take it when it is dry, steep it, and dry it again, as
before, twice or thrice, and then use it as before.

For an Ach in the Bones.
Take Southernwood, Wormwood, and Bay leaves, of each one handful, one Ox
Gall, one pint of Neat-foot oil, put all these together, and let them so stand
two or three days, and let them boil upon a very soft fire, then put in of
Dears suet a good quantity, strain them, and put them into a pot, and so
anoint the Patient, put to this a good quantity of Far, and as much Pitch as
the bigness of a Walnut, and of the juice of Pimpernel a good quantity.

For Children that are troubled with an extreme Cough.
Take Hysor^^ain water, and Fennel water, of each half a pint, of sliced
Licorice, and Sugar, of each a pretty quantity, sees them easily over a good
fire, strain it, and let them take a little hereof at once, and often you may
dissolve pellets therein, and you may anoint their chest with oil of Almonds,
and a little Wax.

A Medicine for sore Eyes.
Take red Fennel, and Celendine, of each one handful, stamp and strain them,
that done, take five spoonfuls of Honey, and white Copperas the quantity of one
Pea, Rosewater five spoonfuls, boil all these together in an earthen pot, skum
it well, and clarify it with the white of an Egg; this is an excellent
Medicine to clear the sight of the eye if there be any thing in the eye
superfluous to hinder the sight, but if there be nothing but heat, it is
nothing so good.

To help one that is inwardly bruised.
Take of Borrage, and red Sage, of each a handful, stamp these together, and
strain them, and put thereto as much Claret Wine, as the juice thereof, and let
the party drink it warm, and if it keep within him four and twenty hours,
after he will recover; if he be bound in the body, let him take three spoonfuls
of Sirupe of Damask Roses, and two spoonfuls of Sallade oil, and drink it
fasting, and an hour after let the party take some warm broth.

For the Spleen.
Take of Lavender, Fennel, Parsley, Cammomil, Thyme, Wormwood, Angelica, of each
one handful, of Sage, and Rue, one handful, of Annise seeds, and Fennel seeds,
of each one handful, of Cummin seeds two handfuls, of Cloves four spoonfuls,
and of Mace two spoonfuls, gather these herbs in the heat of the day, and dry
them in the Sun two days, laying them very thin on a sheet, and bruise the
seed grossly, and steep them in as much Sallade oil as will cover all these
things, and somewhat more, and so set them in the Sun ten days, which being
done, strain your oil from your Herbs and your Spices, and then infuse it new
again as before, with Herbs and Spices in like manner, and to that oil thus
infused or strained, add bitter Almonds, and oil of Capers half a pint, then
take a quarter of a spoonful of the said oil, and put it in your hand, your
hand being warm, rub them together, and anoint and rub the Patient grieved
with both your hands, the one on the right side, the other on the left, from
the loins down to the bottom of the belly, drawing your hands as hard as you
can, and make them to meet at the bottom of the belly, and continue in
continual rubbing, about a quarter of an hour.

For a burning or Scald.
Take a quantity of Sheeps Suet, the white of Hen dung, and fresh Grease, boil
all these together, strain it, and anoint the party with a feather.

For the Emeroides and Piles.
Take juice of Elder, May Butter, and Deares Suet, melt them, letting the Juice
and the Butter simper, and then put the Suet to them, make them into pills, and
if you make a Suppositor, you must put in more Deeres Suet.

For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose.
Take the ashes of green leaves of Holly, with half so much of the burnt powder
of Alum, blow with a quill into the place greived, and it will help Man, or
Child, or Beast.

A Remedy for the Mother.
When the fit begins to take them, take the powder of white Amber, and burn
it in a chasingdish of coals, and let them hold their mouths over it, and suck
in the smoke, and anoint their nostrils with the oil of Amber, and if they be
not with child, take two or three drops of the oil of Amber in white Wine warm
or cold, but the oil of Amber must be taken inward but once a day, and outward
as often as the fit takes them.

A Medicine for the Worms.
Take one penniworth of Alloes with the like quantity of Ox gall and
Mithridate, mix them together, and lay them to the child's navel upon a plaster.

A Preservative against the Plague.
Take one dry Walnut, take off the shell and peel, cut it small, and with a
branch of Rue shred fine, and a little Wine Vinegar, and Salt, put all into a
sliced Fig, take it up fasting, and then you may drink a little Wormwood after
it, and go where you list.

A Pill for those that are infected.
Take of Aloes succatrine half an ounce, of Myrrh, and English Saffron, of each
a quarter of an ounce, beat them into small powder with Malmsey, or a little
Sack, or Diascordion, make two or three small pills thereof, and take them
fasting.

A Poultesse to break a Plague Sore.
Take a white Lilly root, and sees it in a pennyworth of Linseed, and a pretty
quantity of Barrowes grease, beat the Linseed first very soft, afterward beat
altogether in a Mortar, make thereof a plaster.

An Electuary to be taken for the Plague.
Take the weight often grains of Saffron, two ounces of the kernels of
Walnuts, two or three Figs, one dram of Mithridate, and a few Sage leaves
stamped together, with a sufficient quantity of Pimpernel water, make up all
these together in a mass or lump, and keep it in a glass or pot for your use,
take the quantity of twelve grains fasting in the morning, and it will not
only preserve from the Pestilence, but expel from those that be infected.

Against a Tertian Ague.
Take Dandilion clean washed, stamp it, and put it in Beer, and let it stand
all night in the Beer, in the morning strain it, and put half a spoonful of
Triacle into it, make it lukewarm, and let the Patient drink of it fasting
upon his well day, and walk upon it as long as he is able, this has been
approved good for an Ague that comes every second day.

Against the Wind.
Take Cummin seeds, and steep them in Sack four and twenty hours, dry them by
the fire, and hull them, then take Fennel seed, Carraway seed, and Annise seed,
beat all these together, and take every morning half a spoonful in broth or
beer fasting.

Against Wind.
Take Enula campana, grate it, and drink half a spoonful fasting.

For the Sting of an Adder.
Take a head of Garlic and bruise it with some Rue, add some Honey thereto,
and if you will some Triacle, and apply it to the place.

For the biting of a Dog.
Take Ragwort, chop it, and boil it with unwashed Butter to an Ointment.

A Medicine for a Woman that has a dead Child, or for the Afterbirth after
deliverance.
Take Date stones, dry them and beat them to powder, then take Cummin-seed,
Grains, and English Saffron, make them in powder, and put them altogether in
like quantity, saving less of the Saffron then of the rest, then searce them
very finely, and when need is to drink it, take a spoonful at once with a
little Malmsie, and drink it milk-warm, it is good to bring forth a dead
child, or for the afterbirth, or if the woman have any rising in her stomach,
or flushing in her face during her childbed, the Datestones with round holes in
the sides are the best, if you put a quantity of white Amber beaten amongst the
powder, it will be the better.

To make the best Paracelsus salve.
Take of Lith^rge of Gold and Silver of each three ounces, and put to it one
pound and half of good Sallet oil, and as much of Linseed Oil, put it into a
large earthen vessel well leaded, of the fashion of a milk boul, or a great
basin, set it over a gentle fire, and keep it stirring till it begin to boil,
then put to it of red Lead, and of Lapis Calaminaris, of each half a pound,
keep it with continual stirring, and let it boil two hours, or so long till
it be something thick, which you may know by dropping a little of it upon a
cold board or stone, then take a skillet, and put into it a pound of yellow
Wax, as much black Rosin, half a pound of gum Sandrach, of yellow Amber,
Olibanum, Myrrh, of Aloes Hepatica, of both the kinds of Aristolochias round
and long, of every of these in fine powder searced one ounce, of Mummia one
ounce, and a half, of oil of Bays half a pound, of oil of Juniper six
ounces, dissolve all these together in the aforesaid Skillet, and then put them
to the former Plaster, set it over a gentle fire, and keep it with stirring,
till it boil a little; Then take your five gums, Popanax, Galbanum, Sagapenum,
Ammoniacum, and Bdelium, of each of these three ounces, which must be dissolved
in white wine Vinegar and strained, and the Vinegar exasperated from them
before you go about the plaster, let there be three ounces of each of them
when they are thus prepared, then when the Plaster has gently boiled, about
half the bigness of a Nutmeg at a time, continuing that order until all the
Gums be in and dissolved, then set it over the fire again, and let it boil a
very little, but before it boil, be sure that the gums be all dissolved, for
else it will run into lumps and knots, after it has boiled a little take it
from the fire again, and continue the stirring of it very carefully, and put to
it these things following, being in readiness, take of both the Corals red and
white, of mother of Pearl, of Dragons blood, of Terra lemnia, of white Vitriol
of each of them one ounce, of Lapis Hematitis, and of the Loadstone, of each of
them one ounce and a half, of the flowers of Antimony two drachms, of Crocus
Martis two drachms, of Camphire one ounce, of common Turpentine half a pound,
mix all these together, but first let those things that are to be poudred, be
carefully done, and fully searced, then put them altogether among the former
things, and again set it over the fire with a moderate heat, and gentle, to
boil, till it be in the form of a Plaster, the which you may know by dropping
it on a cold piece of Wood, or Stone, or Iron: you must above remember to keep
it with continual stirring from the beginning to the ending, when you make it
up, let your hands and the place you roll it on be anointed with the oil of
S. John's Wort, and of earth worms, and Juniper, Cammomile and Roses together,
wrap it in Parchment or Leather, and keep it for your use.

Memorandum, That the Camphire be dissolved in the oil of Juniper, mix them
together with the Gum Sandrach, and put them in toward the latter end.

An Ointment for any strain in the joints, or for any sore.
Take three pound of fresh Butter unwashed, and set it into an Oven after the
bread be drawn out, and let it stand two or three hours, then take the clearest
of the Butter, and put it into a posnet, then take the tops of red Nettles, and
chop them very small, and put so many Nettles to the Butter, as will be
moistened with the Butter, and so set it on the fire, and boil it softly five or
six hours, and when it is so boiled, put thereto half a pint of the best oil
Olive, and then make it boil a very little, and take it off, and strain it into
an earthen pot, and keep it for your use.

Mr. Ashleys Ointment.
Take six pound of May Butter unsalted, one quart of Sallet Oil, four pound of
Barrows grease, one pound of the best Rosin, one pound of Turpentine, half a
pound of Frankincense; To this rate take these herbs following, of each a
handful, viz. Smallage, Balm, Lorage, Red Sage, Lavender, Lavender-Cotton,
Herb-grace, Parsley, Cumferie called Boneset, Sorrel, Laurel leaves, Birch
leaves, Lungwort, Majoram, Rosemarie, Mallows, Cammomile, S. John's Wort,
Plantain, Allheal, Chickweed, English Tobacco, or else Henbane, Groundsell,
Woundwort, Betony, Agrimonie, Carduus Benedictus, wild wine, or white Wine
called Bryan, Adders tongue, Mellilot; pick all these Herbs clean, wash them,
strain them clean from the water, all these must be gathered after the Sun
rise, then stamp all these Herbs in a stone or wooden-morter, so small as
possible may be, then take your Rosin, and beat it to powder with your
Frankincense, and melt them first alone, then put in your Butter, your
Hog's Grease and Oil, and when all is melted, put in your herbs, and let them
all boil together half a quarter of an hour, then take it from the fire, and
leave stirring of it in no wise a quarter of an hour after, and in that time
that it is from the fire, put in your Turpentine, and two ounces of Verdigrease
very finely beaten to powder, and when you put in your Turpentine and
Verdigrease, stir it well, or else it will run over, and so stir until it
leave boiling: Then put it in an earthen pot, stopping the pot very close with
a cloth and a board on the top, and set it in a dunghill of horse-muck twenty
one days, then take it up and put it into a kettle, and let it boil a little,
taking heed that it boil not over, then strain all through a course cloth, into
an earthen or gally pot, and when all is strained, put to it half a pound of
Oil of Spike, and cover the pot close until you use it, and when you use it
make it warm in Winter, and use it cold in Summer.

An approved Medicine for any ach in the joint whatsoever.
Take half a pound of Rosin, half a pound of Frankincense, of Olibanum and
Mastick, of each one ounce, Wax, Deer Suet, Turpentine, of each two ounces,
Camphire 2 drachms, beat the Olibanum, Mastick, Rosin, and Frankincense, and
Camphire in powder, then put it in a brass pan with a pottle of white Wine, and
put in the Wax and Deer Suet into it, and when it does boil, put in your
Turpentine, and let it boil a quarter of an hour, then take it from the fire
and let it stand and cool until the next day, then work it with your hand to
work out the Wine, anointing your hands first with Oil, then make it up in
rouls, then as need shall serve, take thereof and spread it with a warm knife
upon a fleshie side of a Sheeps skin, and apply it warm to the grieved place,
and take it not off until it fall off of it self, pricking the Plaster full
of holes.

A Searcloth to be used against Carbuncles, red Sores, Biles, Swellings, or any
hot Causes.
Take a wine pint of pure Sallet oil, and put it into an earthen pot that is
very large, and set it upon a very soft fire of Charcoal, and when it begins
to boil, stir it with a Hasel stick of one years shooting, then put into it
two ounces of Venus Soap, that is pure white, half a pound of red Lead, one
quarter of a pound of white Lead, letting it boil very softly, stirring it
continually with this Hazle stick for the space of two or three hours, you
shall know when it is boiled by this, drop one drop thereof upon a board, and
it will be stiff, when it is enough, then take it from the fire, and put into
it half an ounce of oil of Bays, then let it boil again a little, then let
your clothes be ready cut of a reasonable size to dip them in it, then you
must have two sticks which must be hollow in the middle, to strip the clothes
through, then lay them abroad, until they be cold upon a board, then roll them
up and keep them, and when you use them lay them upon the place grieved, and
let them lie twelve hours, then take it off and wipe it, and lay the other
side, and let that lie as long.

Plague Water to be taken three times, for the first helps not.
Take a gallon of white Wine, Ale or Beer, and to that quantity take a quarter
of a pound of each of these Herbs following, Rosewater a quarter of a pint,
Rue, Sage, Vervain, Egrimonie, Betonie, Sallendine, Carduus, Angelica,
Pimpernel, Scabios, Valerian, Wormwood, Dragons, Mugwort, all these herbs must
you shred in gross together, and steep it in the aforesaid liquor the night
before you distill it in a Rosewater still, and then keep the first water by it
self being the weaker, and therefore fitter for Children, it helps all
Fevers, Agues, and Plagues, being thus taken seven spoonfuls or thereabout of
the strongest blood warm, and give it to the party to drink, in an ague or
fever an hour before the fit come, and so to sweat either by exercise, or in
your bed, but your stomach must be empty, and if it be taken for the Plague,
then put into it a little Diascordium, or Methridate.

A defensive Plaster.
Take the white of an Egg, and Bole-Armoniack, spread it on leather.

A Sirrup for a Cold.
Take Coltsfoot, Water Hysop, water and Honey, put Liquorice, Annise seeds, and
Elecampane, put thereto the juice of Fennel, and boil them well.

To stay the bleeding of a Wound.
Take a Charcoal red hot out of the fire, and beat it to powder.

A Poultesse.
Take Milk, Oatmeal, and red Rose-leaves, and a little Deers Suet.

For the running of the Reins.
Take cups of Acornes, and grate them, and grate some Nutmeg, put this in Beer,
and drink.

For a Poultesse.
Take Linseed, and beat it to powder, boil it in Milk with Mallows and Sheeps
Suet.

For a Blast.
Take a good quantity of Vervin, and boil it in Milk, and wash the Blast
therewith very well, then bind the Herbs very close to it some few hours,
after wash it again the Milk being warmed, and so bind it up again, the oftener
it is done the better, and in a day or two it will be well, if it be taken
before it fester.

For a Blast.
Take a good quantity of Vericon being green, with as much Dill, chop them
together, and boil them in Bores grease as much as will cover them, and for
want thereof so much May Butter, and when they be boiled together, let them
stand two or three days, and then boil it a little, and so strain it through
a cloth.

A Balsamum.
Take in the latter end of September good store of Honeysuckle berries, and put
them in a body of a glass Still stopped, and set it in hot horse-dung eight
days, distill it in Balm, then when you have drawn the water forth, pour the
water into the stuff again, stop it close, and put it in the dung four and
twenty hours, then set it in ashes, and distill both water and oil with a
great fire as much as will come forth, and at last separate the water from the
oil in Balm.

To make an excellent Oil of Hypericon.
Take flowers, leaves, and seeds of Hypericon as much as you list, beat them
together, and infuse them in white Wine that they may be covered therewith, and
set them in the Sun for ten days, then put thereto so much Oil Olive as all
the rest does weigh, and let it stand ten days more in the Sun, but look that
you weigh the Oil to know how much it is, then put thereto for every pound of
Oil two ounces of Turpentine, and one dram of Saffron, and of Nutmegs, and
Cloves, of each half an ounce, of Mirrh, and Rosin, of each an ounce, and of
the root of Briony two ounces, put them all in a vessel of glass, and mix them
well together, and set them in a vessel of hot water, and then set thereto a
head of glass and Receiver well shut, and boil it so long until no more will
distill from it, which will be about four and twenty hours, then take it out,
and strain it whilst it is hot, and keep it in a vessel of glass, and when
you use it first heat it well, and apply it upon a wound without using any tent
at all, this is excellent for a green wound, especially if there be veins,
sinews, or bones offended or cut, it keeps wounds from putrefaction, it
cleanses them, and eases pain, and does incarnate and skin them; it helps
bruises, pains, aches, or swellings in any part, and is wonderful good against
venom or poison.

For the Falling Sickness.
Take the roots of single Pionies, grate them, drink them, and wear some of
them about your neck.

For kibed heels.
Take a Turnip, make a hole in the top of it, take out some of the pith, infuse
into that hole oil of Roses, then stop close the hole, roast the Turnip under
the embers, when it is soft, apply it plaister-wise warm to the Kibe, bind it
fast.

Lapis Prunellae.
A Medicine for sore Eyes.
Take one pound of Saltpeter, boil it in a Goldsmiths earthen pot, with a very
hot fire round about it, let it boil till it be very black and melted, then
take a quarter of an ounce, or sixpenny weight of Roch Alum, and a quarter of
an ounce of Brimstone, break them, and put them in the Saltpeter by little at
once as it boyleth, and let it burn till the flame go out of it self, then
pour it into a brass Ladle, or into a Chafer, and so let it stand till it be
cold, and when you will use it, s^rape it very fine with a knife, and put a
little of it to the sore eyes, hold down the eyelid till the pain be gone, then
let water drop out of the eye: This Medicine takes away the Pearl, the Pin,
the Web in the eye, and all sores and bloodshed; it also helps the toothache,
being put into the hollow tooth with a little lint, if the tooth be not hollow
rub it outward; finally, it helps a stinking breath, being eaten in the
morning fasting.

For a scald Head.
Take a handful of Glovers shreds, and a handful of Dock roots, the pith taken
out, and boil them in strong Ale until they be reasonable thick, and anoint
the head therewith.

For a bloody Flux.
Take Rubarb and toast it, then grind it to powder, and take as much as will
lie upon a sixpence, and keep warm that day, the next day eat conserve of Roses
mixed with Corral, and drink that day if ye will posset Ale made of Cammomil.

For the Itch.
Take one pound of Butter unwashed and unsalted, three good handfuls of red
Sage, and as much Brimstone beaten into powder as a Walnut, boil these well
together, and strain it, and put in half an ounce of Ginger beaten small.

For sore Eyes.
Take new Hens dung out of the nest, and put it into an Oven almost cold, let
it lie there all night, then take the white of it, and beat it being dried, and
take as much of the powder of Ginger finely beaten, and put to that half the
like quantity of Sugar Candy, all which must be beaten very well and fearced,
then put it into the sore eyes every night, and in the morning wash it out with
the water.

A Water for sore Eyes.
Take a pint of fair running Water, of wild Daisies, and three leaved Grass,
of each a good handful, wash the Herbs very clean in a Collender, and put them
into a clean Skillet of Water, let them boil very well over the fire, until
the Water look green, then take a little piece of Alum and put into the water
when it is boiling, then taste of the Water, and when it sticks to the mouth,
take as much Honey as will make it very sweet, then after it has boiled a
little while take it off the fire, strain it, and drop a little every night
into the eyes.

An approved Application against any Surfeit.
Take the bottom of a Muncorn loaf, cut it about an inch thick, and as broad
as the palm of your hand, toast it very well, then take of Sallade oil, and
Claret Wine, of each a like quantity, as much as will wet the toast well and
thoroughly, warm it hot, then put the toast into it, when the toast is well
soaked, strew the powder of Cloves and Mace thereupon thick, then apply it to
the stomach of the Patient as warm as he can endure it, it will purge upwards
and downwards so often as you apply a fresh toast made as aforesaid, this may
be applied so often as any one finds their stomach ill at ease, although then
it will not purge, except in case of a Surfeit.

A Medicine against the Plague.
Take of the root called Setwel to the quantity of half a Walnut, and grate it,
of Triacle green one good spoonful, of fair water three spoonfuls, make all
these more than lukewarm, and so drink them off in bed, and sweat six or seven
hours, and in your sweat drink small posset Ale made of small drink as you
need, but not till an hour and half after the taking of the Potion, and it will
bring forth the Plague, for if you cast the Medicine, you may take it the
second, third, or fourth time by the whole half, or less measure, as your
stomach will bear it: if any do take it, and thereupon happen presently
amendment, or a rising, or sore, you may think it to be the sickness, for the
nature of the Medicine is to prevent the Plague, and in others, to expel the
sore, if it be not taken too late, in which case the stomach will not break it
easily, nor after two or three times taking, if you minister it to any, let it
be at their first sickness, least if their disease be other, they may receive
harm thereby.

Jelly of Frogs.
Take the Jelly of Frogs in March, and still it in a glass Still, it is a good
Medicine to stop blood, and for the heat and redness of the face, and good to
cure green Wounds.

For the Toothache.
Take of Sparemints, and ground Ivy, of each a handful, and a good spoonful of
Bay Salt, stamp all these very well together, and boil them in a pint of the
strongest Vinegar that you can get, let these boil altogether until they come
to a quarter of a pint, then strain it, and put it into a glass, and stop it
very close, when your teeth does ache, take a spoonful of it bloud-warm, and
hold it in your mouth on that side the pain is.

For to make teeth stand fast.
Take roots of Vervin in old Wine, and wash the teeth therewith.

For the perilous Cough.
Take white Horehound, and stamp it, and wring out the juice, and mingle it
with Honey, and sees it, and give it the sick to drink; or else Sack, and
Garlic seed, and roast it in the fire, and take away the peelings, and eat the
rest with Honey, or else take Sage, Rue, Cummin, and powder of Pepper, and
sees all these together in Honey, and make there of an Electuary, and take
thereof a spoonful in the morning, and another at night.

For a man that has no taste in meat or drink.
Take a pottle of clear Water, and a good handful of Dandilion, and put it in
an earthen pot, and sees it till it come to a quart, and then take out the
Herbs and put in a good quantity of white sugar, till you think it be somewhat
pleasant, and then put it into a vessel wherein it may cool, and then take
twenty or thirty Almonds, blanch them, and beat them in a Mortar, and when the
Water is cold put it to the Almonds, and then strain it through a clean Cipris
bag without compulsion, and if it he thick let it run through again, and so
keep it in a vessel, and drink of it often, at all times as you please.

To preserve a man from the Plague.
Take Aloe epaticum, and Aloe succatrine, fine Cinnamon, and Myrrh, of each of
them three drachms, Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloe, Mastick, Bole Armoniack, of each
of them half a dram, let all these things be well stamped in a clean Mortar,
then mingle them together, and after keep them in some close vessel, and take
of it every morning two penny weight, in half a glasseful of white Wine, with a
little water, and drink it in the morning at the dawning of the day, and so may
you, by the grace of God, go safely into all infection of the air and Plague.

For a Tetter, or Ring-worm.
Take Mercury a quarter of an ounce, Camphire one penny weight, make them into
powder, and rub them in a fair porrenger, then take and mix them with the water
of the Vine four or five spoonfuls, stir them well together, then put as much
more water to that, then strain it through a cloth, and take Poppey seeds one
quarter of an ounce, beat that in a stone Mortar with a spoonful of the water
of the Vine, putting a little and a little, till you have spent the quantity of
a pint, then put to half an ounce of the Milk of Coker-nut, so mix them well
together with your first Receipt, and strain them as you make Almond milk
through a fair cloth, then keep it in a glass for your use.

To keep ones body loose whenever you need.
Take two ounces of Sirupe of Roses, one ounce of Sine, one pennyworth of
Annise seeds, one stick of Licorice, one pint of Posturn water, sees them
altogether till it sees to half a pint, then strain them forth, then boil the
two ounces of Sirupe of Roses, and drink it warm.

For a red Face.
Take Brimstone that is whole, and Cinnamon, of either of them by even
proportion by weight, beat them into small powder, searse it through a fine
cloth upon a sheet of white paper, to the quantity of an ounce or more, and so
by even proportions in weight mingle them together in clean clarified Capons
grease, and temper them well together until they be well mollified, and then
put them to a little Camphire to the quantity of a Bean, and so put the whole
confection in a glass.

For a young Child to make water.
Boil Organy in fair water, and lay it warm to the Child's Navel.

A Medicine for the falling of the Uvula into the Throat.
Take a red Colewort leaf, whereof cut away the middle rind, then put the leaf
into a paper, and let it be burnt in hot embers or ashes, then take the leaf
out, and lay it hot on the top or crown of the bare head, and it will draw it
up into his place, and rid you of your pain.

A Medicine for the heat of the soles of the feet, that comes by rheum or
blood.
Take a quantity of Snailes of the garden, and boil them in stale Urine, then
let the Patient bath and set his feet therein, and using that often, he shall
be cured.

Gascons own Powder.
Take of powder of Pearl, of red Corral, of Crabs eyes, of Hearts horn, and
white Amber, of each one ounce, beat them into fine powder, and fearce them,
then take so much of the black toes of the Crabs claws as of all the rest of
the pouders, for that is the chief worker, beat them, and fearce them finely as
you do the rest, then weigh them severally, and take as much of the toes as
you do of all the rest of the five pouders, and mingle them well together, and
make them up into balls with jelly of Hartshorn, whereunto put or infuse a
small quantity of Saffron to give them color, let them lie till they be dry
and fully hard, and keep them for your use.

The Crabs are to be gotten in May or September, before they be boiled.

The dose is ten or twelve grains in Dragon water, Carduus water, or some other
Cordial water.

The Apothecaries in their composition of it, use to put in a dram of good
Oriental Bezar to the other pouders, as you may see in the prescription
following.

This is thought to be the true composition invented by Gascon, and that the
Bezar, Musk, and Ambergrice, were added after by some for curiosity, and that
the former will work without them as effectually as with them.

The Apothecaries Gascon Powder, with the use.
Take of Pearls, white Amber, Hartshorn, eyes of Crabs, and white Corral, of
each half an ounce, of black thighs of Crabs calcined two ounces, to every
ounce of this powder put a dram of Oriental Bezar; reduce them all into very
fine powder, and searce them, and with Hartshorn jelly with a little Saffron
put therein, make it up into a paste, and make therewith Lozanges or Trochises
for your use.

You must get your Crabs for this powder about May or in September, before they
shall be boiled; when you have made them, let them dry and grow hard in a dry
air, neitheir by fire nor Sun.

Their dose is ten or twelve grains, as before prescribed in the former page.

The Powder prescribed by the Doctors in their last London Dispensatory, 1650.
called by the Powder of Crabs claws.
Take of prepared Pearls, eyes or stones of Crabs, of red Corral, of white
Amber, of Hartshorn, of Oriental Bezar stone, of each half an ounce, of the
powder of the black tops of the claws of Crabs to the weight of all the
former; make them all into powder according to Art, and with jelly made with
the skins or castings of our Vipers, make it up into small Tablets or
Trochisces, which you must warily dry as before prescribed, and reserve for
your use.

The Countess of Kents Powder, good against all malignant and pestilent,
Diseases, French Pox, Small Pox, Measels, Plague, Pestilence, malignant or
scarlet Fevers, good against Melancholy, dejection of Spirits, twenty or thirty
grains thereof being exhibited in a little warm Sack or Hartshorn jelly to a
man, and half as much, or twelve grains to a Child.
Take of the Magistery of Pearls, of Crabs eyes prepared, of white Amber
prepared, Hartshorn, Magistery of white Corral, of Lapis contra Parvam, of each
a like quantity, to these pouders infused put of the black tips of the great
claws of Crabs, to the full weight of all the rest, beat these all into very
fine powder, and searce them through a fine Lawn Searce, to every ounce of this
powder add a dram of true Oriental Bezar, make all these up into a lump or
mass with the jelly of Hartshorn, and color it with a little Saffron, putting
thereto a scruple of Ambergrice, and a little Musk also finely poudered, and
dry them (made up into small Trochises) neither by fire nor Sun, but by a dry
air: you may give to a man twenty grains of it, and to a child twelve grains.

FINIS.
A True Gentlewomans DELIGHT. Wherein is contained all manner of COOKERY:
Together with Preserving, Conserving, Drying and Candying, Very necessary for
all Ladies and Gentlewomen.

Published by W. I. GENT.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. and are to be sold by William Shears, at the Sign of
the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

To the Virtuous and most Hopeful Gentlewoman, Mis. Anne Pile, Eldest Daughter
of the Honorable Sr. Francis Pile Barouet, deceased.
Most accomplished LADY,
THe many singular favors, which I have received, not only from your worthy
self, but also from your thrice noble progenitors, justly oblige me by all the
due ties of gratitude, to tender a just acknowledgement: I wish the same heart,
that for many and just causes truly honors you, had any present worthy your
acceptance. Now shall it be your singular goodness to patronage this small
Treatise, which (if I mistake no^) carries with it two parts, Delight, and
Utilitie. I doubt not then, but that it will find a general acceptance among
all those, who are any way the least Lovers of such pleasing and all
delightful studies. I intend not to paraphrase upon its worth, its use, and
singular profit, which abundantly speaks it second unto none that have been
published of the like nature: So hoping you will accordingly esteem of it, I
beg pardon for my boldness, and rest ever,

A true and faithful honuorer of your transparent Virtues, W. J.

TO THE READER.
FRIENDLY READER.
Here thou have a small Treatise entitled, A true Gentlewomans Delight,
presented to thy view: be so courteous as to read before thou censure it. If
then the effect be answerable to it is name, I shall be right glad: If their be
any Errors, it will be no error, but a singular token of thy exemplar humanity
to pass it by, and sign it with thy pardon; for which I engage my self,

Thine on the like occasion W. J.

A Table of the Contents.
TO make an excellent Jelly. 1. To make a Christ all Jelly. 2. To make Apple
Cream. 3. To make a trifle Cream. ibid. To make clouted Cream. 4. To make a
Quince Cream. ibid. To make a fresh Cheese. 5. To make a Codling Cream. 6. How
to make a Goosbery Fool. ibid. How to make a white Fool. 7. To make a Goosbery
Custard. ibid. To make a Fool. 8. To make Cheese-cakes. 9. To make a Sack
Posset. ibid. To make Leach. 10. To make yellow Leach. ibid. To make a
slip-coat Cheese. 11. To make Cheese-loaves. 12. How to make a good TAnsie. ib.
To make black Tart stuff. 13. To make yellow Tart stuff. ibid. To make a made
dish. 14. To make sauce for a Shoulder of Mutton. ibid. To fry Aplepies. 15.
To make Curd-Cakes. ib. To make Furmenty. ibid. To make an Artechoke pie. 16.
To make a Chicken pie. 17. To bake beef like red Deer. 18. To roast a Shoulder
of Mutton with Thyme. ibid. To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Oysters. 19. To
make Angelets. ib. To make black puddings. 20. To make white puddings. ib. To
make Almond puddings. 21. To make a pudding to bake. 22. To make a pudding to
boil. ib. To make a Cream pudding to be boiled. 23. To make a whitepot. 24. To
make a forced dish of any cold meat. ib. To make a forced dish of a Leg of
Mutton or Lamb. 25. How to boil a Calves head with Oysters. ibid. To fry a
Coast of Lamb. 26. To Strew Saucedges. ib. To boil Ducks. ib. To make white
broth with a Capon. 27. To make stewed broth. 28. To make Gallendine Sauce for
a Turkey. ibid. A good way to stew Chickens. 29. To boil a leg of Mutton. ibid.
To keep Quinces all the year. 30. To pickle Cowcumbers. 31. To pickle
Purslane. ib. To do Clove-gilliflowers for Salleting all the year. 32. To
pickle Broom-buds. ibid. To pickle Oysters. 33. To make grout. 34. To make
Jelly of Marmalade. ib. To make Jelly of Pippins. 35. To preserve Oranges. 36.
To preserve green Wallnuts. ib. To preserve white Quinces. 37. To make
Goosberry Tarts. ib. To preserve Rasberries. ib. To preserve Currants. 38. To
preserve Medlers. ib. To preserve Goosberries. 39. To make Goosberry-Cakes. 40.
To do Goosberries like Hops. ib. To preserve Apricocks. 41. To make Apricock
Cakes. ibid. To make Mackaroons. ib. How to preserve white Damsons green. 42.
How to preserve Mulberries. ibid. How to preserve Pippins white. 43. To make
white Quince Cakes. ibid. Which way to preserve grapes. 44. How to preserve
Damsons. ib. How to make Cakes of Lemons or Violets. ibid. How to preserve
Quinces red. 45. How to make Biscuit bread. ib. How to preserve Grapes to look
clear and green. 46 How to Candie Apricocks. 47. How to make paste of
Barberies, or English Currants, or Goosberries. 48. How to make paste of Oranges
and Lemons. 49 How to make paste Royal in Spice. 50. How to Candie Pears,
Plums, or Apricocks, that shall look as clear as Amber. ibid. How to make paste
Royal white, that you may make Court bowls, Caps, Gloves, Shoes, or any
pretty thing printed in moulds 51. How to make fine Diet-bread 52. How to
preserve Apricocks. ib. How to preserve Damsons. 53. How to make pap of Barley.
54. How to Candy Lemons and Oranges. 55. How to make Cakes of Almonds. 56. How
to make white Lemon Cakes. ibid. How to make oil of Violets. 57. How to
preserve Pomecitron. ib. How to Candy Ringo roots. 58. How to Candy all kind of
Fruitrages, as Oranges and Lemons, etc. 59. How to Candy all kind of flowers in
ways of the Spanish Candy. ibid. How to make Essings. 60. How to make Sugar
Cakes. 61. How to make a Calves-foot Pie. ibid. How to make a very good Pie.
62. How to make Simbals. ib. How to preserve Angelico roots. 63. How to boil a
Capon with Brewis. ibid. How to make a Spice Cake. 64 To make broth for a
Neats-tongue. 65. To souce a Carpe or Gurnet. ib. To make a fine Pudding. ibid.
To make a broth to drink. 66. To boil a Chicken, Partridge, or Pyton. ibid. A
broth to eat on Fasting days. 67. To make Ponado. 68. To make a Candle. ib. To
make Almond Butter. 69. To stew Beef. ibid. To souce a young Pig. 70 To boil
Flounders or Pickerels after the French fashion. ibid. To make flesh of
Apricockes. ibid. To make flesh of Quinces. 71 To dry Cherries. 72 To dry
Peaches. 73 To boil Veale. 74 To boil a Capon in white broth ibid. To boil a
Capon or Chicken in white broth with Almonds 75 To boil Brawn. ibid. To boil
a Gammon of Bacon 76. How to boil a Rabbet. ibid. How to boil a Mallard with
a Cabbage. 77. How to boil a Duck with Turnips. ibid. How to boil Chickens
and Sorrel sops. 78. How to boil a Pike in white broth ibid. How to boil
diverse kind of Fishes. 79. How to make Sallet of all manner of Herbs. 80. How
to stew steakes between two dishes. ibid. How to stew Calves-feet. ibid. How to
stew a Mallard. 81. How to stew Trouts. ibid. How to stew Smelts or Flounders
82. How to stew a Rabbet. ibid. How to stew a Pullet or Capon. 83. How to stew
cold Chickns. ibid. How to make paste for a Pasty of Venison. ibid. How to make
paste for a Pie to keep long. 84. How to make paste for a Custard. ibid. How to
make paste for buttered Loaves. ibid. How to make paste for Dumplins. 85. How
to make puffe-paste. ibid. How to bake a Gammon of Bacon. 86. How to bake
Fillets of Beef, or Clods, instead of red Dear. ibid. How to bake Calves-feet.
87. How to bake a Turkey. ibid. How to bake a Hare. ibid. How to bake Quinces
or Wardens, so as the fruit look red and the crust white. 88. How to bake
Chucks of Veal. ibid. How to bake a Chicken Pie. 89. How to bake a Steak Pie.
ibid. How to make an Italian Pudding. 90. How to bake a Florentine. ibid. How
to roast a Breast of Veal. 91. How to roast a Hare. ibid. How to roast a
Shoulder of Mutton. 92. How to roast a Neats-tongue. ibid. To roast a Pig with
a Pudding in the belly. 93. How to roast a Leg of Mutton. ibid. How to roast a
neck of Mutton. 94. How to roast a Shoulder, or Haunch of Venison, or Chine of
Mutton. ibid. How to roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal. 95 How to roast a
Gigget of Mutton. ibid. How to fry Bacon, 96 How to fry Chickens. ibid. How to
fry Calfes-feet. ibid. To fry Tongues. 97. To make Fritters. ibid. To souce
Brawn. 98. To souce a Pig. ibid. To souce Eeles. 99 To souce a Breast of Veal.
ibid. To souce a Tench or Barbell. 100. To souce a Fillet of Veal. ibid. To
marble Beef, Mutton, or Venison. 101. To marble Fish. ibid. To make a Tart of
Wardens. 102. To make a Tart of green Pease. ibid. To make Tart of Rice. 103.
To make a Tart of Medlers. ibid. To make a Tart of Cherries. ibid. To make a
Tart of Strawberries. 104. To make a Tart of Hips. ibid. To make a Pippin Tart.
ibid. To scald Milk after the Western fashion. 105. To make a Junket. ibid. To
make Bonny Clutter. 106. To make a Whitepot. ibid. To make a Pudding in haste.
107. To make a Pudding in a Dish. ibid. To Boil Cream. 108. To draw Butter.
ibid. Lady of Arundels Manchet. ibid. To boil Pigeons. 109 A Florendine of
sweet-breads or Kidneys. ibid. A Pork Pie. 110. A Chicken Pie. ibid. A Lamb
Pie. 111. Sauce for a shoulder of Mutton. ibid. A Lumber Pie. ibid. An Oyster
Pie. 112. A Hartechoak Pie. 113. A Calves foot Pie. 114. A Skerret Pie. ibid. A
Calves head Pie for Supper. 115. A Lark Pie. ibid. A hot Neats tongue for
Supper. 116. A cold Neats-tongue Pie. 117. A Potato Pie for Supper. ibid.
Pigeon or Rabbet Pie. 118. To make a puff Paste. ibid. A Pudding. 119. A
Frigasie of Veal. 120. A Frigasie of Lamb. ibid. A Frigasie of Chickens. 121. A
Frigasie of Rabbets. ibid. To harsh a Shoulder of Mutton. 122. To make a Cake.
ibid. To make a Leg of Mutton three or four dishes. ibid. To souce an Eele.
124. To souce a Calfes head. 125. A stewed Rabbit. 126 To boil Chickens. ibid.
To boil a Rabbit. 127 To boil a Duck. ibid. A roasted Shoulder of Mutton.
128.
A TRUE GENTLEWOMANS DELIGHT.
To make an Excellent Jelly.
TAke three gallons of fair water, boil in it a knuckle of Veal, and two Calves
feet slit in two, with all the fat clear taken from between the claws, so let
them boil up a very tender Jelly, keeping it clean scummed, and the edges of
the pot, always wiped with a clean cloth, that none of the scum may boil in,
then strain it from the meat, and let it stand all night, the next morning take
away the top and the bottom, and take to every quart of this Jelly, half a
pint of Sherrie Sack, half an ounce of Cinnamon, and as much Sugar as will
season it, six whites of Eggs very well beaten, mingle all these together, then
boil it half an hour, and let it run through your Jelly Bag.

To make a Crystal Jelly.
Take two Calves feet, fley them, and lay them in fair spring water with a
knuckle of Veal, shift it in half a dosen waters, take out the fat betwixt the
claws, but do not break the bones, for if you do, the marrow of the Bones
will stain the Jelly, when they are soft and picked very clean, boil them very
tender in spring Water, when they be boiled tender, take them up, and use them
at your pleasure to eat, let the broth stand in an earthen pot or Pipkin till
it be cold, then take away the bottom and the top, and put the clear into a
fair Pipkin, put into it half a pound of fair Sugar Candy, or other Sugar,
three drops of oil of Nutmeg, three drops of oil of Mace, and a grain of
Musk, and so let it boil leasurely a quarter of an hour, then let it run
through a Jellie bag into a gallie pot when it is cold, you may serve it in
little careless lumps being taken out with a childs spoon, and this is the
best way to make your Crystal Jelly.

To make Apple Cream at any time.
Take twelve Pippins, pare and slit them, then put them in a skillet, and some
Claret Wine, and a race of Ginger shred thin, and a little Lemon pilled small,
and a little Sugar, let all these stand together till they be soft, then take
them off, and put them in a dish till they be cold, then take a quart of Cream
boyld with a little Nutmeg a while, then put in as much of the apple stuff, to
make it of what thickness you please, and so serve it up.

To make a Trisle Cream.
Take some Cream, and boil it with a cut Nutmeg, and Lemon pill a while, then
take it off, cool it a little, and season it with a little Rosewater and Sugar
to your taste, let this be put in the thing you serve it in, then put in a
little Runnet to make it come, then it is fit to eat.

To make clouted Cream.
Take three gallons of new Milk, set it on the fire till it boyleth, make a
hole in the middle of the cream of the Milk, then take a pottle or three pints
of very good cream, put it into the hole you made in the middle of the Milk as
it boyleth, and let it boil together half an hour, then put it into three or
four milk-pans, so let it stand two days, if the weather be not too hot, then
take it up in clouts with a scummer or slice, and put it in that which you will
serve it, if you like it seasoned, you may put some Rosewater between every
clout as you lay one upon another, with your slice in the dish you mean to
serve it in.

To make a Quince Cream.
Take the Quinces and put them into boiling water unpared, and let them boil
very fast uncovered that they may not color, and when they are very tender,
take them of, and peel them, and beat the pap very small with Sugar, and then
take raw cream, and mix with it, till it be of fit thickness to eat like a
cream, but if you boil the cream with a stick of Cinnamon, I think it the
better, but it must stand till it be cold before you put it to the Quinces.

To make a fresh Cheese.
Take a pint of fresh cream set it on the fire, then take the white of six
eggs, beat them very well, and wring in the juice of a good Lemon into the
whites, when the cream seeths up, put in the whites, and stir it about till it
be turned, and then take it off, and put it into the cheese-cloth, and let the
whay be drawn from it, then take the curd and pound it in a Stone mortar with a
little Rose water and Sugar, then put it into an earthen Cullender, and so let
it stand till you send it to table, then put it into a dish, and put a little
sweet cream to it, and so serve it in.

To make a Codling Cream.
After your Codlings be thoroughly cooled and yielded, put them into a silver
dish, and fill the dish almost half full with Rosewater, and half a pound of
Sugar, boil all this liquor together, until half be consumed, and keep it
stirring till it be ready, then fill up your dish with sweet cream, and stir
it till it be well mingled, and when it has boyld round about the dish, take
it up, sweeten it with Sugar, and serve it cold.

How to make a Goosberrie Fool.
Take your Goosberries and pick them, and put them into clean water, and boil
them till they be all as thick that you cannot discern what it is to the value
of a quart, take six yolks of Eggs well beaten with Rosewater, and before you
put in your Eggs season, it well with Sugar, then strain your Eggs, and let
them boil a little while, then take it up, and put it into a broad dish, and
let it stand, till it be cold, thus it must be eaten.

How to make a white Fool.
Take a quart of Cream, and set it over the fire, and boil it with whole
Cinnamon, and sliced Nutmeg, and Sugar, then when it is almost ready take the
whites of six Eggs, well beaten with Rosewater, and skum off the froth from
them, and put it into the Cream, and boil it together a pretty while, then
season it, and take the whole Spice out of it, and put it up in a broad dish,
and when it is cold then it must be eaten.

To make a Goosberry Custard.
Take as many Goosberries as you please, boil them till they be soft, then
take them out, and let them stand and cool, and drain them, draw them with your
hand through a canvas Strainer, then put in a little Rosewater, Sugar, and
three Whites, and stir them all together, and put them in a Skillet, and
stir them a pace else they will burn, let them stand and cool a little while,
and take them off, and put them in a glass.

To make a Fool.
Take two quarts of Cream, set it over the fire, and let it boil, then take
the yolks of twelve Eggs, and beat them very well with three or four spoonfuls
of cold Cream, before you put the Eggs into the hot Cream, take three or four
spoonfuls of the Cream out of the Skillet, and put it into the Eggs, and stir
it together, and then strain the Eggs into the Skillet of hot Cream, stirring
it all the time to keep it from turning, then set it on the fire, and let it
boil a little while, but keep it with stirring for fear of burning, then take
it off, and let it stand and cool, then take two or three spoonfuls of Sack and
put it in the dish, and some four or five Sippits, and put them in the Sack in
the dish, set the dish and Sippits a drying, and when they be dry that they
hang to the dish, sweeten the Cream, and pour it in the dish softly because the
Sippits shall not rise up, this will make three dishes, when it is cold it is
fit to be eaten.

To make Cheese-cakes.
For the crust take half a pint of Flower, and four spoonfuls of cold Water,
and three parts of a quarter of a pound of Butter, beat and knead these
together, and put the paste asunder several times, then roll it square, and
turn it over, then take a pint of Cream, and seven Eggs, and a quarter of a
pound of Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Currens plump before you put them
in, and a whole Nutmeg grated on a knife, the Pepper must be beaten but not too
much, it must be gently boiled and stirred as you do buttered Eggs, the stuff
must be cold, and then put in the coffin and so bake it.

To make a Sack Posset.
Take two quarts of pure good Cream, a quarter of a pound of the best Almonds,
stamp them into the Cream, and boil Amber and Musk therein, then take a pint
of Sack in a basin, and set it on a chafing dish till it be bloud-warm, then
take the yolks of twelve Eggs, with four whites, and beat them very well
together, and so put the Eggs into the Sack, and make it good and hot, let the
Cream cool a little before you put it into the Sack, then stir all together
over the coals till it be as thick as you would have it, if you take some
Amber, and Musk, and grind it small with Sugar, and strew it on the top of the
Posset, it will give it a most delicate and pleasant taste.

To make Leach.
Make your Jelly for your Leach with Calves feet, as you do your ordinary
Jelly, but a little stiffer, and when it is cold take off the top and bottom,
and set it over the fire with some Cinnamon and Sugar, then take your Turnsele,
being well steep in Sack, and crush it, and so strain it into your Leach, and
let it boil to such a thickness, that when it is cold you may slice it.

To make yellow Leach.
Your yellow Leach is just the same, but instead of Turnsele you must color it
with Saffron, and when it is boiled enough then put in your Saffron and not
before, it must not boil in it.

To make a slipcoat Cheese.
Take five quarts of new Milk from the Cow, and one quart of Water, and one
spoonful of Runnet, and stir it together, and let it stand till it does come,
then lay your Cheese cloth into the Vate, and take up your Curd as fast as you
can without breaking, and put into your Vate, and let the Whey soak out of it
self; when you have taken it all up, lay a cloth on the top of it, and one
pound weight for one hour, then lay two pound for one hour more, then turn him
when he has stood two hours, lay three pound on him for an hour more, then
take him out of the Vate, and let him lie two or three hours, and then salt
him on both sides, when he is salt enough, take a clean cloth and wipe him dry,
then let him lie on a day or a night, then put Nettles under and upon him, and
change them once a day, if you find any Mouse turd wipe it off, the Cheese will
come to his eating in eight or nine days.

To make Cheese-loaves.
Take the Curds of a tender new milk Cheese, and let them be well pressed from
the Whey, and then break them as small as you can possible, then take Crumes of
Manchet, and yolks of Eggs, with half the whites, and some sweet Cream, and a
little fine flower, mingle all these together, and make a paste of it, but not
too stiff, then make them into little loaves and bake them, when they be
baked, cut off the tops and butter them; with Sugar, Nutmeg, and melted Butter,
and put it in with a spoon, and stir it altogether, then lay on the tops, and
sear them with scraped Sugar.

How to make a very good Tansie.
Take fifteen Eggs, and six of the whites, beat them very well, then put in
some Sugar, and a little Sack, beat them again, then put about a pint or a
little more of Cream, then beat them again, then put in the juice of Spinach,
or of Primrose leaves, to make it green, then put in some more Sugar if it be
not sweet enough, then beat it again a little, and so let it stand till you fry
it, the first course is in, then fry it with a little sweet Butter, it must be
stirred and fried very tender, when it is fried enough, then put it in a dish,
and strew some Sugar upon it, and serve it in.

To make black Tart stuff.
To a dozen pound of Prunes take half a dozen of Malligo Raisins, wash and pick
them clean, and put them into a pot of water, set them over the fire till all
these are like pulpe, and stir them often least they burn too, then take them
off, and let them be rubbed through a hair Sieve hard with your hands, by
little and little till all be through, then season them to your taste with
searc'd Ginger.

To make yellow Tart stuff.
Take four and twenty Eggs, and beat them with Salt together, and put into a
quart of seething Milk, stirring it until it caudles, then take it off, and put
it into a napkin, hanging it up till all the Whey be run through, when it is
cold, take it and grind it in a stone Mortar with Sack and Sugar to your taste,
and otherwise to make it look white, leave the yolks, and instead of Sack put
in Rosewater.

To make a made Dish.
Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds, beat them small, and in the beating of
them put in a little Rosewater to keep them from oyling, strain them into
Cream, then take Arterchoak bottomes, and Marrow, and boil the redness of the
Marrow out, then take a quart of Cream, and boil it with Dates, Rosewater, and
Sugar, and when it is boiled to a convenient thickness take it off, and take
your Arterchoak and pare of the leaves, and lay them into the dish, and some
Marrow upon them, then pour some Cream upon them, then set it upon coals till
you serve it in.

To make Sauce for a shoulder of Mutton.
Take a few Oysters, and some sweet herbs, and an Onion, and a pint of white
Wine, and a little beaten Nutmeg, a little Salt, and a large Mace, a little
Lemon pild and a little Sugar, a little leaker posset, if you have no Oysters
take Capers in the room of them, and some gravie of the Mutton.

To fry Applepies,
Take Apples and pare them, and chop them very small, beat in a little
Cinnamon, a little Ginger, and some Sugar, a little Rosewater, take your paste,
roll it thin, and make them up as big Pasties as you please, to hold a spoonful
or a little less of your Apples, and so stir them with Butter not to hastily
least they be burned.

To make Curd-Cakes.
Take a pint of Curds, four Eggs, take out two of the whites, put in some
Sugar, a little Nutmeg, and a little flour, stir them well together, and drop
them in, and fry them with a little Butter.

To make Furmentie.
Take a quart of sweet Cream, two or three sprigs of Mace, and a Nutmeg cut in
half, put into your cream, so let it boil, then take your French Barlie or
Rice, being first washed clean in fair water three times, and picked clean,
then boil it in sweet milk till it be tender, then put it into your cream, and
boil it well, and when it has boiled a good while, take the yolks of six or
seven eggs, beat them very well, and thicken on a soft fire, boil it, and stir
it for it will quickly burn, when you think it is boiled enough, sweeten it to
your taste, and so serve it in with Rosewater, and Musk Sugar, in the same
manner you may make it with wheat.

To make an Arterchoak Pie.
Take the bottom of six Arterchoaks, being boiled very tender, put them in a
dish, and put some vinegar over them, season them with Ginger and Sugar, a
little Mace whole, putting them into a Pie, and when you lay them in, lay some
marrow, and Dates sliced in, and a few Raisins of the Sun in the bottom, with
good store of butter, so close the Pie, and when it is half baked, take a dish
of Sack, being boiled first with Sugar, and a pill of Orange, put it in your
pie, and set it in the Oven again, till you use it.

To make a Chicken Pie.
Make your paste with good store of Butter, and yolks of Eggs and Sugar, then
take six chickens small, taking out the breast bone, and trussing them round,
take two Nutmegs, and a good quantity of Cinnamon, and put it in in little
pieces, take two yolks of eggs, and beat them with six spoonfuls of verjuyce,
then take your juice and verjuyce, and a little salt, stir them well together,
take a good deal of butter, and wet it in the verjuyce, and put it in the
bellies of the Chickens, so lay them in the pie with butter under them, then
take half a pound of Currants washed and dried, so lay them on the top of the
Chickens, with a little piece of Marrow, Barberies, Grapes, and good store of
Butter and Sugar as will season it, a little before you draw out your Pie, put
in Verjuyce and Sugar boiled together.

To bake Beef like red Deer.
Take a pound of Beef, and slice it thin, and half a pint of good wine Vinegar,
some three Cloves, and Mace above an ounce, three Nutmegs, pound them
altogether, Pepper and Salt according to your discretion, and a little Sugar,
mix these together, take a pound and half of Suet, shred and beat it small in a
mortar, then lay a row of Suet, a row of Beef, strew your spices between every
lain, then your Vinegar, so do till you have laid in all, then make it up, but
first beat it close with a rolling pin, then press it a day before you put it
in your past.

To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Thyme.
Draw your shoulder of mutton, and when it is half roasted, save the gravie,
and cut a good deal of the inside of it, and mince it gross, and boil it in a
dish with the gravie, and Time, Claret wine, and sliced Nutmeg, and when your
shoulder is roasted, lay it in the dish with sliced Lemon, but remember to
scorch your Mutton in rosting, as you do when you boil it.

To roast a shoulder of mutton with Oysters.
When you open the Oyster save the liquor, then season them with Pepper, and a
little Cloves, and Mace, and Herbs finely chopped, and the yolk of two or
three eggs chopped small, and some Currants parboiled a little, then stuff your
shoulder of mutton thick with your Oysters, then season it, and lay it to the
fire, and roast it, then take the rest of your Oysters and boil them with a
little white Wine, and some Butter, this is sauce for your shoulder of mutton,
when your Oysters are opened, you may perboil them in their own liquor, then
take them out and season them.

To make Angellets.
Take a quart of new Milk, and a pint of cream, and put them together with a
little runnet, when it is come well, take it up with a spoon, and put it into
the vate softly, and let it stand two days till it is pretty stiff, then slip
it out, and salt it a little at both ends, and when you think it is salt
enough, set it a drying, and wipe them, and within a quarter of a year they
will be ready to eat.

To make Black Puddings.
Take your blood when it is warm, put in some salt, and when it is cold
thoroughly, put in your groats well picked, and let it stand soking a night, then
put in herbs, which must be Rosemary, large Savorie, Penniroyal, Thyme and
Fennel, then make it soft with putting of good cream hot, until the blood look
pale, then beat four or five eggs whites and all, and mingle it, then season it
with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Fennel seeds, then put good store of Beef Suet in
your stuff, and mince your fat not to small.

To make white Puddings.
After the humbles are very tender boiled, take some of the lights, with the
hearts, and all the flesh and fat about them, picking from them all the sinnews
and skin, then chop the meat small as can be, then put to it a little of the
Liver finely searced, some grated bread searced, four or five yolks of Eggs, a
pint of very good cream, a spoonful or two of Sack, a little Sugar, Cinnamon,
Cloves and Mace, a little Nutmeg, a few Canary seeds, a little Rosewater
mingled with a good deal of Swines fat, a little Salt, roll it in rouls two
hours before you go about it, let the fat side of the skin be turned and
steeped in Rosewater till you fill them.

To make Almond Puddings.
Take a pound of Almonds blanched, and beat them very small, with a little
Rosewater, boil good milk with a flake of Mace, and a little sliced Nutmeg, when
it is boiled take it clean from the spice, then take the quantity of a penny
loaf grate it, and searce it through a Collender, and then put it into the
milk, and let it stand till it be pretty cool, then put in the almonds, and
five or six yolks of Eggs, and a little Salt and Sugar, what you think fit,
and good store of Beef suet, and Marrow very finely shred.

To make a Pudding to bake.
Take a penny loaf, pare it, slice it in a quart of Cream, with a little
Rosewater, and break it very small, take three ounces of Jordan Almonds
blanched, and beaten small with a little Sugar, put in some eight Eggs beaten,
a Marrow bone, and two or three Pippins sliced thin, or any way, mingle these
together, and put in a little Amber greece if you please.

To make a boyld Pudding.
Take a pint of cream or milk, boil it with a stick of Cinnamon a little while,
and take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, put in six Eggs, take out
three whites, beat your Eggs a little before you put them into the milk, then
stir them together, then take a penny roll and slice it very thin, and let it
lie and soke, and then braid it very small, then put in some Sugar, and butter
your cloth before you put it in, it will take but a little while seething, and
when you take it up, melt a little fresh Butter and a little Sack, and Sugar,
beat all these together, and put it unto the dish with your pudding to be
served in.

To make a Cream Pudding to be boiled.
Take a pint and a half of thick cream, and boil it with Mace, Ginger, and
Nutmeg quartered, then put to it eight Eggs, with four whites beaten, and
Almonds blancht a pound, and strained in with the cream, a little Rosewater and
Sugar, and a spoonful of flour searced very fine, then take a thick napkin, wet
it, and rub it with flour, and tie the pudding up in it where Mutton is boiled,
or in the Beef-pot, remember to take out the whole spice out of the cream when
it is boiled, the sauce for this pudding is a little Sack, and Sugar, a pretty
piece of Butter, you must blanch some Almonds, when they are blanched, cut
every Almond in three or four pieces the long way, and stick them up an end
upon the pudding very thick.

To make a Whitepot.
Take a pint and a half of cream, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, a little
Rosewater, a few Dates sliced, a few Raisins of the Sun, six or seven Eggs, and
a little large Mace, a sliced Pippin, or Lemon cut sippet fashion, for your
dishes you bake in, and dip them in Sack or Rosewater.

To make a forced dish of any cold meat.
Take any cold meat and shred it small, a little Cloves and Mace, and Nutmeg,
and two yolks of Eggs, a spoonful or two of Rosewater, a little grated bread, a
little Beef suet shred small, make it up into balls or any fashion you please,
and boil them in fried suet between two earthen dishes, your suet must boil
before you put in your meat; for sauce, a little Butter, Verjuyce, and Sugar.

To make a forced dish of a Leg of Mutton, or Lamb.
Take a Leg of Mutton, or Lamb, cut out the flesh, and take heed you break not
the skin of it, then perboyle it, and mince it with a little Beef suet, put
into it a little sweet Herbs shred, three or four Dates sliced, a little
beaten Nutmeg, Cloves, and Mace, a few Currants, a little Sugar, a little
Verjuyce, three or four Eggs, mix them together, and put them in the skin, and
set it in a dish and bake it.

To boil a Calves head with Oysters.
Take the head, and boil it with Water and Salt, and a little white Wine or
Verjuyce, and when it is almost enough, then cut some Oysters, and mingle them
together, and a blade or two of Mace, a little Pepper, and Salt, and a little
liquour of the Oysters, then put it together, and put it to the Calves head,
and the largest Oysters upon it, and a slit Lemon, and Barberries, so serve it
in.

To fry a coast of Lamb.
Take a coast of Lamb, and perboyle it, take out all the bones as near as you
can, and take some four or five yolks of Eggs beaten, a little Thyme, and
sweet Majoram, and Parsley minced very small, and beat it with the Eggs, and cut
your Lamb into square pieces, and dip them into the Eggs and Herbs, and fry
them with Butter, then take a little Butter, white Wine, and Sugar for sauce.

To stew Saucesedges.
Boil them in fair Water and Salt a little, for sauce boil some Currants
alone, when they be almost tender, then pour out the water, and put in a little
white Wine, Butter, and Sugar.

To boil Ducks.
When they be half boiled, take a quart of the liquour and strain it, and put a
quart of white Wine, and some whole Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs sliced, and
Cinnamon, and a few Onions shred, a bundle of sweet Herbs, a few Capers, and a
little Sampire, when it is boiled put some Sugar to season it withal.

To make white Broth with a Capon.
Trusse your Capons, and boil ^^em in fair Water, and when they are half
boiled, take out three pints of the liquour, and put it to a quart of Sack, and
as much white Wine, and slice two ounces of Dates half or quarter wise as you
please, a little whole Mace, Cloves, and Cinnamon, a Nutmeg shred, of each a
little quantity, boil the broth in a pipkin by it self, until the Dates begin
to be tender, then put in the marrow of two bones, and let it boil a little,
not too much for fear, then when your Capons be near ready, break twenty Eggs,
save the yolks from the whites, and beat the yolks until you may take up a
spoonful and it will not run beside the spoon, then you must put a little cold
broth to them, and so strain them through a cloth, then take up some of the hot
broth to heat your Eggs, because else it will turn, let it have a walm or two
after your Eggs be in, but not sees too much for fear it turns, then dish
your Capons, and pour your broth on them, and garnish your dish as you please.

To make stewed Broth.
Take a neck of Mutton, or a rump of Beef, let it boil, and scum your pot
clean, thicken your pot with grated bread, and put in some beaten Spice, as
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, and a little Pepper, put in a pound of Currants, a
pound and a half of Raisins of the Sun, two pound of Prunes last of all, then
when it is stewed, to season it put in a quart of Claret, and a pint of Sack,
and some Saunders to color it, and a pound of Sugar to sweeten it, or more if
need be, you must sees some whole Spice to garnish your dish withal, and a
few whole Prunes out of your pot.

To make gallendine Sauce for a Turkey.
Take some Claret Wine, and some grated Bread, and a sprig of Rosemary, a
little beaten Cloves, a little beaten Cinnamon, and some Sugar.

An exceeding good way to stew Chickens.
Take Chickens, fley them, and cut them in pieces cross way, then put them in
a Pipkin or Skillet, and cover them almost with Pepper, and Mace, and Water, so
let it stew softly with a whole Onion in it till part of that liquour be
consumed, then put in as much white Wine as will cover them again, take Parsley,
sweet Majoram, Winter Savory, with a little Thyme, and shred them very small,
and put them in, and let them boil till they are almost enough, then put in a
good piece of Butter.

To boil a leg of Mutton.
Take a leg of Mutton and stuff it, for the stuffing take a little Beef suet,
and a few sweet Herbs, chop them small, and stuff it, and then boil it, and
put in a handful of sweet Herbs, cut them small, mingle a hard Egg amongst the
Herbs, and strew it upon the Mutton, melt a little Butter and Vinegar, and
pour it into the dish, and send it in.

To keep Quinces all the year.
First you must ^ore them, and take out the kernels clean, and keep the cores
and kernels, then set over some water to boil them, then put them in when you
set over the water, then let them boil till they be a little soft, and then
take them up, and set them down till they be cold, then take the kernels and
stamp them, and put them into the same water they were boiled in, and let them
boil till they be thick, see you have as much liquour as will cover the
Quinces, and if you have not enough, take of the smallest Quinces and stamp
them to make more liquour, and when it is boiled good and thick, you must
strain it through a course cloth, and when the Quinces be cold, then put them
into a pot, and the liquour also, and be sure the liquour cover them, you must
lay some weight upon them to keep them under, so cover them close, let them
stand fourteen days, and they will work of their own accord, and they will
have a thick rind upon them, and when they wax hoary or thick, then take it
from the liquour, for it will have a skin on it within a month or six weeks.

To pickle Cowcombers.
Take the Cowcombers, and wash them clean, and dry them clean in a cloth, then
take some Water, and Vinegar, and Salt, and some Dill tops, and some Fennel
tops, and a little Mace, make it fast enough, and sharp enough to the taste,
then boil it a while, and then take it off, and let it stand and be cold, and
then put in the Cowcombers, and lay a board on the top to keep them down, and
tie them close, and within a week they will be fit to eat.

To pickle Purslain.
Take the Purslain, and pick it in little pieces, and put it into a pot or a
barrel, then take a little Water, Vinegar, and Salt to your taste, it must be
pretty strong of the Vinegar and Salt, and a little Mace, and boil all these
together, and pour this liquour in seething hot into the Purslain, and when it
is cold tie it close, but put a little board on the top to steep it down, and
within a week or two it is fit to eat.

To do Clove-gilliflowers up for salletting all the year.
Take as many Clove-gilliflowers as you please, and slip off the leaves, then
strew some Sugar in the bottom of the gallipot that you do them in, and then
a lane of Gilliflowers, and then a lane of Sugar, and so do till all the
Gilliflowers be done, then pour some Claret Wine into them as much as will
cover them, then cut a piece of a thin board, and lay it to them to keep them
down, then tie them close, and set them in the Sun, and let them stand a month
or thereabouts, but keep them from any rain or wet.

To pickle Broom buds.
Take as many Broom buds as you please, make linen bags, and put them in, and
tie them close, then make some brine with Water and Salt, and boil it a
little, let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen Pot, and put the
bags in it, and lay some weight upon them, let it lie there till it look black,
then shift it again, so you must do as long as it looks black, you must boil
them in a little cauldron, and put them in vinegar a week or two, and then they
be fit to eat.

To Pickle Oysters.
Take your Oysters and pick them out of the shells, and save the liquor that
comes from them, then take your Oysters one by one, and wash them clean out of
grift, then strain the liquor, then take a quantity of white wine, and a large
Mace or two, and two or three slices of Nutmeg, and Pepper grossly beaten, and
salt them, boil it together, then put in your Oysters and boil them, then take
the yolke of an Egg, and beat it well with Wine Vinegar, then take up your
Oysters, and let them cool, then put in your Egg and let it boil, hang it off,
and let it cool, and put it up together.

To make grout.
Take some Wheat and Beans, and when you have made it into Malt, then rittle
it, then take some water, or some small Wort, and heat it scalding hot, and put
it into a pail, then stir in the Malt, then take a piece of four leaven, then
stir it about, and cover it, and let it stand till it will cream, then put in
some Orange pills, then put it over the fire and boil it, keeping it stirring
till all the white be gone.

To make jellie of Marmalet.
Take Quinces and pare them, cut them into water in little pieces, and when you
have done all, then take them out of the water and weigh them, and to every
pound of Quinces, take five quarters of a pound of Sugar, and half a quarter,
then put it into the Skillet, and put as much water as will make it pretty
thin, then set it on the fire, then clarify it with the white of an Egg, and
scum it off clear, then put in your Quinces, and let it boil a pretty pace,
and cover it close, till it is pretty thick, then leave stirring it till it is
thick enough for Marmalet, then take it off, and put it in your glass, and do
it with your knife in little works, when you have done let it stand, your
costly must boil all the while, you must put in as much water as will make it
pretty thin, when it is boiled to a pretty good color, then stir it, and
weigh it, then take of loaf Sugar as much as it weighs and boil it altogether
to a Jellie, then pour it into your Marmalet glass, then put it in a stove,
and put some fire in every day.

To make Jelly of Pippins.
Take Pippins and pare them, and quarter them, and coar them, lay them in
water, and when you set them on the fire, shift them in another water, and put
them in a skillet, put as much water as will cover them and a little more, set
them over the fire, and make them boil as fast as you can, when the Apples are
soft, and the liquor taste strong of the Apples, then take them off, and strain
them through a piece of canvass gently; take to a pound of juice a pound of
Sugar, then set it on the fire, when it is melted, strain it into a basin, and
rince your skillet again, set it on the fire, and when it is boiled up, then
scum it, and make it boil as fast as you can, and when it is almost boiled, put
in the juice of three Lemons strained through a cloth, if you will have Orange
pill, pare it thin, that the white be not seen, and then lay it in the water
all night, then boil them in water till the pill be soft, then cut them in long
pieces, then put it into the Sirrup, and stir it about, and fill your glasses,
and let it stand till it be cold, and then it is ready to eat.

To preserve Oranges.
Take a pound of Oranges, and a pound of Sugar, pill the outward rind, and
inward white skin off, take juice of Oranges, put them into the juice, boil
them half an hour, and take them off.

To preserve green Walnuts.
Take Walnuts, and boil them till the water do taste bitter, then take them
off, and put them in cold water, and pill of the bark, and weigh as much Sugar
as they weigh, and a little more water then will wet the Sugar, set them on the
fire, and when they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two days, and
boil them again once more.

To preserve white Quinces.
Take a pound of Quinces, boil them with the skins on, but core them and pare
them, take a quarter of a pound of Sugar, with water no more then will wet the
Sugar, put the Quinces into it presently, boil them as fast as may be, and skin
them, when the Sirrup is thick take it up.

To make Goosberrie Tarts.
Take a pint of Goosberries, and put them into a quarter of a pound of Sugar,
and two spoonfuls of water, and put them on the fire, and stir them as you did
the former.

To preserve Resberries.
Take as many as you please, a lay of Sugar, and a lay of Resberries, and so
lay them into the Skillet, and as much Sugar as you think will make Sirupe
enough, and boil them, and put two spoonfuls of water in, boscom it, take it
off, and let it stand.

To preserve Currants.
Part them in the tops lay a lain of Currants, and a lain of Sugar, and so boil
them as fast as you do Resberries, do not put in the spoon, but scum them,
boil them till the Sirrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and let them
stand, till they be cold, and put them in a glass.

To preserve Medlers.
Take the just weight of Sugar as they weigh, to a pound of Sugar put a pint
and a half of water, scald them as long as the skins will come off, stone them
at the head, put the water to the Sugar, and boil it, and strain it, put in the
Medlers, boil them apace, let them stand till they be thick, then take them off.

To preserve Goosberries.
Take the fairest Goosberries you can get with the stalks one, prick three or
four holes in every one of them, then take the weight of them in Sugar, lay the
best part of the Sugar in the bottom of a Silver or peuter dish, then lay your
Goosberries one by one upon it, strew some of the rest of the Sugar upon them,
and put two spoonfuls of the water into half a pound, then set the Goosberries
on a chafing dish of coals, and let them stand uncovered, scalding upon the
fire a pretty while before they boil, but not too long, for then they will
grow red, and when they be boiled, let them not boil too fast, when they be
enough put them up, you must put the rest of the Sugar on them as they boil,
and that will harden them, and keep them from breaking.

To make Goosberrie Cakes.
Prick as many Goosberries as you please, and put them into an earthen pitcher,
and set it in a kettle of water till they be soft, and then put them into a
sieve, and let them stand till all the juice be out, and weigh the juice, and
as much Sugar, as Sirupe; First boil the Sugar to a Candie, and take it off,
and put in the juice, and set it on again till it be hot, and take it off, and
set them in a press till they be dry, then they are ready.

To do Goosberries like Hops.
Take pricks of black Thorn, then take Goosberries, and cut them a little a
cross, and then take out the stones, and then put them upon the pricks, and
weigh as much Sugar, as they weigh, and take a quarter or a pint of water and
put into the Sugar, and let it boil a while, then put in the hops, let them
stand and scald two hours upon the coals till they be soft, then take out the
Hops, and boil the Syrup a while, then take it off, and put in the Hops.

To preserve Apricocks.
First stone them and weigh them, and take as much Sugar as Apricocks, put it
in a Basin, some in the bottom, and some on the top, let them stand all night,
set them on the fire till they be scalding hot then heat them twice more.

To make Apricock Cakes.
Take as many Apricocks as you please, and pare them, put as much Sugar as they
weigh, take more water then will melt the Sugar, then boil the Sugar and it
together till they be pretty stiff, take them off, and put them in saucers.

To make Mackeroons.
Take half a po^nd of Almonds, put them in water, stamp them small, put in some
Rose Water, a good spoonful of flower, four eggs, half a pound of Sugar, in
the beating of the Eggs, put in the Almonds, heat the oven hot enough to bake a
Custard, put them in, when you have taken them out, let them stand till they be
cold, they must be baked in earthen pans round, and buttered very thin.

How to preserve White Damsons green.
Take white Damsons, scald them in water till they be hard, then take them off,
and pick as many as you please, take as much Sugar as they weigh, strew a
little in the bottom, put two or three spoonfulls of water, then put in the
Damsons and the Sugar, and boil them, take them off, and let them stand a day
or two, then boil them again, take them off, and let them stand till they be
cold.

To preserve Mulberries.
Take as many Mulberries as you please, and as much Sugar as they weigh: First
wet the Sugar with some juice of Mulberies, stir your Sugar together, then put
in your Mulberries, then boil them apace, till you think they are boiled
enough, then take them off, and boil the Sirupe a while, and put it into the
Mulberries, let them stand till they be cold.

To preserve Pippins white.
Take some Pippins and pare them, and cut them the cross way, and weigh them,
and to a pound of Sugar, a pint of water, then put the Sugar to the water, and
then let it boil a while, and then put in the Pippins, and let them boil till
they be clear at the Core, take them off, and put them up.

To make white Quince Cakes.
Take Quinces and let them stand till they be cold, but not seethed till they
be tender enough, then take them off, and pare them, then scrape off the
softest, and do it through a sieve, and then weigh as much Sugar as it does
weigh, and beat it, and sift it into the Quinces, and stir it altogether, and
set it on the coals, and stir it about, but let it not boil at all, but let it
stand and cool, till it be pretty thick, then take it off, and put it in glass
saucers.

To preserve Grapes.
Stamp and strain them, let it settle a while, before you wet a pound of Sugar,
or grapes with the juice stone the grapes, save the liquor, in the stoning take
off the stalks, give them a boiling, take them off, and put them up.

To preserve Damsons.
Take as many as you please, and weigh as much Sugar as they weigh, and strew
some in the bottom, and some on the top, and you may wet the Sugar with some
Sirupe of Damsons, or a little water, then set them upon the fire, and let them
stand and soke softly about an hour, then take them off, and let them stand a
day or two, then boil them up, till you think they be enough, take them off,
and put them up.

How to make Cake of Lemons or Violets.
Take of the finest double refined Sugar, beaten very fine, and searced through
fine Tiff^nie, and to half a silver poringer of Sugar, put to it two spoonfuls
of water, and boil it till it be almost Sugar again, then grate of the hardest
rinded Lemon, then stir it into your Sugar, put it into your Coffins of Paper,
and when they be cold take them of.

To preserve Quinces red.
Take your Quinces and weigh them, to a pound put a pound of Sugar, and half a
pint of water, put your water to your Sugar, and let it stand, your Quinces
must be scalded till they be tender, take them off, pare them, and core them,
but not too much, then put them in the skillet where the Sugar is, then set
them on the fire, and let them boil two hours, if it be not enough, boil it a
little more, pour it to the Quinces, and stop it close.

To make Biscuit Bread.
Take a pound and a half of white loaf Sugar, and so much flower, as much
Annise seed, Coliander seed, and Carraway seed as you please, and twelve Eggs,
three whites lest out, take the Sugar and sift it fine, and the flower also,
and beat your Eggs a little, then mingle them well together with four spoonfuls
of damask Rosewater, beat them well together, and put in two spoonfuls more,
and beat it again about an hour and a half in all, then butter plate trenchers,
and fit them with stuff, scrape some Sugar on them, and blow it off again,
heat your oven hot enough to bake a Pie, and let the lid stand up a little
while, to draw down the heat from the top, then take the lid down again, and
let it stand till it be cool, that you may suffer your hand in the bottom, then
set in the plates, and set up the lid again, until they rise, then take them
out and loose them from the plates, and scrape the bottoms, and let them stand
four hours, then they be fit to eat.

To preserve Grapes to look clear and green.
Take a pound of Grapes with no stalks on them, when they do begin to be ripe,
then weigh as much double refined Sugar beaten small, then take the Grapes that
were weighed, stone them at the place where the stalks are, pull off the skins,
and strain some Sugar in the bottom of the thing you do them in, and so lay
them in the Sugar you did weigh, till you have stoned and pilled them, and so
strew the Sugar upon them, then set them on the fire, and let them boil as fast
as can be, till the Syrup be pretty thick, then take them off, and put them up
till they be cold.

To Candie Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks the fairest, and scald them, and peel them, between two
clothes ^rush the water softly out of them as dry as you can, without too much
flatting them, then take as much searced Sugar almost as much as they weigh,
and boil it altogether to a Candy height then take it off the fire, and lay
the Apricocks in it one by one, with a feather anoint them over, then set them
on a chafingdish of coals, and let them be through sod but not boil, then take
them off the fire, and set it in a stone or bloudwarm oven, and twice a day set
them on a fire, and turn them once at every heating, anointing them with a
feather, and the same Sirupe every time you take them off the fire, this do
until you see the Sirupe begin to sparkle, and full of eyes, then take them
out of the Sirupe, and lay them on glass plates, and dry them in a stone or
Oven, turning them a day or two, till they be dry, white Pear plums may be done
thus.

To make Paste of Goosberries, or Barberies, or English Currants.
Take any of these tender fruits, and boil them softly on a chafingdish of
coals, then strain them with the pap of a rotten Apple, then take as much Sugar
as it weighs, and boil it to a Candy height, with as much Rosewater, as will
melt the Sugar, then put in the pap of your fruit into the hot Sugar, and so
let it boil leasurely, till you see it reasonable stiff, almost as thick as
for Marmalet, then fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so put it into the Oven
upon two Billets, that the glass may not touch the bottom of the Oven, for if
it do it will make the paste tough, and so let it dry leasurely, and when it
is dry, you may box it, and keep it all the year.

To make Paste of Oranges and Lemons.
Take your Oranges and Lemons, and have on the fire two vessels of fair water
at once, boil them, and then shift the water seven times, that the bitterness
may be taken from them, and they very tender, then cut them through the midst,
and take out the kernels, and wring out all the water from them, then beat them
in an Alablaster mortar, with the paps of three or four Pippins, then strain it
through a fine strainer, then take as much Sugar as that pap does weigh, being
boiled to a Candy height, with as much Rose Water as will melt the Sugar, then
put the pap of your Oranges and Lemons into the hot Sugar, and so let it boil
leisurely with stirring, and when you see it stiff as for Manchet, then
fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so set it in a Stove or Oven, and when it
is thoroughly dry, box it for all the year.

To make Paste Royal in Spice.
Take Sugar the quantity of four ounces, very finely beaten and searced, and
put into it an ounce of Cinnamon, and Ginger, and a grain of Musk, and so beat
it into paste, with a little Gum-Dragon steeped in Rosewater, and when you have
beaten it into paste in a stone mortar, then role it thin, and print it with
your mouldors, then dry it before the fire, and when it is dry, box and keep it
all the year.

To Candie Pears, Plums, or Apricocks, that shall look as clear as Amber.
Take your Apricocks and Plums, and give every one a cut to the stone in the
notch, then cast over Sugar on them, and bake them in an Oven as hot as for
Manchet close stopped, bake them in an earthen platter, let them stand half an
hour, then take them out of the dish, and lay them one by one upon glass
plates, and so dry them, if you can get glasses made like Marmalet boxes to lay
over them they will be sooner candi'd, this is the manner to candie any such
fruit.

To make paste Royal white that you may make Court Bouls, or Caps, or Gloves,
Shoes, or any pretty thing Printted in Moulds.
Take half a pound of double refined Sugar, and beat it well, and searce it
through a fine lawn, then put it into a fine Alablaster mortar, with a little
Gum-dragon steeped in a little Rose Water and a grain of Musk, so beat them in
a mortar, till it come to a pretty paste, then roll it thin with a rouling
pin, and print it with your moulders, like Gloves, Shoes, or any thing else,
and some you may roll very thin with a rouling pin, and let dry in an Ashen
dish, otherwise called a Court cap, and let it stand in the dish till it be
dry, and it will be like a saucer, you must dry them on a board far from the
fire, but you must not put them in an Oven, they will be dry in two or three
hours and be as white as snow, then you may, guilt Box and Cap.

To make Fine Diet-Bread.
Take a pound of fine flower twice or thrice dressed, and one pound and a quarter
of hard Sugar finely beaten, and take seven new laid Eggs, and put away the
yolks of one of them, then beat them very well, and put four or five spoonfuls
of Rosewater amongst them, and then put them into an Alablaster or Marble
mortar, and then put in the flower and Sugar by degrees, and beat it or pound
it for the space of two hours, until it be perfectly white, and then put in
an ounce of Canary seeds, then butter your Plates or Saucers, and put into
every one, and so put them into the oven; if you will have it gloss and Icie
on the top, you must wash it with a feather, and then strew Sugar very finely
beaten on the top before you put it into the Oven.

To preserve Apricocks.
Take your Apricocks, and put them into a skillet of fair water, and put them
over the fire, until they be something tender, then take them up out of the
water, and take a bodkin and thrust out the stone at the top, and then peel off
their skins, and when you have so done put them into a silver dish or basin,
and lay Sugar very finely beaten over and under them, then put a spoonful or
two of water unto them, and set them over a very soft fire until they be ready,
then take them up, and lay them into another dish a cooling, and if you see
good boil the sirupe a little more, when they are cold, and the sirupe almost
cold, put them up in a gally-pot or glass altogether.

To preserve Damsons.
Take a pound or something more of pure Sugar finely beaten, and then take a
pound of Damsons and cut one scotch in the side of each of them, then put a row
of Sugar in a silver dish or basin, and then lay in a row of Plums, and then
cover it with Sugar, and so lay it in till they be all in, and then take two
spoonfuls of clean water, and make a hole in the middle of them, and set it
over a very soft fire, and look to it carefully, for fear the Sugar should
burn, and when the Sugar is all dissolved, shake them together, and stir them
gently, and then set them down and cover them till they be cold, and when they
are cold, set them upon the coals again, and then let them boil gently till
they be ready, and when they are ready take them down, and take them every one
by its stem, and cover them with the skins as well as you can, and then put
them all one by one in a dish, and if the sirupe be not boiled enough, set it
over and let it boil a little longer, and when the Plums be cold, put them in
a gally-pot or glass, and pour the sirupe to them while it is a little warm,
you must not forget to take away the skin of the Plums as it rises.

To make Papp of Barley.
Take Barley, and boil it in fair water softly until it begin to break, then
put that liquour out, then put as much hot water to it as you put forth, and so
let it boil till it be very soft, then put it into a Cullender and strain it,
then take a handful of Almonds, and grind them very well with your Barley and
some of the liquour, so season it with Sugar, and a little Rosewater, a little
whole Mace, and Cinnamon, and boil them well together.

To candy Lemons and Oranges.
Take the peels of your Oranges and Lemons, the white cut away, then lay them
in water five or six days, shifting them twice every day, then sees them till
they be very tender, then take them out of the water, and let them lie till
they be cold, then cut them in small pieces square, the bigness of a penny or
less, then take to every three two ounces of Sugar, put to it a quantity of
fair Water, and a less quantity of Rosewater, and make a sirupe thereof, then
skum it very clean, and put in your peels, and let them boil for the space of
an hour or longer, if you find your liquour wanting you may put in more water
at your pleasure, then boil them a little space after with a little sharp
fire, stirring it always for burning, then take it off the fire three or four
times, stirring them all the while, and set them on again until they be
candied.

To make Cakes of Almonds.
Take one pound and a half of fine Flower, of Sugar twelve ounces beaten very
fine, mingle them well together, then take half a pound of Almonds, blanch
them, and grind them fine in a Mortar, then strain them with as much Sack as
will mingle the Flower, Sugar, and Almonds together, make a paste, bake them in
an oven not too hot.

To make white Lemon Cakes.
Take half a dozen of yellow Lemons the best you can get, then cut and pare
them, leave none of the yellow behind, then take away the sour meat of it, and
reserve all the white, and lay it in water two days, then sees it in fair
water till it be soft, then take it out, and set it by till the water be gone
from it, then weigh it, and take twice the weight in Sugar, mince the white
stuff very fine, then take an earthen pipkin, and put therein some fair Water,
and some Rosewater, if you have a pound of Sugar, you must have half a pint of
water, of both sorts alike, let your water and Sugar boil together, then skum
it, and put in the stuff, and so let them boil together, always stirring it
till it be thick, it will show very thin, and when it is cold it will be thick
enough.

To make Oil of Violets.
Set the Violets in Sallade oil, and strain them, then put in other fresh
Violets, and let them lie twenty days, then strain them again, and put in
other fresh Violets, and let them stand all the year.

To preserve Pomecitron.
Take Pomecitron and grate off the upper skin, then slightly cut them in pieces
as you think good, lay them in water four and twenty hours, then set over a
posnet with fair water, and when it boyles put them in, and so shift till you
find the water be not bitter, then take them up and weigh them, and to every
pound of Pomecitron put a pound and quarter of Sugar, then take of your last
water a pint and quarter, set your water and Sugar over the fire, then take two
whites of Eggs and beat them with a little fair water, and when your sirupe
begins to boil cast in the same that rises from the Eggs, and so let it
boil, then let it run through a clean fine cloth, then put it in a clean
Posnet, and when your sirupe begins to boil put in your Pomecitron, and let it
boil softly three or four hours, until you find your sirupe thick enough; be
sure you keep them always under sirupe, and never turn them, take them up, and
put them into your glass, and when they be cold cover them.

To candy Ringus Root.
Take your Ringus Roots and boil them reasonable tender, then peel them, and
pith them, then lay them together, then take so much Sugar as they weigh, and
put it into a posnet with as much Rosewater as will melt it, then put in your
Roots, and so let it boil very softly until the Sugar be consumed into the
Roots, then take them and turn them, and shake them till the Sugar be dried up,
and then lay them a drying upon a lattice of wire until they be cold, in like
sort you may candy any other Roots, which you please.

To candy all kind of Fruitrages, as Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Lettice stocks,
the Sugar Candy such as the Comf^t-makers do candy the Fruits.
Take one pound of refined Sugar, and put it into a posnet with as much water
as will wet it, and so boil it until it come to a candy height, then take all
your fruit being preserved and dried, then draw them through your hot Sugar,
and then lay them on your hardle, and in one quarof an hour they will be finely
candied.

To candy all kind of Flowers in ways of the Spanish Candy.
Take double refined Sugar, put it into a posnet with as much Rosewater as will
melt it, and put into it the papp of half a roasted Apple, and a grain of Musk,
then let it boil till it come to a candy height, then put in your Flowers
being picked, and so let it boil, then cast them on a fine plate, and cut it
in ways with your knife, then you may spot it with Gold and keep it.

To make Essings.
Take one peck of Oatmeal grots, the greatest you can get and the whitest, pick
it clean from the black, and searce out all the smallest, then take as much
evening Milk as will cover it and something more, boil it, and cool it again
till it be bloudwarm, then put it to the Oatmeal and let it soak all night, the
next morning strain it from your Milk as dry as you can through a cloth, then
take three pints of good Cream, boil it with a Mace and the yolks of eight
Eggs, when it is boiled put it into your stuff, then put in six Eggs more
whites and yolks, season it with a good quantity of Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and
Ginger, and a less quantity of Cloves and Mace, put in as much Sugar as you
think will sweeten it, have a good store of Suet shred small, and forget not
Salt, so boil them.

To make Sugar Cakes.
Take one pound of fine Flower, one pound of Sugar finely beaten, and mingle
them well together, then take seven or eight yolks of Eggs, and if your Flower
be good, take one white or two as you shall think good, take two Cloves, and a
pretty piece of Cinnamon, and lay it in a spoonful of Rosewater all night, and
heat it almost bloud-warm, temper it with the rest of your stuff, when the
paste is made, make it up with as much have as you can, bake them in a soft
oven.

To make a Calfes-foot Pie.
Take your Calfes-feet, boil them, and blanch them, then boil them again till
they be tender, then take out all the bones, season it with Cloves, Mace,
Ginger, and Cinnamon, as much as you shall think good, then put in a good
quantity of Currants and Butter, bake your Pie in a soft oven, and when it is
baked, take half a pint of white Wine Vinegar, beat three yolks of Eggs, and
put to the coals, season it with Sugar and a little Rosewater, always stirring
it, then put it into your Pie, and let it stand half a quarter of an hour.

To make a very good Pie.
Take the backs of four white Herrings watered, the bones and skin taken away,
then take so much Wardens in quantity pared and cored, half a pound of Raisins
of the Sun stoned, mince all these together, and season it with Cinnamon and
Ginger, and when the Pie is baked put in a little Rosewater, and scrape Sugar
on it, if you put in Butter then put in a handful of grated bread.

To make Simbals.
Take fine Flower dried, and as much Sugar as Flower, then take as much whites
of Eggs as will make it a paste, and put in a little Rosewater, then put in a
quantity of Coriander seed, and Annise seed, then mould it up in that fashion
you will bake it in.

To preserve Angelico roots.
Take the roots and wash them, then slice them very thin, and lay them in water
three or four days, change the water every day, then put the roots in a pot of
water, and set them in the embers all night, in the morning put away the water,
then take to a pound of roots four pints of water, and two pound of Sugar, let
it boil, and skum it clean, then put in the roots, they will be boiled before
the sirupe, then take them up, and boil the sirupe after, they will ask you a
whole days work, for they must boil very softly; at Saint Andrews time is
the best time to do them in all the year.

To boil a Capon with Brewis,
Take a Capon, and trusse him to boil, set him on the fire in a good quantity
of water, skum it very clean, before you set on your Capon put a little winter
Savory and Thyme into the belly of it, and a little Salt and gross Pepper,
when you have skummed it clean, cover it close to boil, then take a good
handful of Herbs, as Marigolds, Violet leaves, or any such green Herbs, as
you shall think fit, wash them, and set them on the fire with some of the
uppermost of the broth that boyles the Capon, then put into it good store of
Mace, and boil it with the Capon, when the herbs be boiled, and the broth
very green, and almost consumed away, take the uppermost of your Capon and
strain it together, and scald your Brewis, and put it into a dish, and lay the
Capon on them.

To make a Spice-Cake.
Take one bushel of Flower, six pound of Butter, eight pound of Currants, two
pints of Cream, a pottle of Milk, half a pint of good Sack, two pound of Sugar,
two ounces of Mace, one ounce of Nutmegs, one ounce of Ginger, twelve yolks,
two whites, take the Milk and Cream and stir it all the time that it boyles,
put your Butter into a basin, and put your hot seething Milk to it, and melt
all the Butter in it, and when it is bloud-warm temper the Cake, put not your
Currants in till you have made the paste, you must have some Ale yest, and
forget not Salt.

To make Broth for a Neats-tongue.
Take Claret Wine, grated Bread, Currants, sweet Butter, Sugar, Cinnamon,
Ginger, boil them altogether, then take the Neates tongue, and slice it, and
lay it in a dish upon sippets, and so serve it.

To souce a Carp or Gurnet.
Take fair Water, and Vinegar, so that it may be sharp, then take Parsley,
Thyme, Fennel, and boil them in the broth a good while, then put in a good
quantity of Salt, and then put in your Fish, and when it is well boiled put the
broth into a vessel, and let it stand.

To make a fine Pudding.
Take Crumbs of white Bread, and so much fine Flour, then take the yolks of
four Eggs, and one white, a good quantity of Sugar, take so much good Cream as
will temper it as thick as you would make Pancake batter, then butter your pan,
and bake it, so serve it, casting some Sugar upon it, you must shred suet very
small, and put into it.

To make a Broth to drink.
Take a Chicken, and a little of the neck of Mutton, and set them on, and scum
it well, then put in a large Mace, and so let it to boil while the Chicken be
tender, then take the Chicken out, and beat it all to pieces in a stone mortar,
and put it in again, and so let it boil from four pints to a little more then
half a pint, then ca^^ it through a strainer, and season it.

To boil a Chicken, Partridge, or Pyton.
Take your Chicken, and set it a boiling with a little of the neck of Mutton,
and scum it well, then put in a Mace, and (...) let it boil down, and when it
is almo^^ boiled, have some few herbs perboiled as Lettice, Endive, Spinach,
Marigo^^ leaves, for note these herbs are usual^^ used to be boiled, which by
course wi^^ hold their color in boiling, and put so^^ of these foresaid herbs
to the Chicken and Mutton, if you think your broth strong enough, take out
your mutton, if you see it not put a little piece of sweet Butter, and a little
verjuyce, and a very little Sugar, and Salt, so serve it in with sippets.

A Broth to drink.
Take a Chicken and set it on, and when it boils scum it, then put in a Mace,
and a very little Oatmeal, and such herbs as the party requires, and boil it
well down, and bruise the Chicken, and put it in again, and it is a pretty
broth, and to alter it you may put in half a dosen Prunes, and leave out the
herbs, or put them in, so when it is well boiled, strain it, and season it.

A Broth to eat on Fasting days.
Take fair water, and set it a boiling, and when it boileth, put to it so much
streined Oatmeal as you think will thicken it, and a large Mace, a handful of
Raisins of the Sun, as many Prunes, and as many Currants, if your quantity
require it, so boil it, and when it is boiled, season it with Salt and Sugar,
and a piece of sweet Butter if the time will allow it, and for an alteration,
when this broth is boiled, put in a quantity of cream, and it will do well.

To make Ponado.
The quantity you will make set on in a posnet of fair water, and when it
boyles put a mace in, and a little piece of Cinnamon, and a handful of
Currants, and so much bread as you think meet, so boil it, and season it with
Salt, and Sugar, and Rosewater, and so serve it.

To make a Caudle.
Take Ale, the quantity that you mean to make, and set it on the fire, and when
it is ready to boil, scum it very well, then cast in a large Mace, and take the
yolks of two Eggs for one mess or one draught, and beat them well, and take
away the skin of the yolks, and then put them into the Ale, when it seeths, be
sure to sti^ them well till it sees again for a youngling, then lel it boil a
while, and put in your Sugar, and if it be to eat, cut three or four tosts of
bread thin, and toste them dry, but not brown, and put them to the caudle, if
to drink, put none.

To make Almond Butter.
Blanch your Almonds, and beat them as fine as you can with fair water two or
three hours, then strain them through a linen cloth, boil them with
Rose Water, whole Mace, and Annise seeds till the substance be thick, spread it
upon a fair cloth draining the whey from it, after let it hang in the same
cloth some few hours, then strain it, and season it with Rosewater and Sugar.

To stew Beef.
Take a good Rumpe of Beef cut from the bones, shred Turnips and Carroots
small, and Spinach, and Lettice, put all in ^pan, and let it stew four hours
with so much water, and a quart of white Wine ^s will cover it when it is
stewed enough, then put in a wine glass full of Elder vinegar, and serve it in
with sippets.

To Souce a young Pig.
Take a young Pig being scalded, boil it in fai^ water, and white Wine, put
thereto some Bay leaves, some whole Ginger, and some Nutmegs qua^tered, a few
whole Cloves, boil it thoroughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen
pot.

To boil Flounders or Pickrels after the French Fashion.
Take a pint of white Wine, the tops o^ young Thyme, and Rosemary, a little
whole Mace, a little whole Pepper, seasoned with Verjuyce, Salt, and a piece o^
sweet Butter, and so serve it; this brot^ will serve to boil fish twice or
thrice in or four times.

To make flesh of Apricocks.
Take Apricocks when they are gree^ and pare them and slice them, and ta^^ half
their weight in Sugar, put it to the^ so put them in a skillet, and as much
water as you think will melt the Sugar, so let them boil, and keep them with
stirring till they be tender, and so take them off, and scum them very clean,
so put them forth of the skillet and let them stand, take as much Sugar as you
had before, and boil it to a Candy height, and then put in your Apricocks, and
set them over a soft fire, but let them not boil, so keep them with often
stirring, till the Sirupe begin to jellie, then put them in glasses, and keep
them for your use.

To make flesh of Quinces.
Take Quinces, pare them, and core them, and cut them in halfs, boil them in a
thin Sirupe till they be tender, then take them off, and let them lie in
Sirupe, then take Quinces, pare them, and quarter them, take out the cores, put
as much water to them as will cover them, then boil them till they be very
tender, and then strain out the liquor clean from them, and take unto a pint of
that liquor, a pound of Sugar, put as much water to the Sugar as will melt it,
then boil it to a Candy height, then stir the Quinces that are in the Sirupe
as thin as you can: when your Sugar is at a full Candy height, put in a pint of
the liquor, then set it over a soft fire stirring it leisurely till the Sugar
be dissolved, then put in half a pound of your slices, keeping it still
stirring but not to boil, you must take the Jellie of Quince kernels, that have
lain in water two or three hours, take two good spoonfuls of it and put it to
the flesh, so keep it stirring leisurely till it begin to jellie upon the
spoon, then put it into thin glasses, and keep it in a stove.

To dry Cherries.
Take the fairest Cherries, stone them, take to six pound of Cherries a pound
of Sugar, put them into a skillet, straining the Sugar amongst them as you put
them in, then put as much water to them as will boil them, then set them upon a
quick fire, let them boil up, then take them off, and strain them very clean,
put them into to an earthen pan or pot, so let them stand in the liquor four
days, then take them up and lay them severally one by one upon silver dishes,
or earthen dishes, set them into an oven after the bread being taken out and so
shift them every day upon dry dishes, and so till they be dry.

To dry Peaches.
Take Peaches and coddle them, take off the skins, stone them; take to four
pound of Peaches a pound of Sugar, then take a gally pot and lay a laier of
Peaches, and a laier of Sugar, till all be laid out, then put in half a pint of
water, so cover them close, and set them in embers to keep warm, so let them
stand a night and a day, then put them in a skillet, and set them on the fire
to be scalding hot, then put them into your pot again, and let them stand four
and twenty hours then scald them again, then take them out of your Sirupe,
and lay them one silver dishes to dry, you may dry them in an Oven, when the
bread is taken out, but to dry them in the Sun is better, you must turn them
every day into clear Dishes.

To boil Veal.
Take Veal, and cut in thin slices, and put it into a Pipkin with as much water
as will cover it, then wash a handful of Currants, and as much Prunes, then
take a Court roll, and cut it in long slices like a Butchers skiver, then put
in a little Mace, Pepper, and Salt, a piece of Butter, a little vinegar, some
crumbs of Bread, and when it has stewed two hours, take it up and serve it.

To boil a Capon in white Broth.
Trusse a Capon to boil, and put it into a Pipkin of water, and let it boil
two hours, and when it is boiled, take up a little of the Broth, then take the
yolks of Eggs, and beat them very fair with your broth that you take up, then
put it by the the fire to keep warm, season it with grated Nutmeg, Sugar and
Salt, then take up your Capon, and pour this broth on it with a little Sack, if
you have it, garnish it with sippets, and serve it, remember to boil whole Mace
with your Capon, and Marrow, if you have it.

To boil a Capon or Chicken in white Broth with Almonds.
Boil your Capon as in the other, then take Almonds, and blanch them, and beat
them very small, putting in sometimes some of your broth to keep them from
oyling, when they are beaten small enough, put as much of the uppermost broth
to them as will serve to cover the Capon, then strain it, and wring out the
substance clear, then season it as before, and serve it with marrow on it.

To boil Brawn.
Take your Brawn four and twenty hours, and wash and scrape it four or five
times, then take it out of the water, and lay it on a fair table, then throw a
handful of Salt on every collar, then bind them up as fast as you can, with
Hemp, Bass, or Incle, then put them into your kettle when the water boyleth,
and when it boileth, scum it clean, let it boil until it be so tender that you
may thrust a straw through it, then let it cool until the next morning, by the
souced meats you may know how to souce it.

To boil a gammon of Bacon.
Water your Gammon of Bacon twenty four hours, then put it into a deep kettle
with some sweet hay, and let it boil softly six or seven hours, then take it
up with a scummer and a plate, and take off the skin whole, then stick your
Gammon full of Cloves, strew on some gross Pepper, then cut your skin like
Sippets, and garnish your Gammon, and when you serve it, stick it with bays.

To boil a Rabbet.
Fley and wash a Rabbet, and slit the hinder legs on both sides of the
backbone, from the forward, and truss them to the body, set the head right up
with a sciver right down in the neck, then put it to boiling with as much water
as will cover it, when it boyls, scum it, season it with Mace, Ginger, Salt,
and Butter, then take a handful of Parsley, and a little Thyme, boil it by it
self, then take it up, beat it with a back of a knife, then take up your
Rabbet, and put it into a dish, then put your Herbs to your Broth, and scrape
in a Carret root, let your broth boil a little while, put in salt, pour it on
your Rabbet, and serve it.

To boil a Mallard with a Cabbage.
Half roast your fowl, then take it off, and case it down, then put it into a
Pipkin with the gravie, then pick and wash some Cabbage, and put to your
Mallard with as much fair water as will cover it, then put in a good piece of
Butter, and let it boil an hour, season it with Pepper and Salt, and serve it
upon sops.

To boil a Duck with Turnips.
Half roast her, then cover it with liquor, boil your Turnips by themselves half
an hour, then cut them in Cakes and put them to your Duck, with Butter and
Parsley chopped small, and when it has boiled half an hour, season it with
Pepper and Salt, and serve them upon sops.

To boil Chickens, and Sorrel Sops.
Trusse your Chickens, and boil them in water and salt very tender, then take a
good handful of Sorrel, and beat it stalks and all, then strain it, and take a
Manchet, and cut it in Sippets, and dry them before the fire, then put your
green broth upon the coals, season it with Sugar, and grated Nutmeg, and let it
stand until it be hot, then put your sippets into a dish, put your Chickens
upon them, and pour your sauce upon it, and serve it.

To boil a Pike in White Broth.
Cut your Pike in three pieces, and boil it with water and Salt, and sweet
Herbs, let it boil until it stain, then take the yolks of half a dozen eggs,
and beat them with a little Sack, Sugar, melted Butter, and some of the Pikes
broth, then put it on the fire to keep warm, but stir it often, least it
curdle, then take up your Pike, and put the head and tail together, then cleave
the other pieces in two, take out the back bone, and put the one piece on the
one side, and the other piece on the other side, but blanch all, then pour on
your white broth, garnish your dish, with sippits, and boiled Parslie, and
strew on powder of Ginger, and wipe the edge of the dish round, and serve it.

To boil diverse kinds of Fishes.
Bat, Conger, Thornback, Plaice, Salmon, Trout, or Mullet, boil any of these
with Water, Salt, and sweet Herbs, when they boil skum it very clean, then
put in Vinegar, and let it boil till you think it is enough, your liquour must
be very hot of the Salt, then take it off, you may let it stand five or six
days in the liquour, then if you will keep it longer, pour that liquour away
and put Water and Salt to it, or soucing drink, you must remember to let your
Mullets boil softly, and your Thornback and other Fish very fast, you must
blanch your Thornback while it is warm, and when you serve any of these Fishes,
strew on some green Herbs.

To make Sallet of all manner af Herbs.
Take your Herbs, and pick them clean, and the Flowers, wash them clean, and
swing them in a strainer, then put them into a dish, and mingle them with
Cowcumbers, and Lemons, sliced very thin, then scrape on Sugar, and put in
Vinegar and Oil, then spread the flowers on the top, garnish your dish with
hard Eggs, and all sorts of your Flowers, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To stew Steakes between two dishes.
You must put Parsley, Currants, Butter, Verjuyce, and two or three yolks of
Eggs, Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, and so let them boil together, and serve them
upon sops, likewise you may do steakes of Mutton or Beef.

To stew Calves feet.
Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in two, and put them into a Pipkin with
strong broth, then put in a little powder of Saffron, and sweet Butter, Pepper,
^^gar, and some sweet herbs finely minced, let them stew an hour, put in salt
and serve them.

To stew a Mallard.
Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up, and cut it in little pieces,
then put it into a dish with the gravie, and a piece of fresh Butter, and a
handful of Parsley chopped small, with two or three Onions, and a
Cabbage-lettice, let them stew one hour, then season it with Pepper and Salt;
and a a little Verjuyce, then serve it.

To stew Trouts.
Draw your Trouts and wash them, and then put them into a dish with white Wine
and water, and a piece of fr^sh Butter, then take a handful of Parsley, a
little Thyme and a little Savorie, mince these small, and put to your Trouts
with a little Sugar, let them stew half an hour, then mingle the yolks of two
or three hard Eggs, and strew them on your Trouts with Pepper and Salt, then
let them stew a quarter of an hour, and serve them.

To stew Smelts or Flounders.
Put your Smelts or Flounders, into a deep dish with white Wine and Water, a
little Rosemary and Thyme, a piece of fresh Butter and some large Mace, and
salt, let them stew half an hour, then take a handful of Parsley, and boil it,
then beat it with the back of a knife, then take the yolks of three or four
Eggs, and beat them with some of your fish broth, then dish up your fish upon
sippets; pour on your sauce, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To stew a Rabbet.
Half roast it, then take it off the spit, and cut it in little pieces, and put
it into a dish with the gravie, and as much liquor as will cover it, then put
in a piece of fresh Butter, and some powder of Ginger; some Pepper and Salt,
two or three Pippins minced small, let these stew an hour, then dish them upon
sippets.

To stew a Pullet or Capon.
Half roast it, then cut it into pieces, and put it into a dish with the gravie,
and put in a little Cloves and Mace, with a few Barberies or Grapes, put these
to your Pullet with a pint of Claret, and a piece of Butter, let these stew an
hour, dish them upon sippets, and serve it.

To stew cold Chickens.
Cut them up in pieces, put them into a Pipkin. of strong broth, and a piece
of butter, then grate some bread, and a Nutmeg, thicken your broth with it,
season your meat with gross Pepper and Salt, dish it upon sippets, and serve it.

To make Paste for a pasty of Venison.
Take almost a peck of flower, wet it with two pound of butter, and as much
suet, then wet your Pastie, put in the yolks of eight or ten Eggs, make it
reasonable lithe paste, then roll it out, and lay on suet; First lay a paper
under your paste, then lay on your Venison, close it, pinke it, baste it with
butter, and bake it, when you draw it out, baste it with butter.

To make Paste for a Pie to keep long.
Your flower must be of Rye, and your liquor nothing but boiling water, make
your paste as stiff as you can, raise your Coffin very high, let your bottom
and sides be very thick, and your lid also.

To make Paste for a Custard.
Your Liquor must be boiling water, make your paste very stiff, then roll out
your paste, and if you would make a great Tart, then raise it, and when you
have done, cut out the bottom a little from the side, then roll out a thin
sheet of paste, lay a paper under it, strew flower that it may not stick to it,
then set your coffin on it of what fashion you will, then dry it, and fill it,
and bake it.

To make Paste for buttered Loaves.
Take a pottle of Flower, put thereto Ginger and Nutmegs, then wet it with
Milk, yolks of Eggs, Yest, and Salt, then make it up into little loaves, then
butter a Paper, and put the loaves on it, then bake them, when they are baked,
draw them forth, and cut them in Cakes, butter them, then set them as they
were, scrape on Sugar, and serve them.

To make Paste for Dumplins.
Season your flower with Pepper, Salt, and Yest, let your water be more then
warm, ^^en make them up like Manchets, but let them be somewhat little, then
put them into your water when it boyleth, and let them boil an hour, then
butter them.

To make Puffe-paste.
Take a quart of flower, and a pound and a half of butter, and work the half
pound of butter dry into the flower, then put three or four Eggs to it, and as
much cold water as will make it lithe paste, then work it in a piece of a foot
long, then strew a little flower on the table, and take it by the end, beat it
until it stretch long, then put the two ends together, and beat it again, and
so do five or six times, then work it up round, and roll it up broad, then
beat your pound of butter with a rouling pin, that it may be lithe, then take
little bits of your butter, and stick it all over the paste, then fold up your
paste close, and coast it down with your rolling pin, and roll it out again,
and so do five or six times, then use it as you will.

To bake a gammon of Bacon.
You must first boil it two hours, before you stuff it, stuff it with sweet
herbs, and hard Eggs chopped together with Parsley.

To bake fillets of Beef, or clods, instead of red Deer.
First take your Beef, and lard it very thick, then season it with Pepper and
Salt, Ginger, Cloves, and Mace good store, with a great deal more Pepper and
Salt then you would do to a piece of Venison, then close it, and when it is
baked put in some Vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger, and shake it well, then
stop the vent-hole, and let it stand three weeks before you spend it.

To bake Calves Feet.
Season them with Pepper, Salt, and Currants, when they be baked, take the yolks
of three or four Eggs, and beat them with Verjuyce or Vinegar, Sugar, and
grated Nutmeg, put it into your pie, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To bake a Turkey.
Take out her bones and guts, then wash him, then prick his back together
again, then perboil him, season him with pepper and salt, stick some Cloves in
the breast of him, then lard him, and put him into your Coffin with Butter, in
this sort you may bake a Goose, Feasant, or Capon.

To bake a Hare.
Take out his bones, and beat the flesh in a mortar with the Liver, then season
it with all sorts of spices, then work it up with three or four yolks of Eggs,
then lay some of it all over the bottom of your pie, then lay on some Lard,
and so do until you have laid on all, then bake it well with good store of
sweet butter.

To bake Quinces or Wardens so, as the fruit look red, and the crust white.
Your Wardens must be stewed in a Pipkin with Claret Wine, Sugar, Cinnamon, and
Cloves, then cover your Pipkin with a sheet of paste, and let it stand in the
oven five or six hours, then raise a Coffin of short paste, put in your
Wardens with Sugar, and put it into the Oven, when it has stood an hour, take
it out and wash it with Rose Water and Butter, then scrape on Sugar, and put it
in a quarter of an hour more, and it will be red upon the top, then scrape on
Sugar and serve it.

To bake Chucks of Veal.
Perboil two pound of the lean flesh of a leg of Veal, so it may be eaten,
mince it as small as grated bread, with four pound of Beef Suet, then season it
with Biskay Dates, and Carraways, Rosewater, Sugar, Raisins of the Sun and
Currants, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, then mingle them all together,
fill your pies, and bake them.

To Bake a Chicken Pie.
Season your chicken with Nutmeg, Salt, and Pepper, and Sugar, then put him
into your coffin, then take some Marrow and season with the same spice, then
roll it in yolks of Eggs, and lay it on your Chicken with minced Dates, and
good store of butter, then bake it, and put in a little Sack, or Muscadine, or
white Wine and Sugar, then shake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To bake a Steak Pie.
Cut a neck of Mutton in steaks, beat them with a cleaver, season them with
pepper and salt, and Nutmeg, then lay them on your Coffin, with butter and
large Mace, then bake it, then take a good quantity of Parsley, and boil it,
beat it as soft as the pulp of an Apple, put in a quarter of a pint of Vinegar,
and as much white Wine with a little Sugar, warm it well, and pour it over your
steaks, then shake it, that the gravie and the liquor may mingle together
scrape on Sugar and serve it.

To make an Italian Pudding.
Take a Manchet, and cut it in square pieces like a Die, then put to it half a
pound of Beef suet minced small, Raisins of the Sun the stones picked out,
Cloves, Mace, minced, Dates, Sugar, Marrow, Rose Water, Eggs, and Cream, mingle
all these together, and put it into a dish fit for your stuff, in less then
an hour it will be baked, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To bake a Florentine.
Take the kidney of a loin of Veal, or the wing of a Capon, or the leg of a
Rabbet, mince any of these small with the Kidney of a loin of Mutton, if it be
not fat enough, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, and Sugar, Cream,
Currants, Eggs, and Rosewater, mingle these four together, and put them into a
dish between two sheets of paste, then close it and cut the paste round by the
brim of the dish, then cut round about like Virginal keys, then turn up one,
and let the other lie, then pinke it, cake it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To roast a Breast of Veal.
Take Parsley and Thyme, wash them, and chop them small, then take the yolks of
five or six Eggs, grated bread and cream, mingle them together with Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, Currants, and Sugar, then raise up the skin of the breast of
Veal, and put in your stuff, prick it up close with a skiver, then roast it,
and baste it with butter, when it is roasted, wring on the juice of Lemon, and
serve it.

To roast a Hare.
Case your Hare, but cut not off her ears, nor her legs, then wash her, and
dry her with a cloth, then make a pudding and put into her belly, then sow it
up close, then trusse her as if she were running, then spit her, then take some
Claret Wine, and grated bread, Sugar, and Ginger, Barberries, and Butter, boil
these together for your sauce.

To roast a Shoulder of Mutton.
Roast it with a quick fire that the fat may drop away, and when you think it
is halfroasted, set a dish under it, and slash it with a knife acrosse as you
do Pork, but you must cut it down to the bone on both the sides, till the
gravy run into the dish, baste it no more after you have cut it, put unto the
gravy half a pint of white Wine Vinegar, a handful of Capers and Olives, five
or six blades of Mace, and a handful of Sugar, and stew all these together, and
pour it on your meat.

To roast a Neats-tongue.
Boil him, and blanch him, cut out the meat at the but end, and mingle it with
Beef Suet as much as an Egg, then season it with Nutmeg, and Sugar, Dates,
Currants, and yolks of raw Eggs, then put your meat to your Tongue, and bind it
with a Caul of Veal or Mutton, then roast it, baste it with Butter, save the
gravy and put thereto a little Sack or Muskadine, let it stew a little while,
then pour it on your Tongue, and serve it.

To roast a Pig with a Pudding in his belly.
Fley a fat Pig, trusse his head looking over his back, then temper as much
stuff as you think will fill his belly, then put it into your Pig, and prick
it up close, when it is almost roasted wring on the juice of a Lemon, when you
are ready to take it up, take four or five yolks of Eggs, and wash your Pig
all over, mingle your bread with a little Nutmeg and Ginger, then dry it, and
take it up as fast as you can, let your sauce be Vinegar, Butter, and Sugar,
the yolk of a hard Egg minced, and serve it hot.

To roast a Leg of Mutton.
Cut holes in a Leg of Mutton with a knife, then thrust in slices of Kidney
suet, and stick it with Cloves, roast it with a quick fire, when it is half
roast cut off a piece, underneath and cut it into thin slices, then take a pint
of great Oysters with the liquour, three or four blades of Mace, a little
Vinegar and Sugar, stew these till the liquour be half consumed, then dish up
your Mutton, pour on the sauce, and serve it.

To roast a Neck of Mutton.
Cut away the swag, and roast it with a quick fire, but scorch it not, baste it
with Butter a quarter of an hour, after wring on the juice of half a Lemon,
save the gravy, then baste it with Butter again, wring on the other half of the
Lemon, when it is roasted dry it with Manchet and grated Nutmeg, then dish it,
and pour on your sauce.

To roast a Shoulder or Haunch of Venison, or a Chine of Mutton.
Take any of the meats and lard them, prick them with Rosemary, baste them with
butter, then take half a pint of Claret Wine, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and
grated Bread, Rosemary, and Butter, let all boil together until it be as thick
as Watergruel, then put in a little Rosewater and Musk, it will make your
Gallintine taste very pleasantly, put it on a fitting dish, draw off your meat,
and lay it into a dish, strew it with Salt.

To roast a Shoulder or Fillet of Veal.
Take Parsley, winter Savory, and Thyme, mince these small with hard Eggs,
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Currants, work these together with raw yolks of
Eggs, then stuff your meat with this, roast it with a quick fire, baste it
with Butter, when it is roasted, take the gravy and put thereto Vinegar, Sugar,
and Butter, let it boil, when your meat is roasted pour this sauce on it, and
serve it.

To roast a Giggit of Mutton.
Take your Giggit, with Cloves and Rosemary, and lard it, roast it, baste it
with Butter, and save the gravy, put thereto some Claret Wine, with a handful
of Capers, season it with Ginger and Sugar, when it is boil (...) to your
Giggit, and pour on your (...).

To (...)
Take Bacon and slice it very thin, then bruise it with the back of your knife,
and fry it with sweet Butter, and serve it with Vinegar.

To fry Chickens.
Boil your Chickens in Water and Salt, then (...) with sweet Butter, and (...)
surely, then, ^ut thereto a little Verjuyce, and Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and Ginger,
the yolks of two or three raw Eggs, stir these well together, and dish up
your Chickens, pour the sauce upon them.

To fry Calfes-feet.
Boil them, and blanch them, then cut them in two, then take good store of
Parsley, put thereto some yolks of Eggs, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Pepper,
and Salt, and then roll your Ca^^^^-feet in them, and fry them with sweet
Butter, then boil some Parsley and beat it very tender, put to it Vinegar,
Butter, and Sugar, heat it hot, then dish up your Feet upon sippits, pour on
your sauce, scrape on some Sugar, and serve it hot.

To fry Tongues.
Boil them, and blanch them, cut them in thin slices, season them with Nutmeg,
Sugar, Cinnamon, and Salt, then put thereto the yolks of raw Eggs, the core of
a Lemon cut in square pieces like a Die, then fry them in spoonfuls with sweet
Butter, let your sauce be white Wine, Sugar, and Butter, heat it hot, and pour
it on your Tongues, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make Fritters.
Make your Batter with Ale, and Eggs, and Yest, season it with Milk, Cloves,
Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Salt, cut your Apples like Beans, then put your
Apples and Butter together, fry them in boiling Lard, strew on Sugar, and serve
them.

To souce Brawn.
Take up your Brawn while it be hot out of your boyler, then cover it with
Salt, when it has stood an hour, turn the end that was under upward, then
strew on Salt upon that, then boil your soucing drink, and put thereto a good
deal of Salt, when it is cold, put in your Brawn with the Salt that is about
it, and let it stand ten days, then change your soucing drink, and as you
change your soucing drink put in Salt, when you spend it, if it be too salt,
change it in fresh drink.

To souce a Pig.
Cut of the head, and cut your Pig into two fleikes, and take out the bones,
then take a handful of sweet Herbs and mince them small, then season your Pig
and Herbs with Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, and Salt, then strew your Herbs
in the inside of your Pig, then roll them up like two Collers of Brawn, then
bind them in a cloth fast, then put them a boiling in the boiling pot, put in
some Vinegar and Salt, when they are boiled very tender, take them off, let
them stand in the same liquour two or three days, then put them into soucing
drink, and serve it with Mustard and Sugar.

To souce Eeles.
Take two fair Eeles and fley them, cut them down the back, and take out the
bones, and take good store of Parsley, Thyme, and sweet Majoram, mince them
small, season them with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, and Salt, strew your Herbs in
the inside of your Eeles, then roll them up like a Collar of Brawn, put them
into a cloth, and boil them tender with Salt and Vinegar, when they are
boiled, then take them up, let it be in the pickle two or three days, and then
spend them.

To souce a Breast of Veal.
Take out the bones of a Breast of Veal, and lay it in water ten or twelve
hours, then take all manner of sweet Herbs and mince them small, then take a
Lemon and cut it in thin slices, then lay it with your Herbs in the inside of
your Breast of Veal, then roll it up like a Collar, and bind it in a cloth, and
boil it very tender, then put it into soucing drink, and spend it.

To souce a Tench or Barbell.
First cut them down the back, then wash them, then put them a boiling with no
more water then will cover them, when they boil, put in some Salt and Vinegar,
scum it very clean, when it is boiled enough, take it up and put it into a dish
fit for the Fish, then take out the bones, pour on as much liquour as will
cover it, with grated Nutmeg, and powder of Cinnamon, when it is cold serve it

To souce a Fillet of Veal.
Take a fair Fillet of Veal and lard i^ very thick, but take out the bones,
season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, and Salt, then roll it up hard, let your
liquour be the one half white Wine, the other ha^^ Water, when your liquour
boyleth put in your meat, with Salt, and Vinegar, and the peel of a Lemon, then
scum it very clean, let it boil until it be tender, then take it not up
until it be cold, and souce it in the same liquour.

To marble Beef, Mutton, or Venison.
Stick any of these with Rosemary and Cloves, then roast it, being first
joynted very well, then b^ste it often with Water and Salt, and when it is
thoroughly roasted take it up and let it cool, then take Claret Wine, and
Vinegar, and as much Water, boil it with Rosemary, Bays, good store of
Pepper, Cloves, Salt, when it has boiled an hour take it off and let it cool,
then put your meat into a Vessel, and cover it with this liquour and Hea^bs,
then stop it up close, the closer you stop it the longer it will keep.

To marble Fish.
Take Flounders, Trouts, Smelts, or Salmons, Mullets, Makrels, or any kind of
shell Fish, wash them, and dry them with a cloth, then fry them with Sallade
oil or clarified Butter, fry them very crispe, then make your pickle with
Claret Wine, and fair Water, some Rosemary, and Thyme, with Nutmegs cut in
slices, and Pepper, and Salt, when it has boiled half an hour take it off, and
let it cool, then put your Fish into a vessel, cover it with liquour and
Spice, and stop it close.

To make a Tart of Wardens.
You must first bake your Wardens in a pot, then cut them in quarters and core
them, then put them into your Tart, with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, then
close up your Tart, and when it is almost baked do it as your Warden Pie,
scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of green Pease.
Take green Pease ad sees them tender, then pour them out into a Cullender,
season them with Saffron, Salt, and sweet Butter, and Sugar, then close it,
then bake it almost an hour, then draw it forth and ice it, put in a little
Verjuyce and shake it well, then scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Rice.
Boil your Rice, and pour it into a Cullender, then season it with Cinnamon,
Nutmeg, Ginger, and Pepper, and Sugar, the yolks of three or four Eggs, then
put it into your Tart with the juice of an Orange, then close it, bake it, and
ice it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Medlers.
Take Medlers that are rotten, then scrape them, then set them upon a
Chafingdish of coals, season them with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar, Cinnamon,
and Ginger, let it boil well, and lay it on paste, scrape on Sugar, and serve
it.

To make a Tart of Cherries.
Take out the stones, and lay the Cherries into your Tart, with Sugar, Ginger,
and Cinnamon, then close your Tart, bake it, and ice it, then make a sirupe of
Muskadine and Damask-water, and pour this into your Tart, scrape on Sugar, and
serve it.

To make a Tart of Strawberries.
Wash your Strawberries, and put them into your Tart, season them with Sugar,
Cinnamon, Ginger, and a little red Wine, then close it, and bake it half an
hour, ice it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Tart of Hips.
Take Hips, and cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash them,
season them with Sugar, Cinnamon, and Ginger, then close your Tart, bake it,
ice it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make a Pippin Tart.
Take fair Pippins and pare them, then cut them in quarters and core them, then
stew them with Claret Wine, Cinnamon, and Ginger, let them stew half an hour,
then pour them out into a C^llender, but break them not, when they are cold lay
them one by one into the Tart, then lay on Sugar, bake it, ice it, scrape on
Sugar, and serve it.

To scald Milk after the Western fashion.
When you bring your Milk from the Cow strain it into an earthen pan, and let
it stand two hours, then set it over the fire until it begin to heave in the
middle, then take it off, but jog it as little as you can, then put it in a
room where it may cool, and no dust fall into it, this Milk or Cream you may
keep two or three days.

To make a Junket.
Take Ewes or Goats Milk, if you have neither of these then take Cowes Milk,
and put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little Runnet to it, then pour
it out into a dish and let it cool, then strew on Cinnamon and Sugar, then take
some of your aforesaid Cream and lay on it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To make Bonny Clutter.
Take Milk, and put it into a clean earthen pot, and put thereto Runnet, let it
stand two days, it will be all in a curd, then season it with some Sugar,
Cinnamon, and Cream, then serve it, this is best in the hottest of the summer.

To make a Whitepot.
Take a quart of Cream and put it over the fire to boil, season it with Sugar,
Nutmeg, and Cinnamon, Sack, and Rosewater, the yolks of seven or eight Eggs,
beat your Eggs with Sack and Rosewater, then put it into your Cream, stir it
that it curdle not, then pare two or three Pippins, core and quarter them, and
boil them with a handful of Raisins of the Sun, boil them tender, and pour
them into a Cullender, then cut some sippits very thin, and lay some of them in
the bottom of the dish, and lay on half your Apples and Currants, then pour in
half your Milk, then lay on more sippits, and the rest of your Apples and
Raisins, then pour on the rest of your Milk, bake it, scrape on Sugar, and
serve it.

To make a Pudding in haste.
Take a pint of Milk, and put thereto a handful of Raisins of the Sun, and as
much Currants, and a piece of butter, then grate a Manchet, and a Nutmeg also,
and put thereto a little flower when your Milk boyleth, put in your bread, let
it boil a quarter of an hour, and put in a piece of butter in the boiling of
it, and stir it always, then dish it up, pour on butter, and serve it.

To make a Pudding in a Dish.
Take a quart of Cream, put thereto a pound of Beef Suet minced small, put it
to your Milk, season it with Nutmeg, Sugar and Rosewater, and Cinnamon, then
take some seven or eight Eggs, and beat them very well, then take a cast of
Manchets and grate them, and put unto it, then mingle these together well, then
put it into a dish, and bake it, when it is baked, scrape on Sugar, and serve
it.

To Boil Cream.
Take a quart of Cream, and set it a boiling with Mace, whilst your Cream is
boiling, cut some thin sippets, then take seven or eight yolks of Eggs, beat
them with Rosewater, and Sugar, and a little of your cream, when your cream
boileth, take it off the fire, and put in your Eggs, and stir it very fast that
it curdle not, then put your sippets into the dish, pour in your cream and let
it cool, when it is cold, scrape on Sugar, and serve it.

To draw Butter.
Take your Butter and cut it into thin slices, put it into a dish, then put it
upon the coals where it may melt leisurely, stir it often, and when it is
melted put in two or three spoonfuls of water, or Vinegar, which you will, then
stir and beat it until it be thick.

Lady of Arundels Manchet.
Take a bushel of fine Wheat Flour, twenty eggs, three pound of Fresh butter,
then take as much Salt and Barme, as to the ordinary Manchet, temper it
together with new Milk pretty hot, then let it lie the space of half an hour
to rise, so you may work it up into bread, and bake it, let not your Oven be
too hot.

To boil Pigeons.
Boil them in water and salt, take a handful of Parsley, and as much Thyme
stripped, two spoonfuls of Capers minced altogether, and boil it in a pint of the
same liquor a quarter of an hour, then put in two or three spoonfuls of
Verjuyce, two Eggs beaten, let it boil a little, and put to a little Butter,
when you have taken it off the fire, stir this altogether, and pour it upon the
Pigeons, with sippets round the dish.

A Florendine of sweet-breads or Kidneys.
Parboil three or four Kidneys, and mince them small, season them with Nutmeg,
one stick of Cinnamon, beat as much Sugar as will sweeten it, and a penny loaf
grated, and the Marrow of three bones in good pieces, and a quarter of a pound
of Almond paste, a glass of Mallego Sack, two spoonfuls of Rose Water, a grain
of Musk, and one grain of Ambergriece, and a quarter of a pint of Cream, three
or four eggs, and mix it altogether, and make it up in puff paste, and bake
it three quarters of an hour.

A Pork Pie.
Boil your leg of Pork, season it with Nutmeg, and Pepper, and Salt, bake it
five hours in a high round Pie.

A Chicken Pie.
Scald and season your Chickens with Nutmegs, as much Sugar as Cinnamon, Pepper
and Salt, then put them into your Pie, then put three quarters of quartered
Lettice, and six Dates quartered, and a handful of Goosberries, and half a
sliced Lemon, and three or four branches of Barberies, and a little Butter, you
may use to four Chickens three Marrow bones, rould in yolks of Eggs, and Ringo
roots, and some preserved Lettice; make a Candle, and put in when the Pie comes
out of the oven, an hour and a half is enough to stand in the oven.

A Lamb Pie.
Take the same Ingredients you did for the Chicken pie, only leave out the
Marrow, the Ringo roots, and the preserved Lettice, make your caudle of
White Wind, Verjuyce and Butter, put it in when your pie comes out of the oven.

Sauce for a shoulder of Mutton.
Take a spoonful of Herbs, and as many Capers, half a pint of white Wine, half
a Nutmeg, and two Eggs, when it is boiled put a piece of butter to the gravie,
when it is boiled, take it off, and put the butter in.

A Lumber Pie.
Take three or four sweet-breads of Veal, perboil and mince them very small,
then take the curd of a quart of Milk, turned with three Eggs and half a pound
of Almond paste, and a penny loaf grated, mingle these together, then take a
spoonful of sweet herbs minced very small, also six ounces of Oringado and
mince it, then season all this with a quarter of Sugar, and three Nutmegs, then
take five Dates, and a quarter of a pint of Cream, four yolks of Eggs, three
spoonfuls of Rose Water, three or four Marrow bones, mingle all this together,
except the Marrow, then make it up in long boles about the bigness of an Egg,
and in every bole put a good piece of Marrow, put these into the pie, then put
in a quarter of a pound of butter, and half a sliced Lemon, then make a caudle
of white wine, Sugar and Verjuyce, put it in when you take your pie out of the
Oven, you may use a grain of Musk and Ambergriece.

An Oyster Pie.
Season your Oysters with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, and sweet herbs, your
Oysters being first thrown into scalding water and parboiled, season them and
put them into the Pie, put two or three blades of Mace, and half a sliced
Lemon, and the marrow of two bones rouled in the yolks of Eggs and some butter,
then let your Pie stand almost an hour in the oven, then make a caudle of
verjuyce, butter, and sugar, put it in your pie when you take it out of the
oven; you may use two Nutmegs to one quart of Oysters, and as much Pepper as
the quantity of three Nutmegs, but less salt, and one spoonful of sweet Herbs.

A Hartechoak Pie.
Take the bottomes of boiled Hartechoaks and quarter them, and take the meat
from the Leaves, season it with half an ounce of Cinnamon, and half an ounce of
beaten Nutmegs, and two ounces of Sugar, and put them into your pie, and boild
marrow rold in yolks of Eggs, and six blades of large Mace, Lemon sliced, six
quartered Dates, and a quarter of a pound of Ringo roots, half a pound of fresh
butter; then let it stand in the Oven one hour, and when you take it out put a
caudle into your pie, made of white Wine, Sugar, and Verjuyce.

A Calves foot Pie.
Mince your Calves feet very small then season them with two Nutmegs, and three
quarters of an ounce of Cinnamon, one quarter of a pound of Sugar, half a pound
of Currants, two Lemon peels minced, and ten Dates minced, three spoonfuls of
Rosewater, and half a pound of fresh butter, bake it an hour, and put a caudle
into it, made of white wine, Sugar and Verjuyce.

A Skerret Pie.
Take a quarter of a peck of Skerrets blanched, and sliced, season them with
three Nutmegs, and an ounce of Cinnamon, and three ounces of Sugar, and ten
quartered Dates, and the Marrow of three bones rouled in yolks of Eggs, and one
quarter of a pound of Ringo roots, and preserved Lettice, a sliced Lemon, four
blades of Mace, three or four branches of preserved Barberies, and half a pound
of Butter, then let it stand one hour in the oven, then put a caudle made of
White Wind, Verjuyce, Butter, and Sugar, put it into the pie when it comes out
of the oven.

A Calves head pie for Supper.
Boil your Calves head almost enough, cut it in thin slices all from the bone,
season it with three beaten Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of Pepper, and as
much Salt as there is seasoning, then take a spoonful of sweet herbs minced
small, and two spoonfuls of Sugar, and two or three Hartechoak bottoms boiled,
and cut them in thin slices, and the Marrow of two bones, rouled in yolks of
Eggs, a quarter of a pound of Ringo roots, and a quarter of a pound of
Currants, then put it into your pie, and put a quarter of a pound of butter,
and a sliced Lemon, three or four blades of Mace, three or four quartered
Dates, let it stand an hour or more in the oven, then when you take it out, put
into it a caudle made of Sugar, white Wine, Verjuyce, and Butter.

A Lark Pie.
Take 3 dosen of Larks, season them with four Nutmegs, and half an ounce of
Pepper, a quarter of an ounce of Mace beaten, then take the Lumber pie meat,
and fill their bellies if you will, if not, take half a pound of suet, and one
pound of Mutton minced, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, and six Apples
minced altogether very small, then season it with a Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt,
and one spoonful of sweet herbs, and a Lemon peel minced, one penny loaf
grated, a quarter of a pint of cream two or three spoonfuls of Rosewater, three
spoonfuls of Sugar, one or two spoonfuls of verjuyce, then make this in boles,
and put it into their bellies, and put your Larks in your Pie, then put your
Marrow rold in yolks of Eggs upon the Larks, and large Mace and sliced Lemon,
and fresh butter, let it stand in the oven an hour, when you take it out, make
your caudle of butter, Sugar, and white Wine vinegar, put it into the pie.

A hot Neats tongue for Supper.
Boil your tongue till it be tender, blanch it, and cut it in th^n pieces,
season it with a Nutmeg, and a quarter of an ounce of Pepper, and as much Salt
as seasoning, then take six ounces of Currants, season altogether, and put it
into the pie, then put a Lemon sliced, and Dates, and butter, then bake it, and
let it stand one hour and a half, then make a caudle of white wine, and
verjuyce, sugar, and eggs, and put it in when you take it out of the Oven.

A cold Neats-tongue Pie.
Your tongue being boiled, blanched, and larded with Pork or Bacon, seas^^ it
with the same Ingredients the Deer has, that is three Nutmegs, three races of
Ginger, half an ounce of Cloves and Mace together, and half an ounce of Pepper,
beat your spices altogether, more salt then seasoning, and likewise lay in the
liquor, bake it two hours, but put one p^^nd of butter in your Pie before you
lid it.

A Potato Pie for Supper.
Take three pound of boiled and blanched Potatoes, and 3 Nutmegs, and half an
ounce of Cinnamon beaten together, and three ounces of Sugar, season your
Potatoes, and put them in your Pie, then take the marrow of three bones, rouled
in yolks of Eggs, and sliced Lemon, and large Mace, and half a pound of butter,
six Dates quartered, put this into your pie, and let it stand an hour in the
oven; then make a sharp caudle of butter, Sugar, Verjuyce, and white Wine, put
it in when you take your Pie out of the oven.

Pigeon or Rabbet Pie.
Take one ounce of Pepper, and more Salt, then season your Pigeons or Rabbets,
and take two Nutmegs grated with your seasoning, then lay your Rabbet in the
Pie, and one pound of butter, if you heat the pie hot, then put in two or three
slices of Lemon, and two or three blades of Mace, and as many branches of
Barberies, and a good piece of fresh Butter melted, then take it, and let it
stand an hour and half, but put not in the fresh butter till it comes out of
the oven.

To make a puff Paste.
Break two Eggs in three pints of flower, make it with cold water, then roll it
out pretty thick and square, then take so much Butter as paste, and lay it in
rank, and divide your Butter in five pieces, that you may lay it on at five
several times, roll your paste very broad, and take one part of the same
Butter in little pieces all over your paste, then throw a handful of flower
slightly on, then fold up your paste and beat it with a rouling pin, so roll it
out again, thus do five times and make it up.

A Pudding.
Take a quart of Cream, and two Eggs, beat them, and strain them into the
cream, and grate in a Nutmeg and half, take six spoonfuls of flower, beat half
a pound of Almonds with that cream, and put it into the cream, and mix this
together, boil your pudding an hour and no more; First flower the bag you put
it in, then melt fresh butter, and take Sugar and Rosewater, beat it thick, and
pour it on the pudding, you may put to a little Milk, and stick blanched
Almonds, and Wafers in it; add to the same pudding, if you will, a penny loaf
grated, a quartern of Sugar, two Marrow bones, one glass of Mallago Sack, six
dates minced, a grain of Amber-griece, a grain of Musk, two or three spoonfuls
of Rosewater, bake this pudding in little wood dishes, but first butter them,
your Marrow must be stuck to and again, then bake it half an hour, five or
seven at a time, and so set them in order in the dish, and garnish them with a
sprig in the middle, and wafers about it, strew Sugar about the branch, and
sliced Lemon, set four round, and one in the top.

Frigasie of Veal.
Cut your meat in thin slices, beat it well with a rouling pin, season it with
Nutmeg, Lemon, and Thyme, fry it slightly in the pan, beat two eggs, and one
spoonful of verjuyce, and put it into the pan, and stir it together, and dish
it.

Frigasie of Lamb.
Cut your Lamb in thin slices, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and salt, mince
some Thyme, and Lemon, and throw it upon your meat, then fry it slightly in a
pan, then throw in two Eggs beaten in Verjuyce and Sugar into the pan, also a
handful of Goosberries, shake it together and dish it.

Frigasie of Chickens.
Kill your Chickens, pull skin and feathers off together, cut them in thin
slices, season then with Thyme and Lemon minced Nutmeg and salt, a handful of
Sorrel minced, and then fry it well with six spoonfuls of water, and some fresh
Butter, when its tender, take three spoonfuls of Verjuyce, one spoonful of
Sugar, beat it together, so dish it with sippets about.

Another Frigasie of Chickens.
Take the former Ingredients, and add to it, boiled Hartechoak bottomes, with
the meat of the leaves, and a handful of scalded Goosberries, and boiled
Skerrets and Lettice tossed in butter when they are boiled, add two spoonfuls
of Sugar, two Eggs and Verjuyce beaten together, and lay your Lettice upon your
Chickens, as before, and sliced Lemon upon it, and sippets about the dish.

A Frigasie of Rabbets.
Cut your Rabbets in small pieces, and mince a handful of Thyme and Parsley
together, and a Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, season your Rabbets, then take two
Eggs, and veerjuyce beaten together, and throw it in the pan, stick it, and
dish it up in sippets.

To harsh a Shoulder of Mutton.
Half roast your Mutton at a quick fire, cut it in thin slices, stew it with
Gravy, sweet Majoram, and Capers, and Onions, three Anchovies, two Oysters,
half a Nutmeg, half a sliced Lemon, stir this altogether with the meat, let
it stew till it be tender in a dish, then break three or four yolks of Eggs,
and throw it in the dish with some Butter, toss it well together, and dish it
with sippets.

To make a Cake.
Take half a peck of Flower, two pound and half of Currants, three or four
Nutmegs, one pound of Almond paste, two pound of Butter, and one pint of Cream,
three spoonfuls of Rosewater, three quarters of a pound of Sugar, half a pint
of Sack, a quarter of a pint of Yest, and six Eggs, so make it, and bake it.

To make a Leg of Mutton three or four dishes.
Take a Leg of Mutton, cut out the flesh and the bone, but save the skin whole,
divide the meat in three pieces, and take the tenderest, and cut it in thin
slices, and beat it with a rouling pin, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and
Salt, and mince Thyme and Lemon peel, fry it till it be tender, then beat two
Eggs with a spoonful of Verjuyce, throw two Anchovies into the pan, shake it
altogether, and put it into the dish with sippets round the dish, being dressed
with Barberries scalded, Parsley and hard Eggs minced.

Another part of the same meat stew in a dish, with a little white Wine, a
little Butter, and sliced Lemon, one Anchovy, two Oysters, two blades of Mace,
a little Thyme in a branch, and one whole Onion, take out the Thyme and the
Onyon when it is stewed, do it altogether on a chasingdish of coals till it
be tender, then dish it, garnish your dish with hard Eggs, and Barberries, and
sliced Lemon, and sippets, round the dish.

Take another part of the same meat, mince it small with Beef Suet, and a
handful of Sage, to three quarters of a pound of suet add one pound of meat,
you may use a spoonful of Pepper and Salt, mix this altogether, and stuff the
skin of the Leg of Mutton, hard skiver it close, and spit it at a quick fire,
and well roast it in an hour.

Take another part of the same meat, then put in the Pepper and Salt, with a
grated Nutmeg, some sweet Herbs, and a Lemon peel minced, a penny loaf grated,
one spoonful of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of Raisins, and a quartern of
Currants, mince altogether with the Meat, and the Suet, and the rest of the
Ingredients, put too two spoonfuls of Rosewater, and as much Salt as Spice,
then make it up in little long boles or roules, and butter your dish, and lay
them in with a round bole in the midst, set them in an oven half an hour,
then pour out the liquour which will be in the dish, and melt a little Butter,
Verjuyce, and Sugar, and pour upon it, garnish your dish, stick in every long
roll a flower of paste, and a branch in the middle.

To souce an Eele.
Scour your Eele with a handful of Salt, split it down the back, take out the
chine ^one, season the Eele with Nutmeg, Pepper, and Salt, and sweet Herbs
minced, then lay a packthread at each end, and the middle roll up like a Collar
of Brawn, then boil it in Water, and Salt, and Vinegar, and a blade or two of
Mace, and half a sliced Lemon, boil it half an hour, keep it in the same
liquor two or three days, then cut it out in round pieces, and lay six or
seven in a dish, with Parsley and Barberries, and serve it with Vinegar in
saucers.

To souce a Calfes head.
Boil your Calfes head in Water and Salt so much as will cover it, then put in
half a pint of Vinegar, a branch of sweet Herbs, a sliced Lemon, and half a
pint of white Wine, two or three blades of Mace, and one ounce or two of Ginger
sliced, boil it altogether till it be tender, keep it in the liquor two or
three days, serve it, the dish upright, and stick a branch in the mouth, and
in both the eyes, garnish the dish with Jelly or pickled Cowcumbers with
saucers of Vinegar, and Jelly, and Lemon minced.

A stewed Rabbit.
Cut your Rabbit in pieces, and season it with Pepper, and Salt, Thyme, Parsley,
winter Savory, and sweet Majoram, three Apples, and three Onions minced
altogether, stew it till it be tender with Vinegar and Water, put a good piece
of Butter in, stir it together in your dish, put sippets in the bottom, then
serve it up with the head in the middle of the dish, with sippets in the mouth.

Lay your Pig in the same Ingredients you did for your Calfes head, use the
same for a Capon, and the same for a Leg of Mutton.

To boil Chickens.
Boil your Chickens in Water, and Salt, and Wine Vinegar, a blade of Mace, a
good handful of Endive, and as much Succory, two handfuls of Skerrets boiled
and blanched, when the Chickens and these things are stewed, take a pint of
liquor up, and put to a quarter of a pint of white Wine, and one ounce and half
of Sugar, and three Eggs to thicken it, a piece of Butter to lay them in the
dish, and pour it on.

To boil a Rabbit.
Boil them in Water and Salt, mince Thyme and Parsley together, a handful of
each, boil it in some of the same liquor, then take three or four spoonfuls of
Verjuyce, a piece of Irish Butter, two or three Eggs, stir the Eggs together in
the liquor, set it upon the fire till it be thick, then pour it upon the
Rabbit, so serve it in.

To boil a Duck.
Half roast your Duck with a quick fire, take as much Wine and Water as will
cover them, take some Thyme and Parsley, and one handful of sweet Majoram, two
blades of Mace, half a Lemon sliced, stew these together half an hour without
Onions, take some of your liquor and thicken it with three or four Eggs, two or
three spoonfuls of Verjuyce, a piece of Butter, and as much Sugar as will lie
upon it, dish your Duck, and boil three or four slices of Lemon by it self,
and hard Eggs minced, put this upon your Duck, then pour your liquor upon it
with Barberries; so you may boil Pigeons with the same Ingredients, or Plover,
or Teale.

A roasted Shoulder of Mutton.
When it is roasted slash it, and carbonado it, take two spoonfuls of Capers,
and a little Thyme, and Lemon minced, half a Nutmeg, two Anchovies, a quarter
of a peck of Oysters, mixed altogether, boil them one hour in strong broth and
white Wine, then pour it upon the meat, with hard Eggs minced, and sippets
round the dish, throw first Salt on the meat, then the hard Eggs, sliced Lemon,
and Barberries.

FINIS.

