Of Obedience for Conscience Sake.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT WARWICK. August the 7th. 1683.

By Jonathan Kimberley, A. M. Vicar of Trinity Church in Coventry, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Benj. Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard,
and John Smith Bookseller in Coventry. 1683.

To the Right Worshipful Thomas Lucy of Charlcot, Esquire; High Sheriff, and
Deputy-Lieutenant of the County of Warwick, etc.
THe sutableness of a Dedication is to be measured from the agreeableness of
the Subject to the Person to whom it is directed; If it is to sue for Defense
and Patronage, (which the following Sermon stands in need of, (not for the
subject matter, but for the weakness of the handling of it,) it ought to be
laid at the feet of such who are eminent for the Virtue it recommends to the
World: Now although you are many ways entitled to this Sermon, as being first
composed, and Preached by your command, and by yours, (together with the
injunctions of the very Worthy, Loyal, and Judicious Gentlemen of the Grand
Inquest,) now published in Print, yet the Title upon which it offers it self to
your Protection now is, that you are a person of exemplary Loyalty, of steady
resolutions for the established Government in Church and State, which is the
design of this discourse to promote and defend.

Soon after I received your summons, to officiate as your Chaplain the last
Assizes, the discovery of the late horrid Conspiracy determined my choice of my
subject: I plainly saw that Lenity was no charm against the Witchcraft of
Rebellion, and that the factions and restless Spirits of some men in our age,
by their Sedition, had made it necessary to have Penal Laws, and to have them
duly executed; I thought it might be proper therefore to assert the necessity
of the Magistrates being invested with an irresistible Coercive Power: and
foreseeing also that many who measure their Religion by their Secular Interest,
would be ready to comply so far as to avoid the penalty of the Laws, but at the
same time despise Dominion in their Hearts, and secretly speak evil of
Dignities; I thought I could not do better service either to them, or the
Government, than by laying open this their mistake, in settling Obedience upon
the only sure and right foundation, the principle of Conscience, which will
engage us to be hearty and sincere in our submission to our Governors, in all
times and places.

This is the great security that the Christian Religion gives to the Powers of
the World; and this argument the ancient Apologists Just. Mart. Apol. 2. ad
Anton. Pium. Athenag. Orat. pro Christ. Cypr. ad De^^etr.
made use of to recommend it to them, that it allows of no Resistance; that it
proposes higher rewards for Obedience, and severer punishments for
Disobedience, by binding it as a duty in point of Conscience, than any
Sanctions of Humane Laws.

And herein also the Church of England (above others) has declared her self to
be truly Christian, and sono Enemy to Caesar Act. Rev. Reg. Ed. 6. and Act 37
Reg. Eliz.
, by asserting the Kings Supremacy, and by requiring our obedience to the
Magistrate, as ordained by God, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.

So that in this discourse I have endeavored not only to express the Character
of a good Subject; but of a true Son of the Church of England; and to speak
properly, none can be the latter, but he must also be the former: And indeed I
have so great a veneration for all the doctrines and establishments of that
Church, that I think it far more eligible (if God should permit it for our
sins) to fall and perish with it, than by any indirect or unwarrantable means
to go about to defend it, or to live and triumph in its ruins. And herein I am
confident I express not only my own sentiments, but yours also, and the sense
of all the Loyal Nobility and Gentry of our Country, which as it gives place
but to few other Countries for their number and quality, so it yields to none
for their Loyalty, Unanimity, and Zeal for the established Government. I could
not doubt therefore but that a discourse of this nature would be grateful both
to you and them; and I am sensible that your Zeal for the Subject has so far
biased your Judgments, as to cause you to overlook many f^^lts in the
managing of it, otherwise you would not have thought it fit for a Publication:
But it was not good manners in me to withstand your repeated Commands; and I
doubt not but you aim at the same design in its Printing for which it was
Preached; to make men sensible, in this restless and seditious Age, of their
duty to God and the King, that they cannot truly serve the one, unless they
submit to the other.

If it may be any ways serviceable for these great ends, for the promoting of
Loyalty, Peace, and Religion with any, especially among those that Providence
has placed me with, I shall think my pains well bestowed; and it will
abundantly recompense the censures and ill treatment it is like to meet with
from those who are obstinate and irreclaimable.

That God would strengthen your hands, and prosper you in your undertakings for
his service, and give you all the comforts of this life, and of a better, is
the hearty wish, and prayer of,

Coventry, Aug. 30. 1683. Honored Sir, Your most Obedient, and most Humble
Servant, Jonathan Kimberley.

ROMANS xiii. 5. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but
for Conscience Sake.


THe Doctrine of Submission to higher Powers, as it was in an especial manner
recommended to the World by Christ and his Apostles, both by their Precepts and
Examples; so ought it to be esteemed of universal obligation, and carefully to
be observed by their followers in all ages: for as there cannot be gathered
either from their words or actions any thing that should limit this duty to any
peculiar time or place, so they backed their Injunctions with Reasons that are
perpetual and universal, viz. the Divine Authority, Usefulness, and Necessity
of Government; and allowing that to be necessary, Subjection must be so too,
for they are relative terms, and suppose each other.

That Government in the general is Necessary, cannot be denied by any that
consider what the evil consequences of an unlimited State would be: We see
daily even under the confinement of Laws, and where Government is established,
how difficult it is, notwithstanding these restraints, to curb the exorbitance
of men's Passions, to bridle their Lusts, to bring them into any tolerable
temper, to make them only more mild and sociable than Wolves and Tigers: Under
all these obligation to, and provisions for Peace and Amity, how many are
there, that in despite of all the bonds of duty and gratitude; maugre all the
frowns or smiles of Superiors, the Rewards or Punishments annexed to Laws,
that fly out against their Governors, and their Brethren, that with more than
a savage cruelty would, and too often do, devour one another? And if the case
be so under Government, where there are bounds set, and punishments allotted
for Transgressors, what would be the state and condition of mankind if there
were none? If every man were permitted to follow what was just in his own eyes,
it is to be feared, that nothing would seem so to him, but what was unjust, if
not cruel to his Neighbor, and confusion would be the certain consequence
thereof. Government therefore is necessary.

And as it is necessary in it self, so is it by the Appointment of God, who has
ordained it for the good of mankind: Prove. 8.15. 1 Samuel 26.9. 2 Samuel 5.12.
It is by me (says God) that Kings reign: They are the Anointed of the Lord: He
sets and establishes them in their Thrones. This he did to the Kings of Israel
under the Old Testament in a peculiar manner, but he did not confine his care
to them only, but Gentile Kings are also of his appointment, and even such as
were Cruel and Tyrannical; as appears from our Saviors owning their Power,
Mat. 17.27.22.17, 18, etc.
in paying Tribute (an Arbitrary Tax) to them, at the expense of a Miracle, and
from the Injunctions of S. Paul and S. Peter, Romans 13.2. 1 Pet. 2.13.
who command us to submit to them as the Ordinance of God, and to obey their
commands for the Lords sake. Government therefore is Necessary, and at least in
the general, of Divine Appointment.

And that of all Governments, Monarchical is the best, will appear from hence,
because it bears the nearest resemblance to the Divine Government, and best
answers the ends of it: It is most easy to the Subject if it be good and
gentle, and less cruel if it prove Tyrannical. Most easy, as that Obedience is
always where the fewest command, and so consequently most easy of all, when we
are subject to the will and power but of one: If it should be Tyrannical, it
would be less hurtful, inasmuch as it is better to lie under the lash of one
Tyrant than many, and the rage of a Prince is less dangerous to a Kingdom than
an Aristocratical fury, or the uncontrollable violence of an incensed Rabble.

Government being necessary, and of Divine Appointment; and of all Governments,
Monarchical being the best, as bearing the nearest resemblance to the Divine
Pattern, and being most conducive to the Peace and Happiness of any People:
highly reasonable then, and very beneficial to us, is this doctrine, which S.
Paul in this Chapter sets before us, of subjection to the higher Powers, that
God has placed over us. The extent of which duty he sets before us, ver. 1.
That every Soul is to submit to them; in the following Verses he inforces his
injunction with two Reasons; the first is derived from the original of this
power, it is from God, ver. 2. Whosoever resists the Power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they shall receive to themselves damnation. In the
following verses, 3, 4. he adds another reason, taken from the Authority these
Powers are invested with, If thou do well, thou shall find a reward for thy
ob^^ience; but if thou do evil, he is sent to punish thee for the same: From
both these reasons he infers a necessity of subjection in the Text. Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, for fear of punishment here; but
also for Conscience Sake: ye must submit to them, as they are the Ordinance of
God.

The words are a Precept pressing us to obedience to higher Powers from a sense
of Religion, not only for wrath, but for Conscience Sake.

They afford us these heads.

First, That a submission to those rightful Powers which God has set over us,
is our indispensable duty. Ye must needs be subject. Secondly, That although it
is necessary that the Supreme Magistrate should have an absolute coercive
Power, yet neither the bare hopes of a reward, nor the dread of punishment in
this World, should be the only ground of our obedience. Not only for wrath.
But, Thirdly, The only Obedience that ought to be regarded here, or will be
rewarded hereafter, must proceed from a principle of Conscience. For
Conscience Sake.
As Corollaries from these heads we shall infer:

1. That neither an Atheist, nor a vicious Person, can be a good Subject from
any good ground. 2. That the Laws of the Higher Powers do oblige us to the
observance of them in point of Conscience. 3. That no pretenses of Conscience
or Religion can authorize any resistance of our Superiors.
1. That a submission to those rightful Powers which God has set over us, is
our indispensable duty, If we derive the Ori^inal of Government either from
Paternal right, or from the looser way of Compact, yet still it carries along
with it a necessity of subjection in those that are under it. He that anciently
did, or even now does dispute his Fathers Commands in things lawful, deserves
correction for it, and he that durst oppose his Father formerly upon any
account, was liable to death for his disobedience: Arist. Eth. ad Nich. lib. 8.
cap. 10. (...). etc. Simpl. ad Epic. Ench. (...). Alex. ab Alex. dierum Genesis
lib. 6. cap. 10. de leg. 12. Tabularum.
the ancient paternal power being despotical.

If we suppose that Government arose from Compact from the Concessions of the
people (which hypothesis can never be allowed as true, in regard that
Governors are entrusted with a power of Life and Death, which the People never
had, and so could never grant) supposing then, but not granting that Government
arose from Compact, it must be allowed as necessary, in order to the attaining
of the ends of Government (Peace and Security) that there must be a Supreme
Power, and that Power irresistible. In this case, the People must be supposed
to concenter in him they place over them, to be Umpire among them, and if they
will have him any thing more than the bare Image of a Prince, or expect to
enjoy under him the ends of Government, Peace and Security, to him must be
their final Appeal, and he must be invested with a power to compel them to
submit to his determinations.

Furthermore, allowing this supposition of the Origin of Government to be
true, yet the deductions which by some are made from it, are very
inconsequential: As that the People may resume the Power which they gave, or at
least that those who succeed, are not obliged to stand to the compacts of their
Predecessors; which are not only dangerous Principles, but absurd and false:
Nor can it be imagined that ever any people should be so foolish as to go about
to build any Government on such a sandy foundation, which every storm must
overturn, if the People at pleasure may resume their unbounded liberty, which
in the foundation of the Government they are supposed to part with; which they
can no more do (unless they can produce the original Grant, and show the
reserve in it) than an Hebrew or Roman Slave could regain their liberty at
pleasure; or than that Woman who has bound herself to an Husband can be loosed
from the bond of her Husband, which holds during life. Neither are the Son's
hands more free than the Father's, to oppose the established Government; for he
that is born of a Subject is as much the Prince's, as he that is born of a
Slave is the Master's right, and he can no more emancipate himself than the Son
of the Slave can, nor compel his Governor to set him free, any more than a
Father among the Romans could be constrained to manumit his Children, which by
the Imperial Law is prohibited. Just. Inst. lib. 1. Tit. 12. s. 10. Neque
Naturales liberi, neque Adoptivi ullo modo possunt cogere parents de potestate
sua eos dimittere.
For by it neither Natural nor Adopted Children can compel their Parents to
set them free. If therefore we respect the original, or end of Government any
way, we ought to submit, and it is not in our power to free our selves.

But that Subjection is an indispensable duty, I shall endeavor to make
apparent from these following considerations: 1. If we consider the Commands of
God, requiring it of us, and the examples of the Primitive Christians, who put
it in practice. 2. If we consider the relation that our Governors have to us,
their care in protecting and defending us, it should oblige us to submit to
them.


1. If we consider the commands of God, etc. If we look into the Gospel of
Peace, we shall find that scarcely any duty is more earnestly pressed upon us,
than Subjection to our Governors, in order to the obtaining that Peace it
proposes. Our Savior commands us, Mat. 22.21.
to Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's: S. Paul's injunction in the
Text, and that which he gives to 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
Timothy, no doubt, were of universal and perpetual obligation. That we should
submit to, and pray for Kings, and all in Authority. And S. Peter confirms the
same, Quod dicitur subjectionem dominis deberi, etiam duris idem ad Reges
quoque referendum, etc. Grot. de jur. B. and P. lib. 1. cap. 4 sect. 4.
with a Proviso to obviate exceptions. 1 Pet. 2.18.
That our obedience must be shown not only to the good and gentle, but also to
the froward.

Such was the carriage of the Jews, not only to their own Princes while they
were in their ownland, but also when they were in Captivity, they submitted to,
and prayed for the Kings they lived under, as may be gathered from their
observance of the Decree of Darius: Ezra 6.10. In offering Sacrifices of sweet
savor unto the God of Heaven, and in praying for the life of the King and of
his Sons. And the like we may read done by them for Nebuchadnezzar, and his Son
Balthazar, Bar. 1.11.

I might produce innumerable instances of the heroical patience, and submission
of the Primitive Christians to their Superiors, even when they persecuted
them. Tertul. in his Apology speaks thus: Tert. Apol. cap. 30, and 39.
We Christians pray for the Emperors, that their lives may be long, and their
reigns secure; Oramus pro Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium
securum, excercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem. populum probum, and quaecunque
hominis and Caesaris vot a sunt. vid. ad Scap. cap. 2.
that they may have valiant Armies, faithful Parliaments, and an honest and
obedient people; that Caesar may have every thing according to his hearts
desire.

After they had their Religion established by Law, and had strength enough to
have resisted, they still submitted to, nay further, they prayed for Arrian,
and other persecuting Emperors. Thus Athanasius Athan. Apol. ad Constant.
(that great defender of the Orthodox Faith) submitted to the Emperor
Constantius, an Arrian Persecutor, and would not oppose either him, or any
Commissionated by him, by force, for the maintenance of the true Faith, for the
defense of which he so unjustly suffered.

Such was also the carriage of Ambrosius to Valentinus Ambr. lib. 5. Orat. in
Auxen. Coactus repugnare non novi, dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere
-- Lachrymae mea arma sunt, aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere.
: The young Emperor being infected by his Mother Justina with the principles
of Arrianism, and by her being stirred up severely to persecute S. Ambrose and
his Church, he knew no other way of resisting, but by supplications, sighs, and
tears; these were his only weapons, he durst not use any other Arms against
them. Neither did he thus tamely yield for want of power or courage, Theodoret
lib. 5, cap. 13, 14. (...).
for he declined the assistance of the Rebel Maximus against the Emperor: and
he who so willingly offered his life as a prey to his Persecutors, could not
want courage to have defended it by force, if he had thought it lawful.

We see then, by the command of God, the example of the Jews, and Primitive
Christians, it was esteemed a duty to submit to their Governors, although they
persecuted them, and to pray for them. So that the doctrines of deposing them,
of resisting, or conspiring against them upon any pretense, is not of Primitive
institution, but the Novel Politics of such who have not the fear of God
before their eyes to engage them to pray to him, or of his Vicegerent upon
Earth, to pray for him.

2. If we consider the great care and concern of our Governors in protecting
us, it should in gratitude oblige us to submit to them, to pray for them, that
God would defend and direct them, and establish their Thrones.

Those who have had the Protection of the Government for their education,
certainly owe so much to their Governors, as Obedience to them, to pray for
them, to be ready to assist them with their hearts and hands, in the support of
that Government that protected them when they were not able to help themselves.

We are too apt to think that we are not at all beholden to our Governors:
that no man receives any kindness from them but their immediate Favorites and
Courtiers; And so we think that we may be excused if we pay them no service,
since we do not reckon our selves indebted to them: the most of men
acknowledging no homage due to any, but what they are immediately paid for, nor
have a sense of anyother duty than what is mercenary.

To such an Hireling as this, I say, that the care of thy Governors (although
thou deserve it not) is extended unto thee. Is thy Life or thy Property of
any concern to thee? That thou art safe in the one, and secure in the other,
thou owe to the care and goodness of thy Governors: For could thou think
either thy Life or thy Estate safe in the midst of violence and rapine? And
what hinders men's flying out into these Villainies but the restraint of Laws,
which would be but a dead Letter, unless thy Governors gave life to them by
the execution of them? Is it no kindness to thee that thou art yet Master of
thy own, and not a Slave to a stranger? That thou art not devoured by a foreign
force, or an intestine Rabble? Our Land is not so contemptible, but that if it
were defenseless, no doubt, it would be sought after, and if the defense were
left to our own management, we should not be secure against our Enemies, nor
our selves.

That our days then are prolonged, and that we enjoy our places, that our
Children are not Fatherless, and our Wives Widows, that they are not
Vagabonds, forced to beg their Bread, that the Extortioner has not all that we
have, and that a Stranger does not possess our labors; whom can we, or whom
ought we to thank for these Blessings, but, next under God, the Prudence of our
King and Governors, in the regular administration of Justice, and the wholesome
constitution of our Laws? Certainly such blessings as these, require in return
our ready submission to, and hearty prayers for those under whom we live so
peaceably and quietly, and might be more happy in these enjoyments if we would
our selves. The King is the Father of his Country, and the care that he takes
for all that are in it is not small: Some men find the Government of a Family
to be troublesome, others experience the burden of administering of a small
Province to be heavy; and can we think that the affairs of a whole Kingdom can
be managed without great watchfulness and care?

We are apt to admire, and to be surpised at the brightness and glittering
gaiety of a Crown, and to think that the Head that wears it must needs be free
from all pain and trouble. But alas, we know not the weight of the Crown we
admire, how it is many times lined with Thorns, and presses heavy upon the Head
of him that wears it; intitles him, as to the homage, so to the protection of
his people, to provide against, and secure us from foreign force, and domestic
Conspiracies.

If we were acquainted with, and did thoroughly consider the troubles and
disquietudes of Princes, the great care they undergo for the good of the
People, the great benefits we enjoy under Government, we should not esteem our
selves unconcerned for them, but account it our indispensable duty to pray for
them, and obey them.

2 Prop. That although it is necessary that the Magistrate should have an
Absolute Coercive Power; yet neither the bare hopes of Reward, nor dread of
Punishment in this Life, should be the only ground of our Obedience. Ye must be
subject, not only for wrath.

1. It is necessary that the Magistrate should have an absolute Coercive power.
It is not to be expected, scarcely to be imagined, even in a Platonic or
Vtopian Republic, that ever there should be a society of men so far devoid of
all passions and self-interest, as readily to submit to their Governors, to
obey their Commands, to live in Charity with their Neighbors, and to keep
peace with all men, without the prospect of some reward, or fear of some
punishment in this life. This Notion of Obedience is too abstracted for the
most of men to apprehend, and this Clue of Loyalty so sine spun, that it will
easily be broke, and lost in the Mazes and Labyrinths of State.

Good Laws therefore, with suitable Sanctions, are necessary in Faece Romuli,
and as they are an ornament to any Government, so, when duly executed, they are
a security to it too: For although there may be some persons (as there ought to
be many) who may be so far in love with Virtue, as to be content to wed her
with no other dowry but her own Beauty; who, from a sense of their duty, may
continue faithful and obedient unto death, in hopes of a reward hereafter; yet
were there more of this ingenuous temper (as it is to be wished there were) how
inconsiderable are they to the multitude, who live more by Sense, than by
Reason or Faith; whom the innate Beauties and Pleasures of Virtue can never
invite to admire her: who would never deny their lusts, if they could gratify
them without danger, would quickly pursue their Revenge to death, were they not
afraid that the Avenger of Blood even in this World would overtake them.

Men may talk of Good Nature, and Right Reason; propose fair and worthy
commendations and descriptions of Virtue, and Honesty, and Loyalty, to invite
men to close with them, and possibly by these motives may persuade some of good
understandings and honest inclinations to do so; but such discourses will have
as little effect upon the Vulgar, and the Rabble, with whom Government has to
deal, as fine words upon an unruly Beast, which is to be held in with the Bit
and Bridle, lest he fall upon thee; and is to be kept in the right way with no
other arguments, than with a strait rein, and prudent management of the Whip
and Spur.

If we take away the Laws then, and if they are not duly executed, they are
vertually removed, we should find that the Vizor of Honesty and Religion that
is now worn by many, would be quickly pulled off; that Vice would grow bold and
impudent, and walk barefaced among us; that Rebellion, and Murder, and open
Violence would become the Nations Laws, instead of those of Peace, Honesty, and
Religion, that would presently be abolished: Take away the belief of a Hell,
one part of the Sanction of Divine Laws, and I fear that most men would quickly
forget their duty to their God: and remove the punishments from Humane Laws,
and they would as soon forget that to their Prince and Neighbors too.

It Is therefore the Rods and Axes that in some measure secure the Crown and
Scepter; and in this Rebellious Age, Guards have been found to be a necessary
defense and security for the persons of Princes: The Gibbet and the Pillory are
serviceable instruments for the support and maintenance of Government and
Property, for the preservation of men's Lives, their Names, and their Estates.

But allowing all this to be so, that good Laws are necessary, and that without
Temporal Rewards and Punishments men would not obey them, yet all this is no
more than what the vices of men have made necessary; and it makes no more
against the other part of the proposition, than that because the most of men
are vicious, that therefore it should not be a duty to be virtuous, or that
because many men are honest only for a good name, or for fear of punishment if
they should be otherwise, that therefore they ought not to be so from a
principle of Conscience.

To proceed in proof of the second part of the Proposition, viz. That neither
the barc hopes of a reward, nor dread of punishment in this World, should be
the only ground of our Obedience.

We will suppose at present (which we shall afterward prove more largely) that
Loyalty, and Obedience to our Governors, is a duty that God requires of us,
and so a Christian Grace, and therefore ought to proceed from, and to be
measured by the same principle and rule with other Graces, which none will
allow to be sound, if they flow only from a prospect of Temporal Rewards, or
fear of such Punishments. He therefore that only obeys his Prince out of hopes
of being made great by him, or for fear of suffering if he should disobey him,
can no more be said to be a good Subject, than he that prays to God only to be
seen of men, or keeps his hand from picking his Neighbors Pocket, only for
fear of being discovered and disgraced, can be said to be either a good
Christian, or an honest Man.

Besides, if we consider our Obedience to our Prince as a duty which we owe to
God, it cannot be such as will be accepted by him, if it proceeds from fear
only; for God requires that we pay those duties we owe to him heartily and
sincerely, with the whole bent of our Will and Affections; but those actions
which proceed from fear only, are but Arist. Eth. ad Nich. lib. 3. cap. 1.
(...), etc.
mixed actions, and are so far from being reckoned among the actions of
Christian graces, that they are not esteemed among those of the Virtues of
Heathens.

Furthermore, he that obeys his Prince only from Temporal concerns, his
Obedience is uncertain, his Service unsafe, ^ay, it may be, destructive to the
Government, if relied upon: For if this Mercenary Subject is defeated in his
expectation, or any ways displeased (as haughty and ambitious men soon are at
their Governors) or if he have a prospect of raising himself with safety by
Rebelling, what should withhold such a man, if he pursues his principles, but
to oppose and destroy his King, to advance himself, and to overturn the
Government, that he may go unpunished in so doing?

So that from the whole, we see that we must needs be subject not only for
wrath, for fear of Temporal Punishments, or for hopes of any such Reward, which
is not the obedience that God requires, or the King can trust to, but our
Loyalty must proceed from a sense of duty, and we must obey for Conscience Sake.

3. The only Obedience that ought to be regarded here, or will be rewarded
hereafter, must proceed from Conscience,

For the right understanding of which, we must know what Conscience is, and
what it is to act from a principle of Conscience.

Conscience is a Power which God has implanted in the minds of men, whereby
they are enabled to compare their actions with the Rule, and either to approve,
or condemn them, as they agree, or not agree with the same: Now the Rule that
Conscience is to be guided by among Christians, is the revealed Will of God:
Whatsoever therefore is in Gods Law commanded, is out of Conscience to be done,
and whatsoever is there forbidden, is from the same principle to be avoided;
and this is to act from a principle of Conscience, in conformity to what God
requires of us: Whatsoever then is not founded in the law of God, nor derivable
from thence, is no matter of Conscience in it self, but of private Opinion,
Scrupulosity, or Error.

Now is there any thing in Scripture more plainly commanded than Obedience to
Authority, or prohibited under severer penalties than the resisting of them. To
go no further than this Chapter, Let every soul be subject to the higher
Powers, and whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and
he shall receive to himself damnation Vid. 1 Cor. 11.29, 34. Romans 3.8. 1 Timothy
3.6.
(the fame damnation that belongs to the vio^^^^rs of other ordinances of God)
and this doctrine was not only pr^^ch'd but practiced by Christ and his
Apostles, and the Primitive Christians, to the astonishment of their very
Persecutors.

And yet notwithstanding the plainness and severity of these Precepts, I know
not how it comes to pass, but so it is, that there are many men among us who
pretend to walk according to Scripture, and would be accounted the only
Conscientious persons; yet have no more regard to these Rules than if they were
Apocryphal to them, and pretend even to Conscience for the violation of the
same. They are as free in censuring and condemning their Governors, as if it
were not written, that Exodus 22.28. Acts 23.5.
thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people: Thou shall not revile
the Gods Eccl. 10.20
Nor curse the King, no not in thy thought. They are as ready to oppose him
upon all occasions, as if it were not Canonical Scripture, that whosoever
resists the Power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist,
shall receive damnation. What Criticisms, false glosses, and frivolous
distinctions are invented, and made use of to avoid the force of these plain
Precepts? the Higher Powers are to be divided into Higher and Lower; the
Higher, or Supreme, is to be obeyed, say they, but the lower (although
Commissionated by the highest) may be resisted. The King, the highest Power, is
to be divided, and his Authority may be so far separated from his Person, as
the one may be made use of to destroy the other When we are expressly commanded
to submit to the King, and to those that are sent by him; and that not only to
such as are good and gentle, but also to the froward, and to bear our
sufferings patiently, although we suffer wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.
after the example of Christ; how many limitations must we have before these
precepts (which were delivered indefinitely) can be received or owned? If the
King be Ungracious, Insufficient, or Tyrannical, he is so far (say some) from
being to be submitted to, that he ought to be opposed and destroyed. As if
Nero, and some of those that succeeded him, were not as Cruel and Tyrannical,
as it is imaginable any should be, whom they were commanded to obey, and did
quietly submit to. I Am confident that if the like Sophistry were allowed to be
made use of in other cases, the force of any the plainest precepts of Scriture
might be eluded, and the most desperate actings by such Arts might be defended
thence. But however men by such devices may delude themselves, and abuse the
World, yet God will not be mocked, nor their Consciences always sleep, but will
one day try them, and unless they repent, condemn them by these plain Scripture
Rules, devoid of all their Sophistry and delusion.

Furthermore, he that makes Conscience of his duty to his Governors, dares not
so much as curse them in his thought, much less enter into any Leagues,
Covenants, or Associations against them, be they never so secret, because his
Conscience, which is the foundation of his Obedience, respects a future
judgment; he obeys his Ruler, as the Minister of God, so that although his
Treasonable thought may be concealed from the one, yet he knows it cannot
escape the knowledge and judgment of the other. This is the greatest security
that any Prince can have from any Subject, that he looks upon Obedience as a
necessary duty commanded by God, and that so long as he has the fear of God
before his eyes, he cannot but reverence his Vicegerent upon Earth.

Where Allegiance is founded on Religion, and Loyalty proceeds from Conscience,
it is the same in all times and places; it commands our Prayers for the King,
and those in Authority, in private as well as public; that we neither reproach
them secretly in their prosperity, nor revile them openly in their adversity;
that we be ready with our Hands and Purses, with our Lives and Fortunes, to
establish the Throne, to oppose the Enemies of God, and the King: This is that
Obedience which deserves encouragement here, but (if attended with other
Virtues) will certainly meet with a reward hereafter.

We proceed now to the Corollaries.

1 Coroll. It follows from hence, that neither an Atheist, nor a vicious
person, can be a good Subject from any good ground.

Plato lib. 10. de leg. (...).
Plato, in the beginning of his Tenth Dialogue of Laws, lays down this Divine
Rule, He that believes the Gods to be according to the Laws, will not be guilty
of any evil in word or deed: i. e. in Scripture language, he will render to
every one their due, to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things which are Gods; and without this belief I know not what can withold
any man from committing the greatest villainies, provided they may be done with
secrecy and impunity here.

Men may pretend to a sense of Honor, of Moral Gallantry and Honesty, that may
secure them from the violations of Natural Laws, and the Laws of Society, and
that this may render them as capable of being good Subjects and good Men, as
the apprehensions of an over ruling Deity, and all the Sanctions of Divine
Laws, and terrors of Conscience.

I would only ask this question of such Moraelists, What is the chief end they
propose to themselves? for every man must have some ultimate end to which all
his actions are to be directed: Now these persons deny any thing of futurity,
and so it must be something here. Is it therefore either Honor, Riches, or
Pleasure? (the sum of what this World affords) which soever then of these is
the end proposed, all things are to be directed to it, and what should hinder
such a Person from committing the greatest impiety, rather than be defeated of
his end?

If Honor or Popular Applause be the end they aim at, and if they suppose (as
too many of late have thought) that the ready way to it is by opposing the
King, and ruining the Church and State, who knows whether they may not (with
Brutus) pursue it, to the expulsion of the King, and overthrow of the Monarchy,
or may not kindle a fire in the Temple (with Erostratus) to get a name?

If riches be the game they hunt after, what should hinder them from running
upon desperate attempts to enrich themselves, and to repair or increase their
fortunes (if they have opportunity) out of the Public Treasuries, to become
Robbers of God and the King, to enrich themselves, since they deny the Being of
the one, I know nothing that can secure from them (if they have power) the
Prerogative or Possessions of the other?

If Pleasure be their Deity, and they are wholly devoted to it, what should
keep them from sacrificing all things which stand in their way to it? This
renders men of such tempers not only useless, but dangerous to any Society; for
if the Government should be uneasy to them, put any restraint upon them in
this particular, what should hinder them (if they have convenience) from
endeavoring to cast off the Restraint and the Government together, in hopes of
more Liberty, more Pleasure in another?

If we propose these questions to an Atheist, and press him to declare the
ultimate end of his actions, and the first principle of his Obedience to his
Governors, if he settles not upon the apprehensions of a God, and the dictates
of Conscience; he must at last bottom either on Self-interest, or on Chance and
Casualty, for his Obedience; and how far such Subjects, acting from such
principles, are to be trusted, may be gathered from what has been said, and
has also too lately, and too dearly been experienced, than ever (I hope) to be
relied upon again.

Furthermore, he that professes he knows God, but in his works denies him, is
abominable and disobedient too: The Practical Atheist is little less dangerous
to Government than the Speculative one: He that in words owns the Being of a
God, but at the same time dare live as if there were none, may be ready, with
the Traitor Judas (who bore the like badge of profession) to seize his
Vicegerent with a Hail Master, and betray him with a Kiss.

Highly reasonable then was that observation which Cyrus made of his Subjects,
or Xenophon for him, Xenoph. de Cyr. Inst. l. 8. (...), etc.
That he found those to be his best Subjects, most Loyal, and most Peaceable,
who were most Religious. And it has been the prudence of all Lawmakers in the
first place to take care for the setting of Religion, as the foundation of
Government; supposing that Loyalty is only steady when settled on Piety, and
that Obedience only hearty, which proceeds from Conscience.

Coroll. 2. We are obliged in Conscience to submit to the Laws of the
Magistrate: For if we must be subject to them for Conscience Sake, their Laws
must be supposed, by virtue of that command, to lay an obligation on our
Consciences; and at this time when this precept was given, and a long time
after, Just. Instit. lib. 1. Tit. 2. s. 6. quod principi placuit legis vigorem
hal ^i^.
the will of the Prince having the force of a Law, it must be the same thing to
be enjoined to submit to his Laws, as to him in point of Conscience.

I have not time, neither would it be needful, if I had, to answer particularly
all that is alleged against this position, by those Champions for a pretended
Conscience against the lawful power of Magistrates, and that use their mistaken
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. I shall only lay down thus much in thesi,
That he who is the immediate and direct Lord of Conscience, has in Scripture
Charter committed to his Vicegerents on Earth an indirect power over the same;
and he who has set us free from the Jewish Ceremonies, as essential parts of
Worship, has committed a power to man to make humane Ordinances, and 1 Pet.
2.13.
has commanded all to submit to the same, and that for the Lord's sake.

If therefore we refuse to obey those that have rule over us, God will punish
us for it, and therefore in Conscience we are bound to submit to them always,
and to obey them actively, where God does not interpose to the contrary; for
even those Humane Statutes which are agreeable to the Divine, oblige the
Conscience by virtue of the Divine Command, which requires this duty of us as
we are Subjects of God, and the King: agreeable to that of the Father Bernard
Bern. de Praec. and Dispen. c. 12. Sive deus, sive homo vicarius Dei, mandatum
quodcunque tradiderit, pari obsequendum est cura, pari reverentia deferendum:
ubi tamen deo contraria non praecipit homo.
, with which I shall conclude this point: We are equally bound in Conscience,
in the same kind of obedience, although not in the same degree, to observe the
Laws of God and the King, if the latter are not repugnant to the former.

Coroll. 3. No pretenses of Conscience or Religion can authorize our resistance
of the lawful Powers which God has set over us.

The usual cases that are alleged by Antimonarchical Writers, wherein they
hold it lawful to resist Authority, are either Tyranny, Insufficiency, or
Impiety in the Governors; and they say, that in these cases it is lawful, nay,
a duty to oppose, and destroy them.

But if this Doctrine were true, what Prince could be safe in the Throne, or
what People quiet and secure in their enjoyments? How many good Princes (some
as just and righteous as ever held a Scepter) have been branded with one, or
all these marks, by restless and seditious Spirits? What action of State can be
so ordered, that either Ignorance or Malice will not bring under one of these
heads? Every execution of Justice, every demand of Tribute, or supply of Money
upon any occasion, shall be called Tyranny: Every unfortunate event shall be
charged upon insufficiency: Any Religion that is owned by the Prince, and
settled in the State, be it never so holy and pure, shall by them of another
Sect be proclaimed Impiety: And thus upon every turn the Monarch is liable to
be dethroned, and if he goes about to maintain his ground, he is called a
Tyrant, and so to be destroyed. But blessed be God, the true Religion allows of
no such practices, he that looks into the Gospel, will find that our Savior
has told us, that his Kingdom was not of this World, that the Religion he
established was a meek, peaceable, and suffering Religion, promising especial
rewards to those who leave Houses or Lands to lay down their lives for Christ's
sake: It sets before us the example of our Savior, who was made perfect
through sufferings, and we are commanded to follow his example, in patient
suffering for the truth, if it please God to call us to it.

As this was the Doctrine of the Gospel, so I have shown you that it was the
practice of the first Publishers of it, and their successors; they never knew
what it was in the Primitive times of Christianity, to oppose, expel, or
destroy any Pagan, Persecuting, Arrian, or Apostate Emperor; they knew not yet
what it was to take up other Arms against their Governors, than their Prayers
and their Tears, that they might live peaceably and quietly under them, in
Godliness and Honesty Greg. Naz. Orat. 1. in Jul. (...)
.

But how different is this from the carriage of many in our days, who would be
thought to be the strictest, if not the only followers of Christ, whose
pretenses to Religion make way to Rebellion, and their Faith intitles them to
Faction.

If S. Paul had wrote after their manner, or to please them, he must have
changed the style of his Injunction, and instead of commanding to submit, have
persuaded them to be stubborn, and disobedient for Conscience Sake, instead of
exhorting them to make Prayers and Supplications for Kings, and all in
authority, that they enter into Leagues, Covenants, Associations against them,
and under a show of Religion, destroy those that would live peaceably and
quietly in the Land.

To submit, after the example of our Savior, say they, would be the ready way
to be destroyed, and Prayers and Tears, the ancient Christian Armor against
Persecutors, are now no better than Mountebank Receipts, as the late Apostate
Author of the Life of (his elder Brother) Julian, calls them, (terms fit only
for a Scaffold or a Pillory, and might from thence well enough sound from the
Author, better, I Am sure, than from the Press or Pulpit,) these Receipts, say
they, are now ineffectual to cure the distempers of the Government, and
therefore they hope they may be excused if they use some more violent remedies,
and destroy the Peace and Government, to establish Anarchy and Confusion (which
they call Godliness and Religion). Nay furthermore, the same Author and his
Party tell us, and we are beholden to them for the discovery (for it is a Mine
newly sprung against the Government) that we have Law on our sides now, and
it is current doctrine with them, that where the King persecutes against Law, he
may be opposed and destroyed.

In answer to which vain and impious Plea (for so it has been fully made appear
to be, in the Life of Jovian) I would propose this dilemma to such persons, who
think they may resist, if a good Authority Persecutes them against Law, and
desire their answer: Did our Savior suffer against Law, or according to Law?
If according to Law, what made Pilate to pronounce him Innocent, and declare
that he found no cause of death in him? Mat. 27.23, 24. Luke 23.4. Jo. 18.36,
38.
If against Law, why did he not resist? He did not want strength, for he could
with a word speaking have called down Power enough from Heaven to have
destroyed his Persecutors against Law; and certainly if he intended any such
liberty for Christians, he would not have given such an example by his
sufferings to the contrary, and obliged all his Disciples, Mar. 16.24, 25. Jo.
12.26. 1 Pet. 2. c. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
by an express command, to transcribe the Copy he had set them, and follow his
example.

So that upon the whole we must conclude, that either our Savior died as a
Malefactor, according to Law, or else that he suffering against Law, did too
tamely submit, betrayed his followers, and his example is not to be imitated by
us; either of which are little less than blasphemous, and fit for none but a
Julian, or the Author of his Life to affirm. And thus much shall suffice for
the Propositions and Corollaries.

What remains? But that we all apply our selves to endeavor the support of the
Government, and in our several places and stations study to keep a good
Conscience, and faithfully to discharge that trust which God and the King have
committed to us: You, my Lords, and All that are in Authority, by a steady and
impartial execution of Justice, and all of us by a Conscientious submission to
our Prince, and obedience to his Laws.

Let us be thankful to God, who has established so just and rightful a
Government among us, and has set so gracious a Prince to rule over us, who as
he had greater injuries than any of his Predecessors to forgive, so God endued
him with a Clemency fitted for the same: Although he might justly have resented
the evil carriage of his Subjects toward him in the days of his Exile, yet at
his return he was ready to forget all, to receive them as Friends, who had been
so bitter Enemies, and in much mercy to forgive them more than they could
expect or deserve; God grant that they may be truly sensible of it, and
thankful and obedient to God and the King for it. He still treats his Subjects
with the kindness of a Father: Whose Ox has he taken? Whose Vineyard has he
coveted? Or whom does he in any kind oppress? He is pleased to oblige himself
to walk by the same Law with his Subjects, and if at any time he steps beside
it, of his own motion, it is to abate the rigor and severity of it: And indeed
the yoke of his Government is so easy and gentle, that it tempts some, I fear,
to grow wanton under so light a burden, and to endeavor to cast it off from
their Necks: Strange it is, that men should be so careless and disingenuous as
to neglect to be thankful for, nay, to abuse both God's and the King's mercies,
by sinning against the one, and by murmuring and conspiring against the other.

To conclude then, if we are sensible of the blessings we enjoy in the liberty
of the true Reformed Religion, in opposition to Superstition and Profaneness;
if we are truly sensible of the blessings of Government in general, in
opposition to Anarchy; of a good and gracious Government, in opposition to
Tyranny; let us be heartily thankful to God, who has wonderfully delivered our
King from the hands of violent and bloody men, Sons of Belial, that conspired
against him; that he has hitherto preserved his Church from the insolent
incursions of Sacrilege and Profaneness, and the whole Kingdom from Blood and
Devastation.

If therefore Decency and Order in the Church and State, be better than Anarchy
and Confusion; If Liberty and Property be better than Oppression and Tyranny;
If Peace be better than War, and Life than Death, let us be thankful and
Obedient, that it may be well with us, and our Posterity. Let us fear God and
the King, and meddle not with those that are given to change: let Judgment run
down like water, and Righteousness like a mighty stream; that the Throne may be
established, our Religion defended, our Lives secured, and our Peace continued.
And let us all in an especial manner put up our hearty Prayers and
Supplications to God for the King, and for all that are in Authority; that God
would direct, and defend them, and that under them we may lead peaceable and
quiet lives, in all Godliness and Honesty.

FINIS.

