The Judgment of Private Discretion IN Matters of Religion DEFENDED; IN A
SERMON On 1 Thessal. V. 21. Preached at St. Paul's Covent Garden, Feb. XXIII.
1686.

By RICHARD KIDDER.

IMPRIMATUR,

March 19 1686. Guil. Needham.



LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE READER.
NOthing concerns us so much as the Salvation of our Souls, and, in order to
that, the choice of our Religion. Here it well becomes us to use great care,
and strictly to examine things. This we do in matters of less moment; when we
purchase, and when we trade; when we are concerned for our Health, our Estates,
and Properties. The H. Scriptures frequently put us upon this care; and the man
who is diligent herein will be able to give the best account of himself
hereafter, and find the greatest satisfaction here: Such a man will have steady
Principles, and have this comfort, that it is not by mere chance, but choice,
that he is what he is. This is the way to be certain that we are in the right,
which no man can be without understanding. We may be confident indeed, but can
never be certain, without knowledge and diligent examination of things.

The Church of England does not require a blind Obedience; She is content Her
Doctrines should be examined by the clearest light. Simplicity and Truth seek
not corners. The H. Scriptures are allowed to the people, and no means of
instruction wanting among us. She does not indeed vaunt of what she has not:
She pretends not to any absolute Infallibility. She is modest, and contains
Herself within due bounds, and withholds not from Her Children either the
liberty or means of examining Her Doctrines.

But so it is, that She suffers very greatly in the mean time: Because She
claims not Infallibility, there are those who would infer that there is no
certainty where the other is not. But this is a wild and extravagant
conclusion; for the certaint^ of a Thing does not depend upon the infallibility
of a Person, but arises from the evidence or clear grounds which evict its
truth. It does not follow that because I am fallible that I can be certain of
nothing; or that because I am liable to err, I can never be sure I am in the
right; or that because I am ignorant of some things, therefore I know nothing
at all.

And yet we find it frequently pretended that Protestants want certainty, and
that they build upon an unsure foundation; and that because they claim not that
infallibility which others pretend to. The best way to show the uncertainty of
our Faith would be to prove that we build on false grounds; but those men who
are most forward to traduce us, have no great inclination to consider with due
application the merits of our cause. Instead of this, they would have us rest
upon the Authority of their Church, as if the way to be more certain than we
are, were for us to see with other men's eyes, and not with our own.

A man might justly expect from these men, who thus declaim against
Protestants, that when they attempt to show the uncertainty of their Faith,
they should at least prove the certainty of their own. 'Twill be worth our
while to see if they have any better grounds for their Faith, or safer way to
Salvation, than we have, who examine our Doctrines by the H. Scriptures. The
best way to know this, (...) Examen du livre qui port pour ^^tre ^^^ngez
^^^^tunes (...)
will be to compare them one with another.

They say that the desinition of the Church is our Rule, where, before we can
be certain, we must be sure of two things, [1.] That there is an infallible
Church. [2.] That their Church is that infallible Church. We on the other hand
make the H. Scriptures our Rule, and believe what they teach; and here are two
things also of which we must be sure. [1.] That what God says is true. [2.]
That what the Scriptures reveal is from God. This is the true state of the
question between us. And now let any man consider impartially who builds upon
the surest grounds, They who build upon the Veracity of God, and upon the H.
Scriptures, which are by all Christians owned to be the declaration of his
will; or they who build upon a pretense that there is an infallible Church, and
that their own is it. The Principles on which they build are neither so evident
in themselves, nor yet so generally owned as ours; for theirs are not so much
as owned by the generality of Christians, whereas ours cannot be denied by
themselves. And 'twill appear that our way is as Easy, and more Safe than
theirs.

It Is as easy to know what the Scripture teaches as what their Church does:
God intended it for the use of the people, and surely then he fitted it for
their use. And we have great reason to believe that God can deliver his mind as
plainly as a Council, and that he did it in all things necessary to the
guidance and salvation of the people for whom he wrote it. This is so very
evident, that some of the Church of Rome have owned it. Pref. part 1. page 7.
Celuy qui ne cherche dans l'Ecriture, que son salut l'y trouvera.
The Authors of the Preface to the Testament printed at Mons declare, That he
who in the Scripture seeks nothing but his own Salvation shall find it there.
And presently afterward, speaking of some obscurity in the Scripture, they add
these words: But that which may comfort us in this obscurity is this, that,
according to St. Augustine, the H. Scripture does propose to us after an easy
and intelligible manner all that is necessary for the conduct of our life; That
it does explain and clear it self, in expressing clearly in some places that
which in others it expressed obscurely.

For the Doctrine of the Church, it is not very easy to know it. We find at
this day several representations of it from those who are all of the Communion
of the Roman Church. How shall the simple and unlearned man know what this
Doctrine is? His Curate may not be relied upon, nor can he be secure from the
judgment of any private Doctor. What must he do? How shall he distinguish
between the Doctrine of private Doctors, and that of the Church? Must he read
the ancient Canons, and Councils, and Fathers? He Will find this an harder task
than the searching of the Scriptures. As our way is as easy, so' it is

More safe than theirs. There is danger indeed lest our lasts and worldly
interests should put a bias upon us, and turn us aside from the Truth, but
this lies on both sides: But then on our side the great danger is this, lest we
mistake the sense of the H. Scripture; here is the great fear. But then on the
other side, they who govern themselves by the authority of the Church are under
a double danger; [1.] Lest they take that Church for infallible which is not.
[2.] Lest they take that for the Doctrine of this Church which indeed is not
her Doctrine. We are sure that the Scriptures are God's Word, and were written
for our instruction, and that upon our diligent search into them, and humble
addresses to God, we shall find Salvation, if we seek nothing more.

For the infallibility of the Church, which is so much talked of, it must be
made good before I can be obliged to receive it; and when it is, I shall readily
submit to it. But in the mean time I find great difficulties attending upon
that Doctrine, both as to the Subject of that Infallibility, as to the Thing it
self, and as to the Grounds on which it stands.

As to the Subject of it, I find our Adversaries are not as yet agreed where it
is to be placed, and therefore I know not where to sind it; and then it is all
one as if there were no such thing at all. That which I cannot come at will
stand me in no stead. Let our Adversaries tell us in whom it is lodged: Is it in
the Bishop of Rome? Or is it in Him and the Conclave? Or in Him and a General
Council? Or is it in a Council without Him? If in a Council, must that be
ecumenical only; or does it reside in National and Provincial also?

As to the Infallibility it self, I would be informed how far it reaches. Does
it extend to questions of Fact as well as of Law and Right? Does it take in not
only necessary things, but also things that are of less moment? Is this Church
infallible not only in her Conclusions, but in the premises too from, whence
those Conclusions are drawn? Does this Infallibility require that the question
should be examined before the matter be decided or not? Is it a natural gift,
or is it by Grace? By immediate Revelation, or not? Let us suppose it in a
General Council; yet in this case I would know, whether or not this Council
will be infallible in their decisions however things are carried? Are there no
Rules the Council is to go by? Must not questions be strictly examined, and the
suffrages be free, and the Council be Canonically indicted? Or will the Council
be infallible though it observe none of these rules and forms? Let them tell us
what these forms are that are necessary, and let them after this make it appear
that they have been duly observed; or let them say if any form or rule be
needful, or not. How comes it to pass that the Divines in a General Council
have differed from one another? How comes it that one Council has: determined
against another? Why are some of these Councils in part received, and in part
rejected? What sure marks have we to distinguish one from another? What
assurance can they give that the major part is always the better, and have used
the greatest care?

For the Grounds and proofs of this Infallibility I desire to see those that
are solid and weighty, such as are evident and clear, and will render me
infallibly certain of the thing. This had need be well proved, it not being
self-evident. If I must believe the Church in all other things, yet it is fit
this should be strongly proved. These proofs must be taken from the H.
Scriptures, and not from the authority of the Church which lays claim to it.
And then they must be such proofs as determine it to that very Church, and as
do evidently prove that such an Infallibility does belong to it as she pretends
to.

Till these things are cleared, I know not any better advice I can give the
Reader, than to continue steadfast in the Communion of our Church, as the safest
way to Heaven. For though we ought not to want charity for others, yet we are
bound in conscience (and as we will answer it at the great Day) to choose
wisely, and to be constant to such a choice. There are some things controverted
between Us and the Church of Rome wherein we are manifestly of the safer side:
To worship no Image has no danger, nor is there any hazard in receiving the
Sacrament in both kinds. 'Twere easy to give other instances in which we are
on the safer side.

In the mean time, let it be our care to live up to our Principles, and we
shall not miscarry. The best Church is no security to the careless and the
profane. We shall know the Will of God best, when we do it with great care.
It Is not enough that we prove all things, we must also hold fast that which is
good.

A SERMON PREACHED At Saint Paul's Covent Garden, Feb. 23. 1686.
1 THESSAL. V. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good.


IN these words the Apostle commends to those, to whom he writes, two things,
the one in order to the other.

First, That they should prove all things. Secondly, That they should hold fast
that which is good.
I begin with the first, Prove all things.

And here I think my self obliged before I proceed any farther to consider [1.]
The Persons to whom the advice is given; And [2.] The importance of the advice
it self.

Chapter 1. v. 1.
1. The Persons to whom this advice is given; viz. to the Church of the These
alonians. Not to the Bishops and Governors of the Church only, but to the
People also. This appears from the words (v. 12.) We beseech you brethren to
know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish
you. It cannot be supposed that St. Paul does here direct himself to the head
and not unto the members. He does generally address himself to the Church in
the most diffusive sense of that word; E. G. To all that be in Rome, Romans 1.7.
beloved of God, called to be Saints. 1 Cor. 1.2.
And, Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, 2 Cor. 1.1.
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus called to be Saints, with all that
in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ the Lord. Again, Unto the
Church of God which is in Corinth, with all the Saints which are in all Achaia.
Gal. 1.2.
Again, Unto the Church of Galatia; And, Ephesians. 1.1.
To the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus. And
where the Bishops and other Ministers of the Church are named the body of the
faithful are not forgotten. Thus, To all the Saints in Christ Jesus which are
at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons. Phil. 1.1. Colos. 1.2.
Again, To the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Colosse.
And, 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. Jam. 1.1.
To the Church of the Thessalonians. And thus also St. James, To the twelve
Tribes scattered abroad. Thus St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.1.
To the strangers scattered, etc. And, 2 Pet. 1.1.
To them that have obtained like precious faith with us. And St. John (as a
learned man has observed) may well be supposed to direct that Epistle to the
Church, or whole body of Christians, which according to our version is said to
be directed to the Elect Lady. St. Jude directs his To them that are sanctified
by God the Father, Jude v. 1.
and preserved in Jesus Christ and called. St. Paul where he gives Laws about
the Officers and Government of the Church directs his Epistles to the
Governors only as in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus; otherwise he directs,
as here, to the whole body of Christians.

2. I consider the importance of the advice, Prove all things. The Greek word,
which we render Prove, signifies to examine the truth or goodness of a thing;
and to discern the difference between one thing and another. Luke 12.56. and
chapter 14. v. 19. To. 2.18. 1 Cor. 3.13.11.27.16.3.
It signifies to try and examine, and sometime (as the result of such trial)
to approve.

It has in the New Testament a particular reference to matters of Religion:
To. 2.18.12.2. Ephesians. 5.10. Phil. 1.10.
These things deserve examining, and there are about Religion many dangerous
errors which want not the vogue and color of truth. 1 John 4.1.
We are required to try the Spirits, and warned not to believe every Spirit.

We are required to examine and try the truth and goodness of things, yea of
all things, and not to take them upon trust: And this precept is subjoined to
that, 1 Cor. 14.3, 4, 5.
Despise not prophecyings; i. e. the preaching of the Word, as may be collected
from the Apostle's words elsewhere.

St. Paul does frequently put us in mind to reverence the Ministers of Religion
and tells us how they are to be esteemed; He requires us in this Chapter To
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, Heb. 13.17 1 Cor. 4.1. 2
Cor. 5.20.
(v. 13.) and bids us not despise prophecyings, and yet even to this he adds
Prove all things, etc. whence I raise this Doctrine or Proposition.

That it is the duty of Christian people to examine the grounds of their
Religion and Faith, and not to take them upon trust.

For the better speaking to it I shall.

First, show how this Proposition is to be understood. Secondly, I shall prove
the Truth of it. Thirdly, I shall answer the Objections that may be brought
against it. Fourthly, I shall make some use and application of the whole.


1. What I plead for is a judgment of discretion and not of jurisdiction and
direction, which belongs to our Superiors. It Is here as in the Laws of a
Kingdom. The people are obliged to know and keep them. It is the duty and the
interest of every man to know so much of them as concerns his life and
property, and the discharging his duty to his Prince and Country. But then the
power of making these Laws lies in his Prince or Governors; and the learned in
the Law are only fit to direct and guide men in the matters of doubt and
question. And so it is in Religion. It does not belong to every private man to
be a preacher and interpreter of Holy Writ, much less has he any thing to do
to make Laws for other men. But the private man has a soul to save, and in
order thereunto is bound to inform himself in matters of faith, To. 14.1.
and those things which tend to the regulating his life and conversation. We do
not receive the people as judges of Controversies, and doubtful Disputations;
yet think them concerned in Religion in the mean time. For matters of dispute
and question the Priests lips are to preserve knowledge. Here it becomes
private men to be modest, and to preserve a great reverence for their spiritual
guides. But there is a great deal of difference between asking the way, when we
are at a stand, and pulling out our eyes and leaving our selves wholly to be
led by another. We may use our own eyes and our guides too.

2. It is likewise a judgment of private discretion which I plead for. It is
not fit that a private man should judge for himself and his brother too. His
Conscience is not to be the common standard and measure of other men's. To. 14.5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Every man ought to have this
liberty to himself and to be content therewith, and not to censure his brother.

3. The practice of private men must (notwithstanding this liberty) be governed
by the laws of their just Superiors. And nothing can excuse them from an active
obedience but where their Governors command what God has forbid, or forbid
what he has commanded.

And this determination of our practice (especially in matters of order and
discipline, of which I would be chiefly understood) is very consistent with
that judgment of discretion which I am now pleading for. Indeed if the thing
commanded be evil I must obey God rather than man; but if it be not, I sin
against God when I disobey my Superiors. A private man is not judge of what is
convenient, most decent and orderly, but ought to judge between good and evil,
lawful and unlawful, true and false. Our Doctrine does not give men a liberty
to do what they list when it permits them a judgment of discretion; we do not
pull out the peoples eyes, nor yet allow them to break hedges and throw open
enclosures and ramble wherever they list.

to consider whether what is enjoined them be lawful or not. And to this
purpose I desire you to consider,

1. That the Scripture teaches us this Doctrine. We are here commanded to
prove all things; And our Savior bids his followers take heed that no man
deceive them. Matt. 24.4. c. 23.10. 1 Pet. 5.
Christ allows no man a tyranny over the Consciences of men, nor would St.
Peter have it usurped, nor did the Apostles themselves practice it. St. Paul
declares himself not to be a Lord over their faith but an helper of their joy.
2 Cor. 1.24. Heb. 13.20. 1 Cor. 11.1.
Christ is our Master and great Shepherd. His Ministers are but Stewards and
Ambassadors, and are no farther imitable than they follow Christ.

Our Savior calls upon his followers to beware of the doctrine of the
Pharisees and Sadducees, Matt. 16. Joh. 5.39. 1 John 4.1. Gal. 1.
and to search the Scriptures. And we are required to try the Spirits, and not
to believe an Apostle or an Angel that should preach any other Gospel.

God gave his law for our direction: And we are assured that the Scripture is
sufficient to render the man of God wise unto salvation through faith in
Christ. Deuteronomy 4. Psalm. 1. 2 Timothy 3. Luke 16. Act 17.11.
And those men are commended who searched the Scriptures and examined the
Doctrine of the primitive Preachers by them.

If the blind lead the blind (says Christ) both shall fall into the ditch. Mat.
15.14
Men will not be excused because they have been misled by their guides, and
believed as their Church believed. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18.
Ezekiel tells us that where the people are not warned they shall dye in their
iniquity. Religion is every man's concernment, and every man is obliged to take
care of his Soul, and not blindly to give himself up to him that pretends to be
an infallible guide.

Be ready always (says St. Peter) to give an answer to every man that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you. 1 Pet. 3 15.
We must then judge of the grounds of our Faith and not take it upon trust.

2. I shall represent to you (for the better confirming my Proposition) the
just Exceptions against the contrary belief; viz. That the people are bound to
lay aside their own discretion and entirely to give themselves up (without
examining) to be led as their guides please. I shall show the dangerous
consequences, the inconsistency and vanity, the impiety and unreasonableness of
this principle; and that in the following particulars.

[1.] This principle is of the most dangerous consequence.

It would justify the Idolatry of the Israelites which was at any time
introduced upon them by their H. Priests or false Prophets or evil Kings. We
read of their sacrificing in high places, their worship of the golden Calf,
and the Calves of Dan and Bethel, of their brazen Serpent and their false Gods.
It was not a just excuse for them that the golden Calf was made by Aaron: 2
King. 10.
They were not without blame for offering upon that Altar, which resembled that
which was at Damascus, because Vriah their H. Priest set it up, and Ahaz their
King commanded the use of it. But we know that God was angry with them when
they followed their blind guides which he would not have been had they done
well in it.

This principle would have justified the Jews in rejecting our Savior. For who
could blame them for doing that which their H. Priest and Sanhedrim, their
Priests and Elders had done before? It is true he wrought many Miracles: But to
this they might reply, that their Church did not believe them effected by the
power of God. Indeed Jesus appeals often to the Scripture; but, according to
this principle, to this they might have pleaded that it was not for private men
to understand Scripture, and that their Church did understand it otherwise.
They might have pleaded moreover that the interpreting of Scripture did not
belong to private men as they were, and that they were to be governed by
Tradition or the Oral Law, and not by the written one only; That they had
among them an H. Priest and Sanhedrim, Scribes or men learned in the Law and
Traditions, which latter they received with equal reverence with the Written
Word. Joh. 7.48.
Have any of the Rulers and the Pharisees believed on him? say they. They were
so far from it that they agreed that he who confessed him to be the Christ
should be put out of the Synagogue. Joh. 9.
Would such pretenses, think ye, have served the turn of the Jews? By no means.
They ought to have read the Scriptures, to which Jesus appealed, to have
compared events with prophecies. This our Lord puts them upon, Joh. 5.39.45,
46, 47. Act. 17.11.
and it was at once their duty and interest to have done it. They are commended
who took this course.

This principle might afterward have justified the Jews in their rejecting the
Christian doctrine and the Apostles and first Preachers thereof. The Jews might
have pleaded against the Apostles many things, e. g. The undoubted antiquity of
the Jewish Church, and novelty of the Christian doctrine: The necessity of
giving themselves up to the conduct of their Priests, whose lips were to
preserve knowledge, and they were to seek the Law at their mouth: They might
have pleaded that they were in the safest way to salvation: for, though they
denied the possibility of it to the Christians, yet, Jesus himself owned that
salvation was of the Jews. They might have urged the 17th of Deuteronomy to
prove the infallibility of their Church with a far greater show than ever Thou
art Peter, etc. was produced to prove that of the Bishop of Rome. It being
expressly required ( Deuteronomy. 17.8, 10.) That in matters of Controversy men should
abide by the Sentence of the law pronounced by the Priest, or Judge of that
time; whereas no such thing is said of the Bishop of Rome in the New Testament.

This principle would effectually have hindered the propagation of the Christian
Religion among the Gentil or Pagan part of the world. They had their Priests
and H. Priests too as well as the Jews, they had antiquity to plead, and great
success and prosperity under their way of worship. Sequendi sunt nobis parents
qui feliciter sequuti sunt suos, says Symmachus. If this principle might be
allowed there could be no way left to spread the faith among them.

This one principle where ever admitted would have put a perpetual bar to the
conversion of Jews and Infidels to the Christian Faith. For what method can we
take to bring them over if we cannot convince them that we are in the right and
they in the wrong? And how can they be made sensible of this if we allow them
not the liberty of judging? And sure if they be fit to judge of the whole
matter they are not unfit to judge of the severals. If we allow them the
liberty to judge of Christianity before they embrace it, it is not reasonable
to deny them a judgment of discretion when they are received into the Christian
Faith.

This principle admitted would have excused the people that should have
continued in Arianism, when the Bishops and Priests and generally the whole
Church was infected with it. The Arians once filled the Church, called
themselves Orthodox and Catholics and others Heretics. According to this
principle the people ought to have continued thus always; for they were to be
governed by their Bishops and Priests; And why should they think themselves
obliged to hearken to what you had to offer from Scripture, or Reason, or the
Council of Nice, when it was against the sense of the present Church?

[2.] This principle, not being self-evident, is inconsistent, and manifestly
destroys it self. For it is liable to be examined, and ought to be strictly
examined because very much depends upon it. If it may be examined by the people
they who maintain it have lost their question. For then the people are not
obliged to despoil themselves of their faculties and wiser powers but may judge
in matters of Religion, this being of the most principal concernment of all.
This ought not to be taken upon trust because their salvation depends upon it.
If this chance to be false they may blindly give themselves up to a guide who
may lead them to the regions of darkness.

[3.] Supposing there were any truth in this principle, yet it would be of no
use to us unless we were also directed to the Church and guides to whom we are
to surrender our selves. Supposing we were bound to believe as the Church
believes and blindly to follow our Priests, yet if we do not know what Church
is to be thus trusted, and what Priests thus to be confided in, and under what
profession we are to do it we shall be at as great a loss as ever. For it
cannot be supposed that it is the duty of all people, in every Country and
under every Profession to do this. For Jews, Christians and Infidels cannot be
all under an equal obligation. It is then to be considered to what Church this
belongs. If the Church of Rome put in she must show a better plea than any
other that may pretend, and a better than any she has produced as yet. For
Antiquity, Succession, Miracles, Amplitude, Prosperity, Success, etc. these are
things that may be pleaded in behalf of Jews, Pagans and Infidels. They will at
least severally share in these pretenses. Let the pretense be what it will,
before I can admit the pretender I must judge his title good, and that will
destroy the principle.

[4.] This principle invades the prerogative of God, and usurps upon his
peculiar. He only has a direct dominion over the Consciences of men. Jam.
4.12.
He is the one lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy. We are obliged to
believe a verity because he says it. There must be a revelation before a
divine faith. Men have not power to make articles of faith, or to require our
assent upon presumption of such power.

[5.] Many things in Religion are so plain that a man of ordinary capacity and
competently instructed in the principles of Religion is able to judge of them:
But this principle destroys that power, and supposes men unable to judge in
the plainest cases whatsoever.

From the Writers of the Romish Church we hear much of the obscurity of the
Scriptures. I grant that there are some things in them hard to be understood,
and every man therefore is not fit to interpret them. God has appointed an
order of men to do this. Ephesians. 4.11.
He has given some Apostles, some Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers,
not to hoodwink the people and lead them out of the way, but for the perfecting
of the Saints, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, and preserving the
people from the sleight of men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait
to deceive. This is the great purpose of the institution. It Is for the
instruction and building up of the faithful.

But our way is generally plain, and there we need no guide if we use our eyes,
and mind our rule. Matters of faith as well as manners are plainly revealed.

Such are all the Articles of our most ancient Creed: They are so plainly
taught in the H. Scriptures that he who runs may read them there.

That we love God and our Neighbor are the weightier things of. Religion, and
easy to be understood: Justice and Mercy and Peaceableness are plain. That we
obey the King, be charitable to the poor, just to all men, and do as we would
be done by: That we use no craft or equivocations, but be sincere in all our
actions and professions, are things not hard to be understood.

But if men should undertake to be guides to the people, and teach them
rebellion, injustice, cruelty, dissembling and equivocation; to kill their King
and destroy their enemies; a man of mean understanding may discern that these
are not the gifts which Christ gave unto men, but that they are a company of
false people, or rather ravenous wolves. To judge of these things no man needs
a guide who has eyes in his head.





Panacea or universal remedy for all diseases, who gains small credit with wise
men. I grant that Heresies and Schisms are great evils, and that we ought to
prevent them what we can. And much might be done toward it if the Ministers of
Religion could as easily secure the practice as inform the minds of men. But
Scandals or Offenses are great evils as well as Heresies: Matt. 18.7.
And yet Christ tells us that it must needs be that offenses come; And St. Paul
tells us as plainly, 1 Cor. 11.19.
There must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be
made manifest among you. God has foretold that there should come a falling
away; 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and that some should be under strong delusions and believe a lie. It is a vain
thing to pretend a remedy against that evil against which God himself has
provided none.

2. To believe without examining, as the present Church believes, is so far
from preventing Heresies that it secures men under them without any hope of
emerging. A blind obedience may as well detain men in Heresy as keep them in
the Faith. This principle shuts men up, and is so far from preventing the
disease, that whenever men are overtaken with it all that it does is that it
hinders all remedy.

3. That the principle which I have exposed, being not self-evident but
contestable, may well be supposed to divide men about the main question. It
ought to be examined because it does not carry its Evidence along with it. And
then who can tell but that the principle which is devised to unite may chance
to divide men when they go about to examine it?

4. We will suppose this principle selfevident, and that it has been anciently
and universally received (which is by no means to be granted) yet we know that
it was not effectual. The Gnostics, Arians and other Heretics did infest the
Primitive Church. This principle then was received in the Church from the
beginning or it was not: If it were not, it is then a new Doctrine, and we are
not obliged to receive it now. If it were received in the ancient Church, I
would then know how Heresies and Schisms got into the Church? Was this
principle then ineffectual and shall it not now fail to be effectual?



1 Thessalonians. 5.13. He. 13.17. 1 Cor. 9.11. 2 Timothy 5.17. Gal. 6.6. Matt. 104.
1. There is a great honor due from the People to their Pastors. This cannot be
denied. They are bound to pay it by all instances of regard and kindness. He
that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a Prophet's
reward.

1 Timothy 5.17.
2. This honor has its bounds and measures. It is due for the sake of their
Master and their Work, and in proportion to their faithfulness and labors. Let
the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they
who labor in the word and doctrine. But we need not put out our eyes that they
may lead us whither they please; nor are bound to pay that honor to the
Servants and Stewards which is only due to their Lord and Master.

3. That we may give them all due honor though we do not think them
infallible. This the Apostle supposes in my Text. For though he had required
this esteem from the people toward their Pastors ( v. 13.) yet he commands
them to prove all things. We are obliged to honor our Judges and Civil
Magistrates, and may truly do it though we do not believe every sentence and
determination of theirs to be according to exact truth and equity.

For our Judges in civil matters we are obliged to sit down by their sentence,
when we do not think it just; we are to suffer wrong and not resist. It does
not hence follow that we must follow our spiritual guides without examining.
The Civil Magistrate determines only our outward actions, or disposes of some
of our goods and properties (which we have power to alienate) but he does not
prescribe upon our inward sense, nor touch upon our Conscience as our spiritual
guides do in their commands. And though we do not appeal from the Civil
Magistrate, it cannot hence be inferred that we think him infallible.



Sovereign Vmpire to decide all civil controversies about meum and tuum. For
since these things divide the world, and are occasions of feuds and wars, it
may be as fairly said that this is for the interest of the world as an
infallible Judge is for that of the Church. Shall we then conclude that God
has appointed such an one, or else he had been wanting to his Creatures? It Is
for the interest of the Church that the Members of it should be free from
possibility of sinning as well as of erring, and yet we know God has made no
such provision. An infallible guide of manners is as necessary as such a guide
of controversies, and yet we cannot say there is any such. And then we have no
cause to make such a conclusion.

2. That supposing it necessary there should be an Infallible Judge, yet this
would do us no good unless we could be infallibly sure of this Infallible
Judge. And there are two things in this case we must be infallibly certain of,
viz. [1.] That there is some Infallible Judge: [2.] Who that Judge is. Both
these are necessary. We must be sure of a treasure first, and then know where
it lies before we can have cause to boast of our wealth.

3. That supposing the present Church of Rome were the infallible Church, yet
the more simple sort of people would not be, for all this, at any greater
certainty. For they would have another task upon them, viz. to inquire what is
the faith and what is the worship of this Church. And how will they do to find
that out? must they be ruled by what the ignorant and common people do?
Perhaps the Church does not allow of all their practices. Or shall they be
governed by their Parish Priest? But that Priest for what they know may err,
though a Pope or Council cannot. Shall they be governed by common consent? But
there are differing customs and usages in France and Spain and other Countries,
to which of these shall they adhere? Must they be taught by a Pope ex cathedra?
But how shall they know if this be a true Pope, or whether he speak ex cathedra
or not? Or will you send these people to the Council of Trent? Alas, it is a
thing well known that the words of that Councils Decrees are sometime general
and ambiguous and not fit to direct plain and simple people. And yet Pope Pius
IV. commanded that without his authority no man should explain them. That no
man should presume Vllos commentarios, glossas, annotationes, Scholia, ullumve
omnino interpretationis genus super ipsius Concilii decretis quocunque modo
edere. That is, By any way to publish any Commentaries, Glosses, Annotations,
Scholia, or any sort of interpretation whatsoever upon the Decrees of that
Council. And this under the pain of Excommunication, as appears by his Bull for
the confirmation of that Council. For instance: That Council tells us that
Images are to be had in Churches, and to have due honor given them. What this
due honor is which they allow how shall the simple man know? Whether it be
negative or positive honor? Whether he give too much or too little? Whether he
divide it aright between the Image and the Prototype? How can he know how to
govern himself in this affair? Indeed the Council says afterward that all
Superstition must be avoided. But what the Superstition is which the Council
disallows it does not define. And therefore the plain and simple man will be at
a loss how to govern himself.



1. This serves for the reproof of those who would deprive the people of that
liberty which God has given them. This is to despoil them of the great
prerogative of their nature, and degrade them into a lower rank of being, which
is the greatest tyranny imaginable. There is nothing so much concerns mankind
as Religion and the interest of their immortal Souls. We are here put upon
trying or proving all things. 1 John 4.1.
Believe not every spirit (says St. John) but try the spirits whether they are
of God. Christ bids the Jews search the Scriptures. Surely then the Scriptures
are not to be kept from the people: And they must be allowed their rule when
they are obliged to prove all things. If they are obliged to give a reason of
their hope they must be allowed to examine its grounds.

2. This serves for the reproof of those among our selves who do not use that
liberty of examining which is allowed them; who neither know nor will
understand: That are crafty and diligent in worldly affairs but supinely
negligent in their truest and greatest interest. Too many are wedded to their
faction and fond opinions, and both practice and prescribe that which they
condemn in the Chapter of Rome. Did they ingenuously examine things, and sincerely
seek the truth, they might easily avoid the Errors and Schisms they are now
justly charged with.

3. Let us then examine the grounds of our faith, especially in the points
controverted among us at this time, then will your Communion with the Chapter of
England not be the result of Chance, but of Judgment, and of choice. I know no
mark of a true Church wanting here, and am sure that many things greatly
commend to us her Communion.

First, This Church does not void the necessity of an holy life. It cancels
none of our obligations to God or man; but teaches the absolute necessity of
contrition and repentance, and mortification of our lusts. And does by no means
indulge a liberty of living as we list.

Secondly, She fairly proposes her Doctrines, and does not refuse to have them
examined, nor deprive her Children of the means of doing it by the clearest
light.

Thirdly, Nor are her Doctrines fitted to advance a secular interest or glory.
Religion is an holy institution; heavenly in its principle and pure in its aim,
and disdains to stoop to mean arts for wealth and worldly dignities.

Fourthly, This Church teaches nothing that is manifestly false, nor puts us
upon any practice which is a direct violation of any divine institution.

Fifthly, Nor does this Church want the excellent badge of charity, which is
indeed the bond of perfectness. Religion was designed as the greatest blessing
to mankind, and the author of the Christian was a great lover of humane race.
Its precepts are full of kindness and benignity, and commend the highest pitch
of civility and compassion, and the highest flights of friendship.

Sixthly, As obedience to Kings and Governors is a great part of the Christian
Religion, and an ornament to it, and was in an eminent degree practiced by the
first and best Christians, so it is the doctrine of our Church, and has always
been the practice of the members of it.

In a word, we pray for our enemies, and teach men to give both God and Caesar
their due. We think it safe to worship no Image, and are sure we are right when
we pray to God through the mediation of Jesus Christ. We know that God hears,
but cannot say so of Saints and Angels. We receive the Sacrament in both kinds
as given by Christ, and received by the ancient Church: And do believe the
Sacramental bread after consecration to be what the Apostle calls it more than
once. For the Doctrine of Concomitance we leave it to them who understand it.
We pray in a tongue we understand. We follow the H. Scriptures, believe the
ancient Creeds, nor do we reject the first general Councils. We press men to
piety, loyalty, humility and charity, and earnestly desire the salvation of
mankind. We press men to all manner of good works, but place our hope in the
mercy of God and merits of his Son. If we live up to our rule we are safe; If
not, it is not the fault of our Religion, it is our own. If we live up to our
Religion we shall never be miserable in this world, and in the next shall be
unspeakably happy. Which God of his mercy grant for the sake of Jesus Christ,
to whom with the Father and H. Ghost be all honor and glory now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

