THE Bishop of BATH and WELLS's FAST-SERMON Before the QUEEN At WHITE HALL, On
the 23d of May, 1694.

Zechariah VII. 5. Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests,
saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those
seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me?


THese Words are an answer to the question in the 3d. Verse, Should I weep in
the fifth month, separating my self, as I have done these so many years? To
this the Prophet is commanded to reply in the Words of my Text; When ye fasted,
etc.

I shall premise something concerning the Fasts which obtained among the Jews,
for the better understanding the Words of my Text.

Among the Jews there was but one Fast in a year Commanded in the Law of Moses;
And that was the Day of Expiation, Levit. 16.29. chapter 23.29, 30. Numb. 29.7.
on the tenth Day of the seventh Month: Then they were obliged to afflict their
Souls, and to do no work, under the severest penalty. So that it was at once to
be observed as a Sabbath, and a Fast; a day of Abstinence, and of Rest. And
hence it is called not only a Fast, Levit. 16.31. and chapter 23.32. v. Thorndike
of Religious Assembl. p. 10.
but a Sabbath of Rest. A very solemn time, and which the Jews observed as
such. But whatever their outward Expressions of Devotion were, they were
Hypocrites in the mean time. And their Hypocrisy is laid open by Isaiah, chap.
58. That Chapter I understand of this Fast, even those words, v. 13. If thou
turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my Holy day,
and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord, etc. By Sabbath here, we
have no cause to understand the Jews weekly Sabbath; Seldom de jure Naturali,
l. III. c. 15.
for the Prophet in the foregoing Words speaks of their Fasting; and the Day of
Expiation was then the only stated Fast, and is called from its first
Institution a Sabbath, as has been observed before: Kimchi and Abravenel in
Isa. 58.13.
Kimchi confesses also that the Rabbis understood this place of the Day of
Expiation; and Abravenel cites the Vajikra Rabbah, expressly interpreting the
Holy of the Lord of the same day.

St. Luke is observed to call this Day of Expiation the Fast: (...), Act. 27.9.
When sailing was now dangerous, because the Fast was already past: That is, it
was after the tenth of the seventh Month, a time of year when there was more
danger of Sailing than in the earlier time of the year.

Besides this great Fast, there were others in use among the Jews in
Aftertimes; There were who fasted two days in a Week; Luke 18.
There were private and voluntary Fasts which pious Persons took upon
themselves; Occasional ones appointed upon particular Emergencies. Besides
these, they had their four times a year; of which there is mention in this
Prophet. The Fast of the fourth, Zech. 8.19.
fifth, seventh and tenth Month.

That of the fourth Month was upon occasion that in that Month Jerusalem was
broken up by the Chaldees. Jer. 39.2. Jer. 52.6, 7.
This Kimchi calls the beginning of the Destruction of the Holy City. Kimchi in
Ezekiel. c. 1. v. 1.
This was the true ground of this Fast, Abravenel in 2 Reg. c. 25.
whatever the Jews add concerning the breaking of the Tables of Stone, ceasing
of the daily Sacrifice, and burning the Law, setting up an Idol in the Temple,
etc.

That of the fifth Month was in memory of the burning of the Temple by the Men
of Babylon, Jer. 52.12, 13.
which happened in that Month. Maimon. H. Taan. c. 5.
The Jews do indeed mention some other sad things which happened to them in
this Month: That then it was decreed that their Forefathers in the Wilderness
should not enter into Canaan: That the Temple was destroyed the second time,
that the City of Bitter was taken, etc.

That of the seventh Month was in memory of the Slaughter of Gedaliah, Jer.
41.1, 2.
which happened in this Month.

That of the tenth Month was in memory of that Siege that was so fatal to them,
whereof we have mention, (2 King. 25.1. Jer. 52.4. chap. 39.1.) In this Month
also came the sad news to Ezekiel, that the City was smitten, Ezekiel. 33.21.

By all this it appears, if we follow the Scripture-grounds of these Fasts;
That they were kept in memory of the Jews. Sufferings from the Babylonians, and
upon occasion of the Evils which happened to them about the time of that
Captivity. They who were Captives in Babylon, are now returned to their City,
and Building of their Temple: Their Captivity is expired; and now the question
is, Whether or not they shall need to Fast any longer? Should I weep in the
fifth month, separating my self, as I have done so many years? The question
will admit of some dispute.

On the one side it might be said: Why should we Fast, when the reason of our
Fasting is ceased? We Fasted for the Burning of our City and Temple; we are now
returned to that desolate place, and it is in great measure raised from its
Ruins: It Is now a time to rejoice, and not to mourn. 'Twas fit by the Rivers of
Babylon to sit down and weep when we remembered Zion. Well did it become us
there to hang our Harps upon the Willows; That strange Land was no place to
sing the Lord's Song. He that then called for Mourning, now calls for Joy: He
has turned back the Captivity of Zion, and now our Mouth is filled with
laughter, and our Tongue with singing: The Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad.

On the other hand they might plead for their Fasting thus: We ought not so
soon to forget the Evils we have suffered, much less the Sins which brought
them upon us. We are returned, but we are but newly returned. Our Temple is not
finished; or were it finished, it holds no proportion to that which was
destroyed: We are amidst our Enemies, and not purged from our Sins. This Temple
is like to want many things which the former had; and we come short of what we
should be. We have still much to do. Fasting is a great instrument of Piety;
and the House of Mourning will be more instructive, and more safe, than that of
Feasting.

The question is, Whether or not they shall need Fast any longer? They consult
the Priests and the Prophets, who might be presumed most likely to inform them.
The Prophet is instructed to give them an answer; and such an one it is, as is
very instructive to us; and he begins to do it in the Words of my Text, saying,
When ye fasted, etc.

q. d. When ye Fasted and Mourned, was it to my advantage, or for my sake, that
ye did it? Ye Fasted indeed for Seventy years together; but as you took it upon
your selves at first, so it was not upon its own account any pleasure to me:
For I am not pleased with bare Abstinence, any more than with Eating: Your
Obedience is acceptable, not your mere Fasting: This will turn your Fasts into
Feasts. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Zechar. 8.19.
The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the
seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and
gladness. But the way of turning these Fasts into Feasts, may be learnt from
what follows: Therefore love the Truth and Peace.

I shall, for my more orderly proceeding, show,

First, That mere Abstinence, or Fasting, is not pleasing to God.

Secondly, I shall show the right use of Fasting.

Thirdly, I shall give some Rules for the better discharge of this Duty.

Fourthly, I shall apply it to our present case.

I. That mere Abstinence or Fasting is not pleasing to God. The Jews had Fasted
without Fruit. God is not obliged by Fasting alone. Many have Fasted to Evil
purposes, others to none. We have in this Kingdom kept many public Fasts: Many
times it had been as well, and sometimes perhaps it had been better that we had
eat and drank. Fasting is but an Instrument, and may be used well or ill. It
does not of it self commend us to God; It sometimes renders us more detestable.
Many have Fasted to themselves, and not unto God. Jezebel proclaimed a Fast,
when she designed her Neighbor's Vineyard; and some have Fasted that they
might be seen of Men. A Man may Fast out of Covetousness; or Fast for one Meal,
that he may make the more room for the next. A Man may Fast out of
Superstition, and lay a stress upon that, upon which God has laid none.
Wherefore have we fasted, Isa. 58.3.
(say they) and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou
take no knowledge? God regarded not their Fasting, that was not sufficient to
commend them to Him: He does not envy us the use of his Creatures; not grudge
us our Meat and Drink. We are vain if we think bare Fasting will procure his
favor. Did you at all fast unto me? and when ye did eat, and when ye did
drink, did not ye eat for your selves, and drink for your selves? (v. 6.)
Though we separate our selves from other Pleasures, as the Jews did in their
Fasts, ( v. 3.) who were wont at such times to abstain from Bathing and Music,
and other Pleasures: Though we should not only abstain, but chastise our
Bodies; yet may all this be in vain, and to no purpose, and unacceptable to
God. This appears from my Text, and from Isa. 58.

For we may abstain from Meat, and not from Sin: Drink no Wine, and be drunk
with Passion, Pride, or Revenge: Forbear a Meal, and glut our selves with
Malice, Lust and Envy: Fast one Meal, and be intemperate the next: Pinch our
Bodies, and over-charge our Souls: 'Twas our Savior's advice; Take heed to
your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, Luke 21.34.
and cares of this life. Cares of this life will over-charge us as well as
Meats and Drinks.

This is not said to discourage you from Fasting; whatever it be alone, it is
good in conjunction: It Is not Godliness, but it is a good Instrument and
Companion of it. It Is often convenient, and sometimes necessary. It serves the
Purposes of Religion when it is used with care and prudence. I doubt not but
it is a Duty, and very advantageous also. Nor is it hard to prove it so to be.
It has the approbation of God, and suffrages of Holy Men, and recommendation
of the Holy Writ. 'Twas practiced by Ancient Christians, joined with Prayer and
Alms, of the earliest use in the Christian Church, and of use among the devout
before Christianity. It has a Reward annexed to it, and its Rules assigned,
and its particular Energy (when joined with devout Prayer) allowed. 'Twas the
Pharisees Boasting, not Fasting, that was reproved. It Is sometimes as needful
as Physic; and when well used, it is then always more safe. But then it must be
taken as Physic with good advice and regiment. If it do any hurt, it is where
it is not well managed.

II. I shall show the right use of Fasting: To what purpose it is to be used,
and what the great Intentions of it are: The want of heeding this has been
very pernicious to Mankind: Hence it is that we have lost our labor, in not
having Fasted unto God. Did ye fast at all unto me, etc?

1. It is very useful when it is used as an act of Revenge upon our selves for
our Sins past: Then it is an act of Repentance, and a testimony of the hatred we
bear to our Sins. This is reckoned among the Effects of a godly Sorrow: For
behold, 2 Cor. 7.11.
this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea,
what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge. He
that is a true Penitent, is a sorrowful Man; and as a testimony of that, he
denies himself of what was otherwise lawful, because he had indulged himself
in what was forbidden. It well becomes us to chastise our selves by Abstinence
for our past intemperance; For our Pride and Lust by Severities and
Humiliations.

2. It Is useful when it is used as an instrument of Mortification of our
irregular Desires and Appetites, when it is (...), i. e. destructive of our Sin.
It has a great tendency that way, as it with-draws succors from our sensual
desires. Our Body is an unruly beast; if pampered, and too highly fed, it will
endanger its rider. Plenty hurts us, and our Souls starve under fullness of
bread. Jer. 5.7.
Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods: When I had
fed them to the full, they then committed Adultery, and assembled themselves by
troops in the harlot's houses. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked: Deuteronomy. 32.15, 16.
thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: Then
he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation:
They provoked him to jealousy with strange Gods. There are not many Men that
can digest Plenty and Fullness. This is frequently the Parent of Lust and
Sensuality. And hence we easily lapse into a brutish and sensual life. Here
Fasting is a good instrument of Religion, as it with-draws the fuel of our
Lusts, and the nourishment of our Vices. As in a Fever, or great Plethora, a
thin Diet is advisable, so a constant Temperance and frequent Fasting are in
the case before us. Hieron. ad nepot. de vita Cleric.
Pinguis venture non gignit mentem tenuem. Fullness is generally a wrong to our
better part. Ego Aselle faciam ut non calcitres.
S. Hierom tells of Hilarion, that when he found his Body incline him to folly,
he struck upon his Breast, Hieron. in vie. Hilarion.
and cried, That he would take care that the Ass should kick no longer; and to
that purpose betook himself to frequent Fastings and hard Labors. I keep under
my body, 1 Cor. 9.27.
and bring it unto subjection, says St. Paul. We are in great danger from
Fullness, a spare and thin Diet is generally the safer side; and Fasting is
sometimes needful. Fullness is the Parent of our Vices. Exodus 32.6.
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Our first Parents
rendered themselves and us miserable by eating. Tertull. de jejun.
Salutem gula vendidit. Sin and Death came this way into the World. St. Basil
observes, that whereas Moses Fasted at the giving of the Law, and so Fasting
ushered it in; yet the Tables that were written by the Finger of God, and
received by Fasting, were broken by Drunkenness. They sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play.

I shall not need to tell you the mischiefs of feasting and pampering our
Bodies: It greatly endangers our Souls. When the Children of Job feasted from
house to house, the good Man (knowing how prone Men were in that case to
exceed) sent and sanctified them, Job 1.5.
and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the
number of them all: For Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and
cursed God in their hearts. It Is often so, that great Feasting is attended with
follies and mischiefs; nor were it hard to produce many Examples to this
purpose: Solomon preferrs the House of Mourning before that of Feasting. Eccl.
7.2, 3, 4.


3. Fasting is a good help to Prayer. Prayer and Fasting have a mighty force.
The most obstinate Evil Spirit, that gives way to no other methods, is yet cast
out by Prayer and Fasting. The one of these takes us off from the Creature, the
other brings us nearer unto God. We pray but faintly when we are fed to the
full. We seldom serve God well upon plentiful Entertainments. Our Minds are
most at liberty, when our Bodies are empty. No wonder they are joined together
in Holy Scripture. Fasting helps to wing our Devotions; We are then fittest to
worship God with Devotion when we are Fasting. Aaron and his Sons were
forbidden Wine and strong drink when they went into the Tabernacle. Levit. 10.9.
The public Service of the Morning, under the Temple, was wont to be performed
Fasting. They were not wont to drink till that was over: That did not begin
till the third hour of the day. St. Peter argued strongly enough to those who
knew this practice. Act. 11.15.
These are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the
day.

Thus have I given a short, but a true account of the usefulness of Fasting:
These are the true Uses of Fasting, both public and private: If it minister to
none of these Ends, 'twill be to no purpose, and we might as well have eaten
and drank. If it advance us not in Piety and real Goodness; if it serve not to
chastise a Sin committed, nor to prevent one for the future; if it do not help
us in our Prayers, and bring us nearer to God, and wean us from the Creature,
it can serve no wise purpose. We have need enough to Fast, if we duly consider
what we are, and what we have been. God has called us to Mourning very often,
and very loudly. He has visited us with the Sword, and Fire, and Pestilence.
Amos 4.10.
I have over-thrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha, and ye
were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning. -- I wish I could not with the
Prophet go farther, and add what follows; Yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord. It Is true, we have kept some Fasting-days (and we now begin to
be weary of that too,) but what else have we done?

Are we any better than we were before? Do we love God more fervently, and more
heartily love one another? Our City has been burnt indeed, but not our Vices.
They are entire, and not consumed. We have fasted, but have we amended also?
Are our Sins weakened, and our Devotions enflamed? Is God better served among
us? Is there more Humility, Charity and Brotherly-kindness to be found amongst
us? Should ye not hear the words which the Lord has cried by the former
Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, etc. says this
Prophet, v. 7. What that was which the former Prophets required, you may learn
from v. 9. Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to
his brother: And oppress not the widow and the fatherless, the stranger nor the
poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. We
have Fasted often, but where is our Repentance? Maimon. H. Taan.
We have often confessed our Sins, but who has forsaken them? It was the
Custom among the Jews, upon the day of their public Fasting, to procure an
ancient and wise Man to recite the words of Humiliation: Among other things, he
was wont to depreciate mere Abstinence, or the outward show of Humiliation. He
told them that it was said of the Ninevites, not that God saw their Sackcloth
and Fasting, but that He saw their Work. So it is God is pleased with our
Repentance, not our bare Abstinence. Fasting is, Adjumentum non perfectio
pietatis: It Is a good help to Godliness, not Godliness it self.

III. I shall proceed to give some Rules for the better discharge of this Duty.

1. Let us take care that we do it with great humility of mind, and that we do
by no means give way to a proud thought. Do not vaunt thy self, Luke 17.
or contemn and despise thy Brother, as the Proud Pharisee did. Thou have need
of Fasting, or no need. If no need, why do thou boast of doing that which
God requires not, and which serves no wise purpose? If thou need it, that
Consideration ought to humble thee: No Man is proud of taking Physic, and
Fasting amounts to no more. It Is Medicinal, and designed to cure us of some
Disease. We are commonly troubled that we need a Medicine, no Man is proud that
he makes use of one. Sanctify a Fast, Joel 11.15. (...), LXXII.
call a solemn Assembly. Such an Assembly is designed for a public Cure, and
speaks an Epidemical disease. Here Is no color for Pride and Ostentation. We
may as well be proud of Plasters upon our Sores, as of Fasting. And yet this
Vanity we are liable to. Our Lord gives us Caution: Matt. 6.17, 18.
When thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not
unto men to fast. Bare Abstinence commends us not to God; and therefore we have
no cause on that account to boast. 'Twill be no comfort to us to undergo the
labor, and lose the reward of Fasting. Let us not, when we Fast, despise him
that Eats. Let us not value our selves by it. Our Pride will do us more harm,
than our Abstinence will do us good. Our great End of Fasting is to kill our
Lusts; and if we let our Pride grow, we lose our great End.

2. Let it be with Charity, and Expressions of kindness to our Brother. There Is
a Saying among the Jews, that the best of a Fast is Alms. Isa. 58.6, 7.
In this we are sure we do well. And it becomes us, when we implore God's
Mercy, to show Mercy to one another. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen?
To lose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to
the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? When
thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from
thine own flesh? It is good advice, that what we deny our selves, Quod ventri
subtrahitur pauperi detur.
we should give to the poor. What we spare, let us bestow upon him that needs.
Let us abstain, that we may save something to give. The Meal that we spare, let
us give to the Poor. When we Fast, let us lay by something to feed others with.
We read, that when Tarentum was besieged by the Romans, that the Neighbors of
Rhegium Fasted every tenth day, and sent to the besieged what they should
otherwise have eaten themselves. A rare Example in the Heathens, and that which
serves for a just reproach to many titular Christians. Let us deny our selves,
that we may help others. Our Temperance would afford a great provision for the
hungry, and our Fasting much more. Fasting will not avail without Charity.
Fasting, without Alms, is like a Lamp without Oil. When we afflict our selves,
let us be sure to be merciful to our Brother.

3. Let it be attended with fervent Prayers to God. 'Twill not serve our turn
that we abstain from the Creature, unless we turn to our Creator. These must be
joined; for that is one great End of Fasting, to dispose us for our Prayers.
Matt. 6. Luke 11.37. Matt. 17.21.
Our Savior puts them close together in his Sermon on the Mount; They are
joined together in the Character of the devout Widow, and in conjunction are of
mighty force.

4. Our Fasting must be attended with a constant Sobriety and Temperance. He
that Fasts one day, and is intemperate the next; He whose Fast is a Prologue or
Epilogue to an Excess, Fasts to no good purpose at all. A constant Temperance
is indispensably necessary; here all Men are obliged, and at all times. This
cannot be said of Fasting. Besides, we should learn Temperance at least by
Fasting. Learn to deny our Appetites, when they exceed the bounds of Reason and
Religion. It Is a good use of Fasting to inure our selves by it to a strict
Temperance. It Is a foolish and brutish thing to make way for a Fast by a
luxurious Carnival, and to close it with an excessive Feast.

5. Our Fasting must ever be accompanied with an holy Life. God is no more
pleased with the Fasting, than with the Prayers of a wicked Man. We must not
only abstain from Meat and Drink, but from Pride and Peevishness, Wrath and
Bitterness, Covetousness and Oppression; a conceit of Our selves, and a
contempt of our Brother.

6. We must take care that we do not exceed in Fasting, to the destruction of
our Health. There Is no great danger that many will do this: Yet some there are,
and many there have been, to whom this advice is seasonable. We read of many
among the Ancients that went very far; That fasted to Paleness and Feebleness,
abstained from all Flesh, and all Wine; That fasted to great lengths, and under
great weakness of Body; Sulpit. Sever. Dialog.
Of some that lived upon the Roots of Trees, and of one whom the Sun never saw
eating. I fear we are run into the other extreme, and instead of over-fasting
our selves, we indulge our selves too much. But those who are prone to too
great an Abstinence, should remember that God will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice. The Yoke of Christ is easy, and his Burden light. Plutarch de
Sanit. Tuend.
There Is a Fable in Plutarch of an Ox and a Camel, that were the
Fellow Servants to one Master. The Ox bore the burden alone, the Camel would
bear no part of it: But the Ox told him the time was coming that (when he was
dead) he must bear him and all the burden too. It Is so with the Body and the
Mind; if the Body be over-laid, the Mind is forced to sink and suffer with it.
(...).
We must have a care we render not our selves unfit for the Service of God; and
that we shall be in great measure, when our Bodies are indisposed.

7. I only add, That if we Fast for Mortification of a Lust and ill Habit, we
must repeat it frequently, till we have gained the Conquest. It Is not once
taking Physic will remove a Chronical distemper and ill habit of body; we must
enter into a course and method. Maimon. Taan. c. 4. s. 18.
The like may be said of Fasting, under some great Judgment of Famine, Sword or
Pestilence: It will become us to continue it as long as the Judgment remains.

Thus I have given you some Rules of Fasting: God grant that we may observe
them, and then we shall find our Fasting good Physic; which, who-ever takes,
must observe Rules.

IV. I proceed now to make some Application and Inference. And,

1. We may hence learn why, after all our Fasting in this Kingdom, we are no
better. We are ready to say, Wherefore have we fasted, Isa. 58.3.
and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no
knowledge? I may well reply in the words of my Text; Did ye at all fast unto
me, even unto me? We have abstained from Meat, and been swollen with Pride. We
have eaten no Flesh for some Seasons, but in the mean have devoured one
another. We have called for Mercy from God, but have not showed it to our
Brother. Our Fasting and Prayers have not availed, because we have retained our
Vices. We ought to consider, that Fasting and Prayer, and hearing Sermons, etc.
are but the Means, not the End of Religion. The End of it is to make us good
and happy, like God here, and blessed with him hereafter. We have rested in the
Means, and not attained the End. We have measured our Proficiency by our much
use of the Means, not considering that it is the Attainment of the End that
concerns us most. The main question is not, how often we Fast, or how many
Sermons we have heard; but whether we be humble and modest, patient in
affliction, content with our condition, resigned to God's Will, inflamed with
Love to him and to our Brother. Do we live a life of Faith, and are our Hearts
in Heaven? We Fast, so did the Jews Seventy years, and so did the Pharisees
twice a Week. We pray, and so did the Jewish Hypocrites also; But are we humble
and merciful, harmless and holy? Are we weaned from the World, and devoted to
God and to Religion? Where shall we find any of this Reformation? Who can
discern that we are either more pious toward God, or merciful to our Brother,
more temperate and sober, chaste and modest?

2. We may learn from the great Ends of Fasting what need we have of it. We
have cause to mourn and afflict our selves if ever any people had, whether we
reflect upon our past Sins, or our present Profaneness, and the manifest decay
of Piety and Godliness among us. We are risen up in our Father's room a
generation of Evildoers. Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit nos nequiores. Our
Profaneness and Wickedness has been common and daring, Religion been derided
and mocked at, the Holy Scriptures become the subject of Droll, and the
contempt of them that set up for Wits. We have bid defiance to what is Sacred
and Holy. We had need mourn for the Abominations that have been committed among
us.

3. Let us then humble our selves before God; and put away every Evil thing;
Reform our Lives and our Tempers, and not flatter our selves; Nothing less than
this will secure the Blessings which we have, or prevent the return of those
Evils which we have felt, and had just cause to fear. And the more effectually
to persuade you to this, let me desire you to consider,

1. The crying and heinous Sins of the Nation. They cry for Vengeance, which we
cannot think to prevent, unless we Repent and Reform. We cannot but lament the
woeful decay of Piety and Virtue. We have been Contemners of God, and of his
Holy Worship, both public and private. We have made light of the Sacraments,
and derided the Mysteries of Religion. We have profaned the Holy Name of God,
and broke in upon the Time which was enclosed and set a part for his Holy
Worship. The Oracles of God have not escaped our profane attempts; and we have
set our Mouths against the Heavens; and have been so far from the Power, that
we have hardly retained the Form of Godliness.

We are entertained in our Streets with Horrid Oaths and Execrations, with the
sight of the Intemperate reeling to and fro; And in other places of
Conversation, nothing is more common than playing with the Sacred Writ,
exposing the Holy Oracles of God to contempt, and Reviling the Ministers of
Religion, and the burning and shining Lights of the World.

Mercy and Truth are far from us, and we bite and devour each other. Our
Magistrates have often born the Sword in vain; and our Preachers of
Righteousness have not always been the Examples of it. We have relaxed our
stricter Discipline, lost our Religious Fervor, and quitted that simplicity of
Manners, and generosity and freedom of our Temper which our English Ancestors
were famous for.

Where shall we find any Numbers of Men who worship God in their Families? That
take due care to instruct their Children and Servants in the Principles of
Religion and Virtue? That govern themselves, and those under their influence,
with exact regard thereunto? How great a Number are there that live without God
in the World? who, like the Judge in the Parable, neither fear God, nor regard
Men? who run counter to all that is Holy and Good? whose Mouths are full of
Cursing, and their Right hands are instruments of Falsehood? We shall soon find
sufficient cause of a deep Humiliation, when we consider the Sins of others,
and especially our own: We have cause enough to fast and to mourn, that we may
divert the Judgments that our Iniquities call for. And God grant our
Humiliation and Godly Sorrow may bear some proportion to the hainousness of our
Crimes. It appears, from what has been said, to be our Duty to Fast and Mourn.

2. Consider also what it is that lies at stake, and depends on the King's
Success by Sea and Land: If we do this, it will appear not only to be our
Duty, but our Interest also, which generally takes the surest and fastest hold
on Mankind. It is very fit we should Fast at such a time as this. It becomes us
to do it when the King exposes himself to the greatest dangers. The words of
Uriah are applicable on this occasion: The Ark (says he) and Israel, and Judah
abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in
the open fields; shall I then go into mine house to eat, and to drink, etc? 2 Samuel 11.11. We are nearly interested in our Success abroad. And what is it that
lies at stake? It Is, in short, the indisturbed Profession and Exercise of our
Religion, our Property, our Lives, our Laws and Liberty; in a word, our All:
All that is dear to us, and all that ought so to be. The Contest is now,
whether we shall be Freemen or Vassals; be governed by Laws or Dragoons: The
struggle is between Truth and Falsehood; Religion that is pure and undefiled,
and Superstition and Idolatry.

God has wrought a great Deliverance for us: He has done it without our help,
and without our fault: He has done it not only without our desert, but
notwithstanding our demerits: We are saved whether we would or no: We were
rescued from our Enemies as a brand plucked out of the fire: We are remarkable
Monuments of the Mercy of God. Let Us sin no more, lest a worse thing come upon
us; lest we be returned back to our former dangers; If we be, we shall find our
last End worse than our Beginning. And whereas we were once chastised with
Whips, we must expect then to be stung with Scorpions.

3. Our Repentance and Amendment is our only security. This is the way to
procure the favor and blessing of Heaven: Our Fleets and Armies are poor
things, if God be not with us: Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made
Heaven and Earth: If our Ways please Him, he will soon subdue our Enemies, or
cause them to be at Peace with us: No Weapon formed against us shall prosper,
if God be for us: And if he be our Enemy, we shall not have any cause to rely
upon the help of our strongest Allies, or the greatest of our Preparations. If
we do not Repent, nothing will do us good; our very Success will be but a Snare
to us, and our Victory will not prevent our Ruin. Would to God we were duly
sensible of this.

To Conclude.
As we wish well to our King and Country, as we value our Religion and our
Liberty, let us return to our Duty, and break off our Sins by Repentance. Let
us reform what is amiss in our selves, and restrain those who are under our
Charge and Influence. As ever we would have God do any thing for us, let us do
what we can for the glory of his Name: Let us use all our power for the
advancing his Truth, the encouraging his Service, and suppressing all that
Profaneness, and daring Impiety, that has hitherto obstructed the Success of
our Forces by Sea and Land.

This is what all pious Souls long to see, and hope for this Good from the
Example and united Endeavors of this great Assembly: May then all inferior
Magistrates use their Power for the suppressing of Vice; and may we of the
Clergy preach it, and live it down: May all Masters of Families serve God with
their Domestics; All Governors of Youth bring them up in the nurture of the
Lord; and may every Man of us contribute to the Common safety, by turning from
his Iniquity: Which God of his Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

