Dr. KIDDER'S SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. AT S. SEPULCHERS
CHURCH, ON Easter-Tuesday, April 22. 1690.

PILKINGTON Mayor, etc.
Martis xxix. Aprilis 1690. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae, Willielmi and
Mariae, Angliae, etc. Secundo.
THis COURT does desire Dr. Kidder, Dean of Peterborough, to Print his Sermon,
Preached on Tuesday in Easter-Week last, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Citizens of London at S. Sepulchers.

Wagstaffe.

THE Duty of the Rich: IN A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR, AND Court of
Aldermen, AND CITIZENS of LONDON: AT S. Sepulchers Church, ON Easter-Tuesday,
April 22d. 1690.

By Richard Kidder, D.D. and Dean of Peterborough.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1690.

To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON, Lord Mayor OF THE CITY of
LONDON, AND THE Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
IN obedience to your Order I present you with the following Sermon. I heartily
wish it may gain the End which it aims at; That all Men of Wealth and Public
Influence would improve the advantages they have to the Honor of God and the
Good of the Community. It is high time to set about it vigorously, and that
they make it their constant care and business.

Very much Good may be done this way by the united endeavors of those men who
have Wealth and Authority: God and all Good men expect it from them: It Is at
once their duty and their truest interest. This course will be much for the
Honor of this great City, 'twill be its best security, and the best means to
procure the Divine Protection.

May it please Almighty God to inspire you all with a great zeal for the
advancement of true Religion, the promoting all works of mercy and beneficence,
the encouraging industry and diligence, the suppressing all profaneness, the
obviating all unchristian heats and animosities, and the doing your utmost in
your several places to all these great purposes. This is the hearty Prayer of

Your most assured and humble Servant, Richard Kidder.

A SERMON Preached before The Lord Mayor, etc.
1 TIMOTHY VI. v. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they
be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; Laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life.


THERE is no condition whatever in this world but what is liable to temptation
and a snare: but none is more obnoxious than that of the prosperous and
wealthy. There are many that have born poverty and other afflictions well, and
not only born them but improved them too: they have been happy occasions of
good to mankind; and most of our seize have been owing to our
afflictions. And the Church of God was never more conspicuous for piety and
goodness than when she was poor and persecuted. Nulla pars vitae nostrae tam
obnoxia aut tenera est, quam quae maxim placet. Senec.
But on the other hand there are but few men that can bear prosperity well,
that can concoct and digest a prosperous and full condition. This is generally
too fulsom and rank for the greater part of mankind. Riches are deprecated by
the Wiseman in the Book of Proverbs: They are attended with great cumber and
violent temptations; and as they never make us better, so they do often leave
us worse. We are in very great danger when we are prosperous. This the Apostle
well knew, and therefore requires Timothy to take care in this matter: And that
he does with vehemence and great concern; he does not bid him barely to tell
them that are rich, or put them in mind of their danger, but to charge them, or
to press it home upon them; to rouse and a waken them to a due sense of their
danger and their duty, and of their truest interest also. Charge them, etc.

In which words Timothy is put upon discharging his duty toward those who were
rich; and to that purpose to warn them what to avoid, what to do, and what
great reason they have to comply with this advice. For the more orderly
proceeding and better speaking to my words, I shall First, lay before you the
danger in which rich men are, and what it is they are especially to be
cautioned against. That they be not high-minded, and trust not in uncertain
riches. Secondly, the Duty of Rich men, or what they ought to be earnestly put
upon: viz. To trust in the living God, to do good, to be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Thirdly, the true interest of Rich
men, or the motives that may be used to persuade them to the discharge of their
duty; where I shall consider the importance of what S. Paul lays before us to
this purpose in the words of my Text, Laying up a good foundation for the time
to come, and that they may lay hold of eternal life. Fourthly, I shall make
some Use and Application of what shall have been said.


I.
(I.) I shall lay before you the danger in which Rich men are, and what it is
they are especially to be cautioned against. That they be not high-minded, and
that they trust not in uncertain Riches.

Great is the danger of plenty and fullness; Pride, and fullness of bread, and
abundance of idleness, met together in Sodom. Ezekiel. xvj. 49.
This often extinguisheth that lively sense that we ought to have of our
dependence upon God, renders our Prayers languid and weak, and gives fuel and
nourishment to our lusts and our vices; it choaks God's word, keeps our faults
from our eyes, and makes us unmindfull of the needs of others.

But I shall confine my self in this matter to the words of my Text. St. Paul
would have Rich men charged that they be not high-minded. Haughtiness and
Pride, a great opinion of our selves, and contempt of our poor Brother, do
commonly attend upon Riches. We too often reckon them the pledges of God's
favor, and marks of his kindness, or the fruits of our own wifedom or
industry; and instead of being modest and thankful, we grow proud and
insolent. Hence it is that Moses does so often charge the Israelites, that when
they should have eaten and be full, that they forget not God, nor lift up their
heart. Deuteronomy. vj. 12. viij. 10,14.
And there is great reason that we should be very careful that we be not
swelled with Pride and Vanity upon this account.

If we consider things with due application of mind, we shall think it a very
reasonable charge given here to the rich, that they be not high-minded: for
whatever ground there be for thankfulness, here is none for Pride or Arrogance.

Be it so that you are rich; it is the blessing of God alone that has made you
so; your accounts will be the greater, and much will be required of all them
that have received much. Your wealth does not advance you toward the Kingdom of
Heaven. Our Lord has said it, A rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Matt. xix. 23.
And St. James, that he is made low; Jam. i. 10.
and St. Paul, that God has chosen the weak things of the world. 1 Cor. i. 27.
Again, our Blessed Savior, Woe unto you that are rich, for you have received
your consolation. Luke vj. 24,20.
And on the other hand, Blessed be ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God.
Riches are so far from helping forward our Salvation, that they often obstruct
it, and always render it more difficult and hazardous. We must give a strict
account how we got our Wealth, and how we spend it Here Is enough to humble us,
no ground for Pride or Arrogance. Well might the Apostle require Timothy to
charge them that are rich that they be not high-minded.

But he would have them charged too that they trust not in uncertain Riches.
(...), i. e. That they do not confide in the uncertainty of Riches. There is
great reason for this charge, if we consider how commonly Rich men miscarry in
this matter, or how great a folly and evil it is so to do.

First, Rich men do too often trust in their Riches. We read of them that
trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches.
Psalm. xlix. 6. lij. 7.
Too many there are to whom the Psalmist's words may be applied. Lo, this is
the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his
riches. We desire them passionately, and promise our selves great ease and
satisfaction from them. We too commonly make them our refuge and stay, and when
riches increase we set our hearts upon them. Psalm. xlij. 10.
Hence we expect ease and relief; we please our selves when we think of them,
and promise our selves mountains of felicity from them: There is hardly any man
of Wealth but is in danger, and therefore had need be charged.

Secondly, This is great folly and a great evil. It Is great folly to trust in
uncertainty, to fix our stay and our hope upon that which may fail us; to bear
and rest upon any thing that may fail us, and give way, is so great a piece of
folly that we are not guilty of it in other cases. Nothing is more uncertain
than Riches. This earthly treasure moth and rust does corrupt, and thieves
break through and steal. Matt. vj. 20.
It makes it self wings and flies away. It lies at the mercy of wind and
weather, of fire and water, of robbers and false people, of a multitude of
accidents and contingencies.

Besides, to trust in uncertain Riches is a great evil: It Is to make Riches our
God. It Is Idolatry in the truest sense. It Is no matter though we build no
Altars, though we offer no Blood nor Incense, if we trust in them, and give
them our hearts, we make them our God, and shut our selves out of the Kingdom
of Heaven. How hardly (says our Savior) shall they that have Riches enter into
the Kingdom of God! Mark x. 23,24,25.
They are an hindrance to them that have them; but for them that Trust in them,
as our Savior adds afterward, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for such men to enter into the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. vj. 9.
This Idolatry will exclude us from the inheritance of God's Kingdom. This puts
us out of God's favor and the state of grace; this friend of the World is the
enemy of God: And such a friendship of this world is that Idolatry which is
wont to be expressed by Adultery, or Spiritual Fornication: And this seems to
be the importance of what St. James says. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know
ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Jam. iv. 4.
Our Savior assures us that we cannot serve two Masters, God and Mammon. Mat^.
vj. 24.


II.
(II.) I consider the Duty of Rich men, or, what they ought to be earnestly put
upon: viz. To trust in the living God, to do good, to be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate.

First, To trust in the living God. Not that this is the peculiar duty of the
Rich, for it is the Duty of all: But the Rich are considered here as prone to
trust in uncertain Riches, and in opposition to that are to be warned and
charged to trust in the living God.

And that very agreeably in this place. For whereas Riches are perishing
things, flitting and uncertain, unsatisfactory and disproportionate, unable to
make us happy and at ease; and are so far from it that they often perplex us
and pierce us with many sorrows: it is very fit they should be directed where to
place their trust and their hope, and so wisely to place it that they may not
be disappointed, and nothing could have in this case been advised more
agreeably than this, that they should Trust in the living God.

In the living God and not in fading and perishing Riches. In God who lives,
and lives for ever; who is the first and the last, and always the same: who
lives from himself and can never dye or fail to be, and be what He is, with
whom is no variableness or shadow of turning. It Is worth our while to make him
our trust who cannot fail us, to place our hope in Him who only has
immortality. What can our Riches avail! what comfort can they afford in the day
of trial! what proportion do they bear to our needs, or to our capacities!
what stupendous folly is it to trust in such uncertainty! To direct our
thirsty and parched Souls to these empty and broken vessels, and to neglect the
fountain of living waters! On the side of Riches there is nothing but vexation
or vanity, but varnish and uncertainty, a splendid nothing, that has baffled
and abused the Sons of men from one generation to another. On the other hand if
we trust in God, in the living God, we shall never be deluded with false hopes,
never frustrated in any just expectation. We shall be provided for by an
infinite Wisdom, protected by an Almighty power, and be sure to lack nothing.

Here Is a motive to this in my Text, Who gives us richly all things to enjoy.
We ought to trust in the giver, not in the gift; to hope in Him that gives us
all things: and not only our being, our life and breath, not only the
necessaries of our being, but the comforts and satisfactions of it also: not
only what is needful, but what is for delight and for ornament; for
entertainment and caress; He has advanced the Rich above their
Fellow Creatures, and dealt out his favors with a bountiful and liberal hand.
And therefore are the Rich particularly obliged to trust in so great and kind a
Benefactour: This motive also is of great force to set home the remaining
Duties of the Rich, which follow in the next words, and which Timothy is
required to charge them with: viz.

Secondly, That they do good; i. e. that they bestow benefits: that they be
rich in good works; that is, that they abound in these things: Ready to
distribute; i. e. liberal, and prompt, and always prone to do them: Willing to
communicate; (...) i. e. that they be of a public spirit, not of a narrow and
private one; but doing that which is for the good of the Community of which
they are but members.

I shall wave the critical and nice enquiry into the original words as they lie
in the Greek Text: But yet I shall not forbear to consider the words
particularly in order to my laying before you the several branches of that duty
which is incumbent upon Rich men.

First, That they do good: This is very comprehensive, and extends very far.
To all sorts of Good works; to works of Piety to Godward; of Justice and Mercy
to our Brother; Sobriety and Temperance, with regard to our selves: But more
particularly and specially it takes in all benefactions toward our neighbor;
and as his needs are many and various, so are the parts of this Duty likewise.
Under this Head are contained, the clothing the naked, the feeding the hungry,
ministering to the sick, comforting the afflicted, vindicating the injured,
encouraging the diligent, and advising and instructing the weak and ignorant.
Such acts of kindness are not to be limited, either to persons or times. We
must do good to all, to our enemies, to strangers, and to men who differ from
us: To the present Generation and to Posterity.

Secondly, That they be rich in good works: They must do them plentifully, give
portions to six, and also to seven; not confine themselves to one sort of
charity, or to some small measures, but as God has given them great plenty, so
must they give largely too. It Is not enough for them who abound in wealth to
give away a little broken meat at a Gate, or a few Gowns at the return of an
annual solemnity, or to throw away now and then a few loose grains among the
poor. This is not to be rich in good works. 'Twould well become these men to
think of some endowments, or considerable additions to Churches or Hospitals,
or of erecting Workhouses, and redeeming a number of men from Prisons and great
miseries.

Thirdly, that they be ready to distribute; i. e. that they be prompt and
prone, and always disposed to do good works. There are those who will not
refuse to comply when they are put upon a good work: they will not stand out
and be singular when others contribute, but yet they are not forward to
promote, nor much pleased to be moved this way. But St. Paul would have Rich
men of a temper and inclination this way.

Fourthly, Willing to communicate. (...). That is, of a public spirit,
designing the good of the Community, and preferring it not only to private
interest and advantage, but to private and particular charity also. There are
some things of that nature that they are for the good of a Kingdom, of Cities
and Societies of men; for the good of the present, and of succeeding
Generations. And the farther any good work reaches the better it is, and the
greater imitation of God's goodness, who is good unto all, and whose mercy is
above all his works.

The substance then of the charge laid here upon Rich men amounts to this: viz.
That they exercise themselves in all sort of Benefactions, and that they do it
largely, according to the proportion of their Wealth and Store; that they be
always prone and inclined this way, and that they be more especially addicted
to those good works which promote the good of the Community. I proceed to
consider,

III.
(III) The true Interest of Rich men, or the motives that may be used to
persuade them to this discharge of their Duty; where I shall consider the
importance of what Saint Paul lays before us in the words of my Text, Laying up
a good foundation for the time to come, and that they may lay hold of eternal
life. And that you may take in the following particulars.

1. This is the true end and use of Riches. The end for which they were
bestowed, and the best improvement that can be made of them. They were never
designed to be hoarded up and laid by, but to be employed for the honor of
God, and the benefit of each other. It Is the use of them that gives them their
price and value, and stamps them with the fairest character: Not to be useful
differs very little from not to be at all. He that hides his Talent is as if he
had never received it. He that keeps his wealth (as a Jailer keeps his
Prisoner) voids the end for which 'twas given. Such a man detains good from
those to whom it is due, and is false to his great Lord that entrusts him, and
his wealth becomes Mammon of unrighteousness. For so Riches are not only when
they are ill gotten, but when they are detained from the uses for which they
were bestowed. We are but Stewards and Trustees, and not to dispense is to fail
of our trust, which is Injustice in the sight of God and Men.

2. It Is the best way to make them a blessing, and a durable one: A blessing to
our selves, and to our Posterity also. A Blessing I say, for Riches alone, and
separately considered, are not a Blessing. The Wise man deprecates them as an
Evil, or a Snare. And Solomon says, There is a sore evil which I have seen
under the Sun, namely, Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt: But
those Riches perish by evil travail: And he begets a Son, and there is
nothing in his hand. Eccl. v. 13,14.
How many have been ruined by Wealth, and have perished by Plenty! Poverty, as
great an evil as we think it, has less of danger, and has done less harm than
Riches. If Poverty be reckoned (as it is in the Law of Moses) among the Curses,
yet Philo the Jew observes it is placed among them, (...) i. e. as the lightest
evil: Philo. (...).
And therefore Riches are not to be placed among the greatest Blessings. They
are as they are used, and they must be used with great care and caution; they
are like a rich Soil that will indeed produce excellent Fruits, but then it
must be cultivated and well planted, weeded and kept clean, or else it may
produce what is noxious and mischievous: The Soil will not of it self afford
the best Productions. Riches will corrupt and run to putrefaction as well as
other things: They must be seasoned and stirred, or else they will corrupt and
stink, and that not without the greatest danger to the possessors of them.
Riches are like great waters, if they stagnate they are hurtful; they are
wholesome if they run. It Is the (...), the stagnation of wealth Basil de Divit.
Conc. V.
that is dangerous, or useless and unprofitable at least. By Alms and Good
Works we season our Wealth, and preserve it from perishing; we pare away its
hurtful superfluity, and noxious qualities. We must do by our Wealth as the
beautiful Woman that was taken Captive from an Heathen Country, was obliged to
do by the Law of Moses: Deuteronomy. xxi. v. 10, etc.
Before she could be joined to an Israelite, she was obliged to shave her Head,
and pare her Nails, and lay by the garments of her Captivity, and bewail her
Father and Mother. There is in Wealth a praeputium that must be cut off; and we
must do as the Jews were obliged to do by their Trees which they planted in
Canaan, set aside some of their Fruits as uncircumcised, and not take all the
increase to our selves: Lev. xix. 23.
In a word, Riches are no blessing to him who does not exercise himself in good
works: They are so far from it, that they are a Snare and a Curse. Nor are such
a man's posterity like to be much the better for such an uncircumcised Estate,
unless they take the advice which Daniel gave to the King of Babylon. Break off
thy sins by Righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor:
if it may be a lengthning to thy tranquillity. Dan. iv. 27.
The surest way of leaving a blessing upon an Estate to our posterity, will be
to bestow great portions of it in Works of Mercy and Piety. I have been young,
and now am old, (says the Devout Psalmist,) yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. Who he means by the righteous, we may
learn from his following words: He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed
is blessed. Psalm. xxxvij. 25,26.
That Wealth and Patrimony is like to last longest, that comes thus commended
to the Blessing of God. Patrimonium Deo creditum nec Resp. eripit, nec fiscus
invadit, nec calumnia aliqua forensis evertit. Cyprian.


3. It Is a great act of pure Religion, and that is what we all profess and
pretend to: It Is not only an Ornament, but it is a part; not only a part, but
a main, and essential, and indispensable part of it too; and without which all
that we profess or do is nothing better than mere pretense and show. Matt.
xxij. 37.
Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep ones self unspotted from
the World. Jam. i. 27.
Let men pretend to Faith as much as they will, let them boast and vaunt of it
as they please; As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works
is dead also. Chap. ij. 26.
Let others pretend to what degree they please (even the most Seraphick) of the
love of God: Yet whosoever has this World's good, and sees his Brother have need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? 1 John iij. 17.
Let the proud Pharisee boast of his frequent fasting, of his bowing down his
head like a Bull-rush, and spreading under him Sackcloth and Ashes. Is not this
the fast that I have chosen, (says God?) To deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor, that are cast out, to thy house? when thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh? Isai. lviij. v. 7.
And for Sacrifices of old, though they were of God's institution, and made a
great part of his Worship; yet He declares that he preferred Mercy before them:
I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice. Hosea vj. 6.
For all the other instruments or means of Religion, how serviceable soever
they may be, are yet not worthy to be compared to Brotherly Love and Charity,
to Acts of Mercy and Relief.

There are two ways especially by which we do express a Religious frame of
Mind; viz. By imitating of God; and, Secondly, by a thankful acknowledging his
Mercies: Both these are well done by Acts of Mercy.

First, By Acts of Mercy and Beneficence we imitate God, and by that express a
Religious temper of Mind. To imitate Him whom we pretend to worship, is very
reasonable and safe: And if we live by this Rule, we shall make considerable
seize in Religion. Hence it is used as a great Motive under the Law of
Moses, That they should be Holy, because God was Holy. And our Savior does
more than once use this Topic, when he persuades his Followers to forgive
their Enemies, and to do good; He would have them merciful, as their Father
in Heaven is merciful: And it is believed the Heathens upon this account were
wicked, because their Deities were represented as such; they were wicked
Magisterio Deorum.

But the wiser of the Heathens owned God to be good, and the greatest
Benefactor to Mankind; and that the way to imitate the Gods, was to do
Benefits; Hic est vetustissimus referendi been merentibus gratiam mos, ut tales
numinibus adscribantur, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 11. c. 7.
And they were so far of that persuasion, that they reckoned their great
Benefactors among their Deities. We have here a powerful Motive to do good,
etc. from the Example of God, and of our Blessed Savior, who went about doing
good. God is good unto all, and his Mercies are above all his Works: If we
think we have reason to worship Him, we have the same to imitate Him, and to be
Followers of God as dear Children.

Secondly, By Acts of Mercy, we make an acknowledgment or recognition of his
Mercies to us; by which we do likewise express a Religious frame and temper of
Mind. This is the way to own him to be the Author of all our Mercies: And when
out of gratitude, and a sense of his favors, and for his sake, we do good to
our Brother, we do effectually demonstrate, that our Religion is more than
bare profession and pretense. And here is another very powerful Motive to
prevail with them that are Rich in this World to do good, etc. It Is due from
them as a Tribute of Praise to God, who alone has made the difference: Among
the Jews this was done by certain Eucharistical Sacrifices, where the Offerer
expressed the sense he had of the Divine Mercies by his Oblation; of which a
very small part only was offered upon the Altar, the rest was divided between
the Priest and the Offerer. And as the Offerer had the bulk or main part of the
Offering to himself, so he was obliged by the Law of Moses to take care that it
might not be laid by any long time for his own private use; it was to be eaten
quickly, and consequently not eaten by himself alone: But his Neighbor was to
be partaker with him. Charity and Hospitality was thus provided for: 'Twas not
the Offering that God accepted alone, but the grateful Mind and the thankful
Recognition of the Offerer: And He was to express that by his kindness to his
Brother.

Has God given you Wealth, and abundance? Make your Acknowledgments to Him who
alone has made the difference: Let it appear that you have a due Sense of his
Bounty. How many ways may you express the great Sense you have on your Mind of
the peculiar Mercy of God to you? There are some that want bread and clothing;
some are diseased, others in prison; some hopeful Youths will want
instruction, and a way of livelihood, without your charity and care: You may,
if you please, comfort many a mournful Widow, support many fatherless
Children, help many disconsolate Strangers, keep many from Idleness and more
from Starving: God has done much for you, is it not fit you should cast about
what to do for Him? For Him who has given you all things richly to enjoy; For
Him who is your greatest Friend and Benefactor; For Him who has the greatest
right to you and yours: Shall we spend upon our Lusts, or in the Service of the
Devil, what God has so bountifully bestowed upon us? This would be the
greatest impiety and ingratitude at once.

I remember Cyprian upon this occasion brings in the Devil (accompanied with
his numerous train) vaunting over our Savior: De Opere and Eleemosyn.
Ego pro istis quos mecum vides, nec alapas accepi, nec flagella sustinui, nec
crucem pertuli, etc. For these followers of mine (says he) I have received no
blows, endured no stripes, nor born a Cross, nor shed my blood, a price of
their redemption; I promise no heavenly Kingdom, no immortality in Paradise;
And yet (says he) they present me with great, and precious, and costly gifts,
etc. Tuos tales munerarios, Christ, demonstra, etc. Show me, O Christ, such
followers of thee among the rich and the wealthy, who are encouraged by the
promise of Eternal life. We shall be without excuse, if we do not that out of
gratitude to God and our Savior, which others do in the service of the Devil,
and prosecution of their lusts.

4. To do good, etc. is the way to secure to our selves Eternal life; It Is at
least a necessary condition on our part, and the way to it; without it we must
never expect that Blessed state. And thus much is intimated to us in the words
of my Text, which come next to be considered: Laying up in store for themselves
a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal
life. It Is considered as a foundation, which though it do not raise, yet it
must precede the following superstructure; Our hope of Eternal life falls to
the ground without this course: And if we would build to any height or purpose,
we must lay a good foundation first: But the Greek word we render foundation,
is thought to signify somewhat else here, and that as agreeably to my present
purpose: And this a writing that is obligatory, or a writing that gives the
Creditor caution, and a right to recover his debt: And this it is supposed to
signify in correspondence to a certain Hebrew word that answers to it. And
thus this Greek word is supposed to signify in the following Epistle, The
foundation stands sure; 2 Timothy ij. 19.
That is, God's Covenant or Promise: For it follows, Having this Seal, etc. A
Seal belongs properly enough to a writing or instrument of Contract, but not to
a foundation which lies underground: And in this sense they that do good may
be said to have good security that they shall not lose their revvard; and it is
the best and surest whatsoever: Quas dederas tantum semper habebis opes; He
that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord; Prove. xix. 17.
and He has engaged to re-pay him: The Revvard is due now by Covenant and
Promise: Henceforth (says St. Paul) there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day.
2 Timothy ij. 8.
We disclaim the Merit, but must believe the Necessity of Good Works, in order
to obtaining Eternal life: And this we must do if we believe the Holy
Scriptures; They put us upon them as the way to Glory and Immortality. Thus
our Savior, Sell that ye have, and give Alms: Provide your selves bags which
Wax not old; a treasure in the Heavens that fails not. Luke xij. 33.
Again, Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; that when
ye fail, they may receive you ( i. e. ye may be received) into everlasting
habitations. xvj. 9.
Give diligence (says St. Peter) to make your calling and election sure. 2 Pet.
i. 10,1^.
This is indeed according to our ordinary Copies; but it is otherwise in some
other Copy of the Greek: (...), etc. i. e. Give diligence, that by Good Works
ye make your Calling and Election sure. It follows, For so an entrance shall
be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. All this agrees exactly with the words of my Text,
Laying in store, etc. and affords a mighty Motive to do good: He that does
good, advances tovvard Heaven; does that which tends to the lessening his
account, and making sure his future Happiness: He that shows Mercy for God's
sake, shall not fail to receive it when he needs it most; and we shall need
it at that Great Day. These things we firmly believe, or we do not: If we
do not, why do we profess the belief of them? If we do, we need no other
Motive to do good: For we take the vvisest course when we exchange
Perishing for Eternal Riches; when by Works of Mercy here we store up a
reversion of Mercy at that great and terrible Day, when God shall treat every
Man according to his Works. And when all good Men will receive a revvard
incomparably beyond what our Eye has seen, our Ear has heard, or has entered
into the Heart of Man to conceive.

IV.
(IV.) I proceed now to make some Use and Application of what has been said.

1. We may learn from what has been said, the great danger of a plentiful and
prosperous Condition: St. Paul thought so, when he put Timothy upon the Charge
here in my Text; Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, etc. I wish we were duly sensible of this truth: If we were, we
should now and then tremble for fear we should receive all our good things in
this life. Here Is enough to humble the most prosperous, if it be duly laid to
heart: Here Is nothing in this World generally more unhappy than that Man is who
meets with no Affliction, or with very little. We pity the poor and destitute,
and we ought to do it: But, alas! there are young persons to be seen in
Coaches, and with Trains after them, that are acquainted with nothing but the
glozing Side of the World, that spend their Time in Plays and Pleasures, that
in the Judgment of a Wife man, are greater Objects of Pity and Compassion. It Is
a peradventure but these young persons lose their hopes of a future happiness:
They will be in great danger of forgetting God and themselves. We treasure up
Wealth for our Children; we design to make them great Fortunes, as we call it:
But, alas! vain Men that we are, we know not what we do; We rake together what
perhaps will be but the nourishment of their Pride, the fuel of their Lusts,
and a snare to their immortal Souls. God give us a due sense of this danger of
prosperity. This would mightily dispose us to do good: And for that reason
sure St. Paul makes it the first part of the Charge, That they who are rich in
this World, should not be high-minded, etc.

2. We may also learn, from what has been said, the true use of Riches. They
are not things desirable upon their own account: So far from it, that the Wise
man deprecates them as well as Poverty: And indeed Poverty seems the less Evil
of the Two to him that considers things with due Application. But I will not
enter into that Enquiry now. It Is certain that the Good of Riches lies in this,
That they give us an opportunity of doing good in the World.

3. Give me leave then to press upon you the Duty that lies before you in the
words of my Text; To do good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate. If you would have it in other words, you may take it in
our Savior's, Be merciful, as your Father which is in heaven is merciful.
Imitate God and your Blessed Savior; show whose Creatures, and whose Disciples
you are: And if the Mercies of God, and the Example of Jesus be not powerful
enough; yet your own Interest, methinks, should not fail to move you. Be kind
to your selves, and to your Posterity. Lessen your accounts, and lay up a store
of Mercy against you need it. Do not leave an unseasoned and unblessed Estate
to your Children. Correct it, and make it wholesome, that it prove not their
Bane. Let it have none of the Cries of the Poor mingled with it. Adorn your
Holy Religion, and let all Men see the mighty Sense you have of the Mercies of
God, and of the Love of Jesus. Do good while you can. Your opportunities will
not always remain. The time may come that you may not be able to do it. Serve
your Generation with your Power and Wealth; encourage Piety and Diligence;
promote with all your Might the good of Souls, and the benefit of the Public:
This will gain you a Name better than that of Sons and Daughters; 'Twill bring
you Peace upon your dying Beds, and (if you continue and abound) you will at
last enter into Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. Which that we may all do,
God of his infinite Mercy grant, for Jesus Christ's sake.

FINIS.

