CHOICE PRESIDENTS Upon all Acts of Parliament, Relating to the OFFICE and DUTY
OF A JUSTICE of PEACE. WITH Necessary Notes and Instructions thereupon taken
out of the said Acts of Parliament, and other particular Cases in Law adjudg'd
therein. As also A more useful method of making up Court-Rolls than has been
hitherto known or published in print. By Rich. Kilburne, Esquire late one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Kent, and Principal of
Staple-Inn.

The second Edition, with many useful Additions. Made public by G. F. of
Grayes-Inn, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins, Esquires, for Richard
Tonson within Grayes-Inn-Gate next Grayes-Inn-Lane. 1681.

THE Publisher's Preface TO THE READER.
THE good Reception this Treatise has met with in the World, has put me upon
the Revising of several of the Author's Papers that came to my hands since his
Death, which, for the public good, I have with all Faithfulness and Candor
(strictly observing his own Method) reduced into order. But withal, I cannot
but let the Reader know, that though the Title Courts be added to this
Collection, which at first sight may seem something Foreign to the rest of the
Matter, yet it being collected by the same Author (who was an Attorney as well
as a Justice of the Peace,) and his Design always being to improve the Method
of making up Court-Rolls in a more succinct and beneficial manner than others
understood, I thought it my Duty to oblige all Persons concerned in that
Practice, by incerting that Title in the second Impression of this Book. The
other Additions the Reader will find extremely suitable to the first Intention
of the Author, being Precedents which have received their Forms from late Acts
of Parliament, and otherwise since the Author's Death to the time of this
second Publication. Only I must further add that no small pains has been taken
in this second Edition, to fit the several Authorities quoted in the Margin to
the last Impressions of the Statutes at large, and Dalton's Justice, which I
hope will find a favorable Acceptance and Esteem from the Purchaser, which is
the utmost desire of

G. F.
Grayes-Inn, May 12. 1681.
OF ALEHOUSES, etc.
A License to keep an Alehouse.
Kent ss. MEmorandum, That we 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 25. 2 Justices, 1 of the
Quorum.
whose Names are hereunto subscribed, Justices of the Peace within the said
County, have Admitted, Licensed, and Allowed A. B. Victualler, to keep a
common-Ale-house in the house where he now dwells in C. in the County
aforesaid; and not elsewhere, for the space of one whole year next ensuing the
date hereof and no longer. Which said A. B. has entered into Recognizance with
two Sureties before us in certain sums of money, to the use of our Sovereign
Lord the King, under Condition that he shall not, during the time aforesaid,
permit, or suffer, or have any playing at Dice, Cards, Tables, Shovel-board,
Bowls, Quoits, or any other unlawful Game or Games, in his House, Yard,
Garden, or Backside; nor shall suffer to be or remain in his house any person
or persons (not being of his ordinary Family) to drink any Beer, Ale, or
Tobacco, on the Lord's day, Humiliation or Thanksgiving-day, during the time of
Divine Service or Sermon; nor shall suffer any person to lodge or stay in his
house above one day and one night, but such whose true Name and Surname he
shall deliver to some one of the Constables, or (in his absence) to some one of
the Officers of the same Parish, the next day following, or such as he will
answer for; nor shall refuse to lodge any person that shall be brought to him
by the Constable or Officer; nor suffer any person to remain in his house
tippling or drinking, contrary to the Law; nor shall willingly admit or receive
into his House, Barns, Stables, or otherwhere, any Players of Interludes,
Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, Masterless men, or any person notoriously
defamed for Theft, Incontinency, Drunkenness, or any other notorious Crime; nor
shall buy or take to pawn any stolen Goods, or other, of any Wayfaring man, or
other that shall bring the same to sell, but of such as he shall be able always
to produce, and have forthcoming: And also shall sell his Beer and Ale by
sealed Measure, according to the Assise, and not otherwise: And lastly, shall
in all things behave himself according to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom
in that case provided. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and
seals, the 6. day of S. in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
Charles the Second, of England, etc. Annoque Domini 1679.

Or thus:
We whose Names are hereunto written; His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of
the said County, do (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided) License, Admit and Allow A. B. Victualler, to keep a common Alehouse
or Tipplinghouse in the house wherein he now dwells in C. aforesaid. Provided
always, that the said A. B. do not suffer any unlawful Games to be used in his
said House, but do use and maintain good Order and Rule within the same.
Provided also, that this our License shall not continue in force above the
space of one year now next ensuing at the most. G^ven under our hands and seals
at, etc.

A License to Brew, and keep an Alehouse.
K. ss. WHereas A. B. of C. in the said County of K. etc. has come before us
I. Do and Ric. Roe, two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the
said County, and bound himself in a Recognizance with sufficient Sureties to
Brew, to Sell, and to keep a common Alehouse, according to the Statu^e of
Brewers made in the fifth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King
Edward the Sixth: Now know ye us, the said John Do and Rich. Roe, to have
Licensed the said A. B. to Brew, Sell, and keep a common Alehouse, according to
the said Statute. Given under our hands the 10. of September, in the, etc.

A Recognizance thereupon.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die 5 and 6. E. 6. cap. 25. Two Justices, one
of the Quorum.
Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. vicesimo ^ono apud C. in
Com' praedict' A. B. de, etc. D. E. de, etc. and F. G. de, etc. personaliter
venerunt coram Observe to bind the Principal in 20 li. and each of the Sureties
in 10 li.
nobis H. J. and K. L. Iustic' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' praedicto
conservand' assignat', and recognoverunt se debere dicto Domino Regi modo and
forma sequen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras legalis monetae Angliae, and
uterque praedictorum D. E. and F. G. december libras consimilis monetae,
separalit' levand' de separalibus bonis and catallis, terris and tenementis
suis, ad opus and usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' and successorum suorum, si
defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis sequen'.

H. J. K. L.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the within bounden A.
B. is by the Justices within named licensed, admitted and allowed to keep a
common Alehouse in the house wherein he now dwells in C. within written: If
therefore the said A. B. shall not (during the continuance in force of the said
License) suffer any unlawful Games to be used in his said house, but does use
and maintain good Order and Rule within the same, That then this Recognizance
to be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

Another Recognizance for an Alehouse-keeper.
Quarto die Sept. Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. tricesimo secundo
Annoque Domini, 1680.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod die and Anno supradictis J. R. de G. in Com'
praedict' victualler recog' se debere dicto Domino Regi -- etc. T. N. de eadem
in Com' praedict' victualler and G. B. de eadem in Com' praedict' Yeoman, and
uterque eorum recog' se debere Domino Regni 5. li. si praedict' Johannes
Desalt' fecerit in performatione Conditionis indorsat; Capt' and Recog' coram
nobis E. F.

R. H.

The Condition.
The Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas I. R. of G. in the
within named County, is by the Justice within named Licensed and allowed to
keep a Common Alehouse or Victualling-house in ^. aforesaid for the space of
one whole year next ensuing the Date hereof, If therefore the said I. R. shall
and do observe and perform all the Restitutions and Clauses mentioned in his
said License, That then this Recognizance to be void, or else to stand in full
force and virtue.

Against an Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, etc. suffering to Tipple* Innkeeper,
Victualler, or Alehousekeeper. 1 Iac. c. 9. 21 Iac. c. 7. View. Confession. 1
Witness that can or will justify.

To the Constable of the Hundred of H. and to the Churchwardens of the Parish
of C. in the said County.
Kent. ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved before me this present day,
That A. B. of C. aforesaid, Victualler, did upon the first day of A. suffer D.
E. of, etc. to remain and continue drinking and tippling in the house of the
said A. B. in C. aforesaid, contrary to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided: These are therefore (in 1 Car. c. 4. Vintners within the
Statute. And I conceive by 1 Car. c. 4. it must be 2 Witnesses for suffering a
stranger to tipple. The Alehousekeeper is disabled for 3 years. 7 Iac. c. 10.
21 Iac. c. 7.
His Majesty's name) to command you, that you the said Constable and
Churchwardens do levy for the offense aforesaid ten shillings, (to the use of
the Poor of the said Parish) by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of
the said D. E. to be taken and detained for the same. And for default of
satisfaction within six days, that then you do presently appraise and sell the
same, and deliver the Surplusage or Remainder over and above the said ten
shillings unto the said D. E. And for want of sufficient Distress, that you
certify the same unto me within twenty days next ensuing, (to the end that I
may farther proceed therein as to Justice does appertain.) Here of fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant to levy Money for Tippling.
To the Constable of the Hundred of H. and the Churchwardens of the Parish of
C. in the said County.
K. ss. FOr^smuch as it has been this present 1 Iac. c. 9. 4 Iac. c. 5. 21
Iac. c. 7. 1 Justice. View. Confession. 1 Witness. Within six months. In Inn,
Victualling-house, or Alehouse.
day duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. aforesaid, did upon
the first day of A. last past remain and continue drinking and tippling in the
house of C. D. in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided:) These ar^ therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you, that you the said Constable or Churchwardens do require the said
A. B. to pay for the said Offense (to the hands of you the Churchwardens, to
be by you accounted for to the use of the Poor of the same Parish) the sum of
three shillings four pence of current money of England, within one week now
next ensuing. And if the said A. B. shall refuse or neglect to pay the same as
aforesaid, that then you the said Constable or Churchwardens do levy (to the
use aforesaid) the said three shillings four pence of the goods of the said A.
B. (by Distress and Sale of the same, rendering unto him the overplus of the
money remaining of the said Sale.) And if the said A. B. be not able to pay the
said three shillings four pence, that then you the said Constable do set him in
the Stocks by the space of four hours. H^eof fail not at your perils. Given
under my hand and seal at, etc.

Convicted upon my View. 4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7.

Convicted by his Confession before me.
A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper suffering to Tipple) for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the first day of 1 Iac. c. 9. 1 Justice. 2 Witnesses
forfeit 10 s. to the use of the poor.
A. last past it was duly proved before me, That W. L. of the Parish of C. in
the County aforesaid, Alehouse-keeper, did upon the tenth day of, etc. suffer
I. G. to remain drinking and tippling in the house of the said W. L. in C.
aforesaid, (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided;) And whereas, by Warrant under my hand and seal, I did upon the said
first day of August command, that you the said Constable or the Church*wardens
of the said Parish should levy (for the offense aforesaid) ten shillings to the
use of the Poor of the said Parish, by way of Distress of the goods and
chattels of the aforesaid W. L. to be taken and detained for the same, and for
want of sufficient Distress, you the said Constable or the Churchwardens
aforesaid should certify the same unto me within twenty days then next
ensuing, (to the end that I might farther do therein as to Justice does
appertain;) And forasmuch as the said Constable and Churchwardens have this
present day certified unto me, that the said W. L. has no sufficient Distress
to be taken for the said ten shillings, and that the same is not yet satisfied:
The^e* are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable
and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said W. L. and him
safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the aforesaid
Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said
Keeper, to receive the said W. L. into the said Gaol, and him there safely to
keep, until the said ten shillings be truly paid to the use aforesaid. Hereof
fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Mittimus for an Unlicensed Alehouse-keeper.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. etc. has 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 25. 2 Justices
one of the Quorum.
been this present day convicted before us of (obstinately and of his own
authority) keeping a common Alehouse at C. in the County aforesaid, contrary to
our commandment: These are therefore (in his Majesty's name) to command you,
the said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take him
the said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver
him to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also
you, the said Keeper, to receive the said A. B. into the said Gaol, and him
there safely to keep, without Bail or Mainprise, by the space of three days,
and until he shall enter into Recognizance with Pay 20 s. 2 Witnesses. This
Conviction is to be certified to the next Sessions.
two Sureties, (according to the form of the Statute in that case provided)
that he shall not keep any common Alehouse or Tipplinghouse, or use commonly
selling of Ale or Beer, besides the penalty of 20 s. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Churchwardens of the Parish of C. in the said County.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. aforesaid 3 Car. c. 3. 1 Justice. View.
Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or
Tipplinghouse. To use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry.
has this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him, upon his own
authority, (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in
the Parish aforesaid; by reason whereof he has forfeited and lost the sum of
twenty shillings of current money of England, to the use of the Poor of the
said Parish: These are the^fore (in his Majesty's name) to command you, that
you the said Constable or Churchwardens do levy (by way of Distress of the
goods and chattels of the said A. B. to be by you taken and detained) the said
twenty shillings, (to the use aforesaid.) And for default of satisfaction of
the said twenty shillings within three days after such Distress taken, you do
appraise and sell the said Distress, and deliver the overplus thereof to the
said A. B. And if he shall not have sufficient goods and chattels whereby the
said twenty shillings may be levied by way of Distress, as aforesaid, and shall
not pay the said sum of twenty shillings within six days next ensuing, that
then you the said Constable and Borsholders, or some or one of you, do openly
whip him for the offense aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
my hand and seal at, etc.

The like, for the second Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Keeper of the
House of Correction for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of 3 Car. c. 3. 1 Justice. View.
Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or
Tipplinghouse. To use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry.
C. etc. has this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him of his own
authority (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in
the Parish aforesaid; ^d forasmuch also as the said A. B. has been once before
in like manner convicted of the like offense: These are therefore (in his
Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said* A. B. and him safely convey to the
aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive
him into the said House, and him there safely to keep for the space of one
month, and to deal with him as an Idle, Lewd and Disorderly person. Hereof, etc.

The like, for the third Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the Keeper of the
House of Correction for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of 3 Car. c. 3. 1 Justice. View.
Confession. 2 Witnesses that can or will. To keep a common Alehouse or
Tipplinghouse. To use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry.
C. etc. has this present day been (according to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided) convicted before me of taking upon him, of his own
authority, (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse in
the Parish aforesaid; And forasmuch as the said A. B. has been twice before in
like manner convicted of the like offense; ^ese are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the
aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the
same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said House, and him there safely to keep, until by good
order of the Justices in their general Sessions for the County he shall be
delivered from thence. And that you do in the mean time deal with him as an
Idle, Lewd and Disorderly person. Hereof fail not, etc.

A Warrant for Witnesses against an Unlicensed Alehouse-keeper.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as complaint has been 3 Car. c. 3. 1 Justice.
made unto me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. etc. does take upon him of his
own authority (not being thereunto lawfully Licensed) to keep a common Alehouse
in the Keep a common Alehouse or Tipplinghouse. To use commonly selling of
Beer, Ale, Perry, or Cider.
Parish aforesaid; And forasmuch as I am credibly informed, that the several
persons here undernamed can (if they will) testify that the said A. B. does so
do: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you,
some or one of you, do give notice unto the said several persons, that they and
every of them are by me required to come before me at C. upon Monday the first
day of, etc. at eight of the clock in the Forenoon of the same day, then and
there to testify their several knowledges touching the premises. Whereof they
nor any of them are to fail at their perils. And what you shall do herein, you
shall make known unto me at the time and place aforesaid. And have you there
then this Precept. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A. B. C. D. E. F.

For Suppression of an Alehouse for Disorder.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as we are credibly informed, Dalt. 34. 2 Justices, 1 Quorum.
That A. B. of C. etc. does suffer evil Rule and Disorder to be kept in his
house in C. aforesaid, (contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm) for
which Imprisonment, Fine, and Bond for the good Behavior.
we have thought fit to Suppress him from any longer keeping any Alehouse or
Tippling-house, or using commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cider: These
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do forthwith repair to the said A. B. and charge him to surcease from
keeping any longer any Alehouse or Tipplinghouse, and from common selling of
Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cider, at his peril. And that what you shall do in the
premises, you, some or one of you, (so giving notice) do make known unto us,
some or one of us, with all convenient speed. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under our hands and seals at ^. in the said County, the, etc.

For renewing Licenses of Alehousekeepers.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them.
Dalt. 34. 2 Justices, 1 Quorum.

Kent ss. THese are (in his Majesty's name) to command you, to warn all the
licensed Alehouse-keepers, Victuallers, and such others within the said
Hundred, as do use commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or Cider, personally
to appear before us at the house of I. G. etc. upon Friday the ninth day of O.
at ten of the clock in the ^renoon of the same day; and to bring with them then
and thither, as well their former Licenses, as also a Certificate of the civil
Demeanours and Fitness of themselves for that purpose to be new licensed; and
of the convenience of Situation and Accommodation of their said respective
houses for that purpose. The same Certificate to be signed with the hands at
least of two substantial, honest, discreet, and civil Inhabitants of the
respective Parishes where they do so now dwell. And have you there the names of
such persons as you shall have so warned, together with the names of the
several Parishes and places of the said Parishes where their said houses are
situate, and by what Signs the same are known; to the end that such of them may
be continued, and such of them suppressed, as shall be thought fit. And have
you there also this precept. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

Against an Alehouse-keeper for selling less than Measure.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to the
Churchwardens of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and to every of
them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 1 Iac. c. c. 9. 1 Justice. 1 Witness.
View, or Confession by 21 Iac. c. 7. Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, or Victualler.
Disabled for 3 years. 21 Iac. c. 7.
proved before me, That A. B. of the aforesaid Parish of C. did lately utter
and fell in his house in C. aforesaid less than one full Ale-quart of the best
Beer for a penny, (against the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided) by reason whereof the said A. B. has forfeited for his said offense
twenty shillings to the use of the Poor of the said Parish of C. These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do levy to the use aforesaid the said twenty shillings by way of Distress
of the goods and chattels of the said A. B. to be by you, some or one of you,
taken and detained for the same; And for default of satisfaction within six
days next ensuing, that then you presently appraise and sell the said Distress,
and deliver the surplusage or remainder over and above to the said A. B. And
for want of sufficient Distress, that then you, some or one of you, do within
twenty days next ensuing certify unto me the default of such Distress, to the
end that I may farther do therein as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Mittimus for selling less than Measure for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the common Gaol at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas it has been duly 1 Justice. 1 Iac. c. 9.
proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. in the said County did lately
utter and sell in his house in C. aforesaid less than one full Ale-quart of the
best Beer for a penny (against the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided;) And whereas I did thereupon, by Warrant under my hand and seal,
command you the said Constable and Borsholders and the Churchwardens of the
Parish of C. aforesaid, that you, they, or some or one of you or them, should
levy (to the use of the Poor of the said Parish) twenty shillings, for the
offense aforesaid, by way of Distress of the goods and chattels of the said A.
B. to be taken and detained for the same; and that for want of sufficient
Distress, you, they, or some or one of you or them, should within twenty days
then next ensuing certify unto me the default of such Distress, to the end
that I might farther do therein as to Justice does appertain; And forasmuch as
it has been certified unto me, that no sufficient Distress can be found
whereby the said twenty shillings may be levied, and that the same is not yet
satisfied: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said
Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B.
and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
Keeper of the same, to be by him there kept until the said twenty shillings
shall be truly paid. Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into
the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, until the said twenty shillings
shall be paid accordingly. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand
and seal at, etc.

For Suppressing an Alehouse after Suppression at the Quarter Sessions.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of Marden and West Barnfield,
and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas at the general Quarter Sessions of the Peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King holden at M. in the said County, upon Tuesday in the first week
next after the Close of Easter last past; it was (for the reasons therein
mentioned) ordered by the said Court, That A. B. of G. in the said County
should forthwith surcease, and be suppressed from selling Ale- or Beer in his
then dwelling house, (or elsewhere) and that the Constables of the said Parish
of G. or one of them should require him to forbear to sell any more Ale or
Beer; which if he should refuse to do, that then he should be immediately
afterward dealt withal as an unlicensed Victualler, (any License to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding;) of which said Order the said A. B. had
notice; And whereas notwithstanding the said Order at the last monthly meeting
of the Justices of the Peace of the said County for this lower Division of the
Lath of Scray, upon Thursday the fourth day of September last past, being the
day for new Licensing of the Alehouse-keepers in that Division, amongst the
multiplicity of business there that day, a new License for the said A. B. to
keep a common Alehouse in the house wherein he dwelt (at the time of his
aforesaid Suppression) was, amongst several other such Licenses, laid down
before us, and by us signed and sealed, in the so doing whereof we were
surprised: Upon consideration of all which, and forasmuch also as the same
reasons and causes for which the said A. B. was as aforesaid suppressed do (as
we are informed and believe) still remain; We have therefore thought fit to
suppress him from any longer keeping any Alehouse or Tippling-house, or using
commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Cider, or* Perry. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith
repair to the said A. B. and charge him to surcease from keeping any longer any
Alehouse or Tipplinghouse, and from commonly selling of Ale, Beer, Perry, or
Cider; and that what you shall do in the premises, you, some or one of you,
(so giving notice) do make known unto us, or one of us, with all convenient
speed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at C. in
the said County, the second day of October 1679. 31 Car. II. Regis.

A License to keep an Alehouse with Articles.
Articles to be observed and kept by A. B. admitted to keep a common Alehouse
or Victuallinghouse in his now dwelling house in C. in the said County of Kent
as follows, viz.
Kent ss. IMprimis, If he here of any Robery or other heinous offense committed
against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, he shall certify to the
Constable or Borsholders of the Hundred where for the time he then dwells, or
some of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, of such persons
as lodged at his house within two days before or after such Robery or heinous
offense committed, and what apparel they had and used, and the Christian name,
or Surname, or names of them or as many of them, as he shall know.

2. Also he shall not use or keep, nor suffer to be used or kept any Carding,
Dicing, Bowling, or any other unlawful Game or Games at any time in his house
or yard.

3. Also he shall not permit or suffer any person or persons to continue
drinking, or remain tippling in his house otherwise then is permitted and
allowed by the several Statutes in that case made and provided.

4. Also he shall not suffer any person or persons to lodge at his house above
one day and one night together, but such as he will answer for, and have forth
coming if occasion shall require.

5. Also he shall keep one or more beds in his house, as also Men's meat and
Horse meat during the time of License, conveniently furnished to lodge any
wayfaring Man or Travellor.

Lastly, He shall not utter or sell less than one full Ale-quart of the best
Beer or Ale for one penny, and of the small two Quarts for one penny, and shall
have in his house Beer and Ale of both sorts, and also Bread for the Poor and
sueh others as will buy the same.

We whose Names are hereunder written, Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign
Lord the King within this County of K. do hereby license and allow the said A.
B. to keep a common Alehouse or Victuallinghouse in his now dwellinghouse,
known by the name of the Sign of the George in C. aforesaid, for the space of
one whole year next ensuing.

The said A. B. observing and keeping all and singular the Articles above
written, for observing whereof he is bound by a Recognizance in 10 li. and two
sufficient Sureties with him, viz. C. D. and E. F. in 5 li. a piece to the use
of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors. Dated at C. the
8 day of September. 1671.

The Recognizance as in Page 3.

The Condition.
The Condition of the Recognizance within written is such, That whereas the
within named A. B. is by the Justices within named, licensed, admitted, and
allowed to keep a common Alehouse or Victuallinghouse in C. for the space of
one whole year next ensuing; If therefore the said A. B. do well and truly
observe and keep all and singular the Articles contained in his said License,
That then, etc.

Apprentices.
A Warrant to put out poor Children Apprentices.
To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A.
in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's name) Dalt. 162. 1 Iac. c. 25. 21 Iac.
28. 3 Car. c. 4. 2 Justices, 1 of the Quorum. 43 Eliz. cap. 2.
to command you, that you do present unto us, or some of us, in writing under
your hands, at the house of A. B. in, etc. upon the third day of June next, at
nine of the clock in the morning of the same day, the names of all such poor
Children of your said Parish as are Orphans, or whose Parents shall not by you,
or the greater number of you, be thought able to keep and maintain them;
together with the names of the Parents of the said Children, (if they have any
living) and the several Ages of the Children aforesaid: And that you do cause
such of the said Children as be able to come thither, (and more especially such
of them as by you shall be thought fit to be put forth Apprentices) to appear
before us, (at the time and place aforesaid,) to be by us there viewed: And
likewise that you do then and there also present unto us (in writing as
aforesaid) the names of such substantial Inhabitants of your said Parish, to
whom you shall think fit to put the said Children, or any of them, Apprentices;
and more especially of such of the said Inhabitants as have not formerly taken
such poor Children of the said Parish Apprentices: And lastly, that you do give
notice 7 Iac. 3.
to the said Inhabitants, that they are by us required then and there to appear
before us, to show cause why you (by our assent) shall not bind such of the
said Children Apprentices unto them, (as to you shall seem convenient) unless
they shall in the mean time consent to take and receive the same accordingly;
and that you your selves be then and there also present, and have there this
Precept. Of all which you are not to fail at your Perils. Given under our hands
and seals the, etc.

An Indenture for an Apprentice so put out.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Justices, 1 of
the Quorum. Man-child till he shall come to the age of 24 years; Woman-child
till she shall come to the age of 21, or the time of her marriage.
in the year of the Reign, etc. Between A. B. and C. D. Churchwardens of the
Parish of E. in the County of etc. and F. G. H. I. Overseers of the Poor of the
same Parish, etc. of the one part, and K. L. of, etc. of the other part,
Witnesses, That the said Churchwardens and Overseers, by the Assent of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, whose names are hereunto
written, (according to the form of the Statute made in the 23. year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for the Relief of the
Poor) have put out and bound M. L. a poor Child of the said Parish of E.
Apprentice to the said K. L. till the said M. L. shall come to the age of 24
years. During which time the said Apprentice his said Master well and
faithfully shall serve, his Secrets keep, his Commandments lawful and honest
everywhere willingly shall do. He shall do no hurt nor damage to his said
Master, nor consent to be done of others, but to his power shall let the same,
or forthwith give notice to his said Master thereof. He shall not waste the
Goods of his said Master, nor lend them to any person without his consent. He
shall not frequent Taverns, Inns or Alehouses, (except it be about his said
Master's business there to be done.) He shall not (during the said term) play
at Cards, Dice, or other unlawful Games. He shall not, either by day or night,
absent himself from his said Master's service: But in all things (as a good and
faithful Servant) shall demean himself toward his said Master and all his.
And the said K. L. his said Apprentice shall (during the term aforesaid)
educate and bring up, or cause to be educated and brought up, in his Trade,
with due and reasonable Chastisement; and find and allow unto him (during the
said term) sufficient wholesome and competent meat, drink, lodging, washing,
apparel, and all other necessaries meet for such an Apprentice: And in the end
of the said term shall find, provide for, and deliver unto his said Apprentice
double Apparel, that is to say, Apparel meet for him to have and wear as well
on the Lord's days as on the working-days, both of Linen, Woollen, Hose,
Shoes, and all other necessaries meet for such an Apprentice to have and wear.
In Witness whereof the parties above said to these present Indentures their
hands and seals interchangeably have set, the day and year first above written.

A Warrant against them which refuse to take Apprentices.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of K. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas the Churchwardens On refusal to be bound to good Behavior,
or Indicted for a Contempt, and thereupon to be Fined and Imprisoned. Dalt. 163.
and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid did by
our assent by Indenture, bearing date the, etc. put and bind out unto B. C. of
the Parish aforesaid D. E. a poor Child of the said Parish Apprentice,
(according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided in the 43
year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for the Relief
of the Poor,) And forasmuch as the said B. C. does refuse to take, receive and
keep the said Apprentice accordingly, and does likewise refuse to seal the
Counterpart of the said Indenture: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said B. C. to come
before us, or one of us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County,
to enter into Recognizance unto His said Majesty conditioned for personal
appearance at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden at E. in the
County aforesaid, then and there to answer the premises, and farther to do
and receive as the said Court shall then consider of him in this behalf. Hereof
fail not at your perils, Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

A Warrant against a Master for abusing his Apprentice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of H. etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 5 Eliz. 4.
been made unto me by A. B. an Apprentice, against C. D. his Master, both of
the Parish aforesaid, That he the said C. D. does not allow unto his said
Servant competent meat, drink, and apparel, and does immoderately correct him
without any cause at all, (or turns him out of his house and will not suffer
him to return) as the Case requires. These are therefore (in his Majesty's
name) to command you, that some or one of you, do cause both the said Parties
to come before me at H. on Monday the tenth day of this instant June, at four
of the clock in the afternoon, to the end that I may examine the same matter.
Hereof fail not, etc. Given under my hand and seal this, etc.

A Warrant against a disorderly Apprentice.
To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 5 Eliz. 4.
been made unto me by A. B. Joyner, against C. D. his Apprentice, both of your
Parish of H. in this County, That the said C. D. is a stubborn and disobedient
Servant, and does very much misbehave himself toward his said Master, (or that
the said C. D. has departed from his said Master, etc.) These are therefore,
etc. as in the foregoing Warrant.

A Discharge of an Apprentice.
K. ss. WE R. K. H. D. E. F. G. H. four 5 Eliz. 4.
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, etc. for the County of K. aforesaid,
Whereas Complaint having been made unto us by A. B. an Apprentice, against C.
D. his Master, both of your Parish of H. within this County, That the said C.
D. his Master has not allowed to his said Servant competent diet, and apparel
befitting such Apprentice, and has sometimes corrected him without any just
cause at all, and when he had cause, corrected him above measure, and we having
ordered the said Parties to appear before us, and having examined the
Complainant find it to be true, and therefore we do think fit to discharge the
said Apprentice of his Apprenticeship, And therefore do by these presents,
under our hands and seals pronounce and declare, That we have for the causes
aforesaid, discharged the said A. B. the Apprentice of his Apprenticehood the
eighth day of July, Annoque Dom. 1679. Giv^n under our hands, etc.

A Warrant against one that departs out of Service before his time expired.
To the Constable and Borsholders, etc.
Kanc. ss. WHereas Complaint has been made unto me this present day by A. B.
of, etc. That one C. D. having been bound and put Apprentice to him the said A.
B. is now lately, contrary to Law, departed from his said Master without his
License, or other Lawful discharge. These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to charge and command you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the
said C. D. when and where he shall be found within your several Limits and
Precincts. And thereupon do further bring him before me, or some other of his
Majesty's Justices of and within the said County to answer to the premises.
And further to be dealt withal according to Law. Hereof. etc.

Bail.
Recognizances for Bail.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die If it be taken before 1 Justice, say, uno
Iusticiarior' Domini Regis, etc.
Maii, Anno Regni, etc. A. B. de, etc. personalit' venit coram me C. D. uno
Iusticiar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo praedicto conservand'
assign', and recognovit se debere eidem Domino Regi december libras legalis
monetae Angliae, de bonis and catallis, terris and tenementis suis fieri and
levari, ad opus and usum dicti Domini Anno Domini not necessary.
Regis, haered' and successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione
Conditionis indorsat'.

Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quinto die If it be taken before 1 Justice, say,
uno Iusticiarior' Domini Regis, etc.
Octobris, Anno Regni, etc. A. B. de, etc. G. H. de, etc. and J. K. de, etc.
personalit' venerunt coram nobis C. D. and E. F. Iusticiar' dicti Domini Regis
ad pacem suam in Com' suo praedicta conservand' assignat', and recognoverunt se
de bear eidem Domino Regi modo and forma sequen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti
libras legalis monetae Angliae, and uterque praedictorum G. and J. december libras
consimilis monetae, de separalibus bonis and catallis, terris and tenementis
suis, separalit' fieri and Anno Domini not necessary.
levari, ad opus and usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' and successorum suorum,
si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis indorsat'.

A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evidence.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices of Jail-deliver at the next
general Jail-deliver to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do
then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of indictment against W.
T. for the matters wherewith the said W. T. is charged before, The Justices
within named (or the within named Justices.)
and do also then and there give such evidence as he knows concerning the
same, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial
of the said W. T. for the same; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or
else it shall stand in full force.

If at the Sessions, then say:
Do personally appear before His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the within named County of Kent, at the next general Sessions of the Peace
to be holden for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, and do then and
there prefer, etc. as in the foregoing Condition.

A Condition to give Evidence.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A, B. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices of Jail-deliver at the next
general Jail-deliver to be holden for the within named County of Kent, and do
then and there give such Evidence as he knows against I. K. concerning the
matters wherewith he is charged, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire
thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors
that shall pass upon the Trial of the said I. K. for the same; That then this
Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:
Do personally appear before His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the within named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to
be holden for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, and do then and
there give such Evidence, etc. as before.

A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Felony.
The Condition of this Recognizance is 2 Justices, 1 of the Quorum. If charged
but with suspicion, then say,
such, That if the within bound A. B. do personally appear before His
Majesty's Justices of Jail-deliver at the next general Jail-deliver to be
holden for the within named County of Kent, then and there to answer our
Sovereign Lord the King for and concerning the the suspicion of his, etc.
Felonious taking and stealing of (as the Case is) whereof he stands charged.
wherewithal he stands charged before, etc. and to do and receive, etc. and
do not depart the said Court without license for the same; That then this
Recognizance to be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

If it be to appear at the Sessions, then say:
Do personally appear before His Majastie's Justices assigned to keep His Peace
in the within named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to
be holded for the said County at T. in the County aforesaid, then and there to
answer, etc. as before.

If the Fellon be in Prison.
These are to charge and require you that immediately you bring before me the
body of A. B. now in your Custody to be Bailed, as Law requires. Whereof fail
you not, etc. Given, etc.

Bastards.
For the apprehending and conveying the Woman to the House of Correction.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundreds of B. and C. in the said
County, and to every other His Majesty's Officers in the County aforesaid,
whom the Execution thereof may concern.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do apprehend I. L. of B. in the said County, Single woman, and her
safely convey to the House of Correction for the said County at T. in the
County aforesaid; and there deliver her to the Keeper of the same, together
with the Mittimus herewithall delivered unto you. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. in the said County the second day
of June 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.

A Mittimus of the Mother of a Bastard-Child to the House of Correction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. has lately 7 Iac. c. 4. May be chargeable to the
Parish. 2 Justices, Quaere, if not fit one to be of the Quorum, according to 18
El. c. 3. If she put in security to discharge the Parish, she cannot* be
punished by the Statute 7 Iac. but by that of 18 Eliz. Coke* Magna Charta, fol.
733.
had a Bastard-Child; These are therefore (in his Majesty's name) to command
you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one
of you, do take the said C. D. and her safely convey to the aforesaid House of
Correction, and there deliver her to the said Keeper of the same, (together
with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive her into
the said House, and there punish and set her on work during the term of one
whole year, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals, etc.

A Warrant against the Mother (for the second Offense) to commit to the House
of Correction, and find Sureties of good Behavior.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. has lately 7. Iac. cap. 4. etc. May be chargeable
to the Parish. 2 Justices; if not fit one be of the Quorum, according to ^8 El.
c. 4. If she put in surety to discharge the Parish, she cannot be punished by
the Statute 7 Iac. but by that of 18 Eliz. Coke Mag. Chapter fol. 733.
had a Bastard-Child; And for as much as she has before offended in the like
kind: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said
Constable and Borsholders and every of you, That you, some or one of you, do
take the said A. B. and her safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correction,
and there deliver her to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this
Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive her into the said
House, and there punish and set her on work, until she do put in good security
for her good Behavior not to offend so again, (according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals at, etc.

To convene the Mother and reputed Father.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc. 2 Justices, 1 of the Quorum.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as we are informed, That A. D. of the Parish of B. in the
County aforesaid (within the said Parish) 18 Eliz. cap. 3.
has lately been delivered of a Bastard-Child (begotten and born out of
lawful Matrimony) yet living, and chargeable to the Parish aforesaid; And
forasmuch as the said A. D. upon her Examination taken has charged E. F. of,
etc. to have begotten her with Child of the Bastard-Child aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do bring the said Woman before us at the house of R. in T.
in the County aforesaid, upon the tenth day of June at nine of the clock in the
forenoon of the same day, to be by us farther examined touching the premises;
and that you give notice thereof unto the said E. F. (if conveniently you can)
to the end that he may likewise be at the time and place aforesaid to make his
lawful Defense therein, (if he shall so think fit.) And farther, that you,
some or one of you, do give notice to the several persons whose names are here
under written, that they and every of them are by us required to appear at the
time and place aforesaid, to certify their several knowledges touching the
premises; to the end that upon the examination of the Cause and Circumstance,
we may take such order therein as to Justice does appertain. And lastly, that
what you shall do in execution of this our Precept, you do make known unto us
at the time and place aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals at, etc.

A. B. of, etc. C. D. of, etc. E. F. of, etc.

A Warrant against the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child.
To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as upon Examination Dalt. 39.
of A. B. of, etc. Single woman, this day taken before me, (upon Oath) it
appears that she is at present with Child of a Bastard-Child, which is likely
to be chargeable to the Parish when it shall happen to be so born; And
forasmuch as (upon her Examination) she has confessed that C. D. of, etc. did
beget her with Child of the Child aforesaid, and has before me charged him
with the same: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the
said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said
C. D. to come before me, or some one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
Lamb. 122. Cromp. 196.
of the said County at, etc. aforesaid, then and there to receive as by the
said Court shall be enjoined; and also that he shall in the mean time be of
good Behavior, as well toward His said Majesty, as toward all His liege
people. Which if he shall refuse to do, that then (without expecting any
farther or other Warrant) you, some or one of you, do safely convey him to the
Gaol of, etc. and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, together with
this Precept. Commanding also you, the aforesaid Keeper, to receive him into
the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep, until he shall find such
sufficient Security as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my
hand and seal at, etc.

An Order for Releif of the Parish touching a Bastard-Child, and for punishing
the Mother and reputed Father.
Kent ss. THE Order of us W. B. and R. K. 18 Eliz. cap. 3. 2 Justices, 1 of the
Quorum.
Esquires, two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County,
(whereof one of us is of the Quorum) and both residing in the limits where the
Parish Church of H. in the County aforesaid is the 19. day of April in the year
of our Lord 1672. (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided) touching the male Bastard-Child late born in the Parish of H.
aforesaid, of the body of A. G. of the same Parish, Single woman, (the keeping
of which said Bastard-Child has ever since the birth thereof been, and still
is chargeable to the Parish aforesaid, and so likely to continue chargeable.)

First, (upon our Examination of the Cause and Circumstance, and due
Consideration thereof by us had) we do adjudge W. S. late of H. aforesaid,
Tailor, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child.

And for Punishment of the said Mother and reputed Father, and the better
Relief of the said Parish, we do hereby order as follows: that is to say,

We do order, That the said Mother shall by the Constable and Borsholders of
the Hundred of Great B. in the said County, or by some or one of them, (upon
some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common
Highway at or near, etc. in the Parish aforesaid) be stripped naked from the
middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or
Dungcourt, and being so stripped and tied, shall be there openly whipped until
her body be bloody.

We do also order, That the said reputed Father shall by the Constable and
Borsholders of the Hundred aforesaid, or some or one of them, (upon some day,
between the hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common Highway in
the Parish aforesaid, over against the dwelling house of I. S. there) be
stripped naked from the middle upwards, and shall then and there be tied to the
tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and being so stripped and tied, shall be from
thence drawn to the Watch-house aforesaid, and on the way well whipped, in such
manner as is in such cases accustomed.

We do farther order, That the said Mother shall within three days next after
notice of this our Order render her body to the said Constable and Borsholders,
or to some or one of them, ready to undergo her Punishment before ordered:

And that the said reputed Father shall within six days next after notice of
this our Order render his body to the said Constable and Borsholders, or to
some or one of them, ready to undergo his punishment before ordered.

We do likewise farther order, That the said reputed Father shall within six
days next after notice given unto him of this our Order pay, or cause to be
paid, to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, or to some or one
of them, twenty shillings of lawful money of England, toward the moneys by
them disbursed (before the said notice given) for or toward the charges of the
keeping of the said Bastard-Child, from the time of the birth thereof until
the time of the giving of the said notice.

And that upon every Friday which shall be next after the end of the said six
days, until the said Bastard-Child shall attain unto his age of ten years, the
said reputed Father shall likewise pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of the
said Parish (for the time being, (or unto some or one of them, sixteen pence of
lawful money of England, toward the charges by them disbursed toward the
keeping of the Bastard-Child aforesaid,) meaning between the end of the said
six days, and the time that he shall attain unto his said age of ten years.)

We do farther order, That the said Bastard-Child shall be kept and nourished
by his said Mother until he shall attain unto the age aforesaid; and that she
(so far as she shall be able) shall during the said time so keep and nourish
the same.

We do lastly order, That both the said Mother and reputed Father shall (for
ever from and after such time as the said Bastard-Child shall attain unto his
said age of ten years) jointly and severally discharge the said Parish of and
from all charges whatsoever, for, touching or concerning the keeping or
relieving of the same.

In Witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names the day and year
first above written.

W. B. R. K.

A Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid, for giving notice thereof
to the Mother and reputed Father.
To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. The same Justices.
in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
THese are (in His Majesty's name) to command you and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do (with all convenient speed) give or cause to be given
notice of our Order, (a Copy whereof is herewith delivered unto you) both unto
the Mother and reputed Father therein mentioned; to the end that they and every
of them may the better observe and perform the same: And what you shall do in
execution of this our Precept, you, some or one of you, do certify unto us, or
one of us, (with all convenient speed next after the Execution of the same) to
the end that farther proceedings may be thereupon had as the Case shall
require, and to Justice does appertain. Given under our hands and seals at,
etc. aforesaid the, etc.

A Warrant for the Punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of a
Bastard-Child.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. WHereas A. G. of Hawkh. in 18 Eliz. cap. 3. 2 Justices, 1 of the
Quorum.
the said County, Single woman, was lately delivered within the said Parish of
a male Bastard-Child (begotten and born out of lawful Matrimony) yet living,
and chargeable to the Parish aforesaid, and so likely to continue chargeable,
to the great burden of the same Parish, and the defrauding of the Relief of
the impotent and aged true Poor of the Parish aforesaid, and to the evil
example and encouragement of lewd life; And whereas, upon our Examination of
the Cause and Circumstance, (according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided) we have (in and by an Order by us this present day made, and
subscribed under our hands, touching the Bastard-Child aforesaid) adjudged W.
B. the elder, late of Hawkh. aforesaid, Broad-weaver, the reputed Father of the
said Bastard-Child; And for Punishment of the said Mother and reputed Father*
(according to the form of the Statute aforesaid) we have thereby ordered, That
the said Mother shall by you, some or one of you, (upon some day, between the
hours of nine and twelve in the forenoon, in the common Highway, at or near
the Watch-house at Highgate in the Parish aforesaid) be stripped naked from the
middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or
Dung-court, and being so stripped and tied, shall be there openly whipped
until her body be bloody; and that the said reputed Father shall by you, some
or one of you, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the
forenoon, in the common Highway in the Parish aforesaid, over against the
house of I. B. there,) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and then and
there shall be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and being so stripped
and tied, shall be from thence drawn to the Watch-house aforesaid, and on the
way well whipped in such manner as is in such cases accustomed; And that the
said Mother shall, within three days next after notice of that our Order,
render her body to you, some or one of you, ready to nndergo her Punishment
before ordered: And that the said reputed Father shall, within six days next
after notice of our said Order, render his body to you, some or one of you,
ready to undergo his Punishment before ordered: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you and every of you, that in case the said Mother
and reputed Father, or either of them, shall so render her, his, or their body
or bodies to you, or any of you, as aforesaid, that then you, they or he (to
whom the same shall be so rendered) do (with all convenient speed afterward)
proceed with effect to execute your, their or his office according to the faid
purport of the Order aforesaid, and do execute the same accordingly; And that
what is done in the premises, you, or one of you, do (with all convenient
speed, after the aforesaid, etc. day of, etc.) make known unto us, or one of
us, to the end that in case of failer by him or her of rendering his or her body
to you or one of you, (according to the said Order) such farther proceedings
may be thereupon had as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at Hawkh. aforesaid the first day of
May, 1672.

A Warrant and Mittimus against the reputed Father for not obeying the Justices
Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to the Keeper of the
common Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas by an Order by us 18 Eliz. cap. 3. It is not expressly said
what Justices shall commit: But I conceive it fit to be the 2 Justices that
made the Order. But likewise conceive that other Justices may so do, (mutatis
mutandis.) But I also conceive it fit that then it should be done by 2
Justices, whereof one of the Quorum.
made, and subscribed under our hands the first day of May last past, touching
a male Bastard-Child lately born in the Parish of Hawkh. in the said County of
the body of Anne Gardener of Hawkh. aforesaid, Single woman, (chargeable to the
Parish aforesaid) we have adjudged Will. Bowman the elder late of Hawkh.
aforesaid, Broad-weaver, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; And for
Punishment of the said reputed Father, (according to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided, among other things in the said Order contained)
have ordered, That he shonld by you the said Constable and Borsholders, or by
some or one of you, (upon some day, between the hours of nine and twelve in the
forenoon, in the common Highway in the Parish of Hawkh. aforesaid, over
against the house of I. B. there) be stripped from the middle upwards, and then
and there should be tied to the tail of a Cart or Dungcourt, and (being so
stripped and tied) should be from thence drawn to the Watch-house at Highgate
in the Parish aforesaid, and on the way well whipped, in such manner as is in
such cases accustomed; and that he should within six days next after notice of
our said Order render his body to you the said Constable and Borsholders, or
some or one of you, ready to undergo his punishment before ordered; And whereas
it has been duly proved before us, that after the making of the said Order,
and by the space of six days and upwards before the day of the date hereof, the
said Will. Bowman (so as aforesaid the reputed Father of the said
Bastard-Child) had notice of the said Order, and yet notwithstanding has not
hitherto rendered his body to you the said Constable and Borsholders, or any of
you, according to the purport of the same, and so has not for his part
observed and performed the Order aforesaid. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do attach the body of the said Will.
Bowman, and him deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to be by
him kept in the same without Bail or Mainprise, (except he shall put in
sufficient Surety to perform the said Order, or also personally to appear at
the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the said County;) And
also to add such Order as the Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, or
the more part of them, then and there shall take in that behalf, (if they then
and there shall take any;) And that if at the said Sessions the said Justices
shall take no other Order, then to abide and perform the Order before made as
is abovesaid. Commanding also you, the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to
receive then the said Will. Bowman into the same, and him there safely to keep,
according to the purport and tenor of this Precept. Given under our hands and
seals at Hawkh. aforesaid, the second day of June, Anno Dom. 1673. Annoque
Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 25.

An Order for Relief of the Parish in case of a Bastard out of the Estate of
the reputed Father.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of, etc. in the
County of, etc. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FO^asmuch as (upon your Complaint 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Justices, 1
of the Quorum.
to us) it appears, That A. B. the reputed Father, or Mother, of a
Bastard-Child born in the Parish aforesaid, has lately ran away out of the
said Parish, and left the said Bastard-Child upon the charge of the Parish
aforesaid, although A. B. has Estate sufficient to discharge the said Parish:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require and authorize you, and
every of you, that you, some or one of you, do seize and take so much of the
Goods and Chattels, and receive so much of the annual Rents and Profits of the
Lands of the said A. B. as will amount unto the sum of, etc. which we do This
Order must be confirmed at the Sessions. 18 Eliz. cap. 3. 3 Car. c. 4.
(according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made) order you to
take and receive for or toward the discharge of the said Parish, for the
bringing up and providing for the aforesaid Bastard-Child. Given under our
hands and seals the, etc.

A Warrant for Punishment of the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child, for not
keeping the Child, and obeying the Order.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundreds of C. and B. and to every of
them, and to the Keeper of the common Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas upon our Examination of the Cause and Circumstance, and due
Consideration thereof by us had, touching a male Bastard-Child late born in the
Parish of C. in the said County, of the body of I. A. of C. aforesaid, Single
woman, (the keeping of which said Bastard-Child was at the time of making of
the said Order chargeable to the said Parish, and has ever since continued
chargeable) we did by an Order by us made, and subscribed under our hands the
19th. day of April last past, (according to the form of the Statute in such
case made and provided) adjudge W. S. of H. in the said County, Tailor the
reputed Father of the said Bastard-Child; and for the Punishment of the said
reputed Father, and the better Relief of the said Parish, we did thereby order,
That the said reputed Father should by the said Constable, or by the Borsholder
of the Town-Burrough, (within the Hundred aforesaid) upon some day of the
Market to be holden in the Town of C. in the said County, (within the Hundred
aforesaid) between notice given of that our Order given unto him, and the 12.
day of this instant A. (and now lately past) at the Market-Cross in the Town
aforesaid, (between the hours of three and five in the afternoon of the same
day) be stripped naked from the middle upwards, and tied to one of the Posts of
the Market-Cross aforesaid, (most visible to the said Market) and then and
there openly whipped until his body be bloody; and that he should in such
convenient time after notice of that our Order to him given render his body to
the said Constable and Borsholder, or one of them, (ready to undergo his
Punishment so ordered) as that the said Punishment might be executed
accordingly; And that the said reputed Father should pay to the Overseers of
the Poor, or one of them 20 s. by them disbursed hefore the said notice given,
for or toward the charge of keeping the said Child from the time of its Birth;
And that upon every Friday which (after notice to him given of that our Order)
should be during such time as the said Bastard-Child should be chargeable to
the said Parish of C. pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish
aforesaid for the time being, or to some or one of them, sixteen pence of
lawful money of England, toward the charges by them disbursed for relief of
the Bastard-Child aforesaid; and that the reputed Father should for ever after
such time as the said Bastard-Child shall first cease to be chargeable to the
said Parish, discharge the Parish aforesaid of and from all future charges
whatsoever, for, touching or concerning the keeping or reliving of the same;
And whereas (after the making of the said Order, and by the space of six days
and upwards before the day of the date hereof) the said W. S. had notice of the
said Order, and yet has not observed or performed any part thereof on his part
to be observed and performed: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do attach the body of the said W. S. and him to deliver to
the aforesaid Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to be by him kept in the same
without Bail or Mainprise, (except he shall put in sufficient Surety to perform
the said Order, or else personally to appear at the next general Sessions of
the Peace to be holden in the said County) and also to abide such Order as the
Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, or the more part of them then
and there shall take in that behalf, (if they then and there shall take any;)
and that if at the said Sessions the said Justices shall take no other Order,
then to abide and perform the Order before made as is abovesaid. Commanding
also you the said Keeper of the Gaol aforesaid, to receive then the said W. S.
in the same, and him there safely to keep, according to the purport and tenor
of this Precept. Given under our hands, etc.

A Warrant for sending a Bastard-Child (found wandering) to the place of its
Birth.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
K. ss. WHereas upon our examination we find, That A. B. being the
Bastard-Child of C. D. and about the age of five years, has been found
wandering and going up and down the Parish of H. and other places thereabouts,
and was, as we are credibly informed, born in the Parish of I. as appears by
the Book of the said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
will and require you, That (according to the General usage, custom, and common
acceptance of the Law in case of a lost Child) you do convey the same Child to
the said Parish of I. and that you the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor
of that Parish, do take due care, that the said Child may be there provided
for. Hereof fail not at your perils. G^ven under our hands and seals the, etc.

A Warrant for apprehending a Woman on suspicion of having murdered her
Bastard-Child.
To the Constable, etc.
K. ss. WHereas I am informed that A. B. has had a Child lately born alive of
her Body, and is suspected to have murdered or made away the said Child, since
the birth thereof: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and
command you, that immediately upon sight hereof you do apprehend and bring the
body of the said A. B. before me or some other Justice of the Peace of the said
County to answer to all such matters and things as on the behalf of His Majesty
shall be objected against her touching the premises. Likewise you are to make
diligent search, by all lawful means, to find out the truth of the premises,
and to bring before me or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County,
all such persons as can give any information on the behalf of His Majesty
touching the premises.. And hereof fail not, as you will answer the contrary
at your perils. Given under my hand, etc.

A Condition of a Recognizance for the Appearance of the reputed Father of a
Bastard-Child.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas the Overseers of the
Poor of the Parish of H. within mentioned did on the day of the date within
written complain to the Justice within named, that M. H. of the Parish
aforesaid, Single woman, was then with Child of a Child, which when born is
likely to be a Bastard, and chargeable to the said Parish; And whereas the said
M. H. upon her Examination (the day aforesaid) before the said Justice did
confess the same to be true, and charged the within bound I. N. to have
begotten her with Child of the Child aforesaid: If therefore the said I. N. do
answer unto such matters as shall be objected against him by the said M. H.
touching the said Bastard-Child, then this Recognizance to be void, or else,
etc.

The Condition of a Recognizance, of one charged to be the Father of a
Bastard-Child, before its Birth, to appear at Sessions.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas upon Examination of
A. B. in the said County of K. Single woman, lately taken before the within
named Justice of the Peace, it appears that she was then with Child, which
(when it shall be born) is likely to be chargeable to the Parish where it shall
happen to be so born; And whereas the said A. B. upon her said Examination did
charge the within bound C. D. with the begetting her with Child of the Child
aforesaid: If therefore the said C. D. do personally appear before His
Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County aforesaid, at the
next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at, etc. in
the County aforesaid, to do and receive as by the said Court shall be
enjoined, (and shall in the mean time be of good Behavior, as well toward His
said Majesty, as also toward all His liege people;) That then this
Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force.

A Condition to discharge Churchwardens and Parishioners of a Child born in
the Parish.
K. ss. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas M. H. has of
late been delivered of a Man-child within the Parish of, etc. within written,
to the which Child the within bound E. G. by his own voluntary Confession does
acknowledge himself to be the Father: If therefore the said E. G. his Heirs,
Executours or Assigns, or every or any of them, do from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, fully and clearly acquit, discharge and save harmless as*
well the within named I. B. and H. T* Churchwardens of the Parish Church of,
etc. aforesaid, and their Successors for the time being, and every of them, as
also all the Inhabitants and Parishoners of the said Parish, which now are or
hereafter shall be for the time being, and every of them, of and from all and
all manner of Costs, Charges and Expenses whatsoever, which shall or may in any
manner of wise at any time hereafter arise, happen, come, grow, impose or be
imposed upon them or any of them, for or by reason or means of the birth,
education, nourishing and bringing up of the said Child, and of and from all
other Actions, Suits, Charges, Troubles Impeachments and Demands whatsoever
touching and concerning the same; That then, etc

Good Behavior.
A Warrant and Mittimus for Good behavior.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at C. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. etc. These 2 or 3 Justices Lam. 119. First
Assignavimus in the Commission of the Peace.
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and
Bolsholders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. to come
before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said
County, to find sufficient Security, as well for his Appearance at the next 2
or 3 Witnesses. 34 E. 3. c. 1.
general Session of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. aforesaid,
then and there to do and receive as by the said Court shall be enjoined; as
also that he shall in the mean time be of Good behavior, as well toward His
said Majesty, as toward all His liege people: Which if he shall refuse to do,
that then (without expecting any farther or other Warrant) Dalt. 290. to 297.
you, some or one of you, do safely convey him to the Gaol aforesaid, and him
there deliver to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.)
Commanding also you, the aforesaid Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol,
and him there safely to keep until he shall find such sufficient Security as
aforesad. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

Causes for the Good behavior.
Threaten to hurt any in the body, of ill name and First Assignavimus in the
Commission of the Peace. 34 E. 3. c. 1. Dalt. 290. to p. 297. Either of these
are sufficient.
fame, and of very lewd life and conversations, or common Barterer, or common
Rioter, or common breaker of the Peace, or common Alehouse-haunter, or common
Drunkard, or common Swearer, or common Woodstealer, or do keep a common Stew or
Bawdyhouse, or common Hedge-breaker, or common Talebearer, or common Slanderer,
or common Libeller, or common Whoremonger, or common Whores, or common sowers
of Discord, a maker of strife amongst his Neighbors, or common Night-walker,
common Cheater, or common Companions of Thieves, or common Messenger for
Thieves, or common Pilferers, or commonly suspected to be Thieves, or do
commonly practice Poisoning, or common Eve-droppers, or are commonly suspected
of Incontinency, or common harberers and entertainers of Whores, Rogues, or
Thieves, or common Robbers of Orchards, or have sold Ale or Beer without
License, and contrary to the Command of the Justice of the Peace, or are Idle
persons, wandering up and down, fare well and spend much in Alehouses, and have
no known and visible Estate to maintain it, or that A. B. has begotten a
Bastard Child on the Body of C. and is like to be chargeable to the Parish, or
has a hand in sending away the reputed Father of a Bastard Child then left to
the Charge of the Parish, etc.

Another Warrant for Good behavior.
To the Constable and Borsholder of A. etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as we have been credibly informed that A. B. of your Town of
C. etc. is a man of Evil behavior, and one that daily moves discord between
his Neighbors, and a common disturber of His Majesty's Peace. These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you and every of you,
that immediately upon the sight hereof you bring before me (or some other of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) the Body of the said
A. B. to answer such matters as on His Majesty's behalf shall be objected
against him by C. D. and also that you require him to bring sureties for his
Good behavior until the next Sessions. And hereof fail not. Given under, etc.

A Mittimus to the Gaol for one that refuses to find Sureties for his Good
behavior.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid, or to his lawful Deputy thereof.
Kent ss. I Send herewithall the Body of A. B. Lamb. 120. 1 Justice.
of, etc. for that he refuses to find sufficient Sureties to be of Good
behavior toward His Majesty and all His liege* people, and to appear at the
next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County at M.
aforesaid, straightly charging and commanding you in the name of our said
sovereign Lord the King to receive him the said A. B. into safe custody, and
him safely to keep in the said Gaol until he shall find sufficient Sureties as
aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, etc.

A Supersedeas for the Good behavior.
R. R. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said County of
Kent, To the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Tythen-men and all other His said
Majesty's Officers and Ministers within the said County, and to every of them
Greeting.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. in the Crompt. 237.
County of K. aforesaid, Yeoman, has personally come before me, and has found
sufficient Sureties, That is to say, C. D. of F. in the said County, Yeoman,
and E. F. of G. in the County aforesaid, Gent. either of the which has
undertaken for the aforesaid A. B. under the pain of 10 l. and the said A. B.
has undertaken for himself under the pain of 20 l. that he shall well,
uprightly and honestly behave himself as well toward His said Majesty as
toward all his liege people, and especially toward C. D. of K. in the said
County, Yeoman, And that he will personally appear at the next Quarter Sessions
to be holden in the said County of K. These are therefore to command you (in
His Majesty's name) that you utterly surcease to molest, arrest, trouble, or
imprison the said A. B. for the said occasion, And that if you have for the
said occasion, (and for no other) taken and imprisoned him, That then you do
cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without farther delay. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal, etc.

A Recognizance thereupon.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod primo die 5 E. 6. c. 25. Two Justices, one of the
Quorum. Observe to bind the Principal in 20. li. and each of the Sureties in 10
li.
Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. vicesimo nono, apud C. in
Com' praedict' A. B. de, etc. D. E. de, etc. and F. G. de, etc. personaliter
venerunt coram nobis H. J. and K. L. Justice* dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in
Com' praedicto conservand' assignat', and recognoverunt se debere dicto Domino
Regi modo and forma sequen', viz. praedict' A. B. viginti libras legalis
monetae Angliae, and uterque praedictorum D. E. and F. G. december libras
consimilis monetae, separalit' levand' de separalibus bonis and catallis,
terris and tenementis suis, ad opus and usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' and
successorum suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione Conditionis sequen'.

A Condition of a Recognizance for the same.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in
the within named County of K. at the If at the Assizes, then say, at the next
Assizes and general Jail-deliver to be holden for the said County, to do and
receive, etc.
next general Assizes of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T. in
the County aforesaid, to do and receive what by the Court there shall be then
and there enjoined; and shall in the mean time be of Good behavior toward our
Sovereign Lord the King and all His liege people; That then this Recognizance
shall be void, or else it shall stand in full sorce.

Another Condition.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace of K. and M. in the
County aforesaid, then and there to do and receive as by the said Court shall
be enjoined; and do in the mean time keep His Majesty's Peace toward His
Majesty and all His liege people, and especially to T. A. of C. within written;
That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else to stand in full force.

Another Condition.
The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in
the within named County of K. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be
holden for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, to do and receive
what by the Court there shall be then and there enjoined; and shall in the mean
time be of Good behavior toward our Sovereign Lord the King and all His liege
people; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in
full force.

Bridges.
A Warrant to a Hundred for Assessing a proportionable Rate of a Tax (appointed
by the Body of the County) toward repair of the County Bridges.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to C. D. E. F. etc.
Inhabitants of the said Hundred in the County aforesaid and to every of them.
Kent. ss. WHereas several common Bridges of the said County were much out of
repair, The charges of Reparations whereof was estimated to amount to 750 li.
which were ordered to be repaired by the Body of the County aforesaid, The
proportionable part whereof to be born by the Hundred aforesaid do amount unto
20 li. These are therefore (by virtue of His Majesty's Commission of Oyer and
Terminer) to us and others (on that behalf) directed (under the great Seal of
England) To command you (the said Constable and Borsholders) sorthwith equally
to assess and tax the said Hundred by a pound rate upon all Lands, Tenements,
Goods and Chattels (both real and personal) within the Limits, Circuits and
Bounds of the Hundred aforesaid (as has usually been done within the said
Hundred (for public Taxes,) And that you do collect and gather the same so
that you may have the same ready in the hands of you the aforesaid Constables
within one and twenty days next after your receipt of this Precept (to be paid
and disposed of) for and toward the purpose aforesaid as we some or one of us
shall (for that purpose) direct; And in case of refusal or neglect of any
person or persons to pay his, her or their proportion or proportions of the
said money (so by you assessed and taxed) within one week next after demand
thereof, that then you some or one of you do cause the said person or persons
(so refusing or neglecting) to come before us some or one of us to be bound
over (according to an Order by the said Commissioners in that behalf made) to
appear at the next general Assizes or Quarter Sessions for this Western
Division of the said County which shall next happen after such refusal or
neglect to answer the same: and you are hereby further required to make known
unto us some or one of us (with all convenient speed next after the end of the
aforesaid one and twenty days) what you have done in execution of this Precept.
Given under our hands and seals the second day of May, 1681.

A Warrant to make a Tax for County Bridges repaired.
To the Constable of the Hundred of A. and to B. C. etc. Inhabitants of the
said Hundred, and to every of them.
Kent. ss. WHereas the usual Bridges In allusion to the Statute of 22 Hen. 8.
cap. 5. I conceive it fit to have 4. Justices, whereof 1 of the Quor.
of, etc. within the said County were lately in great decay and unrepaired, and
by an Order made at C. etc. the said Decays and Irreparations were ordered to
be mended at the Charges of the said County, and have lately been amended
accordingly, the proportionable part of which said Charge thought fit to be
imposed upon this Division does amount unto, etc. of lawful money of England,
and the proportionable part of the same thought fit to be imposed upon the said
Hundred does amount unto, etc. of like money: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and Inhabitants, that you,
or any three of you at the least, (whereof you the said Constable to be one) do
forthwith (after public notice before given, as is usual in other Taxations)
make a Taxation of all and every the Inhabitants of the said Hundred as in such
cases.

A Warrant to collect a Tax for repairing County Bridges.
To A. B. and C. D. Inhabitants of the Hundred of E. in the said County, and to
every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's In allusion to the Statute of 22 H. 8.
cap. 5. I conceive it fit to have 4 Justices whereof one of the Quorum.
name) to command you, That you do forthwith collect and gather the several
sums of money (specified in the Taxation herewithall delivered unto you) of
the several persons therein mentioned to be taxed upon them for the purpose in
the said Taxation specified, and that you do pay the same unto R. T. (whom we
have appointed general Receiver of the moneys raised for the purpose aforesaid
within this Division of the several Hundreds) on or before the second day of
May, (deducting out of the same only 5 s.) as by us allowed unto you for and
toward your pains in collecting and paying in of the same, and in case of
refusal or neglect of payment of any of the said parties so taxed of the moneys
taxed upon them as aforesaid (after demand made thereof by you or either of
you) that then you do certify unto us, or some or one of us, the names of the
said persons so refusing or neglecting, When moneys received as much as you can
get.
with all convenient speed, to the end that such farther proceeding may be had
thereupon as to Justice does appertain. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

A Warrant for not paying the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint has been made unto us by R. T. etc. (by us
appointed collectors and gatherers of the moneys imposed upon the said Hundred
for and toward the reparations of the several Bridges of D. in the said
County) that the several persons (whose names are here under written) have
refused to pay unto them the several sums of money adjoined to their several
names (being taxed upon them for the purpose aforesaid) although the same have
been duly demanded of them: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said several persons to
come before us, or one of us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said
County to answer the premises, and farther to do and receive as to Justice
does appertain, unless they shall forthwith pay the said moneys unto you, some
or one of you, which if they shall so do, that then you (so receiving the
same) do forthwith pay the said moneys so received unto the said R. T. etc. or
one of them, to the end that the same may be by As aforesaid.
them paid over to the general Receiver of the moneys raised for the purpose
aforesaid by us formerly appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals at, etc.

A. B. C. D. E. F. etc.

Carriages for the King.
A Warrant to provide Carriages.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas we have (by Warrant 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Justices.
from the Green-cloath) received notice to provide Carts and Carriages from the
places adjacent for the present service of His Majesty, (according to the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do cause four sufficient Carriages within the said Hundred (each
Carriage to consist of four able Horses, or six Oxen, or four Oxen and two
Horses) to be and attend for the service aforesaid at B. in the said County
upon the first of April next ensuing at eight of the clock in the forenoon of
the same day. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals
the, etc.

Another Warrant for providing of Carriages for the King's use.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss WHereas we have received 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Justices.
notice in writing by Warrant under the hands and seals of Lord High Admiral of
England, or 2 more of the principal Officers or Commissioners of His Majesty's
Navy, or Master of His Majesty's Ordnance, or Lieutenants of His Majesty's
Ordnance
for providing of Carriages for the service of His Majesty Service of the Navy
or Ordnance.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do cause to be sent to A. ten Carriages on the
second day of May next furnished with Horses or Oxen sufficient for the said
service. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the,
etc.

A Warrant to levy the Penalty for not appearing with Carriages for the King
upon notice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. FOr as much as it has been duly 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Justices, by
oath of the Officer or two credible Witnesses.
proved before us, That B. C. of C. etc. having had reasonable notice to bring
one Carriage to T. upon the first day of May last for the service of his
Majesty's Ordnance, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf
lately made) has Refuse or wilfully neglect.
wilfully neglected so to do, by which he has forfeited forty shillings (to
the King's Majesty's use:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do demand of the
said B. C. (to His Majesty's use) the aforesaid forty shillings; and in
default of payment upon demand, that then you, some or one of you, do forthwith
levy the aforesaid forty shillings (to the use aforesaid) by Distress and Sale
of the Goods and Chattels of the said B. C. rendering to him the overplus upon
such Sale, (if there shall be any, the charge of Distraining being first
deducted.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the,
etc.

A Mittimus for one that does impress or take away any Cart or other thing from
the Owner, under pretense of power from the Greencloath for Carriage of His
Majesty's Provisions, without lawful Authority.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol at C. in the County aforesaid. 12 Car. 2.
cap. 24. Settled the 13. of the same King cap. 8. Provision for His Majesty, or
the Queen, or any of the Children of the King or Queen. Or impress or take any
Cart, Carriage, or other thing, without the consent of the Owner. 2 Justices.

K. ss. FOr as much as it has been made appear unto me, upon (the complaint of
A. B. of, etc. in the County aforesaid) That C. D. of E. has impressed a Cart
for Carriage of His Majesty's Provisions without consent of the Owner, on
pretense or color of a Warrant from the Green-cloath, (contrary to the intent
of the Statute in that case made and provided:) These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) at the request of the said A. B. to will and require you the
said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you,
do take the said C. D. and him deliver to the said Keeper of the Gaol
aforesaid, (together with this Precept.) Requiring and commanding also you, the
said Keeper, to receive the said C. D. into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there
safely to keep until the next Sessions. And thereof neither you nor any of you
are to fail at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the second day of May
in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, etc.

Certificates.
A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inhabitants of the Parish of a man's
Honesty.
K. ss. WE I. ^. Minister of the Word of God in the Parish of S. in the said
County of Kent, I. B. of S. aforesaid Constable of the Hundred of S. wherein
the said Parish stands, I. B. and G. C. Churchwardens of the said Parish, W.
V. T. L. T. W. A. W. T. I. and E. H. etc. of the said Parish, and most of us
Freeholders within the same, Do hereby certify to all to whom it shall concern,
That A. B. one of the Inhabitants of the said Parish of S. is, and by the space
of five years last past, has been a Householder within the said Parish, and by
all that time has behaved himself and lived in good sort, and reputed a man of
honest Conversation, and has paid according to his degree all manner of Scots
and Assesments as other the Inhabitants of the said Parish have done. In
witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands the ninth day of May, 1681.

A Certificate for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper.
To the right Worshipful His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the Lower
Division of L. in the County of Kent.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, Inhabitants of the Parish of H. within
the Division and County aforesaid, do humbly certify, That the now
Dwelling House of A. B. Victualler is conveniently situated there for a
Victualling-house, and that he is of good name and fame, and the said House is
well accommodated for entertainment of Travelers, and that he keeps good
Rule therein; And therefore we humbly desire your Worships that his License for
keeping the said Victuallinghouse there may be continued.

A Certificate for the time of the Birth of a Child.
THese are to certify your Worships, That A. B. Son of E. B. Widow, was born in
the month of August, in the year of our Lord God 1679. in the Parish of R. in
the County of B. about the latter end of the month. In witness whereof we, the
Neighbors and Godmother of the said Child, who were present at the birth of
the said Child, are ready to testify the same when your Worships shall please
to require it, and have hereunto set our hands this 30th day of November, Anno
Dom. 1679.

A. B. C. D. etc.

A Certificate for one that has not been touched of the Evil.
WE the Rector and Ancient Inhabitants of the Parish of A. in the County of B.
whose names are hereunto subscribed, do upon good Information certify, that C.
D. the Son or Daughter.
of E. F. of the Parish aforesaid has not as yet been touched for the
Distemper commonly called the Evil. Given under our hands, and seals this 10th
day of March, Annoque Dom. 1680.

Chimney-money.
A Mittimus for disturbing a Collectour.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's common Gaol for the said County at M. in
the County aforesaid. 16 Car. 2. cap. 3 1 Justice dwelling near the place.
Proof upon Oath.

K. ss. FOr as much as it has been duly proved before me, That A. B. an
Officer duly appointed to receive, collect and answer the Duty arising by
Fire-hearths and Stoves in this County, (according to an Act of Parliament,
entitled An Act for collecting the Duty arising by Hearth-money by Officers to
be appointed by his Majesty) has been violently opposed or injured.
(in the due Execution of the said Act) by C. D. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him
safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said
Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep by the
space of for any time (not exceeding a month.)
next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Church.
For not coming to Church.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent. ss. FOr as much as I have received 1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 2. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 4. 1 Justice of that Division. 1 Witness within a month after default made.
Information, That B. C. of D. in the County aforesaid, etc. did not upon any
of the, etc. Sundays last past resort or repair to any Church, or Chapel, or
other usual place appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service,
(according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made:) These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, that you, some or one of you,
do cause the said B. C. to come before me, to answer the premises. Hereof fail
not at your perils. G^ven under my hand and seal the, etc.

To levy the Forfeiture for not coming to Church.
To the Churchwardens of the Parsh of A. in the said County, and to every of
them.
Kent. ss. FOr as much as B. C. of D. aforesaid, 1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 4. 14
Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Justice of that Division, etc.
etc. did not upon Sunday the second day of May, nor upon Sunday then next
following, nor upon Sunday then next following, resort or repair to any Church,
Chapel, or other usual place appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine
Service, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made) and being
called before me, did not make sufficient excuse of his said defaults to my
satisfaction: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require
you, that you, or one of you, do levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the
said B. C. three shillings for his defaults aforesaid, to be 1 s. per Sunday.
employed to and for the use of the Poor of the said Parish, (rendering to him
the overplus of the money raised of the Goods aforesaid so to be sold;) and in
default of such Distress, that you do certify me thereof with all convenient
speed, to the end I may further proceed therein as to Justice does appertain.
Hereof, fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church (for want of Distress.)
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol at B. in the County
aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas (by Warrant under 1 Eliz. c. 2. 3 Iac. c. 4. 14 Car. 2. cap.
4. 1 Justice of that Division.
my hand and seal) the Churchwardens of the Parish of A. in the said County
were lately by me commanded to levy three shillings by Distress and Sale of the
Goods of B. C. of the Parish of A. in the said County, (to be employed to and
for the use of the Poor of that Parish) for that he did not upon Sunday the
second day of May, nor upon Sunday then next following, nor upon Sunday then
next following, resort or repair to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place
appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service, (according to the
form of the Statute in that behalf made;) and the Churchwardens aforesaid have
returned to me, that the said B. C. has no Goods or Chattels sufficient for
the levying of the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to will and require you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
aforesaid B. C. and him safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and him
there deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.)
Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and
him there safely keep, until payment shall be made of the moneys aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

To Distrain for a Church-Tax.
To the Churchwardens of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to either of
them.
Kent ss. FOr as much as complaint has been by you made unto us, That the
several persons hereunder named have refused or neglected to pay unto you the
sums of money adjoining to their several names, being assessed upon them for
and toward the reparation and maintenance of the Parish Church of H. aforesaid
and other Church-duties, and for doing and performing such things as by an
Ordinance of Parliament (made the 9th day of Febr. in the year of our Lord one
thousand six hundred forty seven) are appointed to be done at the charge of the
said Parish: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that
you, some or one of you, do levy the said several and respective sums of money
by Distress and Sale of the several and respective Goods of the said several
and respective Offenders, and likewise the sum of 2 s. more of every of them,
for and toward the charge and expense in levying of the same, rendering to the
said several and respective parties the overplus (if any be;) And in default of
such Distress, that then you, or one of you, do certify the same unto us, to
the end that there may be such farther and other proceedings touching the
premises as to Justice does appertain. Given under our hands and seals at H.
aforesaid the 17th day of May, Anno Domini 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
Secundi 31.

Against a Minister for not reading Prayers, etc. once in a month.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the
said County.
Kent* ss. FOr as much as it has been duly 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 4. 2 Justices.
Confession, or 2 Witnesses.
proved before us, That A. B, the proper Incumbent of the Parsonage, Vicarage,
or Benefice with Cure. The Ordinary may allow an Impediment.
in the County aforesaid, does reside on his Living and keep a Curate, and has
not himself in person within one month now last past openly and publicly read
the Common Prayers in and by the Book prescribed (by the Statute made in the
thirteenth year of His now Majesty's Reign, entitled An Act for the
Uniformity of Public Prayers and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites
and Ceremonies, and for establishing the Form of making, ordaining and
consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the Church of England) in the
Parish Church of C. to the said Parishioners in such order, manner and form as
in and by the said Book is appointed, whereby he has (by virtue of the Statute
aforesaid) forfeited five pounds to the use of the Poor of the Parish
aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require
you, and every of you, that you, or some of you, do demand of the said A. B.
the aforesaid five pounds to the use of the Poor aforesaid; and in default of
payment thereof within ten days after such demand, that you, or some of you, do
levy the same by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.
rendering to him the surplusage. Hereof ^ail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, etc.

The like Warrant (mutatis mutandis) if he do not (if there be occasion)
administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, once in every
month.

A Mittimus for Preaching whilst Disabled.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOr as much as we have received a 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 4. 2 Justices.
Certificate from the Ordinary within whose Jurisdiction the Parish of T. in
the said County is situate, That A. B. being (by virtue of the Statute in that
behalf made) disabled Sermon or Lecture.
to preach any Sermon, did, during the time that he did continue and remain so
disabled, preach a Sermon in the Parish Church of T. aforesaid, (against the
form of the Statute: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and
require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol
aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper thereof, (together with
this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the
Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely to keep by the space of three months,
(without Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands, etc.

Coals.
Upon Complaint touching Coals.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 2. 2 Justices.
name) to require you to cause A. B. of, etc. to come before us at the house
of, etc. to answer such Complaint against him for Offenses against an Act of
Parliament lately made (entitled, An Act for the regulating the measures and
prices of Coals) as has lately been made unto us, and farther to do and
receive as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals the, etc.

For delivering a Moiety of such Coals as are sold contrary to the Statute to
the Informer.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. FOr as much as A. B. of, etc. is 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 2. 2 Justices.
Sea-coals brought into the Thames must be sold by the Chauldro^ containing 36
bushels heaped up, according to the Bushel sealed at Guild Hall, London: And
Scotchcoals and other Coals (sold by weight) after the proportion of 112 li. to
the hundred (of Avoirdupois weight) without fallacy or deceit.
duly convicted before us, (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf
made, entitled, An Act for regulating the measures and prices of Coals) That
he sold or exposed to Sale. Half to the person prosecuting or complaining.
Parish where the Offense committed, or any other adjoining Parish or Parishes.
did lately expose to sale forty Chauldron of Coals of the value of, etc.
(contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to will and require you to seize the Coals aforesaid, and the
double value thereof; and that you do deliver the one half of the Coals and
value aforesaid unto C. D. (being the person prosecuting in this behalf) to his
use, and likewise that you do employ and dispose the other half of the same to
and for the use of the Poor, or Repairing of the Highways of the Parish of M.
where the said Offense was committed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals the, etc.

Touching Prices of Coals.
To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss. FOr as much as (according to an 16 and 17 Car. 2. c. 2. 3 Justices of
the Quorum.
Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act for regulating the measures
and prices of Coals) we did appoint and judge reasonable, that Coals coming
into the River of Thames within this County, and sold by retail, should be sold
at the rate and price of, etc. by the Chauldron; And forasmuch as A. B. an
Ingrosser or Retailer.
of such Coals does refuse to sell as a^oresaid: We do therefore (according to
the said Act) appoint and empower C. D. and E. F. jointly or severally, to
enter into the said Wharf or place where the Coals are stored up.
where the said Coals are stored up, (and in case of refusal to take a
Constable to force entrance; which Constable is hereby required to act
accordingly.) And you the said C. D. and E. F. jointly and severally, are
hereby farther appointed and empowered the said Coals to sell, or cause to be
sold, at the rate aforesaid, (rendering to the said A. B. the money for which
the said Coals shall be sold, necessary charges being deducted.) For all which
this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

Constables Charges.
A Warrant for making of Constables.
THese are (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you to make your 2
Justices.
repair unto us, or to some other Justice of Peace of this County, to take the
Oath of a Constable to serve His Majesty within the Town of A. ( If not chosen
at the Leet this Clause is to be omitted.
according to the Choice made of you by the Jury at the last Leet holden in
your Town) And hereof fail not. Dated, etc.

Or thus,
To A. B. C. D. and E. F. etc. Inhabitants of C. etc.
WHere^s A. B. of your Town of C. the now Constable thereof, is by reason of
his Age and Impotency very unable and insufficient to execute the said Place:
These are (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, whose names are
hereabove written, to come and appear before me at my house at H. to morrow
being Thursday by eight a Clock in the morning, that I may make Choice of one
of you to be sworn to undertake the said Office. And hereof fail not, etc.

A Warrant for a Tax for the Constable's Charges in the Execution of his Office.
Kent ss. FOr as much as we are informed I conceive that it is fit to have 2
Justices, and one of them of the Quorum. Dalt. 165.
by A. B. Constable of the Hundred of D. in the County aforesaid, That he has
necessarily disbursed (for and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the said
Hundred, in the Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of His
Majesty) several sums of money, and (for his Reimbursement of the same) has
craved from us such assistance as has been in such cases accustomed: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require and authorize you the Inhabitants
of the Hundred aforesaid, whose names are hereunder written, or the greater
number of you, to take and examine the Account of the said Constable touching
the premises; and for his Reimbursement of such money (as you or the greater
number of you shall find upon the said Account to have been by him so
necessarily disbursed as aforesaid,) that you or the greater number of you do
forthwith make a Tax or Assessment of and upon all and every the Inhabitants of
the said Hundred, in such manner as has formerly in such cases been accustomed
within the same; and to authorize you, the said Constable, to demand, collect,
and gather the said money so taxed and assessed; and in case of refusal of
payment thereof unto you, that then you do return unto us, (or some other of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) the names of the
persons so refusing, to the end that they may be farther proceeded against for
the same as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not, etc. Given under our
hands and seals at, etc. the, etc.

To A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. and N. O.
To appear and show cause for their not paying the said Charges.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. These are (in His Majesty's name) I think 2 Justices best, Quorum 1.
to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the several persons
whose names are hereunder written to come before some or one of us at the house
of T. N. Inn-holder at the George Inn, etc. in the said County the fifth day of
June next ensuing, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to
show cause why they did not pay unto A. B. late Constable of the said Hundred,
the several sums of money hereunder mentioned, added to their several names,
and severally assessed upon them, for and toward his Reimbursement of moneys
by him necessarily laid out, (for and upon the behalf of the Inhabitants of the
said Hundred in the Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of
His Majesty) and farther to do and receive as to Justice does appertain.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. the first
day of June 1679, etc.

A. B. xij. d. C. D. vi. d.

For refusing to appear to show Cause for not paying the said Charges.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as the several persons Best 2 Justices, Quorum unus.
here-under named were (by virtue of a Warrant to you directed under the hands
and seals of us A. B. etc. His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid) warned to come before us, or some of us, this present day, etc. in
the said County, to show cause why they did not pay unto A. B. late Constable
of the said Hundred, the several sums of money hereunder mentioned, (added to
their several names, and severally assessed upon them, toward his Reimbursment
for his necessary Disbursements for and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the
said Hundred, in the Execution of his said Office in and about the Service of
His Majesty) yet the aforesaid persons have refused so to come, or to pay the
moneys aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you,
that you, some or one of you, do bring the aforesaid persons before us, or one
of us, and other His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, at
the house of, etc. in, etc. upon Monday the fifth day of May, at nine of the
clock in the forenoon of the same, to show cause why they do not pay they said
moneys, and farther to do and receive as to Justice does appertain, (unless
they shall pay the moneys aforesaid.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals at, etc.

To levy the Charges upon their refusing to pay the same.
To the Constable of the Hundred of A. in the said County.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Complaint) 14 Car. 2. 2 Justices.
it appears unto us, That the several persons hereunder named have refused to
pay unto you the several sums hereunder specified, and severally added to
their several names, assessed on them (according to the form of the Statute
lately made) toward your Reimbursement of such moneys as you have disbursed in
and about the Execution of your said Office, (according to the Statute
aforesaid:) These are therefore to require and authorize you, to levey the said
several and respective sums so assessed upon the said respective persons so
refusing to pay the same, (rendering the overplus to the owners, if any shall
be.) Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A. B. 11 s. C. D. 13 s. etc.


A Condition of a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying the same at
next Sessions.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is See Title Recognizances.
such, That whereas the within bound C. D. has refused to pay to A. B. late
Constable of the Hundred of D. in the within named County of K. assessed upon
him the said C. D. (for and toward the Reimbursement of the said late
Constable of moneys by him necessarily laid out for and on the behalf of the
Inhabitants of the said Hundred, in Execution of his said Office in and about
the Service of His Majesty:) If therefore the said C. D. do personally appear
before his Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the said County at
the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at T.
in the County aforesaid, to do and receive what by the said Court shall be
enjoined touching the premises; That then this Recognizance shall be void, or
else it shall stand in full force.

A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Constable for neglect of his Duty, in
giving an account of Rogues, Vagabonds, etc.
To the chief Constables of A. and to the under Constables of H. and to their
Deputies greeting.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as at our Assembly at 7 Iac. c. 4.
A. the second day of June last, for the adjusting the accounts of the under
Constable, according to a Statute made in the reign of King James touching
Rogues and Wanderers, A. B. of H. aforesaid, was fined at 3 s. 4 d. for being
negligent in his Office, and refusing to make such account as by the said
Statute is appointed: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and
require you, that some or one of you, do forthwith upon the receipt hereof
demand of the said T. C. the said Fine, and if he shall refuse or neglect to
pay the same unto you within three days, that then you do immediately levy the
said 3 s. 4. d. by Distress and Sale of his Goods and Chattels, rendering unto
him the overplus thereof, if any such shall remain. And lastly, that one of you
the chief Constables do pay the same unto the now Treasurer of the Marshalsey,
at or before the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden at B. for
these parts, and this shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf. Given
under our hands, etc.

A Warrant to sell the Goods of an Offender that refuses to bear his own
Charges to the Gaol.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 3 Iac. 10. 1 Justice. He that committed
him. For any offense or misdemeanour. Must bear the charges of himself and of
those appointed to guard him thither; or that shall so guard him thither. If
the Offender be unable to bear his Charges the Parishoners must do it.
been made unto me by the Parishioners of C. in the said County, That whereas
A. B. being apprehended in the said Parish upon suspicion of Felony, and by my
Warrant for that cause sent from thence to His Majesty's Gaol for the said
County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, the charges of the said
Parishioners in conveying and guarding him to the said Gaol did amount to ten
shillings, and the said A. B. has refused to bear the same; And forasmuch as I
am credibly informed that the said A. B. has Goods and Chattels within the
Parish of D. in the County aforesaid sufficient to defray the said Charges:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, and every of you,
to seize so much of the said Goods and Chattels as shall be sufficient to
defray the Charges aforesaid, and to cause Apprisement to be made thereof by
four of the honest Inhabitants of the said Parish of D. where the Goods are;
And that you do after the said Apprisement sell the said Goods, and that out of
the moneys arising of the said Sale you do pay over unto the Parishioners of A.
aforesaid the aforesaid ten shillings, delivering unto the said A. B. the
overplus arising of the said Sale. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant to make a Tax for conveying a Felon to the Gaol.
To the Churchwardens and other substantial Inhabitants of the Parish of A.
within the Hundred of B. in the said County Greeting.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Constable of the Hundred aforesaid has made
Complaint unto us that you refuse to make a Tax or Scot in the said Parish, for
conveying of C. D. of, etc. lately attached for Felony in the said Parish to
the Gaol, not having of his own to bear his Charges thither: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and command you forthwith to make a
Tax or Scot for the discharge of such moneys as the said Complainant has been
at in the premises, or to come before us or some of us, at the house of, etc.
(sale die.) And then and there to show cause why you do not so do. Hereof fail
not etc.

Conventicles.
A Condition of a Recognizance in case See Title Recognizances.
of an Appeal made touching Conventicles.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas R. G. of R. in the
within named County of Kent, Gentleman, was lately convicted by the within
named Justices of taking upon him to teach in an Assembly lately held in the
Parish Church of Sandherst within written, (under pretense of exercise of
Religion in other manner then according to the Liturgy and practice of the
Church of England, against the form of the Statute lately made to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles) and had therefore (according to the Statute
aforesaid) forfeited the sum of twenty pounds; And for that (in the judgments
of the said Justices) they did think the said R. G. unable to pay the said
sum of twenty pounds, they did therefore (by their discretions) adjudge five
pounds thereof to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of
the within bound W. W. who was also (according to the said Statute) convicted
of being present at the said Assembly, (contrary to the Statute aforesaid:) And
whereas the said W. W. was also by the said Justices convicted, for that he at
the time of the said Assembly was one of the Churchwardens of the said Parish,
and knowing the said Assembly to be holden within the same, did not give
information thereof to any Justice of the Peace, nor endeavor the Conviction
of the parties which were at the said Assembly, nor of any of them, (according
to the duty of his said Office) but wittingly and willingly did omit the
performance of his Office aforesaid in the execution of the said Statute,
(against the form of the same) by which he forfeited the sum of five pounds:
And the said two several sums of five pounds have (by Warrant of the said
Justices) been levied of the Goods and Chattels of the said W. W. and he has
the day and year within written appealed from the Justices aforesaid to the
judgment of the Justices of the Peace of the said County in their next
Quarter Sessions: If therefore the said W. W. do prosecute the said Appeal
(with effect,) that then this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall
stand in full force.

And forasmuch also as the aforesaid Wife of Where Offender is a Feme-Covert,
levy upon her Husband.
the said S. B. is a Feme-Covert cohabiting with the said S. B. (her Husband;)
These are therefore, etc. (prout, etc.) forthwith to levy the aforesaid five
shillings (so imposed upon her as aforesaid) by Distress, etc. (prout, etc.)

And forasmuch as a man unknown did then Where Teacher is a man unknown.
and there take upon him to preach or teach, ( prout the Record) you may levy
twenty pound upon any the Offenders as in your judgment shall seem fit.

A Record of a Conventicle.
This Record must be written in Parchment, and would be better in Latin,
according to the Precedent ensuing.
K. st. MEmorandum, That upon the tenth 22 Car. 2. Regis, c. 1. 2 Justices. By
Consession of the party, or Oath of witness, or notorious evidence of the fact.
Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting.
day of June in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, (by the grace of God) of England; Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. it was (according to the form of an Act of
Parliament in that behalf lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles) duly proved to us, That A. B. being of the age
of sixteen years and upwards, and a Subject of this Realm, was (upon the first
day of June now last past, in the Parish of, etc.) present at T. in the said
County, under under color or pretense of exercise, etc.
of exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the other then is
allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England. Where five persons
are present more than those of the same household.
of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid.) Of all which we
have the day and year first above written made this Record under our hands and
seals.

A Record concerning Conventicles where several persons are convicted.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod J. S. de Sundrich in Com' praedict' Yeoman, Ed. W.
de W. in Com' praed' Generosus, Maria uxor G. J. de parochia de E. in Com'
praed' Husbandman, Eliz. Williard de Edenbridge praed' in Com' praed' vidua, J.
B. de, etc. (cum multis aliis, in toto se attingen' ad numerum duodecim
personarum,) and quilibet eorum, die Solis vicesimo sexto die Junii, Anno Regni
Domini Regis nunc vicesimo secundo, ultra ^tatem sexdecim annor' and subditi
dicti Dom' Regis nun^ existen', praed' 26. die Junii, Anno vicesimo secundo
supradicto, insimul assemblaver' and praesentes fuer', and quilibet eor'
praesens fuit, in domo mansionali ipsius Annae Pelham, viduae, in praed'
parochia de Edenbridge in Com' praed' ad Conventiculum, sub color
exercitationis (Anglice exercise) Religionis in alio modo quam secund'
Liturgiam and practicationem (Anglice practice) Ecclesiae Angliae (ad tunc and
ibidem tent') contra formam Statuti praevenire and supprimere seditiosa
Conventicula nuper edit' and provis.

Memorandum etiam, Quod (tempore and loco supradictis) praed' Johannes Styles
assumpsit super se docere in Conventiculo praed', and in eodem (adtun^ and
ibidem) docuit, contra formam Statuti praed'; Quodque praed' Anna Pelham vidua
tempore supradicto scienter (Anglice wittingly) and voluntary permisit
Conventiculum praedictum fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua praed', (etiam
contra formam ejusdem Statuti.)

Record' quarum quidem separalium offensarum Quaere, if there must not be two
Justices.
Ego Willielmus Leche miles, (unus Iustic' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in
Com' suo pr^d' conservand' assign') cui (secundum formam and effectum Statuti
praed') separales offens. praed' sic (ut praefertur) fore commiss. sufficient'
apparuit, per praesentes sub manu and sigillo meo undecimo die Julii, Anno
vicesimo secundo supradicto, apud Westerham praed' in Com' praed' feci.
Praedictique Johannes Styles, Edwardus Whitaker, praedict' Maria, uxor praed'
Georgii Johnson, Eliz. Williard, Josephus Brown junior, Josephus Brown
senior, Johannes Fletcher, Robertus Pelham, Anna Pelham vidua A. B. and
Dorothea Pelham Spinster, de separalibus offensis suis (in Record' praedict'
superius mentionat') per Recordum illud (virtute Statut' praed') plene and
perfect convicti sunt, and quilibet eorum inde separalit' plene and perfect
convict' est. Et ego praefat' Iusticiar' superinde (virtute Statut' praed')
die, Anno and loco ultim' mentionat' Finem quinque solidor' super quemlibet
offensor' (Anglice Offenders) praed' sic (ut prefertur) ad Conventiculum praed'
praesent' existen' (pro separali offensa sua praed') imposui. Praedictaque Anna
Pelham vidua pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipsa (ut praefertur) permisit
Conventiculum praed' fore tenend' in domo mansionali sua praedicta, forisfecit
summam viginti librar' (virtute Statuti praed'.) Praedictusque Johannes Styles
pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) assumpsit super se docere
in Conventiculo praedicto, and in eodem (ut praedictum est) docuit, forisfecit
summam viginti librarum (virtute Statuti praed'.)

A Record of the Conviction of certain persons taken at a Conventicle.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod S. B. de par. de C. etc. prout, etc. and quidam
alius homo ignotus, (in toto se attingen. ad numerum octo personarum) and
quilibet eorum, 3. die, etc. Anno, etc. ultra aetatem, etc. and subdit', etc.
quorumque ad numerum quinque personarum non adtunc fuerunt de familia Roberti
Kite de praedicta par' etc. in Com' praed' Mercer, (in praed' par' de Stapl.)
eodem 3. die, etc. Anno, etc. insimul assemblaverunt and presents fuerunt, and
quilibet eorum praesens fuit, in domo mansionali ipsius Roberti Kite in praed'
par' de Stapl. in Com' praed' (ad Assembl. sub color, etc. prout, etc. and
adtunc and adhuc in pleno robore existen'.)

Memorandum etiam, Quod praed. homo ignotus ad tunc and ibidem assumpsit super
se docere in Ass. praed. and (ad tunc and ibidem) docuit, (etiam contra formam
ejusdem Statut.)

Memorandum etiam, Quod praed. Robert. Kite tempore supradicto scienter (Angl.
wittingly) and voluntary permisit Ass. praed. fore tenend. in domo mansionali
sua praed. (etiam contra formam Statuti praed.)

Record. quarum quidem separalium offensarum Nos J. H. Miles, W. C. S. B. and
R. K. Arm. (Justice. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com. sua praed. cons.
ass.) quibus (secundum formam and effectum Sta^uti praed.) separales offens.
praed. sic (ut praefertur) fore commiss. sufficient. apparuit, per praesent.
sub manibus and sigillis nostris 17. die Apr. Anno 27. supradicto apud C.
praed. in Com. praed. fecimus. Praedictique Sam. Bates and praed. uxor ejus,
Henr. Start, etc. Robert. Kite, and praed. homo ignot', de separalibus offens.
suis in Recordo praed. superius spec. per Record. illud (virtute Stat. praed.)
plene and perfect convict. sunt, and quilibet eorum inde separalit. plene and
perfect convict. est. Et nos praefat. Iustificiarii superinde (virtute Stat
praed.) die, anno and loco ultim. mentionat. super quemlibet offensorum
(Anglice Offenders) praed. (sic ut praefertur ad Assembl. praed. praesent.
existen.) pro separali offensa sua praed. Finem quinque solidorum imposuimus.
Praedictusque homo ignot. pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur)
assumpsit super se docere in Assembl. praed. and (adtunc and ibidem) docuit,
forisfecit summam viginti librarum, (virtute Stat. praed'.) Praed. Robert. Kite
pro offensa sua praed', eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) permisit. Ass. praed. fore
tenend. in domo mansionali sua praed', forisfecit summam viginti librarum,
(virtute Stat. illius.) Et quia (in judiciis nostris) putamus praed. H. Start
fore pauperem and inhabilem solvere praed. finem quinque solid. super ipsum pro
offensa sua praed. (eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) praesens fuit ad Ass. praed'.
ut praefertur) impositum; Et eo quod praed. finis quinque sol. super praed.
hominem ignot. (eo quod ipse (ut praefertur) praesens fuit ad Ass. praed', ut
praefertur) imposit' de bonis and catallis suis levari non potest: Ideo (ex
discretionibus nostris) praed. duos separales fines 5 sol. ult. mentionat. de
bonis and catallis praed. C. B. qui (ut praefertur) ad Ass. praed. praesens
fuit, nos praefat. Iusticiarii (apud Cr. praed. in Com. praed. eodem 17. die
Apr. Anno 27. supradicto) levari adjudicavimus. Et quia praedictus homo qui (ut
praefertur) assumpsit super se docere in Ass. praed', and adtunc and ibidem
docuit, est extraneus, (Angl. a stranger) and nomen and habitatio sua incognit.
exist'; Ideo (ex discr. nostris) praed. summam 20 li. per ipsum pro offens. sua
praedicta (ut praefertur) forisfact', nos (praesat. Iusticiarii, die, anno and
loco ult. mentionat.) de bonis and catallis separalium personarum hic postea
mentionat. levari adjudicavimus modo and forma sequen'; videlicet de bonis and
catallis praed. J. B. qui, etc. (prout, etc.) 9 li. and 10 s. inde, and de
bonis and catallis praed. C. B. qui etiam, etc. (prout, etc.) 40 s. inde, and
de bonis, etc. praed. R. C. qui etiam, etc. (prout, etc.) 100 s. (inde resid',)
etc. ut in Recordo.

In quarum omnium rerum test. nos praefat. Justice. (die, anno and loco ult.
mentionat.) man. and sigill^ nostr. praesentibus opposuimus.

Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle.
Kent ss. A Memorial of the Account of the Moneys mentioned in the Record
certified at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at
Maidstone in the County aforesaid, (on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter,
1679.) by Sir I. H. Knight, W. C. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (four of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) forfeited (as in the said
Record is mentioned) in an Assembly holden (in the dwelling house of R. K. in
the Parish of Stapleherst in the County aforesaid) under color of exercise of
Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, upon the thirtieth day of March, 1675.

His Majesty's third part of the said Forfeitures by the said Justices tendered
into the Court of the general Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County
at M. aforesaid on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter, 1679. and by
appointment of the same by the said Justices paid to Sir I. C. Knight and
Baronett, (Sheriff of the said County) to His Majesty's use. Viz.

For R. C. 20 d. 20 d. and 39 s. 4 d. All which was levied and paid to the said
Justices since the last general Sessions of the Peace holden for the said
County at M. aforesaid, viz. 02 02 08

Summa patet.

And as concerning the moneys in the said Record mentioned to be payable by the
several persons ^ere under named, His Majesty's third part whereof comes to
as follows, viz.

S. B. 20 d. 20 d. and 3 l. 3 s. 4 d. In all -- -- -- 03 06 08 C. B. 20 d. 20
d. 20 d. and 13 s. 4. d. In all -- -- 00 18 04 I. B. 20* d. and 23 s. 4 d. In
all -- -- 01 05 00 R. K. -- 06 13 09 In all -- 12 03 09

The said Justices do say, that they did upon the seventeenth* day of April
1678. (being the day of the Conviction of the persons aforesaid for their
Offenses in the said Record mentioned) make out their Warrants for levying
thereof, but they have not as yet received* the same, or any part thereof; nor
is the same, or any part thereof, (as yet) levied (that they know of,) though
they have diligently enquired after the same.

A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Offense.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.
K. ss. Forasmuch as C. D. was this present 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices.
day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An
Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles*) convicted by Record (by us
made) of being present in the Parish of C. in the said County at an Assembly,
Conventicle, or Meeting.
under color or pretense.
of exercise of Religion in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice.
of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did
upon the said Conviction fine the said C. D. not exceeding 5 ^i.
for his said Offense, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you the said Constable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said C. D. and him safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there
deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding
also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) by the space of no^x exceeding 3 months.
next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under our, etc.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Justices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if the
Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Freehold or
Copyhold, or 50 li. in Goods.

A Mittimus upon the second Offense.
To the Constable, etc. ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. was this present 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices.
day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An
Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convicted (by Record by us
made) of being present in the Parish of T. in the said County at an Assembly,
Conventicle, or Meeting.
under color or pretense.
of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice.
of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did
upon the said Conviction fine the said C. D. not exceeding 10 li.
for his said Offense, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us; And
forasmuch as the said C. D. has been once before that time convicted of the
like Offense, (contrary to the Act asoresaid:) These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him
safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said
Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without
Bail or Mainprise) by the space of not exceeding six months.
next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not, etc.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Justices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do; if
they be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li.
per annum Freehold or Copyhold, or 50 li. in Goods.

A Mittimus upon the third Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders, etc. ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. was this 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices.
present day (according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made,
entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convicted (by
Record by us made) of being present in the Parish of T. in the said County at
an Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting.
under color or pretense.
of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice.
of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And forasmuch as
the said C. D. has been twice before that time convicted of the like Offense,
(contrary to the said Act:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely convey to
His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive
him into the said Gaol, and him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise)
until the next general Quarter Sessions for the West-Division of this County,
the next Assizes, Jail-deliver, Great Sessions, or Sitting of Oyer and
Terminer, in the County aforesaid, (which shall first happen;) And that you
then and there have him, to be farther proceeded against as by the said Act is
directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the,
etc.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Justices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if
they be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li.
per annum Freehold or Copyhold, or be worth 50 li. in Goods.

A Record against one that suffers a Conventicle, etc. to be kept in his
house.
I conceive it fit that this Record be written in Parchment. And Quaere if not
fit to be in Latin.
Kent ss. MEmorandum, That upon the 22 Car. 2. Regis, c. 1. 2 Justices. By
Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of the fact.
second day of June in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, (by the grace of God) of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. it was (according to the form of an Act of
Parliament in that behalf lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles) duly proved to us, That R. T. of, etc. did
wittingly and willingly suffer Assemb. Conventicle or Meeting.
under under color or pretense of exercise of, etc. other than, etc.
of exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the by the Liturgy
or practice of, etc.
of the Church of England, to be held in his in House, Out-house, Barn or Room,
Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds.
in the Parish of T. in the said County on, etc. day now last past, (contrary
to the Act aforesaid.) Of all which we have the day and year first above
written made this Record under our hands and seals.

A Mittimus thereupon, upon the first Conviction. 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2
Justices. By Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of
the fact.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at C. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as D. E. was this present day (according to the form of an
Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress
Seditious Conventicles) convicted (by Record by us made) of wittingly and
willingly suffering Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting.
under under color or pretense of exercise of Religion other than, (...). by
the
of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice ^f, etc.
of the Church of England, to be held in his in House, Outhouse, Barn or Room,
Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds
in the Parish of T. in the said County upon the second day of June now last
past, (contrary to the Act aforesaid;) And whereas we did upon the said
Conviction fine the said D. E. not exceeding 5 li.
for his said Offense, and he did not pay down the said Fine unto us: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you the said Constable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said D. E. and him safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there
deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding
also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) by the space of not exceeding 3 months.
next after such delivery of him unto you. Hereof fail not at your perils, etc.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Justices think fit to send the Offender thither: which they must not do, if the
Offender (or her Husband, if Feme-Covert) have 5 li. per annum Freehold or
Copyhold, or 50 li. in Goods.

A Mittimus thereupon, upon the second Conviction.
To the Constable, etc. ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
K. ss. FOrasmuch as, etc. (as in the precedent 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. as in the
precedent Warrant. Not exceeding 10 li. not exceeding 6 mon.
Warrant, till you come to these words) And he did not pay down the said Fine
unto us; (go on thus) And forasmuch as the said D. E. has been once before
that time convicted of the like Offense, (contrary to the Act aforesaid: These
are therefore, etc. (as aforesaid.)

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) etc. as aforesaid.

A Mittimus thereupon, upon the third Conviction.
To, etc. ( as in fol. 102.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as, etc. (as in fol. 102. 22 Car. 2. cap. 1.
till you come to these words) And forasmuch as the said D. E. has been twice
before that time convicted of the like Offense, (contrary to the said Act:)
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you the said
Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
take the said D. E. and him safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and
there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.)
Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and
him there safely keep (without Bail or Mainprise) until the next general
Quarter Sessions, (for the West Division of this County) the next Assizes,
Jail-deliver, Great Sessions, or Sitting of any Commission of Oyer and
Terminer, (in the County aforesaid) which shall first happen; And that you then
and there have him to be farther proceeded against, as by the said Act is
directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the,
etc.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis, etc.) as aforesaid.

A Warrant to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher in a Conventicle.
To the Constable, Borsholders, Headboroughs and Tithingmen of the Hundred of
M. and C. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and to
every of them* and to all and every other Officers within the said County, whom
the execution hereof may concern.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I did (this present This is by way of Certificate, where
the Offender lives in another County, (made to a Justice of Peace.)
day) receive a Certificate (to me directed) under the hand and seal of W. E.
of S. in the County of Sussex, Esquire, (one of His Majesty's Justices
assigned to keep His Peace in the said County of Sussex) That G. H. of C.
aforesaid, Tailour, was (upon the first day of this instant August) by him
convicted (by proof to him made according to an Act of Parliament, entitled,
An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, lately made and
provided) of being present in the Barn of R. W. of W. in the said County of
Sussex, Husbandman, and there did take upon him to preach or teach at a
Conventicle, (the five and twentieth day of July last past) under pretense of
exercise of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice
of the Church of England, and contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid; and
that therefore, being thereof convicted as aforesaid, the said G. H. did
forfeit for the said first Offense twenty pounds and that he (the said Justice)
had (by virtue of the said Act) imposed on him (so convict as aforesaid) for
his said Offense the said sum of twenty pounds, (as being thought by him able
to pay the same, as by the said Certificate appears:) These are therefore (by
virtue of the Act aforesaid) in His Majesty's name, to command you, that you,
some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said twenty pounds, (by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said G. H;) And that when you or any of
you have so levied the said twenty pounds, (or any part thereof) that then you,
they or he that has so levied the same, do forthwith deliver the moneys so
levied to the aforesaid W. E. (to be by him distributed according to the Act
aforesaid.) Hereof neither you nor any of you are to fail at your perils. Given
under my hand and seal at A. in the said County of Kent 10. Aug. 1679. Annoque
Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 31.

A Warrant pro testes to prove the Conventicle.
To the Constable, ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. WHereas we have (this day) received information, That several persons
(upon the 19. day of June last past) were present in the Parish of S. in the
said County at a Conventicle then and there held, under color of exercise of
Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the
Church of England, (contrary to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made
and provided to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles;) And whereas we
are also informed, That the several persons here under named can testify the
particulars and truth of the premises: These are therefore (in his Majesty's
name) to command you and every of you, that you do give notice to the several
persons, that they and every of them are by us commanded to appear before us at
the house of R. K. Esquire in H. in the County aforesaid on Wednesday the first day
of this instant August at 8 of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, then
and there to testify their several knowledges touching the premises. Whereof
neither they nor any of them are to fail at their perils. And you are farther
hereby commanded to appear (at the time and place aforesaid,) to make appear
unto us what you have done in the execution hereof. Hereof also you are not to
fail at 1 Justice enough.
your perils. Given under our hands and seals at H. in the said County the,
etc. day of, etc. 1670. 22 Car. etc.

A. B. of, etc. etc. as many as be*
C. D. of, etc. etc. as many as be*

A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.
To the Constable, ( as in page 105.)
K. ss. FOrasmuch as R. L. of the said Parish Note, You must make your Warrant
into the several Hundreds and Liberties where the Offenders inhabit* and use
their addition, prout the Record.
of S. Mercer, was (this present day, according to an Act of Parliament to
prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles lately made and provided) by us
convicted of his wittingly and willingly suffering an Assembly to be holden in
his dwelling house in the said Parish of S. upon the 30. day of March now last
past, (under color of exercise of Religion in other manner than according to
the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the
Act aforesaid) by which he has (according to the said Act) forfeited the sum
of twenty pounds for his said Offense: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy* (by Distress and Sale
of the Goods and Chattels of the said Robert Kite) the aforesaid sum of
twenty pounds; And you and every of you are (in his Majesty's name) hereby
farther commanded, that when you or any of you have (as aforesaid) levied the
sum aforesaid, that then they or he having so levied the same do forthwith
deliver the same to us or one of us, to be distributed according to the said
Act. Hereof neither you nor any of you are to fail at your perils. Given under
our hands and seals at C. etc. prout supra.

A Warrant to levy the money upon the Offenders.
To the Constable, etc. ( prout precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as W. W. of the aforesaid Parish of S. Gent. (one of the
Churchwardens of the said Parish) I. H. of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, (the
other Churchwarden of the said Parish) T. N. of the Parish aforesaid,
Chandler, (one of the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish) I. W. the elder
of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, G. P. etc. (many others) W. H. of the Parish
aforesaid, Yeoman, (Headborough of the North Borough in the said Parish) etc.
(prout) were every of them this present day by us convicted, (according to an
Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles lately made
and provided) of being present (in the Parish Church of Sandherst aforesaid in
the County aforesaid) upon Sunday the nineteenth day of June last past (between
the hours of nine and twelve before noon the same day) at an Assembly then and
there held, (under pretense of exercise of Religion in other manner than
according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the
form of the Act aforesaid;) and we have (by virtue of the said Act) imposed
upon every of the said Offenders (so convicted as aforesaid) a Fine of five
shillings for that his respective offense: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy upon every
of the said Offenders (respectively)* by Distress and Sale of his respective
Goods and Chattels the aforesaid Fine of five shillings. And forasmuch as R.
Giles of Roll. in the said County, Gent. did then and there take upon him to
teach (in the Assembly aforesaid,) and did then and there teach, (against the
form of the Act aforesaid) and was this present day by us (according to the
said Act) convicted of his said Offense, and he has (for the same) forfeited
the sum of twenty pounds; and for that (in our judgments) we do think the
said R. G. unable to pay the said sum so forfeited as aforesaid: We have
therefore (by our discretions) adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and
Chattels of the aforesaid W. W. I. H. Da. Pet. and I. C. who (as aforesaid)
were all of them present at the Assembly, and are thereof (as aforesaid)
convicted; and the same sum of twenty pounds to be levied in manner
following. That is to say, one hundred shillings thereof of the Goods and
Chattels of the said W. W. other one hundred shillings thereof of the Goods and
Chattels of the said I. H. other one hundred shillings thereof of the Goods and
Chattels of the said D. P. and the other one hundred shillings thereof
(residue) of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. C. These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy one
hundred shillings (parcel of the said sum of twenty pounds) by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said W. W. and to levy other one hundred
shillings (other parcel of the said sum of twenty pounds) by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. H. and to levy other one hundred
shillings (other parcel of the said sum of twenty pounds) by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said D. P. and to levy the other one
hundred shillings (residue of the said sum of twenty pounds) by Distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. C. And forasmuch as Thomas Hur of
the aforesaid Parish of Sand. Labourer, was (this present day by us convicted
(according to the Act aforesaid) of being present at the Assembly aforesaid,
(contrary to the said Act) and we have also (by virtue of the Act aforesaid)
imposed upon him a Fine of five shillings (for that his Offense;) and for that
we do (in our judgments) think the said Thomas Hur poor, and unable to pay the
said sum of five shillings (upon him for his said Offense imposed, as
aforesaid:) We have therefore (by our discretions) adjudged the same to be
levied of the Goods and Chattels of the said I. W. who (as aforesaid) is
convicted of the like Offense at the same Assembly. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you and every of you, forthwith to levy the said
Fine of five shillings by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the
said I. W. And forasmuch as T. H. of B. in the County aforesaid, Malster, was
(this present day) by us convicted (according to the Act aforesaid) of being
present at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the said Act) and for that the
said T. H. heretofore committed the like Offense, and (according to the form of
the Act aforesaid) was thereof convicted, therefore he (for his said Offense of
being present at the Assembly herein before mentioned) has incurred the
penalty of ten shillings: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you and every of you, forthwith to levy the said ten shillings by
Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said T. H. And forasmuch as
Mary (the Wife of the said John Wats) and Elizabeth (the Wife of the said John
Cogger) were both of them (this present day) by us convicted (according to the
Act aforesaid) of being present at the Assembly aforesaid, (contrary to the
said Act) and we have (by virtue of the Act aforesaid) imposed upon the said
Mary a Fine of five shillings for that her said respective Offense; and we have
also (by virtue of the said Act) imposed upon the said Elizabeth a Fine of five
shillings for her said respective Offense; and for that the said Mary is a
Feme-Covert, (cohabiting with the said John Wats her Husband) and the said
Elizabeth is also a Feme-Covert, (cohabiting with the said John Cogger her
Husband;) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you and every
of you, forthwith to levy the aforesaid Fine of five shillings so imposed upon
the said Mary (as aforesaid) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of
the said John Wats; and to levy the aforesaid Fine of five shillings so imposed
upon the said Elizabeth (as aforesaid) by Distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the said John Cogger. And forasmuch as the aforesaid W. W. (at the
time of the said Assembly) was, and still is one of the Churchwardens of the
Parish of Sand. aforesaid, and the aforesaid John H. then also was, and still
is the other Churchwarden of the aforesaid Parish, and the aforesaid Tho.
Nurley then was, and still is one of the Overseers of the Poor of the said
Parish, and the said Will. Hammon then was, and still is Headborough of the
North Borough in the Parish aforesaid; and every of them was (this present day)
by us (according to the said Act) convicted, for that he knowing the Assembly
aforesaid (in form aforesaid) to be holden within his aforesaid Parish, did not
give information thereof to any Justice of the Peace, nor endeavor the
Conviction of the parties aforesaid, or any of them, but wittingly and
willingly did omit the performance of his duty, in execution of the Act
aforesaid, (against the form of the said Act) for which Offense every of them
respectively* has forfeited the sum of five pounds: These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to command you and every of you to levy the sum of five
pounds (by the said William Ward so forfeited as is last before mentioned) by
Distress and Sale of his Goods and Chattels; and to levy the sum of five
pounds (by the said W. H. so forfeited as is last before mentioned) by Distress
and Sale of his Goods and Chattels; and to levy upon the other Churchwarden,
(prout.) And you and every of you are hereby (in His Majesty's name) farther
commanded, that when you, or any of you, have (as aforesaid) levied the several
Fines and Forfeitures aforesaid, (or any of them) that then they or he so
having levied the same do forthwith deliver the same to us, (or one of us) to
be distributed (according to the said Act.) Hereof neither you nor any of you,
etc. (prout common form.)

To levy money upon a Jailer, etc. for suffering one committed (upon this Act)
to go at large.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved 22 Car. 2. cap. 4. compared with
41. 2 Justices. Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence
of the fact.
before me, That A. B. Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol at C. in the County
aforesaid did upon the 10th day of June last past permit D. E. to go at large,
contrary to the Warrant of his Commitment made by virtue of an Act of
Parliament lately made, (entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles) and contrary to the Act aforesaid: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten pounds by
him forfeited for his said Offense; and that you do pay the moneys so levied to
the Churchwardens of the Parish of T. in the said County, (for the relief of
the Poor of the said Parish.) Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) if the Keeper of the House of Correction
suffer the Offender to go at large.

The like for suffering one at large to join with the Offender in custody in
the exercise of Religion, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices.
Confession of the party, Oath of Witness, or notorious Evidence of the fact.
before us, That A. B. Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol at C. in the County
aforesaid did upon the 10th day of June last past permit E. F. being then a
person at large, to join with D. E. (a person committed to his custody by
virtue of an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles) in the exercise of Religion differing from the
Rights of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
A. B. ten pounds by him forfeited for his said Offense; and that you do pay the
moneys so levied to the Churchwardens of the Parish of T. the Parish where the
Offender did last inhabit, in the said County, (for the relief of the Poor of
the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and
seals the, etc.

The like (mutatis mutandis) against the Keeper of the House of Correction, if
he offend in the like case.

Against a Peer of the Realm for being at a Conventicle, the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices of the
place or division where the Peer dwells, one of the Quorum.
of this Realm) was this present day (according to the form of an Act of
Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles) convicted (by Record by us made) of being present in the parsh of
V. in the said County at an Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting
under color or pretense
of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice of the Church of England, (contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
T. Lord C. ten pounds, (for the Offense aforesaid;) and that you do pay the
moneys so levied to the Churchwardens of the aforesaid Parish of V. (for
relief of the Poor of the said Parish.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals the, etc.

Upon the second Conviction.
To the Constable, etc. ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer 22 Car. 2. cap. 1.
of, etc. as in the precedent Warrant, till you come to these words, contrary
to the Act aforesaid; go on thus,) And forasmuch as the said T. Lord C. has
been once before that time convicted of the like Offense, (contrary to the said
Act: These are therefore, etc. to levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
T. Lord C. twenty pounds, etc.

Against a Peer for suffering a Conventicle, etc. to be kept in his House, etc.
the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them. 22
Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices of the place or division where the Peer dwells. 1 of
the Quorum.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer of this Realm) was this present day
(according to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act
to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) convicted (by Record by us
made) of wittingly and willingly suffering an Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting.
under color or pretense.
of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice.
of the Church of England to be held in his in House, Outhouses, Burns or
Rooms, Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds.
in the Parish of V. in the said County upon the 12. day of June now last past,
(contrary to the Act aforesaid:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T. Lord C. ten pounds, (for the
Offense aforesaid;) and that you pay the moneys so levied to the Churchwardens
of the aforesaid Parish of V. (for relief of the Poor of the said Parish.)
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

Upon the second Conviction.
To the Constables, etc. ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
K. ss. FOrasmuch as T. Lord C. (a Peer 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices, etc. (as
in the precedent Warrant.)
of this Realm, etc. as in the precedent Warrant) And forasmuch as the said T.
Lord C. has been once before that time convicted of the like Offense,
(contrary to the said Act:) These are therefore, etc.

A Mittimus for a Nonconformist, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices.
proved before us, That A. B. Parson, Vicar, Curate, Lecturer, or other person.
(in Holy Orders,) Stipendary, or other person who has been possessed of any
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual promotion, who has not declared assent to the
Common Prayer, (prout the Act of 14. of this King, cap. 4.) or Preacher in
Conventicle
upon the 12. day of, etc. or, etc. was within five miles of not be within five
miles of a City, Town-Corporate, or Borough that sends Burgesses to Parliament,
or of any Parish-town or place wherein he or they have since the Act of
Oblivion been Parson, Vicar, Curate, Stipendary, or Lecturer, or taken upon
them to preach in a Conventicle. Nor shall any teach School, take Boarders (to
be taught) till he take and subscribe the Oath in this Act (prout, etc.) and
frequent Divine Service.
(contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided,
entitled, An Act for restraining Nonconformists from inhabiting in
Corporations:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require
you to take the said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there
deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding
also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely keep for six months, (without Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A Certificate to the Militia, etc. for Aid, in Case of a Conventicle.
To the Lieutenant, any Deputy-lieutenant, or any Commissioned Officer of the
Militia, or any other His Majesty's Forces, the Sheriffs, Justices, or other
Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, jointly or severally.
Kent ss. THese are to certify you, That I 22 Car. 2. cap. 1. 1 Justice, upon
his information or knowledge.
A. B. (one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, etc.) have received
Information of an unlawful an unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held or to be
held.
under under color or pretense of the exercising Religion, etc. or prevent.
of exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or
practice, etc.
of the Church of England, (contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made,
entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) at T. in the
Parish of C. in the County aforesaid; And that I (with such assistance as I can
get together) am not able to dissolve, dissipate,
suppress or dissolve the same. All which I do certify unto you, to the end
that you may repair unto the said place aforesaid, and do therein as by the
said Act is required and enjoined. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Certificate made by a Justice, where the Offenders live in a Corporation.
Kent ss. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majesty's Justices assigned to
keep the Peace in His County aforesaid) To the chief Magistrate of the
Corporation of Tenterden in the said County Greeting. Whereas W. S. of Tent.
aforesaid in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, was (this present day before us)
convicted (according to an Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles lately made and provided) of being This will serve to a particular
Justice in another County, (mutatis mutandis.)
present in the dwelling house of I. B. in the Parish of C. in the County
aforesaid upon the sixth day of this instant July at a Conventicle then and
there held, (under color of exercise of Religion in other manner than
according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, contrary to the
form of the Act aforesaid;) and we have (by virtue of the said Act) imposed
upon him a Fine of five shillings (for that his Offense;) And whereas also the
said I. B. was this present day (before us) also (according to the said Act)
convicted of his wittingly and willingly suffering the Conventicle aforesaid to
be held in his aforesaid dwelling house, (contrary to the form of the Act
aforesaid) for which his Offense he has forfeited the sum of twenty pounds;
And for that we do (in our judgments) think the said I. B. poor, and unable to
pay the said sum of twenty pounds (by him as aforesaid forfeited:) We have
therefore (by our discretions) adjudged one hundred shillings thereof to be
levied of the Goods and Chattels of the aforesaid W. S. (who, as aforesaid, was
present at the same Conventicle.) And forasmuch as the said W. S. is an
Inhabitant in the Corporation aforesaid, we do therefore hereby certify you of
the premises, to the end you may proceed thereupon as by the said Act is
required. Given under our hands and seals at C. in the said County the one and
twentieth day of Nov. An. Dom. 1679. 31, etc.

A Certificate for the taking the Oath, according to the said Act.
Kent ss. I A. B. (one of His Majesty's Justices 15 Car. 2. cap. 1.
of the Peace of the County of K.) do humbly certify, That D. E. did this
present day before me take the Oath mentioned in an Act of Parliament lately
made, (entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) in
these words, I do swear that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be
unlawful, nor refuse to take an Oath on that account. In testimony whereof I
the said A. B. have hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc.

Corporations.
A Certificate upon taking the Oaths, and subscribing the Declarations
mentioned in the Act for Regulating Corporations.
Kent ss. MEmorandum, That A. B. of C. 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. 2 Justices.
did upon the 21. day of May last past, before us whose names are hereunto
subscribed, (His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath appointed to be taken by the
Statute made in the 13. year of His now Majesty's Reign, (entitled, An Act
for the well Governing and Regulating of Corporations) and did likewise before
us subscribe the Declaration in the said Statute mentioned. In testimony
whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals the, etc.

Court Leet and Court Baron.
A Precept directed to the Bailiff of the Manor by the Steward of the
Court Baron to warn the Court.
To the Bailiff of the said Manor.
Kent ss. THese are to require you to warn all the tenants of the said Manor
(whose names are here under written) and all other the tenants of the same,
personally to appear at the Court Baron to be holden for the Manor aforesaid
(at the place accustomed) upon Thursday the tenth day of this instant Month of
August, at eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, then and there
to do and perform their several Suits and Services, (according to the custom
of the said Manor) and have you there the names of such persons as you have so
warned, and this Precept. Given under my hand and seal the first day of August,
1676. 28. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.

A Precept to warn a Jury* for a Court Leet.
To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss. THese are to will and require you to give public notice within the
said Hundred, That His Majesty's Court Leet and view of Franck-pledge for the
same, shall be holden at the house called the Red Lion in B. upon Thursday the
seventeenth day of this instant October, at ten of the Clock in the Forenoon of
the same day: And that you warn all persons that do owe any Suit or Service to
the said Court, That they and every of them personally be and appear at the
time and place aforesaid, then and there to do and perform the same; And that
more especially you warn four and twenty honest and lawful men of the said
Hundred, to appear at the time and place aforesaid, to enquire for our
Sovereign Lord the King of those things which to the said Court do appertain.
And that you your selves be then and there also personally present, and have
you there the names of such persons as you have so warned, and this Precept.
Given under my hand and seal the second day of October. 1680. 32 Regni Regis
Caroli Secundi.

A Precept for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the said
Office, and to repair to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his faithful
execution of the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of F. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as at His Majesty's Court Leet holden this present day for
the said Hundred of F. you are elected [ name the Office.
Borsholder] for the year to come: These are therefore to will and require you,
upon receipt hereof, to take upon you the said Office; And forthwith to repair
to one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County of K. before him
to take your Oath for your faithful execution of your said Office. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the second day of March, Anno
Dom. 1680. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi tricesimo secundo.

A Precept to bring in a Scould to be tried at a Court Leet.
K. ss. RIchard Kilburne, Esquire, Steward of His Majesty's Court Leet, holden
this present day for the said Hundred, to the Constable of the Hundred
aforesaid, and Officer of the said Court greeting. Forasmuch as E. P. of the
Parish of C. in the said County, Spinster, otherwise called E. the Wife of R.
T. of the aforesaid Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, Labourer; was at His
Majesty's said Court, holden before me this present day, by the Oaths of
twelve honest and lawful men of the Hundred aforesaid, presented for her being
a common Scould at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, within the
Jurisdiction of the said Court, as well with her Neighbors as with other the
Liege people of the King, whereby they are much molested, disquieted and
grieved (against the Peace of the said King, his Crown and Dignity,) to the
great disturbance and disquiet of His Majesty's Liege people, and against his
Peace, These are therefore to command you to cause the said E. P. to come
before me, or my sufficient Deputy, at the next Court Leet of our Sovereign
Lord the King, to be holden at C. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, (within
the Jurisdiction of the said Court) upon Saturday the second day of October. next
ensuing, to answer the premises. And further to do and receive as the said
Court of the said King shall consider of her in that behalf. And have you there
this Precept. Given under my seal at C. aforesaid, the tenth day of April in
the seven and twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

The manner of making up of Court-Roles.
Cur' Baron' Thomae Bristow Arm' ibidem tent' The Title of a Court Baron.
die Lunae quarto decimo die Octobris Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi
(Dei gratia) Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor.
etc. vicesimo quarto annoque Dom. millessimo sexcentesimo septuagesimo secundo
coram Richardo Kilburne Armig' Senescallo ibidem.

Esson' Carolus Cox, de malo lecti.

Iur'
Johannes Hover, Franciscus Jervas, Johannes Shosmith, amp; Johannes Cat.
Kanc. ss. QUi jurati super sacrm' suum ad Ad inquir' jur'. Ammerc' in ipsos
qui fecer' defalt'.
inquirend' and praesentand' ea quae ad Cur' praed' pertinent.

Super sacrm' suum praed' dicam and praesentant. quod Thomas Sampson, Johannes
Bowls, Jacobus Hawes, gener', etc. Tenentes hujus Manerii, debent sectam ad
hanc Cur', and ad hunc diem sec' defalt' Ideo quilibet eorum in mia' and
amerceamentum cujus^ibet eorum inde per homagium praed' afferat' ad ij d.

Praesentant etiam quod Johannes Banks, qui Alienatio pro qua solvit Domino
relevium.
de Domino hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed' tenuit quatuor pecias terrae
vocat', etc. Continen' per aestimationem, etc. cum pertin' in Breed per
annualem reddit' duodecim denariorum and alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem,
ejusdem Manerii) alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin' S. Petter viduae and
haered' suis, unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl. xij d.) Quodque praed' S.
Petter Al' alienatio pro qua, etc. Et quod cepit in virum and alienaver' etc.
Solv. Dom. rel. etc. Praecept' Ball' distr'.
postea alienavit praemis. praed' cum pertin' Elizabethae Sloman and haered'
suis, unde etiam accidit Dom' relevium (videl' xij d.) Et quod Elizabetha
Sloman cepit in virum Georgium Boraston Clericum, Quodque praed' Georgius and
Elizabetha alienaverunt praemissa praed' cum pertin' Carolo Cox and haered'
suis, unde etiam accidit Dom' relevium (videl' xij d.)

Ideo praeceptum est Ball' Manerii praed' quod distring' praed' Carolum. Ita
quod sit hic ad prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend' ad solvend' Dom'
separalia relevia praed' and ad faciend' ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.

Praesent. etiam quod Edwardus Barton, Qui Rel. super alienation'
de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed' tenuit unum mesuagium, and
quatuor acr' terrae (per aestimationem) cum pertin' in Breed prope quendam
parcum ibid' (vocat' Breed pound) per annualem reddit' quatuor denariorum, Et
alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) alienavit praemissa
praed' cum pert' Cui sic alienat ignorant and petunt diem ad inquirendum.
unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl' iiij d.) sed cui vel quibus, praed'
Edwardus sic alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin' Iuratores praed' penitus
ignorant, Et petunt diem ad inquirend' inde usque in prox' Cur' Baronis Manerii
illius hic tenend' and eis concedit.

Et praeceptum est Ball' Manerii illius quod distringat Praecep' distr.
Alienatio.
pro relevio praed'.

Praesent' etiam quod Richardus Edwardus genesis qui de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de
Manerio suo praed') tenuit certas terras (vocat' le, etc.) cum pertin' in
Breed per annualem reddit' trium solidorum septem denariorum unius oboli and
unius Sed cui ignorant.
quadrantis, Et alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii)
alienavit praemissa praed' cum pertin', unde accidit Dom' relevium (videl' iij
s. vij d. ob. q.) Sed cui, vel quibus, praemissa praed' sic alienat' fuer.
Iuratores praed' Petunt diem.
penitus ignorant, Et petunt diem ad inquirend' inde usque in prox' Cur'
Baronis Manerii praed' hic tenend', and eis conceditur.

Et praeceptum est Ball' Manerii illius distringere Praecept. distring. Jure ux.
pro relevio praed'.

Cumque etiam Will. Foster and Elizabetha uxor ejus (jure ipsius Elizabethae)
nuper tenuerunt de Dom' hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praed') quasdam terras
(vocat' Totty) cum pertin' nuper terrarum (vocat' S.) In Parochia omnium Sanct'
in Hasting parcel' per annualem reddit' quinque denariorum Et alia servicia
(secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) Modo Iuratores praedict' (super sacr.
suum praed') dicunt and praesentant quod praed' Elizabetha Obiit seis. unde
accidit rel. etc. Haeres inde. accidit Dom. etc.
obiit inde seisita unde accidit Domino relevium (videlicet v d.) quodque
(Fillus ipsius Elizabethae suit ejus haeres inde and quod praed' (Filius)
postea alienavit praemiss. praed' cum pertin. Johanni Austen and haered. suis
unde etiam accidit Domino relevium (videlicet v d.)

Ideo praeceptum est Ball. Manerii praed' quod Praecept. distr. separalia
relevia. Et faciend. sidelitatem. Relevium super Alienation.
distringat praedictum Johannem Austen, Ita quod sit hic ad prox. Cur. Baronis
Manerii illius ad solvend. Domino separalia relevia praedicta, Et ad faciend.
ei fidelitatem pro praemissis.

Praesent. etiam quod Thomas Marten and Anna uxor ejus qui (jure ipsius Annae)
tenuerunt de Domino hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo praedicto) unum
messuagium, and dimidium unius acr. terrae cum pertin. in Breed per annualem
reddit. quatuor denariorum Et alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem ejusdem
Manerii) alienaverunt praemissa praed. cum pertin. in Breed, Samueli Horn
Clerico and haered. suis, unde accidit Dom. relevium (videlicet iiij d.)

Ideo praeceptum est Ball. Manerii praedicti Praecept. distr.
quod distring. praed' Sam. Horn, Ita quod sit hic, ad prox. Cur. Baronis
Manerii illius ad solvend. Dom. relevium praed. and ad faciend. ei fidelitatem
pro praemissis. Cumque Jacobus Parker Praecept. quod tenement. nativum, dirut.
existit.
nuper tenuit de Dom. hujus Manerii (ut de Manerio suo) quoddam tenementum
nativum (videlicet unum messuagium and certas terras cum pertin. in Breed
(prope parcum ibidem) per annualem reddit. duorum denariorum and alia servicia
(secundum consuetudinem ejusdem Manerii) Modo juratores praed. (super sacr.
suum Et quis ten. toftum and terras pet. diem ad inquir.
praed.) Dicunt and praesentant quod messuagium praed. dirutum existit and quis
modo tenet toftum inde and terras praed. Iuratores praed. penitus ignorant, Et
petunt diem ad inquirend. inde usque in prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius hic
tenend. and eis conceditur.

Et modo hic ad hanc Cur. prima proclamatio Prim. Proc. facta ad clam.
tenement. praed. sec. etiam ad prox. cur. Obiit seif.
facta suit quod si aliquis legitime clamare potuit tenementum praed. cum
pertin. quod veniret and audiretur. Et nullus venit, Ideo siat super inde
secund. proclamatio ad praed. prox. Cur.

Praesentant etiam quod Johannes Cogger qui de Dom. hujus Manerii (ut de
Manerio suo praed.) tenuit quoddam tenementum nativum (nuper Johannis Tompson)
cum pertin. in Breed per Et quis haeres ignorant. Pet. diem ad inquir.
annualem reddit. duorum denariorum and alia servicia (secundum consuetudinem
ejusdem Manerii) obiit de tenemento praed. cum pertin. seisit. sed quis est
ejus haeres inde Iuratores praed. penitus ignorant Et petunt diem ad inquirend.
inde usque in prox. Cur. Baronis Manerii illius hic tenend. and eis conceditur.

Et modo hic ad hanc Cur. prima proclamatio Prima proclamatio ad clam.
tenement. illud, etc. Petunt ulteriorem diem ad inquirend. quis est haeres,
etc. Concedit. Ad ultimam Cur. Bar. Jur. impanell. petierunt, etc. quomodo,
etc. tenuit, etc. Ven. and protulit in Cur. quoddam scriptum sub manum and
sigill. Dom. Manerii. Per quod satis liquet
facta fuit quod si aliquis legitime clamare poterit tenementum praed. cum
pertin. quod veniret and audiretur and nullus veni, ideo fiat superinde secunda
proclamatio ad praed. prox. Cur.

Et ulterius Iuratores praed. petunt ulteriorem diem usque in praed. prox. Cur.
ad inquirend. and praesentand. quis est haeres Josephi* Hunt Defuncti duarum
peciarum terrae (Iacen. ad orientalem partem messuagii, in quo Johannes Hunt
pater ipsius Josephi nuper habitabat, cum pertin. (per praed. Josephum nuper
tent.) Nec non quarumdam terrarum (vocat. Hamster Marst) contin. per
aestimationem sex acr. cum pertin. nuper etiam per praed. Josephum tent. and
eis conceditur.

Cumque ad ultimam Cur. Baronis hujus Man. hic tent. die Lunae sexto decimo die
Octobris Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc vicesimo tertio Iuratores ad Cur. illam
inpanellati petierunt ulteriorem diem usque in hanc Cur. ad inquirend. and
praesentand. quomodo Will. Ivy (Filius and haeres Johannis Ivy defuncti) tunc
tenuit de Dom. hujus Manerii quoddam messuagium (vocat. le Hundred house) Et
dimidium unius acr. terrae cum pertin. and eis adtunc concedebatur modo hic ad
hanc Cur. venit praed. Will. (in propria persona sua) and protulit hic in Cur.
quoddam scriptum manu and sigillo Henrici English Arm. (nuper Domini hujus
Manerii) signat. per quod satis liquet Curiae hic quod praed. Henricus dimisit
cuidam Willielmo Butler praemissa Cur. etc. quod dimis. etc. est pro 90.
annorum legitime devenit. per volunt. legavit term. suum adhuc ventur. Sup.
tert. Procl. etc. ad clamand. etc. Ven. and clam. prescript. dimis. per Dom.
Man. concess.
praed. cum pertin. pro termino nonaginta annorum extunc prox' sequen. (unde
maxima pars adtunc ventur. existit) Modo etiam apparet Cur. hic quod terminus
ipsius Willielmi Butler de and in praemissis praed. cum pertin. postea eidem
Johanni Jvy legitime devenit quodque praedictus Johannes postea per ultimam
voluntatem suam in Scriptis legavit tantum termini praedicti de and in
praemissis praedictis ad tunc ventur. quantum esset durante vita ipsius
Willielmi and resid. termini inde post mortem ipsius Willielmi ventur. Johanni
Ivy (Filio ipsius Willielmi.)

Ad hanc Cur' super tertiam Proclamationem in ea part factam, Quod si aliquis
legitime clamare poterit quoddam tenementum (vocat. Hunts) cum pertin' in
Breed per Johannem Ivy defunct' (tempore mortis suae) tent' quod veniret and
audiretur venit hic in Cur' Willielm. Ivy (Filius Johannis Ivy) in propria
pers. sua and protulit hic in Cur' quoddam Scriptum dimissionis tenementi
praedicti cum pertin' per Thomam Lord Clericum, and Willielmum English
Generosum (nuper Dominos hujus Manerii) cuidam Willielmo Gram fact' pro termino
diversorum annorum ad tunc ventur' and ulterius constat Curiae hic Quod
terminus ipsius Williel. Gram, de and in tenemento praedicto cum pertin' postea
ad praedictum Johannem legitime devenit, and quod praedictus Johannes postea
per ult' voluntat' suam in scriptis legavit Annae Uxori ejus tantum residui
termini praedicti quantum esset in vita ipsius Annae and residuum termini
praedicti dicto Willielmo (Filio suo.)

Ad hanc Cur' venit Richardus Cox in propria Protulit in Cur' Indentur. etc.
persona sua and protulit hic in cur' quandam Indenturam sub manu and sigillo
Jacobi Payton, geren' dat' decimo die Julii, Anno Dom' millessimo sexcentesimo
quinquagesimo sexto Recitando Recitando, etc.
quod Willielmus Steed miles, Thomas Culpepper Arm' and Johannes Culpepper
Arm' (nuper Dom' Manerii praedicti per Indenturam suam geren' Quod Dom. hujus
Manner. dimis. etc.
dat' primo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Domini Jacobi nuper Regis Angliae
sextodecimo dimisisset Richardo Fuller executoribus and assignat' suis pro
termino Mill annorum a Festo annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis, ult'
praeterit' ante dat' Indenturae praedictae computan' (absque Impetitione
alicujus vasti) pro and sub annuali reddit. duorum solidorum proinde reservat'
ad Festa Sancti Michaelis Arch' and annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis (per
aequales portiones solvend') unum Cotagium and parcel' terrae continen' per
aestimationem tria quarteria unius a^r' terrae (majus sive minus) cum pertin'
in Breed jacen' inter W. and S. ibidem (existen' parcel' Manerii praedicti and
aliquando concess. per copiam rotulorum cur' cuidam B. postea Ric. Hunt and
postea Thomae Jenner defunct' and haered' suis, qui quidem Thomas Jenner sursum
reddidit eadem Sursum reddit.
ad usum Dom' Ric. Fuller, and haered' suorum ac etiam recitando quod
praedictus Ric. Fuller per Indenturam geren' dat' vicesimo octavo die Per al.
Indent. Dimissit
Martii, Anno regni Domini nostri Caroli primi nuper Regis Angliae quarto
decimo dimisisset Jacobo Payton executoribus administ' and assign' suis pro
termino noningentor' and octoginta annorum a vicesimo quinto die Martii tunc
ult' praeterit' ante dat' indenturae praed. computan' praed. messuagium sive
cotagium (una cum pomario, gardino, clausulo, and pecia terrae ad tunc inde
spectan. continen. per aestimationem quarterium unius acre (majus sive minus
parcel. praemissorum) per Indenturam praedictam sub manu and sigillo ipsius
Jacobi Payton testan. quod praedict. Jacobus Payton (in in consid. Maritagii.
consideratione Maritagii, inter ipsum and quandam Elizabetham Clerk ad tunc
solemnizand.) assignasset cuidam Ric. Barnet praemissa praedicta cum pertin.
una cum toto residuo dicti termini mill annorum in eisdem ad tunc ventur' sub
fiducia Usus Maritagii.
quod de and post Maritagium praed. solemniz. Tunc ad beneficium dictorum
Jacobi Payton and Elizabethae durant' vitis suis naturalibus and vita diutius
eorum viventis, and post decess. dictorum Jacobi and Elizabethae and diutius
eorum viventis tunc ad beneficium exit. corporis Dict' Jacobi super corpus
dict' Elizab. legitime procrean. and pro defectu talis exit. tunc ad beneficium
executorum, administratorum and assignatorum dictae Elizabethae ( and ad and
pro nullo alio usu, intention, and proposito quibuscunque,) prout per
Indenturam praedictam apparet. Et inde Ric. Cox ulter' dicit quod Maritagium
praedictum postea solemnizat. fuit praedictusque Jac. Payton postea obiit and
praedicta Elizabetha ipsum super vixit and postea obiit (sine exitu super
corpus suum per Obiit sine exit intestat.
praedict' Jacobum procreat') intestat. and ulterius idem Richardus protulit
hic in Cur' quandam Indenturam manu and sigillo Richardi Edwards
(Administratoris bonorum and catallorum quae fuerunt praefatae Elizabethae
(tempore mortis suae) signat. geren. dat. sexto die Martii, Anno Regni Domini
Regis nunc vicesimo, per quam satis liquet Cur' hic quod praedictus Richardus
per Indenturam illam assignavit eidem Richardo Cox executoribus
administratoribus* and assign. suis praemissa praedicta cum pertin. and totum
residuum termini praedicti de and in eisdem ad tunc ventur'

Ad hanc Cur' secunda Proclamatio facta fuit Secunda Procl. fact. ad clamand.
separal. tenementa.
quod si aliquis legitime clamare potuit separalia tenem. hic postea mentionat'
videlicet. Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet unum cotagium and unam peciam
terrae cum pertin. in Breed (prope Parochiam de Udimer) and ad terras modo vel
nuper Danielis White Arm. adjungen. per Nicolaum Summons nuper tent.

Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet unum mesuagium and dimidium unius acr'
terrae cum pertin. in Breed (ad vel prope quendam locum vocat. Stonelepe) per
Johannem Jervas defunct. nuper tent.

Quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet unum cotagium and unam peciam terrae,
cum pertin. in Udimer (ad quendam locum ibidem vocat. Cotham Green) per
Johannem nuper tent.

Et quoddam tenementum nativum (videlicet unum Toftum cum pertin. nuper per
Richardum Lindfield tent.

Sive eorum aliquae vel aliquod, quod veniret, and Si aliqui venirent
audirentur.
audiretur, and nullus venit Ideo fiat super inde tertia Proclamatio ad prox'
Cur. Baronis ejusdem Manerii hic tenend.

The manner of making up of Estreates.
The Estreates of the Fines, Forfeitures and Amerceaments, at the several
Courts-Leet, holden for the said Hundred on the several days, and in the
several years herein after mentioned.

That is to say,

Monday 12 October. 1668. XX. Regni Regis Caroli Secundi.
John B. (of the Borough of Combwell) for that he did not appear at this Court,
to enquire for our Sovereign Lord the King, of those things which to the said
Court do appertain, (though summoned so to do) -- 12 d. T. H. (of the Borough
of C.) for the like -- -- -- -- -- -- 12 d. N. F. (of the same Borough) for the
like -- -- -- -- -- -- 12 d. ( etc. as many as be) -- -- In all -- etc.
Monday 18 October. etc. prout
N. F. for that he did not amend his six Rods of Ditch (in the Borough of C.)
Adjoining to the Highway between Struecrouch and Tiseherst within the time at
the last Court limited -- 3 s. ( etc. as before) In all -- etc.
Thursday etc. prout)
C. I. (Borsholder of the Borough of B.) for that he did not appear at this
Court to do those things, which to his said Office do appertain. -- 5 s. (
etc. prout) In all -- etc. Sum. total. -- etc. R. K. Arm. Senesc. ibidem.
To make up a Rentall.
A Rentall of the Manor of Stone for one Year, ended at the Feast of S.
Michael the Archangel, in the Year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy
six, as follows. viz.
Katherine A. Widow.
For one Mess. and Lands in Cran. near upper Wilsley late of Richard A. (her
Husband deceased) -- -- -- 7 s.
Robert H. Gent.
For one Mess. etc. in Cr. etc. late of, etc. -- 3 s. And for one Mess. etc.
late also, etc* -- 10 d. In all -- 3 s. 10 d. The Owners of one Mess. etc. -- 2
s. ( etc. as many as be in such form) In all -- 39 s. 41 hens, 2 capons, and 2
cocks.
In case where several Manors, then say at the top, A Rentall of the several
Manors, hereafter mentioned, for one year, etc. and begin one first, and go
through with it, then another, etc.

In case where custom for Lord to have draught of Fish yearly, or such like,
you must mention it in the Rentall, both when you come to the Tenant, and in
Sum. total. And where several Manors at the end of them severally you must
say, In all, etc. prout. and when they are all done at the end you must say,

R. K. Arm. Senescallus ibidem.

So these Rentals come to as follows. viz.

Stone -- 00 -- 11 -- 01 q. 1 hen, etc. Sislingherst -- etc. Copton -- etc. In
all, etc. (and here you must mention the custom for Fish.
Customs.
A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the due
execution of his Office.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been made 14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Justice.
appear unto me, That A. B. and C. D. Persons appointed by His Majesty for
managing the Customs, Officers of the Customs, or their Deputies.
have lately been forceably hindered, affronte^ abused, ^aten or wounded, to the
hazard of their lives.
in the due execution of Offices in the said place by E. F. G. H. armed with
armed with Clubs or any manner of weapon, either on board any Ship or Vessel,
or upon the land or water. And such as act in their aid and assistacce.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require you the said Constable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said E. F. G. H. and them convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and them
there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this
Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive them into the said
Gaol, and them there safely to keep till the next Quarter Sessions, there to be
dealt withal as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Against carrying away Goods without paying Custom, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Justice. 2
Witnesses.
been made unto me, That A. B. Carman, Porter, Waterman, or other person.
has assisted in the taking taking up, landing, shipping off, or carrying away
of
of Goods goods, wares or merchandises prohibited, or whereof the Custom,
Subsidy, or other Duty are due and payable to the King
at E. in the County aforesaid without without the presence of any of the
Officers of His Majesty's Customs thereunto appointed,
at hours or at hours and times not appointed by Law. Or goods passing by
Certificates, Waste, Coquet, or otherwise, without the presence of, or notice
given to one of His Majesty's Officers.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and
every of you, that you, some or one of you, do apprehend the said A. B. and him
bring before me, to answer the premises, and farther to do and receive as by
the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Mittimus upon the precedent Warrant, for the first Offense.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Justice. 2
Witnesses* for the first Offense. Be committed to Gaol, till he find Sureties
for Good behavior.
proved before me, That B. C. has assisted in the, etc. (as in the last
Warrant.) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require you the said
Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
convey the said B. C. to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver
to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring
also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely to keep, until he shall find sufficient surety to be of Good behavior
for so long time until he be thereof discharged by the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, Under-Treasurer, or Barons of the Exchequer. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Upon the second like Offense.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 14 Car. 2. cap. 11. 1 Justice. 2
Witnesses for the second Offense. pay 5 li.
proved before me, That C. D. has assisted in the, etc. [as in the Warrant
last but one] And forasmuch as the said C. D. has once before offended in the
like kind: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require you the said
Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
convey the said C. D. to his Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver
to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring
also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely to keep for the space of two months, (without Bail or Mainprise) or
until he shall pay the Sheriff of this County the sum of five pounds, (for
the use of His Majesty) or until he shall by the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor,
or Under-Treasurer, or Court of Exchequer, be thence discharged. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal, etc.

Deer.
A Warrant for stealing Deer.
To the Constables, etc. of T. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas information has been given to me that A. B. of H. within
your said Parish of T. has lately within the space of six months last past
coursed, killed, or taken forth of a Park situate in this County certain Deer
contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided; These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) straightly to charge and command you, and
every of you, that immediately upon sight hereof you bring before me or some
other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, the Body of the
said A. B. to answer the aforesaid premises, and be proceeded against
according to Law. And hereof fail not at your perils, etc.

A Warrant to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Justice. By
Confession, or one Witness, within six months.
proved before me, That A. B. of C. has unlawfully unlawfully coursed, killed,
hunted, or taken away any Red or Fallow Deer
Deer in in any Forest, Chase, Purlieu, Paddock, Wood, Park, or other Ground
where Deer are or have been usually kept. Or shall be aiding or assisting
therein.
of E. F. against the form of the Statute in that case made and provided: These
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by way of Distress upon the Goods
and Chattels of the said A. B. the sum of 20 li. by him forfeited for the
Offense aforesaid; the one moiety thereof to the use of C. D. (who informs of
the said Offense) and the other moiety to the use of the said E. F. Owner of
the Deer aforesaid: And in case of want of sufficient Distress, that you
certify me thereof forthwith. Given under my hand and seal this second day of
May, Anno Dom. 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, etc. 31.

A Mittimus to the House of Correction for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent. ss. WHereas by my Warrant you 13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Justice, 1 or more
Witnesses, 6 months hard Labor, or 12 months Imprisonment and Sureties for
Good behavior for a year then following.
the said Constable and Borsholders were lately required to levy by way of
Distress of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of C. the sum of twenty pounds by
him forfeited for an Offense by him lately committed against the form of the
Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majesty's Reign, (entitled, An
Act to prevent the unlawful coursing, hunting, or killing of Deer;) And you
the said Constable have returned unto me thereupon, that the said A. B. has
not sufficient Distress to be taken for the moneys aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you the said Constable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said A. B. and him safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and
deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.)
Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and
there detain and put him to hard labor for six months. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. WHereas by my Warrant you the 13 Car. 2. cap. 10. 1 Justice.
said Constable and Borsholders were lately required to levy by way of Distress
and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of, etc. the sum of twenty pounds,
by him forfeited for an Offense by him lately committed against the form of the
Statute made in the thirteenth year of His now Majesty's Reign, (entitled, An
Act to prevent the unlawful coursing, hunting, or killing of Deer;) And you
the said Constable have returned unto me thereupon, that the said A. B. has
not sufficient Distress to be taken for the moneys aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you the said Constable
and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said A. B. and him safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and deliver him to the
aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you,
the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to
keep for the space of one whole year, (without Bail or Mainprise) and farther,
until he has given sufficient Security for his Good behavior for one whole
year next ensuing after his enlargement. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Warrant for a Buck.
To the Keeper, etc.
UPon sight hereof you are to kill and deliver to I. B. Esquire one fat Buck of
this Season, for which this shall be your Warrant.

A. B.

Drunkenness.
A Warrant for Drunkenness, the first Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to the Churchwardens of the Parish of, etc. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has this present 4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1
Justice. View. Confession. 1 Witness within six months. Upon Conviction pay 5
s. to the Poor.
day been duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. was on the
fifth of May last drunk in the Parish (contrary to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you, that you the faid Constable or Churchwardens do require the said
A. B. to pay (for the said Offense) to the hands of you the said Churchwardens
(to be by you accounted for to the use of the Poor of the same Parish) five
shillings of lawful money of England within one week now next ensuing, and if
the said A. B. shall refuse or neglect to pay the same as aforesaid, that then
you the said Constable or Churchwardens do levy (to the use aforesaid) the
said 5 s. of the Goods of the said A. B. by Distress and Sale of the same
(rendering unto him the overplus of the moneys remaining of the said Sale,) and
if the said A. B. be not able to pay the said sum of 5 s. that then you the
said Constable do set him in the Stocks, there to remain by the space of six
hours. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

Convicted upon my view. Convicted by his Confession before me.
The second Conviction.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been this 4 Iac. c. 5. 21 Iac. c. 7. 1 Justice.
View. Confession.
present day duly proved before me, That A. B. of the Parish of C. was upon the
fifth of May last drunk in the Parish (contrary to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided) And forasmuch as the 1 Witness within six months.
said A. B. has been once before lawfully convicted of the said offense of
Drunkenness: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the
said Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said
A. B. to come before me, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County,
to be bound with two Sureties to His said Majesty in one Recognizance or
Obligation of ten pound, with condition to be from thenceforth of good
behavior (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided)
which if he shall refuse to do, that then you do him safely convey to the Gaol
aforesaid, and deliver him there to the said Keeper of the same, (together with
this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said
Gaol, and him there safely to keep until he shall be so bound with two
Sureties as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and
seal at, etc.

Convicted upon my view. Convicted by his own Confession before me.
Excise.
Note NOne shall meddle with any Office relating to the Excise till they have
taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before 2 Justices of the Peace of
the County where such Office is, or one Baron of the Exchequer, and the Oath
mentioned Vide Title Oaths.
in 12 Car. 2. cap. 23.

A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise.
Kent ss. WE whose names are hereunto 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Justices.
subscribed (His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid) do
certify, That A. B. of C. in the said County has before us (this present day)
taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath mentioned in the
Statute made in the twelfth year of His now Majesty's Reign, (entitled, A
Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquours, for the
increase of His Majesty's Revenue during His life.) Given under our hands and
seals the 2. day of May in the 31. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles the Second.

None shall meddle with any Office relating to the Excise till they have taken
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy before two Justices of the Peace of the
County where such Office is, or one Baron of the Exchequer. And the Oath of an
Excise man. Vide Title Oaths.

This Oath is by the Justices to be certified to the next Quarter Sessions,
there to be Recorded.

A Warrant to summon those who refuse to pay the Excise.
To the Constable, etc.
Kanc. ss. WHereas Complaint has been made unto us this present day by A. B.
of C. sworn Officer to the Commissioners of Excise of Ale and Beer of the said
County, That E. F. of G. in the said County, Victualler, has Brewed and put to
sale certain Barrels of strong Beer since the second day of May last past,
without paying the duty of Excise in compounding with the Commissioners for
this division contrary to an Act of Parliament in that behalf made: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do cause the said E. F. to be and appear before us at T. in the County
aforesaid upon the tenth day of June, at nine of the Clock in the forenoon of
the same day to show cause why the said E. F. should not pay the duty of Excise
as aforesaid. Hereos fail not, etc. Given under, etc.

A Warrant for Distress on Alehousekeepers, for not paying Excise.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has been 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24.
2 Justices. Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, Victualler, and Retailer of Beer, Ale,
Cider, Perry, Metheglin, Strongwater, brewing, making, or retailing the same.
Every month make particular Entries thereof at the Office of Excise within
their (...) (...).
made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed (His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the said County of K.
Alehousekeeper has not paid or cleared off his Duty of Excise unto such person
as by the Statute in that behalf made is appointed, according to the Entry of
the said A. B. in that behalf made, as by the Statute aforesaid is directed;
and upon examination of the Complaint aforesaid we do find the same to be true:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the sum of, etc. upon the Goods
and Chattels of the said A. B. being the double value of the Duty so not paid
or cleared off, and by him forfeited, according to the form of the said
Statute, and to sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be
redeemed within fourteen days;) and that you pay the moneys so levied to such
person or persons as by the said Statute is directed, rendering to the said A.
B. the overplus, (if any be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, that you do
forthwith certify us thereof, to the end we may farther proceed touching the
same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, etc.

A Mittimus where not sufficient to pay Excise.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas by Warrant under our 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Justices.
hands you the said Constable and Borsholders were required to levy of the
Goods and Chattels of A. B. of C. in the said County, etc. by him forfeited,
(according to the form of the Statute, entitled, A Grant of certain
Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquours, for the increase of his
Majesty's Revenue during His life,) and you the said Constable have this day
certified us, that the said A. B. has not sufficient Distress whereby the
said, etc. can be levied: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will
and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the
said A. B. and him convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you,
the said Keeper, to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there imprison,
till satisfaction be made of the aforesaid, etc. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

To levy the Forfeiture for not making a due Entry.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has been 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24.
2 Justices. Common Brewer forfeits 10 li. Innkeeper forfeits 5 li.
Alehousekeeper, Victualler, Retailer of
made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the said County of D,
etc. has not made such due and particular Entry of Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry,
Metheglin, or Strongwater, forfeits 20 s. 15 Car. 2. 11, 12.
as by the said Statute is required; and upon examination of the Complaint
aforesaid we do find the same to be true: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do levy the sum of, etc. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
A. B. (being the double value of the Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by
him forfeited, according to the form of the Statute aforesaid) and do sell the
said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days)
and that you pay the moneys so levied to such person or persons as by the said
Statute is directed, (rendering to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, if any be;)
And for want of sufficient Distress, that you do forthwith certify us thereof,
to the end we may farther proceed touching the same as by Law is oppointed.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A Warrant to levy the double value of the Excise on a Brewer for not paying
according to Entry made.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has been 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. cap. 24. 2
Justices.
made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of the County aforesaid) That A. B. of C. in the County aforesaid,
common Brewer, has not paid nor cleared off his Duty of Excise unto such
person as by the Statute in that behalf made is appointed, according to the
Entry of the said A. B. in that behalf made, as by the Statute aforesaid is
directed; Common Brewers forfeit (for omitting such Entries) for every default
10 li. Innkeeper 5 li. Alehousekeeper, Victualler, or Retailer of Beer, Ale,
Cider, Perry, Metheglin, strongwater, brewing, making, or retailing the same
forfeit for every default 20 s. Brewer for not paying off within a week after
Entry pay double the Duty. Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, Victular, or other
Retailer not paying off within a month after Entry pay double the Duty.
and upon examination of the Complaint aforesaid we find the same to be true:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the sum of, etc. upon the Goods
and Chattels of the said A. B. (being the double value of the Duty so not paid
or cleared off, and by him forfeited, according to the form of the Statute
aforesaid) and to sell the said Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be
redeemed within fourteen days) and that you pay the moneys so levied to such
person or persons as by the said Statute is directed, rendering to the aforesaid
A. B. the overplus, (if any be;) And for want of sufficient Distress, that you
do forthwith certify us thereof, to the end that we may proceed touching the
same as by Law is appointed. Hereof fail not, etc.

Loss of Allowance for making false Entries.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as by the Statute in 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24.
2 Justices. Allowance 3 in 23 Barrels of Beer, and 2 in 22 Barrels of Ale.
that behalf made it is enacted, That all common Brewers and makers of Beer or
Ale, (not selling the same by retail) for and in consideration of waste by
fillings and breakage of their Beer and Ale, shall have and be allowed out of
the returns made by the Gagers, upon every three and twenty Barrels of Beer
(whether strong or small) returned by the said Gagers, three Barrels; and upon
every two and twenty Barrels of Ale, (whether strong or small) returned by the
Gagers, two Barrels; And forasmuch as A. B. of C. in the said County, common
Brewer, has this present day been duly convicted before us, that he has
wittingly and willingly made a faulse Entry of [ as in Margent] Ale, Beer, etc.
by him lately brewed, contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid: We do
therefore adjudge, that the said A. B. shall forfeit and lose (for his Offense
aforesaid,) over and besides the Penalties in the said Act mentioned, the said
Allowance so to be made, for six months now next ensuing. Given under our hands
and seals the, etc.

Upon Complaint of false Entry to appear.
To A. B. of C. in the said County.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Justices. This upon complaint of false Entries of Liquours.
been made unto us, That you A. B. of C. etc. [ as above] contrary to the
Statute in that case made and provided: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to require you to appear before us at the house of D. in E. in the County
aforesaid upon the 22. day of May, to answer the premises. Hereof fail not at
your peril. Given under our hands the 18. day of May, etc.

Not suffering to gage the Vessels.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. Confirmed cap. 24. 2
Justices.
been made unto us whose names are hereunto subscribed, (His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace of the said County) That A. B. of C. in the County
aforesaid Brewer, Innkeeper, Victualler, or Retailer of Beer, Disteller of
Strongwater, or Retailer of
has refused to permit C. D. (a Gager appointed according to the Statute
aforesaid) to enter into his etc. to gage or take account of his Beer, Ale,
Cider, Perry, Metheglin, or Strongwater, over and above the double value pay 5
s.
[ Margent] And having been by the said Gager thereupon forbidden to sell,
carry out or deliver to any of his Customers any Ale, etc. [as in the Margent]
yet notwithstanding the said A. B. (after such warning given) has sold and
retailed, etc. [as in the Margent] not having paid or cleared the Duty of
Excise; And upon examination of the said Complaint we do find the same to be
true: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and
every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels
of the said A. B. five pounds for his Offense aforesaid, and sell the said
Goods and Chattels, (if they shall not be redeemed within fourteen days) and
that you do pay the moneys so levied to such person or persons as by the said
Statute is directed, (rendering to the aforesaid A. B. the overplus, if any be;)
And for want of sufficient Distress that you do forthwith certify us thereof,
to the end we may farther proceed touching the same as by Law is appointed.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A Warrant against one that procures a false Return to be made in the Office
of Excise.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved 15 Car. 2. cap. 11. 2 Justices.
before us, That A. B. of, etc. Brewer did bribe or corrupt, or give any money,
fee, or other reward whatsoever, to any Gager or other Officer
to make a false Return to make false return or report unto the Office of Excise
into the Office of Excise of of any Beer, Ale, or other Liquours exciseable
within his Charge, Division, or Walk; or to forbear or omit the doing or
executing of his place or employment.
exciseable within his Division in the said County, against the form of an Act
of Parliament lately made, (entitled, An additional Act for the ordering and
collecting the Duty of Excise, and preventing the Abuses therein) whereby he
has forfeited ten pounds for his said Offense: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, to levy by
Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. the aforesaid ten pounds,
rendering to him the overplus thereof. Fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, etc.

A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas it was duly proved 15 Car. 2. cap. 11. 2 Justices.
before us, That A. B. of, etc. Brewer, did bribe C. D. Gager, to make a false
Return into the Office of Excise of Beer, etc. exciseable within his Division
in the County against the form of an Act of Parliament lately made, (entitled,
An additional Act for the ordering and collecting the Duty of Excise, and
preventing the Abuses therein) whereby he forfeited ten pounds for his said
Offense; and we did therefore by Warrant under our hands and seals charge and
command you to levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A B. the
aforesaid ten pounds; and you the said Constable have returned to us, that for
want of such Distress you could not levy the same: These are therefore (in his
Majesty's name) to charge and command you the said Constable and Borsholders,
and every of you, to attach the said A. B. and him convey to His Majesty's
Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with
this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the
said Gaol, and him there safely keep by the space of three months, (without
Bail or Mainprise.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and
seals the, etc.

The like as in the two former Warrants (mutatis mutandis) against any sworn
Gager or other Officer that shall take and receive any bribe, money, fee, gift,
or other reward of any Brewer or other person, for any cause or matter relating
to the Excise.

A Warrant (against several persons) to distrain for the Duties of Excise, etc.
To Thomas Osborn and John Tiffin, Gent. and to either of them, and such other
person or persons as they or either of them shall take to their or either of
their assistance in execution hereof.
K. ss. WHereas Complaints were lately made unto us S. B. and R. K. Esquires,
(two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) by the
Officers of Excise, That the several persons hereunder named had committed the
several and respective Offenses herein after mentioned, and severally added to
their several names, against the form of several Statutes made for payment to
His Majesty of the Duties of Excise; And forasmuch as upon hearing of the said
Complaints (this present day) it was duly proved before us, that the said
Complaints were true, and we have therefore (according to the form of the
Statutes aforesaid) adjudged, that the said several and respective persons
shall, for his, her, and their several and respective Offenses, forfeit and pay
the several sums of money hereunder added to their several and respective
names, that is to say, Thomas Daniel of Horsmonden in the said County, Vintner,
(a Retailer of Beer,) for forfeiture for neglect of entering (by the space of
twelve months last past) of Beer by him retailed (within the said time,) twenty
and four pounds, and for double the Duty of Excise for twenty and five Barrels,
three Firkins and five Gallons of Beer of above six shillings the Barrel, and
for three Barrels and three Firkins of Beer of six shillings per may set down
for charges of levying.
Barrel or under, (he not having paid the single Duty, or any of the same)
eight pounds, fourteen shillings, and a half penny;

In all -- 32 14 00 ob.

James Jews of Horsmonden aforesaid Cordwinder, for forfeiture for neglect to
appear before us this day, to give evidence for discovery And so all other
Offenses (mutatis mutandis.) The date hereof, and locus in quo, must be upon
the day and at the place of condemnation.
of breaches of the Laws of Excise, notwithstanding that he was summoned so to
do, (according to the Statute in that behalf made) forty shillings; Edward
Budgen, late of Brenchley, in the said County, Labourer, for the like, 40 s.
and for forfeiture, for that he refusing to permit the Gager to gage or take
account of Beer by him brewed, and being thereupon forbidden by the said Gager
to sell any of the Beer aforesaid, he (after such warning given) did sell the
same, (not having paid or cleared the Duty of Excise) five pounds; and for
costs and charges of the Officer and others employed in the service (touching
the premises) five shillings,

In all -- -- 09 05 00

These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to authorize and command you, and
every of you, to levy the aforesaid several and respective sums of money upon
the Goods and Chattels of the said several and respective Offenders, and to
make sale of the said Goods and Chattels, if they shall not be redeemed within
14 days, (rendering to the parties the overplus, if any be;) And for want of
sufficient Distress, to certify us, or one of us, of the same, to the end that
such farther proceedings may be made therein as (by the Laws and Statutes
aforesaid) are required. And you are hereby farther commanded, to dispose of
all such moneys as you shall (by virtue hereof) levy or receive in such manner
as (by the Laws and Statutes aforesaid) is appointed. Given under our hands and
seals the, etc.

All the beforementioned Warrants upon the Statute of Excise 12 Car. 2. cap.
24. will also serve (mutatis mutandis) upon the other Statute touching Excise,
made the same Parliament, entitled, An Act for taking away of the Court of
Wards and Liveries.

Felony.
A Warrant to apprehend a Felon.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received Information 1 Justice.
and Charge against A. B. of, etc. for felonious taking of, etc. These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do attach the said A. B. of, etc. and him bring before me, or some other
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be Examined
touching the premises, and to be farther dealt withal according to Law.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Mittimus of a Felon.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and H. the Keeper of His
Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid, or his
Deputy, and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's name) 2 Justices 1 Quorum.
to command you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do safely
convey to His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in the County
aforesaid, A. B. of, etc. and him there safely to deliver to the Keeper of the
said Gaol, or his sufficient Deputy, (according to the tenor of the Precept in
that behalf herewithall declared unto you.) Delivering also to the said Keeper
the Precept aforesaid. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

Another.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid.
K. ss. I Send you herewithall the Body of A. B. of, etc. brought before me
this present day, and charged with the Felonious taking, etc. commanding you
(in His Majesty's name) to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely to keep, till he shall be from thence delivered by due Order of Law.
Hereof fail not at your peril. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion.
To the Constable and Borsholders of F.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint has been made unto me by A. B. of C. that of late
he has had feloniously taken from him certain Goods, six Cows, etc. (as the
Case is) and that he has in suspicion diverse evil disposed persons within your
Parish of F. These are to require you that immediately upon sight hereof, you
make diligent search in all and every such suspected houses, and places within
your Parish, as you and the said A. B. shall think convenient. And if upon your
search you find any of the said Goods in the hands of any person, or shall have
any other just cause of suspicion of any person, that then you bring such
suspected person before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Kent, to answer such matter as shall be alleged
against them. Hereof fail not, etc.

A Warrant for apprehending of one that has dangerously hurt another.
To the Constable and Borsholders, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I am credibly informed, That A. B. of your Town, Ioyner,
has now lately dangerously hurt one C. D. of your said Town, Bricklayer, by a
blow which he has given the said C. D. on the Head, and another on the
Stomach, so as the said C. D. is in danger of Death thereby. These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) straightly to charge and command you, that
immediately on sight hereof you, or one of you, do bring the said A. B. before
me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County,
to find sufficient Sureties, as well for his appearance before the Justices at
the next Gaol delivery to be holden for this County, then and there to answer
unto the premises, and do and receive therefore what the Court shall enjoin
on him; As also, that he the said A. B. shall in the mean time keep the Peace
toward our Sovereign Lord the King, and all His Liege people, but especially
toward the said C. D. And hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand
and seal at this, etc.

A Liberate to deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol in A. etc. Greeting.
K. ss* FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. etc. Blacksmith, has before us found
sufficient Mainprise to appear before the Justices of Gaoldelivery at the next
general Jail-deliver to be holden in the said County, there to answer to such
things as shall be then on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord objected
against him, and namely, to the feloniously taking of two Sheep, (for the
suspicion whereof he was taken and committed to your said Goal.) We command you
on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord, that if the said A. B. do remain in
your said Gaol for the said cause, and for none other, then you forbear to
grieve or detain him any longer, but that you deliver him thence, and suffer
him to go at large, and that upon the pain will fall thereon. Given under our
hands and seals, etc.

A Warrant to Bind persons to give in Evidence against a Felon.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and every of them.
K. ss. THese are to require you upon sight hereof to warn to be before me, or
some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, within two
days next following, A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. to the end that they may be bound
to make their personal appearance at the next general Jail-deliver or
Quarter Sessions to be holden for this County, then and there to testify their
knowledge concerning a Felony supposed to be done by R. H. now a Prisoner in
the Castle of K. and that you do then go with them to the Justice with this
Warrant. Hereof fail not, etc.

Or thus:
To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss. YOU are hereby required forthwith to warn the persons undernamed of
your Parish to be before me at my dwelling house in D. etc. upon Thursday next
by eight of the Clock in the morning, to testify their knowledge concerning
certain felonious acts supposed to be done by A. B. C. D. of, etc. and that you
your self be then there with this Warrant, to show how you have executed it.
Hereof fail not. Given under, etc.

A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence against
Principals and Accessory in case of Felony.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is See Title Recognizance.
such, That if the within bound A. B. do personally appear before His
Majesty's Justices of Jail-deliver to be holden for the within named County
of K. and do then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of
Indictment against A. R. and I. R. for the felonious taking and stealing one
Goose and two Hens from the aforesaid A. B. wherewith the said A. R. and I. R.
are charged before the within named Justices, and against M. R. Wife of A. R.
as Accessory to the Felony aforesaid, with which she is also charged before the
Justices aforesaid, and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knows
concerning the Felony aforesaid, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire
thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors
that shall pass upon the Trial of the said A. R. I. R. and M. R. or any of them
for the same; That then, etc.

T. G.

A Condition of a Recognizance where two Felonies are committed to give
Evidence.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound I. W. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices of Jail-deliver at the next
general Jail-deliver to be holden for the within named County of K. and do
then and there prefer or cause to be preferred one or more Bill or Bills of
Indictment against I. B. for the felonious taking and stealing of one Shirt and
one pair of ^ustian Drawers from the aforesaid I. W. wherewith the aforesaid I.
B. is charged before the within named Justices; for the felonious taking and
stealing of six Napkins and one Table-cloath from Sir R. B. Baronet, with
suspicion whereof the said I. B. is likewise charged before the Justices
aforesaid; and do also then and there give such Evidence as he knows against
the said I. B. touching the several Felonies aforesaid, as well to the Jurors
that shall enquire thereof for our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the
Jurors that shall pass upon the Trials of the said I. B. for the same; That
then, etc.

A Condition to give Evidence for Felony, thus.
UPon Condition, That if you A. B. shall pursonally appear, and do then and
there pursue, and give such Evidence as you know against C. D. now prisoner in
the Gaol of the Liberty aforesaid, for and concerning his felonious stealing of
an holland Apron of the Goods of one E. F. and do not depart, etc, then, etc.

A Condition of a Recognizance to appear upon Felony.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas at the last general
Jail-deliver holden for the within named County of K. it was ordered, that the
within bound E. R. shall give very good Security in such sums as is within
mentioned before the Justice within named, for his personal Appearance at the
then next general Jail-deliver to be holden for the County aforesaid, to
answer a Felony and Robbery on the Highway, whereof he stands indicted in the
said County, (as by the Record of the said Court reference thereunto being had
may more fully appear) which Security he has given, (as in the said
Recognizance is mentioned:) If therefore the said E. R. do personally appear at
the aforesaid next general Jail-deliver to be holden for the said County, to
answer the Felony and Robbery aforesaid, That then, etc.

A Condition to appear upon suspicion of Felony.
UPon the Condition, That if the said A. B. shall personally appear before His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace at the next general Sessions of the Peace and
Jail-deliver to be holden at A. and do then and there make answer unto all
such matters which on the part and behalf of His said Majesty shall be objected
against him, for and concerning the suspicion of his felonious stealing of a
Horse [or of the Goods] of one C. D. and do not depart thence without License
of the Court. Then your Recognizance to be void, or else to stand in force.

A Bond.
NOverint universi per praesentes, nos T. G. de C. in Com. K. and N. B. de C.
in Com. praed. Yeoman, teneri and firmiter obligari W. P. de C. praed.
Blacksmith, in quadragint. libris legalis monetae Angliae, solvend. eisd. W. P.
and H. C. aut eorum alteri, vel eorum certo Attern. Executoribus vel
Administratoribus suis: ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter faciend.
obligavimus nos, and utrumque nostrum per se, pro toto and in solid. Haeredes,
Executores and Administ. nostros, and utriusque nostri, firmiter per praesentes
Sigillis nostris sigillat. Dat. etc. Anno Dom. etc. Annoque Regni, etc.

A Condition to save one harmless who was bound for the appearance of a person
suspected for Felony.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named W. P.
and H. C. at the special instance and request of the above bound T. G. and N.
B. in and by one Recognizance bearing the date above written, taken and
acknowledged before S. B. and R. K. Esquires, (two of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace of the above named County of K.) do each of them the said W. P.
and H. C. stand bound to His said Majesty in, etc. of lawful money of England,
with Condition, that if the said T. G. do personally appear before His
Majesty's Justices of general Jail-deliver at the next general Jail-deliver
to be holded for the said County, to answer unto His said Majesty, in and upon
such matters as shall be then and there objected against him, touching the
felonious taking and stealing of, etc. (with suspicion whereof he stands
charged before one of the Justices aforesaid) and farther to do and receive as
by the said Court shall be enjoined, and do not depart the said Court without
license of the same; That then the said Recognizance to be void, etc. as by the
same and the Condition thereof may more certainly and at large appear: That if
therefore the said T. G. do in all things perform the said Condition of the
said Recognizance, that then this Obligation shall be void, or else shall stand
in full force and virtue.

If any man be Arrested for Felony, his Goods ^ Ri. 3. c. 3. Coke. 8. 171.
Stamf. 162. Br. forf. 58.
shall not be seized until Attainder or Conviction, upon pain to forfeit the
double value to the Party grieved; for the Party grieved may sell them bona
fide for his maintenance in Prison before Conviction.

After Conviction the Town presently stands F. Cor. 3. 66. Stam. 193, 194. 3^
Ed. 3. 3.
Charged for the Felons Goods (if then in his possession,) and shall answer the
Impairing of them, except they show who detained them, and that they could not
have possession of them.

Fire.
A Testimonial for Justices of the Peace for Poor men that have had loss by
Fire.
Kent ss. TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing or Testimonial
shall come to be seen, heard, or read; A. B. C. D. and E. F. Esquires, three of
the Justices of the Peace within the said County of K. send greeting. Whereas
it is both Godly, and consonant to Christian Charity, in matters doubtful and
ambiguous to certify and report the truth; We have thought it our duty, (at
the earnest and lamentable Suit and Petition of our loving Neighbors the
Bearers or Bringers hereof, G. H. I. K. etc.) to publish and declare unto your
common knowledge, That on the twentieth of M. last past, between two and three
of the clock in the morning, by casualty and great mischance by Fire, as well
their several dwelling Houses, to the number of, etc. and all other Edifices
and Buildings to every of their said dwelling Houses belonging; and also all
their Corn, and most of their several Goods and Household Stuff were consumed,
wasted, and burnt, to the great danger of the Bodies of them and their
Families, and their exceeding great loss and impoverishment. And forasmuch as
it is a Godly and Charitable deed, to further, help, and relieve such poor,
needy, and miserable persons, (being of honest name, fame, and conversation) as
they who have suffered this great loss; And for that the Bearers hereof in the
behalf of themselves and their Neighbors, are enforced by reason of their
Losses to seek for help and succor for their relief. And we knowing their
Estate to be such as is premised, and moved with commiseration of their sad
Estate and Condition, Have therefore as much as in us lies, given License unto
them, and every of them, to make their repair from Parish Church to Parish
Church, and to every Parish Church and Chapel, Town, and Place within the
County of K. to ask, receive, and take Charitable Devotion and Benevolence of
all good and well disposed people toward the recovery of their said great
Losses. And our request further is, That you, and every of you to whom they
shall repair, do extend your lawful favor unto them, permitting them without
your denial to execute the tenor of this our License. Desiring all
Ecclesiastical Persons, to whom these distressed persons shall make their
Address in this behalf, to declare the tenor hereof to their Parishioners in
every of their Parish Churches and Chapels on the Sabbath days, or other
Festival days, exorting them to extend their Charity in this behalf; and those
whom it concerns, to aid and assist them in the collection thereof. In Witness,
etc.

A Charitable Request made by certain Justices of the Peace to the Inhabitants
of a Division for Relief of F. S. who had been therein lately ruined by Fire.
K. ss. WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the County of K. and inhabiting in and near the division of the said
County, wherein the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid is situate, having
received credible information that F. S. of the Parish aforesaid Labourer, upon
the second day of April last past (by a sudden Fire hapening in his said
dwelling house in the said Parish) had his Flax (to the value of thirty and
five pounds) suddenly burnt and consumed (to the utter undoing him, his wife
and children) unless he be relieved by the Charity of well disposed people. We
therefore taking the said Loss into consideration, and much commiserating the
same do, upon the humble Petition of the F. S. (so far forth as lawfully we
may) earnestly recommend his said sad condition, to the charitable
consideration and benevolence of all well disposed people inhabiting within the
division aforesaid, desiring them to contribute (what God shall move their
hearts unto) toward his help and relief, therein desiring also the Ministers
and Churchwardens of every the Parishes within the division aforesaid to
promote the said Charitable work. Given under our hands the, etc. of May, 1681.
etc.

Forceable Entry.
A Warrant to return a Jury to inquire 15 R. 2. cap. 2.
of a Forceable Entry.
The Party grieved shall bear the Costs that the Justice of Peace shall sustain
in the execution of the Statute of Forceable Entries. 8 H. 6. c. 9.
Kent ss. R. K. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace
in the County aforesaid) To the Sheriff of the said County Greeting. On the
behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King I command you, that you do cause to come
before me at C. in the Parish of G. in the County aforesaid, upon Monday the
tenth day of June next ensuing, four and twenty sufficient and indifferent men
of the neighborhood of L. in the said County, whereof every one have lands and
tenements of the yearly value of forty shillings by the year at the least,
(above reprises,) to enquire upon their Oath for His said Majesty of a certain
Entry by strong hand made into the mesuage of A. B. at L. aforesaid, against
the form of the Statute in that behalf provided, (as it is said:) And that you
do at the said day return twenty shillings issues upon every The second day 40
s. issues. The third 100 s. issues. Every day after double issues.
of the Jurors by you in this behalf to be impannelled. Hereof fail not upon
pain of twenty pounds to be by you forfeited to His said Majesty, and upon such
other penalty as (by the Statute in that behalf provided) is declared, (if you
shall be slack, and make not due execution hereof.) And have you there the
names of the Jurors, and this Precept. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.
the second day of, etc.

A Record of a Forceable Entry.
K. ss. EGO R. K. Armig. unus Iusticiariorum Dom. Regis nunc ad pacem in
Comitatu Kanc. praedicto conservandam assignatorum, Certifico, quod secundo die
Februarii, Anno Regni dicti Dom. Regis nunc tricesimo questus est mihi A. B. de
C. in Comitatu Kanc. praedicto Yeoman, Quod E. F. and aliae personae ignotae
perturbatores pacis dicti Dom. Regis nunc praedicto secundo die Februarii Anno
supradicto in unum messuagium and unum Atrium cum pertin. adtunc, and adhunc,
existens liberum tenementum W. I. Gent. ac in possessione praed. A. B. pro
termino december annorum adhuc venturorum, situatum in C. praedicta, in Com.
praedicto pacifice and quiet intraver. and intrationem fecer. Et postea, viz.
praedicto secundo die Februarii, Anno supra dicto apud C. praedictam in Com.
praedicto, praedictum A. B. a praedicto Messuagio, and Atrio cum pertin. vi,
and Armis, etc. illicite, and manu forti expuler. ejecer. and amover. Et praed.
A. B. sic deinde expuls. ejectum, and amotum a Messuagio, and Atrio,
praedictis, cum pertin. ut praedicitur vi and Armis, illicite and manu forti
adtunc and ibidem extra tenuer. and detinuer. Ad grave damnum praedicti A. B.
contra pacem dicti Dom. Regis nunc, etc. ac contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi
casu editi, and provisi. Et unde praedictus A. B. petiit a me remedium in hac
part relevari. Qua querela and petitione, praedict. per me auditis existen.
Ego praefatus J. B. immediate personaliter accessi ad Messuagium and Atrium
praedicta cum pertin. Ac in Messuagio praedicto adtunc and ibidem inventi
praedictum E. F. praedictum Messuagium and Atrium cum pertinentiis, a praedicto
A. B. vi, and armis illicite and manu forti, extra tenentem, and detinentem,
contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi, and provisi, super quo, ego
praefatus J. B. adtunc, and ibidem causavi praedictum E. F. capt. and arrestat.
and misi ad Gaolam de M. in Com. Kanc. praed. ibid. remanere sub salva custodia
donec inveniret coram me, sive aliquo alio Iusticiariorum dicti Dom. Regis ad
pacem in Com. praedict. sufficientem securitatem pro personali comparentia
ipsius A. B. ad proximam generalem Quarterialem-Sessionem pacis dicti Dom.
Regis in Com. praed. tenent. ad respondendum transgressioni and contemp. praed.
Ac quod interim se been gereret in cujus rei testimonium ego praefatus J. B.
praedictae Certificationi manum and sigillum meum apposui, vicesimo die Maii,
Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli secundi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. Tricesimo secundo Annoque
Dom. 1680.

A Warrant to the Sheriff for Restitution.
Kent ss. R. K. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace
in the County aforesaid) To the Sheriff of the said County Greeting. Whereas by
a certain Inquisition taken before me at A. in the County aforesaid the second
day of June, etc. upon the Oath of A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. according to the form
of the Statute in Case of Forceable Entry made and provided, it was found that
G. H. etc. and others [ as in the Inquisition] as by the said Inquisition of
Record does more fully appear. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
will and require you, (with the power of the County) if need require, to go to
the said Message, etc. and other the premises, and do cause the same with
their appurtenances to be reseized, and the said C. D. to be restored in,
and-to his full possession thereof, as he was before the same Entry, according
to the form of the aforesaid Statute. And hereof fail not, etc.

A Mittimus upon view of Forceable Detainour.
Kent ss. R. K. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace
in the County aforesaid) To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said
County at Maidstone in the County aforesaid Greeting. Whereas, upon Complaint
unto me by A. B. of L. in the said County, I did this present day go to the
dwelling house of the said A. in L. aforesaid, and there did find C. D. of,
etc. E. F. of, etc. forceably, with strong hand and armed power holding the
said house, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and against the
form of the Statute in that behalf made and provided; I do therefore
herewithall send unto you the Bodies of the said C. D. E. F. and G. H.
convicted of the said forceable holding by my own View, Testimony and Record,
commanding you (in His Majesty's name) to receive them into the said Gaol, and
them there safely to keep until they have made fine and ransom to His said
Majesty for their said trespasses, and shall be thence delivered by the order
of the Law of this Land. Hereof fail not, etc.

Foreign Wares.
A Warrant to search for, and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibited, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. Forasmuch as I am informed, That 14 Car. 2. 1 Justice.
great quantities of foreign Bonelace, Cut-work, Imbrodery, Fringe,
Bandstrings, Buttons of Thread of Silk, and Needle Work made of Thread or Silk,
have been lately brought into this Kingdom from parts beyond the Seas, (against
the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made:) These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to require and authorize you, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do enter and search for such Manufactures in the Shops
being open, Warehouses and Dwelling-houses of such person or persons within
the said Hundred as shall be suspected to have any such Imbrodery, foreign
Bone-lace, Cut-work, foreign Bandstrings, Buttons, or Needle Work, and to seize
the same. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Highways.
A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the Inhabitants of a Parish for not choosing
Surveyors of the Highways.
To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as the Churchwardens, 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Justices.
Surveyors to be chosen yearly, the Monday or Tuesday in Easterweek.
Constables, Borsholders and Inhabitants of the said Parish did not choose
Surveyors of the Highways aforesaid for this present year of our Lord, but
made default of such choice, (against the form of the Statute in that behalf
lately made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will
and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy,
collect and gather the sum of five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods of
the said Churchwardens, Constables, Borsholders and Inhabitants, (rendering to
the Parties so distrained the overplus, if any be;) And that you do employ and
bestow the moneys so levied, collected or gathered, in such manner as by the
Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

To distrain for Highway Tax.
To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Complaint) 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Justices.
it appears unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named have not paid
unto you the several sums hereunder specified, and severally added to Not
paying within 20 days after demand forfeits double his Assessment.
their several names, assessed on them for the repairing and amending and
enlarging of the public and common Highways in the said Parish, (according to
the form of the Statute in that behalf made and provided:) These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather, by Distress and Sale of the
respective Goods of the said respective Persons, double so much money as was so
as aforesaid respectively assessed on them, (rendering to the Parties so
distrained the overplus, if any be;) And that you do employ and bestow the
moneys so levied, collected or gathered, in such manner as by the Statute
aforesaid is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals the, etc.

A. B. of A. aforesaid 2 s. C D. of A. aforesaid 3 s. etc.


For not sending in Teams, to work in the Highways.
To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Complaint) 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Justices.
Forfeit 10 s. per diem for a Team, Laborers 18 d. Vide 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2
next Justices. Proof by 1 Witness.
it appears unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named were by you
charged to send each of them a Team to work in the Highways in the Parish
aforesaid, (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and
provided;) and yet nevertheless they neglected so to do by the space of such
number of days as are hereunder mentioned, and severally added to their several
names: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather, by
Distress and Sale of the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, the
respective sums of money hereunder added to their respective names, (being
moneys by them respectively forfeited for their said neglects, according to the
Statute aforesaid) To be employed toward mending the Highways.
rendering to the Parties so distrained the overplus, (if any be;) And that you
do employ and bestow the moneys so levied, collected or gathered, in such
manner as by the Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed. Hereof fail not
at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A. B. of one day 10 s. C. D. of two days 20 s. etc.


Against those that refuse or neglect to work in the Highways.
To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your Complaint) 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 next Justices.
Every Labourer forfeits 1 s. 6 d. per diem that he neglects to work. Vide 22
Car. 2. cap. 12.
it appears unto us, That the several Persons hereunder named were by you
charged to come to labor in the Highways in the Parish aforesaid, (according
to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and provided;) and yet
nevertheless they neglected so to do by the space of such number of days as
are hereunder mentioned, and severally added to their several names: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do levy, collect and gather, by Distress and Sale
of the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, the respective sums of
money hereunder added to their respective names, (being moneys by them
respectively forfeited for their said neglect, according to the Statute
aforesaid) rendering to the Parties so distrained the overplus, (if any be;) And
that you do employ and bestow the moneys so levied, collected or gathered, in
such manner as by the Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed. Hereof fail
not, etc.

A. B. of A. aforesaid one day 1 s. 6 d. C. D. of A. aforesaid two days, etc. 3
s. etc.


To empower the Surveyors to dig Gravel, etc. upon Wastes or Commons out of the
Parish.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (by the information 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Justices.
of the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid)
it appears unto us, that there is not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders
and Stones, within the said Parish to repair their common and public
Highways: We do therefore (according to the form of the Statut^e in that case
lately made and provided) hereby allow and approve, that the said Surveyors, or
either of them, and such Person and Persons as they or either of them shall
appoint, shall and may dig, take and carry away Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cinders or
Stones, out of any Waste or Common of any Parish, Town, Village or Hamlet,
neighboring to the Parish aforesaid, or upon the Seacoast, without paying any
thing for the same, (for the repairing and amending of the Highways aforesaid)
so as they fill up the place within one month next after their digging
aforesaid, (if required by the owner of the Soil.) Given under our hands and
seals the, etc.

To appoint what shall be paid by the Surveyors for digging Gravel, etc. in any
man's Ground.
Kent ss. WHereas (by the information 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Justices.
of the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid)
it appears unto us, that there being not sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Stones,
Cinders and Sand, or other materials, for to amend and repair the aforesaid
Highways, within the common or waste grounds of the said Parish, they did
(according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made and provided)
enter into the ground of B. C. in the Parish aforesaid, near adjoining to the
Highways to be repaired, and did dig, take and carry away materials which they
judged necessary for the said Reparations; and for that difference did arise
between the said Surveyors and the said B. C. about the Damages by the said B.
C. suffered by the digging and carriage thereof: We do therefore (according to
the Statute aforesaid) assess the Damages aforesaid at, etc. of lawful money
of England, which the said Surveyors are to render unto him for the same. Given
under our hands and seals the, etc.

Against Surveyors for not accounting.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's common Gaol for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. fol. 128. 2 Justices.
To account in a year after their Surveyorship, or to Gaol till they account.
been made unto us, That B. C. and D. E. Surveyors of the Highways in the
Parish of A. in the said County for the year, etc. have not made such account
touching their said Office as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is
appointed; and upon examination of the business upon Oath, we do find the said
Complaint to be true: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require
you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one
of you, do take the said B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey them to His
Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver them to the said Keeper of the
same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said Keeper, to
receive them into the Gaol aforesaid, and them there safely to keep, until
they have made such true and perfect account touching their said Office as by
the said Statute is appointed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our
hands and seals the, etc.

Against the Surveyors who have not paid the moneys in their hands to the next
Surveyors.
To the Constable, etc. ( as in the precedent Warrant.)
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has 14 Car. 2. cap. 6. 2 Justices.
been made unto us, That B. C. and D. E. Surveyors of the Highways in the
Parish of A. in the said County for the year, etc. had in their hands (upon
their account made touching their said Office, according to the form of the
Statute in that case made) the sum of, etc. overplus, which they have not
returned or paid to the next Surveyors, or either of them, (as by the said
Statute is appointed;) and upon examination of the business upon Oath, we do
find the said Complaint to be true: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that
you, some or one of you, do take the said B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey
them to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver them to the said
Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you, the said
Keeper, to receive them into the Gaol aforesaid, and them there safely keep,
until they have made payment of the said, etc. to the aforesaid next Surveyors
(as by the said Statute is appointed.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under our hands and seals the, etc.

House of Correction.
A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it is observed, That 2 Justices. 1 Iac. c. 4. The second
part of the Institutes, page 728.
(for want of due Execution of the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made
and provided for the apprehending and punishing of Rogues, Vagabonds, sturdy
Beggars, and other wandering and idle Persons) the number of them does daily
increase within this Division, to the great prejudice of the Inhabitants
therein: (For the better prevention whereof for the future, and of Robberies,
Burglaries, and other Felonies, and Misdemeanors often occasioned thereby)
These are (in His Majesty's name) to command you, and every of you, diligently
to observe and perform our Directions in the premises herewith sent unto you,
as you, and every one of you will answer to the contrary at your perils. Giving
you farther hereby to understand, that we shall from time to time require a
strict account of your due observance and execution of the same: and in case of
negligence of you or any of you therein, we shall forthwith (upon knowledge
thereof) proceed with effect (according to Law) to punish such of you as shall
so neglect the same. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

1. That you do henceforth take special care to apprehend all Rogues,
Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandering and idle Persons, and punish and
pass them away according to Law.

2. That you do in one night within every week, between the date of the Precept
aforesaid and our next meeting, make a general search within the said Hundred
in all suspicious places for the finding out and apprehending of all Rogues,
Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandering and idle Persons: And such as in
the said search you shall find and apprehend, that you do punish and pass them
away according to Law.

3. That you do cause Watches to be duly 13 Edw. 1. cap. 4. Watch to be kept in
every Town, from Michaelmas to Ascension day.
kept in fitting places of the said Hundred by honest and able men of the same
every night, from Sunsetting until Sunrising, until the nine and twentieth
day of September next ensuing; according to the Statute made at Westminster. in the
thirteenth year of the Reign of the late King Edward the First.

4. That you do forthwith bring before us, or some or one of us, or some other
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, all such Rogues,
Vagabonds, sturdy Beggars, and other wandering and idle Persons as you shall
apprehend by day or night, and conceive to be more than ordinarily dangerous,
or to be suspected for any Murder, Robbery, Burglary, Felony, or other
Misdemeanour, to the end they may be farther dealt withal as to Justice does
appertain.

5. That you do from time to time (and more especially at every of our
Assemblies or Meetings herein after mentioned) present unto us the names of all
such Persons within the said Hundred as be masterless, or live out of service
or be common Alehouse-haunters, or expenders of their money in riot, (not duly
laboring for their living, and not having whereby so to maintain them.)

And the names of all unlicensed Alehousekeepers within the said Hundred, or
notoriously suspected so to be.

Together with the names of such licensed Alehouse-keepers within the same as
are of evil behavior, or do suffer evil Rule, Gaming, or other Disorder to be
kept in their said houses.

And the names of such Witnesses as can or will testify the keeping of any such
Alehouse* unlicensed, or the evil behavior of, or suffering evil Rule, Gaming,
or other Disorder by any of the said licensed Alehouse-keepers.

And that you do give notice unto all and every the said Witnesses, that they
and every of them are by us required to appear before us accordingly, to
testify their several knowledges touching the same.

And that you do likewise give notice unto all and every the said Persons so by
you to be returned, all Persons out of service, riotous Spenders, unlicensed
Alehouse-keepers, or disorderly licensed Alehouse-keepers; that they, and every
of them, are by us required to appear before us, or some of us, as aforesaid,
to answer the premises, and farther to do and receive as to Justice does
appertain.

6. That you do from time to time at every of our said Assemblies or Meetings
deliver unto us, or some of us, in writing an account of what you have done in
pursuance of the directions before mentioned.

7. That (taking assistance of sufficient men 7 Iac. c. 4. The search to be
made twice in every year at the least.
of the said Hundred) you do in the night before every of our days of Assembly
or Meeting hereafter mentioned, that is to say, (here name the days of meeting
of the Justices) make a general privy search within every of the Parishes,
Villages and Hamlets within the same, for finding out and apprehending of all
Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering and idle Persons, in and about the said
Parishes, Villages and Hamlets; And that such Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering
and idle Persons, (as you shall then find and apprehend in the said search) you
do cause to be brought before us, or some of us, on the day and at the place of
our Assembly or Meeting aforesaid, at ten of the clock in the forenoon of the
same day, there to be examined of their idle and wandering life, and to be
farther dealt withal according to Law.

And that you be then and there also ready to give account and reckoning (upon
Oath in writing, and under the hand of the Minister of each respective Parish)
what Rogues, Vagabonds, and disorderly Persons you have apprehended within the
said Search, and also between every such Assembly and Meeting; and how many
have been by you punished, or otherwise sent unto the House of Correction,
(according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made in the seventh year
of the Reign of the late King James;) and upon such Fines, Pains and Penalties
as are in the said Statute contained, (in case you, or any of you, do neglect
to perform what is in this behalf before commanded.)

Lastly, That upon some day (about three or four days before every of our said
Assemblies or Meetings) you the said Constable and Borsholders do meet and
consult together touching the making of your Return to us of what you have done
between every such our Assembly or Meeting; and do also then agree how to
divide your selves in your then next Search, and where to meet in the morning
then next following, for your more ready giving to us your account of what you
have done in the said Search.

A Mittimus of a Rogue thither, taken in the general Search.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appears unto 7 Iac. c. 4.
me, That A. B. of, etc. is of lewd life, etc. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him or her
safely convey, or cause to be conveyed, to the aforesaid House of Correction,
and there deliver him or her to the said Keeper of the same, there to be
punished and set on work during the space of, etc. delivering also to the said
Keeper this Precept. Commanding likewise you, the said Keeper, to receive A. B.
into the said House, and him or her there to punish and set on work, (according
to the tenor of this Precept.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my
hand and seal at, etc.

Of an idle Person out of Service, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as C. D. of, etc. (according Dalt. 113. 7 Iac. c. 4.
to the Crime as below) Is an idle, dissolute and disorderly fellow, one that
will not keep his Service, follow any honest course of Life: Sturdy Beggar:
Idle and disorderly Person: Of evil and disorderly Life and Conversation:
Lives idly out of Service, (notwithstanding our command to the contrary:) Will
not be reformed of his said idle kind of Life, and evil and disorderly
Conversation. Rogues, Vagabonds, and other wandering and idle Persons. Idle
Persons. Idle or disorderly Persons.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable
and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do safely convey the said C. D.
to the aforesaid House of Correction, and him there deliver to the said Keeper
of the same, together with this Precept. Commanding also you, the said Keeper,
to receive him into the said House, and there set him to work and labor from
time to time by the space of, etc. next after such his delivery unto you; in
the mean time to punish him according to Law. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal at, etc. Dalt. 113. 2 Justices 730. 7 Iac. c. 4.


A Mittimus to the House of Correction of an idle Person, that would run away,
and will not work to maintain his Family.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been proved 7 Iac. c. ^. If run aw^ and lea^ his
Fai^ to the Parish, is adjudged incorrigible Rogue. 2 Justices of that
Division. 2 Witnesses upon Oath.
before us upon Oath, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made
and provided) That A. B. of the Parish of C. aforesaid (being able to work, and
thereby relieve his Family) has threatened to run away, and leave his said
Family upon the Parish of C. aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you,
(unless he do put in sufficient Securities for the discharge of the Parish)
that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to
the said House of Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the
same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said House, and there deal with and detain him as a sturdy
and wandering Rogue, and to be delivered at the next Assembly or Meeting within
this lower Division of the Lath of Scray, for the better execution of an Act of
Parliament made in the seventh year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord
King James over England, (entitled, An Act for the due Execution of diverse
Laws and Statutes heretofore made against Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy
Beggars, and other lewd and idle Persons) or at the Quarter Sessions, and not
otherwise. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at,
etc.

A Liberate from thence.
To the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County at A. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas C. D. was by Warrant from us sent to the said House of
Correction, and is at present in your Custody there: Now if the said C. D. is
in your Custody for the cause aforesaid, and no others, We do hereby authorize
and command you forthwith (upon receipt hereof) to set C. D. at large from your
said Custody: For which this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our
hands and seals at A. in the said County the, etc.

Huy and Cry.
The Examination of a Person robbed on the Highway praying an Huy and Cry.
The Examination of A. B. of C. in the County of D. Gent. taken by E. F. Esquire
one of the Justices of the Peace of the County of F. on the second day of
October, Anno Dom. 1679. upon his Oath.
Kent ss. THIS Examinant deposes and 27 Eliz. cap. 13.
says, That as he was riding on Saturday the first day of April last past from
the Town of A. in the County of B. to C. in the same County, he was assaulted
in the common Highway leading from one of the said Towns to the other, at or
near a place there called K, at about eleven of the clock in the forenoon of
the same day, by two Footmen, who there seized upon him this Examinant, and
carrying him into a certain Wood, robbed him, and bound him. And this Examinant
farther says, That he is since informed, that the said place and Wood are both
in the Parish of A. aforesaid, and so within the Hundred of A. and D. in the
said County. And this Examinant farther says and deposes, That the said
Thieves did then seloniously take from him and rob him of 10 l. 17 s. in money,
and one cloth Saddle with Stirups and Girts, worth in all 10 s, and two
leather Purses, two Knives, etc. in all worth 5 s. And this Examinant farther
says and deposes, That he then did not, nor yet does know the Parties that
committed the said Robbery, or either of them.

R. W.

Another.
Kent ss. A. B. of C. in the County of D. 27 Eliz. cap. 13.
did upon the present 10. day of October in the 31. year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, etc. personally come before me E. M. Esquire
(one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County of D.
inhabiting in the Parish of Saint M. C. in the County aforesaid, in the Hundred
of R. in the said County) and upon his corporal Oath then taken before me did
say, That upon Friday the 8. day of May last past, at about the hour of seven
of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, in the King's Highway, (at a
certain place called E. F. in the Parish of C. in the aforesaid Hundred of R.
in the said County of D.) he was assaulted by five men, all unknown to him the
said A. B; and they the said five men did then and there feloniously take and
carry away from him the said A. B. 100 li. in moneys numbered, of the moneys of
him the said A. B. and also his Goods and Chattels (that is to say) one Ring
with a deep Table-stone set in the same, one Watch in two gold Cases, etc. to
the value of 30 li. and robbed him the said A. B. of all and every the Moneys,
Goods and Chattels aforesaid. And the said A. B. was on the day and year first
above mentioned (upon his Oath aforesaid) by me examined, whether he did know
the Parties that committed the said Robbery, or any of them: And he then (upon
his Oath) did say, that he (neither at the time of the said Robbery committed,
nor at any time since) did know, or does yet know the said Parties that
committed the said Robbery, nor any of them. In testimony whereof I, the
aforesaid Justice, have hereunto set my hand and seal the day and year first
above written.

A. B.

The Examination of a Person robbed on the Highway by three Persons, one of
which he knew.
The Examination of A. B. of C, etc. sworn and examined before R. K. one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County of K. on the 2. day of March,
Anno Dom. 1679. deposes and says.
Kent ss. THat about three weeks since he 3 Ed. 1.
was riding from C. aforesaid, toward Feversham, in the said County of K. and
in the Highway within the Parish of F. in the said County of K. he was set
upon by three Persons, and was by them robbed, and they took from him, etc. And
he says and deposes that he does know one of those Persons, and says that
his name is E. F. an Essex man, born in, etc. and of the age as he adjudgeth
him, of 30 years or thereabouts, and the others he says he knows not.

An Huy and Cry upon the escape of a Prisoner from the Constable.
To the Constable, Borsholders, and other Officers, as well within the said
County as elsewhere, within the Kingdom of England, to whom the Execution
hereof does or may concern.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. Constable of 3 Ed. 1. ^ Justice.
the Hundred of M. within the said County, having yesterday (together with two
Precepts) delivered unto him the Body of C. D. of, etc. before charged with the
suspicion of his felonious taking of one Gelding, to be by him the said
Constable and other Officers conveyed to the Gaol for the said County at M. in
the County aforesaid, has this day (as the said Constable has upon his
complaint informed me) made a felonious escape from him: These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to require you, and every of you, to make diligent
search within your several Precincts for the said C. D. being a Person about 30
years of age, of a middle stature, slender body, long black curled hayr, having
on his body a short colored close Coat, light gray Breeches and Stockings, a
narrow-brim'd Hat; And also that you the said respective Officers do make Huy
and Cry after him from Town to Town, and from County to County, and that as
well by Horsemen as Footmen; And if you shall find him the said C. D. that then
you do convey him before some Justice of the Peace, within the County where he
shall be taken, by him to be dealt withal according to Law. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given, etc.

A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a Felon.
R. W. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County) To
all Constables, Borsholders, and other His Majesty's Officers within the said
County, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Execution hereof may
concern, Greeting.
K. ss. WHereas I have received Information 1 Justice. 28 Ed. 3. cap. 11.
and Charge against A. B. who is a Person of evil fame, (describe the Person,
Age, and Apparel) who is charged before me to have assaulted and taken from the
person of C. D. on the second day of June last, at, etc. ten pounds in moneys
numbered, etc. (according to the Information) And he the said A. B. is very much
suspected to have committed several other Felonies; and notwithstanding several
endeavors for apprehension of him, he has not as yet been apprehended, but
has withdrawn himself, and is fled: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name) to command you, and every of you, to make diligent search within your
several Precincts for the said A. B. and to make Huy and Cry after him from
Town to Town, and from Country to Country, and that as well by Horsemen as
Footmen, (according to Law:) And if you shall find the said A. B. that then you
do carry him before some one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the
County or place where he shall be taken, to be dealt withal according to Law.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant to search for a Person (who has committed a Robbery,) and for Goods
stolen.
R. W. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) To
all Constables, Borsholders, and other His Majesty's Officers within the
County aforesaid, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Execution
hereof may concern, Greeting.
Kent ss. WHereas I have received Information, That a bay Gelding about 15
hands high, with a bald Face, (his Head bigger than ordinary) two wall Eyes, a
short Tail, aged about 7 years, his paces all Trot, being the Gelding of R. G.
of B. in the said County, Gent. was in the night of the 18. day of this instant
July stolen out of his Land in B. aforesaid, and that he suspecteth a Person
(whose name he knows not) of a middle stature, aged about 22 years, and in
saddishcoloured Clothes, to have stolen this Gelding aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, and every of you, to make
diligent search (within your several Precincts) for the Gelding and person
aforesaid, and to make Huy and Cry after the said Person from Town to Town, and
from Country to Country, (according to Law:) And if upon your search or
otherwise you shall find the said Person, or the Gelding aforesaid, or other
just cause of suspicion, that then you carry the said Person, or other Persons
suspected, before some one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
County or place where he or they shall be taken, (to be dealt with according to
Law.) Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal this, etc.

Inns of Court.
A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court, against one of
that Society, for refusing to observe the Order of the House.
To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other His Majesty's Officers and
Ministers, whom these presents may concern.
Mid. ss. WHereas I Sir R. R. Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
King's Bench, am informed and fully satisfied, by some of the Masters of the
Bench of the Society of, etc. That F. M. Gent. lately a Member of the said
Society has for his contempt of several Orders of Council made for the
compelling him to pay his Commons, and other Duties amounting to a considerable
Sum, been by order of Council expelled the Society, and his Chamber and Study
seized to the use of the House; notwithstanding which, the said F. M. without
performance of any of the said Orders, has contemptuously broken off Padlocks,
put upon his Chamber door, entered thereinto, and made use thereof, and both in
Words and Deeds reproachfully and contemptuously slighted and affronted the
Governors and Government of the said Society, and that he continues at this
present actually and obstinately in his contemptuous Carriage, to the
disturbance of the said Society, in contempt and violation of the Government
thereof, and as a dangerous example to others, if not prevented by a speedy and
severe proceeding against him. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
straightly to charge and command you, and every of you, that you bring before us,
or some other of the Justices of the Court of King's Bench, the Body of the
said F. M. to answer to such Misdemeanors, Contempts, and Misbehaviour, as
shall be objected against him by the Masters of the Bench, or others, on the
behalf of the said Society, to the end that his Insolences may be repressed by
such proceeding against him as shall be agreeable to Justice. Given under my
hand and seal the 24th. day of June, in the 27th. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second over England, Annoque Dom. 1675.

R. R.

Irish Cattle.
A Warrant to seize certain Cattle, imported from Foreign parts into England.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas I am given to understand, 18 Car. 2. cap. 2. 32 Car. 2. cap.
that there are lately Imported into England, out of Ireland or some other
Foreign parts, and are now remaining in your Precinct, certain Cattle and
Beasts, prohibited by the late Acts of Parliament to be Imported. These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to give you notice thereof, and to will and
require you, and every of you, forthwith after sight hereof, to use your utmost
diligence and endeavor to enquire, find out, and discover the same Cattle and
Beasts, and the same to seize and take into your Custody, to the intent the
same may be proceeded with as by the said Acts is appointed. Given under my
hand and seal this, etc.

A Warrant to deliver to the Owners certain Cattle seized, as forfeited for
being Imported from Foreign parts, upon proof that they were not so Imported.
To the Constables, etc. ut supra.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint has been The same Acts.
made to me, that you, or some or one of you, have or has seized and taken
into your Custody certain Cattle belonging to, or late in the possession of A.
B. viz. 2 Oxen, 3 Kine, 4 Heifers, 5 Yearlings, 100 Sheep, and 6 Swine as
forfeited for being Imported out of Ireland into England, contrary to the late
Acts of Parliament in that behalf. Now forasmuch as the said A. B. within 48
hours after such seizure has made it appear to me, by the Oath of two credible
Witnesses, viz.

That the same Cattle were not Imported from Ireland aforesaid, nor any other
place beyond the Seas contrary to the said Acts. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to will and require you forthwith upon sight hereof, to
deliver unto the said A. B. the said Cattle, and every of them, without delay,
according to the said Acts, as you will answer the contrary. Given under my
hand and seal, etc.

A Warrant to kill the said Cattle.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them. If
not them, To the S^izor or Seizors of the Cattle, as the Case is.
Kent ss. WHereas I am given to understand, The last Act.
That you, or some of you, having seized within your Precinct certain great
Cattle, Sheep, and Swine, viz. (here name the Sorts and number of each Sort of
the Cattle as the Case is) late belonging to or in the possession of A. B. as
forfeited for being Imported out of Ireland, or some other Foreign parts beyond
the Seas, contrary to the late Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And that the
Importer or Importers thereof have been convicted of such Importation and
Forfeiture of the said Cattle, yet nevertheless you the said Seizor or Seizors
by the space of six days next after such Conviction and Forfeiture, have
delayed and do still delay, or neglect to cause the same Cattle to be killed,
whereby the distribution thereof according to the said Act is retarded and
hindered. These are therefore to require you immediately upon sight hereof, to
cause the said Cattle to be killed, to the end the same may be forthwith
distributed as by the said Acts is required. And hereof you are not to fail.
Given under my hand and seal, etc.

A Warrant to levy 40 s. upon the Seizor or Churchwardens that shall fail in
killing, or making distribution as aforesaid.
To the Constable and Borsholders of, etc.
Kent ss. WHereas I am given to understand, The last Act.
That A. B. having seized within your Precinct certain great Cattle, Sheep and
Swine, viz. (here name the Cattle ut supra) lately belonging to or in the
possession of C. D. as forfeited for being Imported from Foreign parts beyond
the Seas, contrary to the late Acts of Parliament in that behalf. And that the
same are convicted and forfeited according to the same Acts, yet the said A. B.
by the space of six days next after such Conviction and Forfeiture, have
delayed and do still delay to cause the same Cattle and Beasts to be killed,
and distribution to be made thereof according to the said Acts. Now forasmuch
as Oath has been made before me of the premises: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to will and require you forthwith after sight hereof, to levy
or cause to be levied the sum of 40 s. for every one of the said great
Cattle, and 10 s. for every of the said Sheep, and 10 s. for every of the said
Swine which should have been killed and distributed as aforesaid, in pursuance
of the said Acts by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A.
B. rendering the said A. B. the overplus, (necessary Charges of destreyning
being first deducted) and in default of such Distress, to commit the said A. B.
to the common Gaol of the said County, there to remain for the space of three
months without Bail or Mainprise, according to the Statute in that behalf.
Hereof you are not to fail. Given under my hand and seal, etc.

According to these Presidents may like Warrant or Warrants be made for Fish or
other Goods, prohibited by the said Acts, Mutatis mutandis.

Lent.
A Warrant for the observing of Lent.
To the Constables and Borsholders, etc.
Kent ss. THese are therefore in His Majesty's name, and in pursuance of His
said Majesty's late Proclamation, to will and command you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do cause to come and appear before us upon
Thursday the second day of March, (name the place) all Inn-holders, Tavernors,
Alehouse-keepers, Butchers, and all other Victuallers whatsoever within the
said Hundred of, etc. And that you give notice to the said persons, that they
bring with them two sufficient Sureties to enter into several Recognizances for
His said Majesty's use, for the due observation of Lent, according to the
effects and contents of the said Proclamation, and according to the Law in that
case made and provided. And that you your selves, or one of you, be then and
there present, and make a return in writing of all such as you shall have
warned by virtue of this Warrant. Hereof, etc. Given, etc.

Licenses.
A License for a Badger of Corn.
Kent ss. AT the general Sessions of the 6 Ed. 6. cap. 14. 13 Eliz. 25. made
perpetual. 5 Eliz. 5. 31 Eliz. 5. 21 Iac. 22. 2 Justices. 1 Quorum. Not for
above a year.
Peace holden at M. in the County aforesaid this present day, A. B. of H. in
the County aforesaid is admitted, licensed, and appointed by the Justices of
the Peace of the said County, to be a common Badger, Lader, Kedder, Carrier,
Buyer or Transporter of all manner of Corn, or Grain, in any Market or Fair
within the Realm of England, and the same so bought to convert to Meal, and the
same to carry to the City of L. or the Suburbs of the same, or to any other
Market or Fair, so that he use the same, according to the tenor and true
meaning of the Statute in that case made and provided, against Forestallers,
Regrators, and Ingrossers, and not otherwise. The same License to have
continuance from the day of the date hereof, until the next general Sessions of
the Peace after the Feast of E. next coming, to be holden at M. aforesaid. In
Witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals this second day of
November, 1680.

R. K. R. H. T. B.
A License as before may be granted to Drovers of Cattle, to Buy and Sell
again, by the same Statute.
A License for a petty Chapman.
To the Bailiffs, Constables, and other of His Majesty's Officers of the same
County, and to every of them Greeting.
Kent ss. KNow ye that we R. K. and G. H. Esquires, two of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace within the County aforesaid, have licensed, and by these
presents do license T. W. of M. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, to be a petty
Chapman, to wander and go from Town to Town, Village to Village, and place to
place, to sell Pins, Points, Tapes, Laces, Knives, Gloves, Purses, etc. and
such other kind of small Wares, and also to gather and buy Coney-skins, and
such kind of small Wares within the County aforesaid, and not elsewhere.
Provided that this our License shall continue in effect, only for the term of
one whole year coming from the day of the date hereof, and no longer. In
witness whereof, etc.

A License or Pasport for a Poor man to his Friends for Relief.
To all Constables, Borsholders, Bailiffs, and other His Majesty's Officers of
the same County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. R. K. and T. B. Esquires, two of 39 Eliz. cap. 4.
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the same County greeting. Forasmuch
as A. B. of C. etc. the Bearer hereof, being reduced to great poverty and
necessity, has desired a Testimonial or License for his safe travel unto the
City of D. in the County of S. where he says he was born and has some Friends
yet living, by whose Means and Friendship he hops to be fully relieved and
helped. In consideration whereof, Know ye that we the said R. K. and T. B. (as
far as in us lies) have licensed the said A. B. to travel and pass the direct
way from C. unto the said City of D. so that his Journey be not for longer or
further continuance than twenty days next after the date hereof, praying you,
and every of you, not to molest or trouble the said poor man in his travel; but
to permit and suffer him to pass, so that he show himself in no respect
offensive to His Majesty's Laws. In witness whereof, etc.

Another.
K. ss. R. K. and T. B. two of the Justices, It is convenient that the party be
particularly described in this Pasport, lest others make use thereof.
etc. Whereas the Bearer hereof A. B. of C. etc. having (showing the cause of
his travel) desired one Testimonial or License for his safe travel to the City
of D. (show to what place he goes) Wherefore we (as much as in us lies) do
license the said A. B. to travel the direct way from C. in the said County of
K. to the said City of D. so as his Journey be no longer than twenty days next
after the date hereof, praying you, and every of you, to suffer him to pass in
Peace, so that he demean himself orderly. In witness, etc.

A License to Beg.
To all Constables, Borsholders, Bailiffs, and all other His Majesty's
Officers within the County of K. and to every of them.
Kent ss. R. K and T. H. Esquires, two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
within the County aforesaid greeting. Whereas the Bearer hereof A. B. of C. in
the County aforesaid, being a very poor man and blind, by reason whereof he is
not able to Labor, nor get to live of himself, without the charitable Relief
of others, and being now Resident in the said Town, is therefore to be
relieved; and being likewise informed that the Town is at this present charged
with more poor and impotent people than it is able to relieve. Know you
therefore, that we the said Justices have licensed and allowed the said Poor
man and his Leader, to go abroad and beg, gather, and receive the charitable
Alms of well disposed people, inhabiting and dwelling within the Hundred of
etc. in the said County, requiring you not to molest or trouble the said Poor
man or his Leader for so doing, but desiring you rather to relieve him and his
Leader in their necessity, as to you shall seem meet. This our License to
remain and be in force for one whole year next ensuing the date hereof, and no
longer. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals, etc.

R. K. T. H.

A License to Travel by Water on the Lord's day.
WHereas by Act of Parliament made in 29 Car. 2.
the 29th. year of His Majesty's Reign that now is, it is Enacted, That no
person or persons shall use, employ, or travel upon the Lord's day with any
Boat, Wherry, Lighter, or Barge, except it be upon extraordinary occasion, to
be allowed by some Justice of the Peace of the County, or Head-Officer, or some
Justice of Peace of the City, Borough; or Town-Corporate where the Fact shall
be committed, upon pain that every person so offending shall forfeit and lose
the sum of five shillings for every such Offense, as by the said Act, (among
other things) it does and may appear: And forasmuch as A. B. of the Parish of
Saint A. in the County of M. Gent. having extraordinary occasion to travel on
the next Lord's day to B. in the County of S. and to use and employ a Boat,
Wherry, or Barge in his said Journey, has desired my Allowance thereof: These
are therefore (in pursuance of the said Act) to will and require all
Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and all other Officers whom
these presents may concern, to permit and suffer the said A. B. quietly and
peaceaby to perform his said Journey on the next Lord's day as aforesaid, and
to use and employ any Boat, Wherry, or Barge, at his discretion, without any
Molestation or Disturbance whatsoever at their peril. Given under my hand and
seal this tenth day of July, Anno Dom. 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi
31.

Another.
K. ss. THese are to certify that A. B. C. D. E. F. the Bearers hereof have
made it appear before me, that they have urgent occasions to pass on the next
Lord's day from A. to B. by Water. All Constables, Churchwardens, and other
His Majesty's Officers, are therefore required to permit the said Gent. to
pass without interruption. Given under my hand and seal this second day of
October 1680.

I. C.

A License to Travel on the Lord's day.
To all Constables, etc.
THese are to certify that A. B. of C. etc. where he now dwells, having
informed me that he has a Brother living at C. in the County of H. where he
lies now very Sick, and he has a desire to see him. Know ye that for this
cause I do hereby license him to travel upon the next Lord's day the direct way
to his Brother. Willing and requiring you not to molest or hinder him for the
same, so that he behave himself orderly in his travel. Given under my hand, etc.

Misdemeanors.
A general Warrant for the same retornable before a particular Justice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's 1 Justice. Dalt. 481.
name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause A. B. of C. to
come before me, to answer unto such matters of Misdemeanour as (on His
Majesty's behalf) shall be objected against him, and farther to do and
receive as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given
under my hand and seal at, etc.

Or thus:
THese are to will and require you (in His Majesty's name) straightly to charge
and command you, and either of you, that immediately upon the sight hereof (or
upon Thursday next at two of the clock in the afternoon) you bring A. B. of
your said Town, Barber, before me, to answer to such matters of Misdemeanors
as (on His Majesty's behalf) shall be objected against him. And hereof fail
you not at your perils. Given under, etc.

The like retornable before any Justice, and the Accuser to have Notice.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do cause A. B. of, etc. to come before me, or some other of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County to answer unto such matters
of Misdemeanour as (on the behalf of His said Majesty) shall be objected
against him by E. F. of, etc. Husbandman, and farther to do and receive as to
Justice does appertain. And you are farther hereby required to give convenient
notice to the said E. F. of the time and place when, whither, and before whom
you shall cause the said A. B. so to come, in execution of this Precept, to the
end that the said E. F. may then and there also be personally present, to make
appear the Misdemeanour aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under
my hand and seal at, etc.

A Condition of a Recognizance for Misdemeanour.
UPon this Condition, That if you A. B. shall personally appear before our
Sovereign Lord the King's Justices of the Peace at the next general Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for the Liberty of Saint A. and do then and there make
answer unto all such things which (on His Majesty's behalf) shall be objected
against you, and do not depart thence without License of the Court, Then your
Recognizance to be void, or else to stand in full force, etc.

Murder.
A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and to give
Evidence at the next general Gaoldelivery, alias Assizes, to both Iuries in
case of Murder.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is See Title Recognizances.
such, That if the above bound W. B. do personally appear before His Majesty's
Justices of Jail-deliver at the next general Jail-deliver to be holden for
the within named County of Kent, and do then and there prefer or cause to be
preferred a Bill of Indictment against A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. for
murder of L. M. Gent. deceased, wherewith the said A. B. and C. D. are
chargeable before the within named Justice, and with suspicion whereof the said
E. F. G. H. I. K. are also charged before the Justice aforesaid, and do also
then and there give such Evidence as he knows concerning the Murder
aforesaid, as well to the Jurors as shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the Trial
of the said A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. or any of them for the same, then
this Recognizance shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force and
virtue.

A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence at Assizes.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the above bound A. B. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep His Peace in
the above named County of C. at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be
holden for the said County at the Castle of C. in the County aforesaid, and do
then and there prefer or cause to be preferred one or more Bill or Bills of
Indictment against M. W. of, etc. and do then and there also give such Evidence
as he knows concerning the same against the said M. W. to the Jurors that
shall enquire thereof on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is;
That then this Recognizance shall be void and of no effect, or else it shall
stand in full force.

A Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and to give Evidence to both
Iuries at the next general Gaoldelivery, alias Assizes, in case of an Abettor
in Murder.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound W. B. do
personally appear before His Majesty's Justices of the Jail-deliver at the
next general Gaoldelivery to be holden for the within named County of K. do
then and there prefer or cause to be preferred a Bill of Indictment against Sir
P. H. Knight, touching his the said Sir P's being an Abettor to the Murder of
M. C. deceased, (wherewith ^e is charged before the within named Justices) and
do also then and there give such Evidence as he knows concerning the matter
aforesaid, as well to the Jurors that shall enquire thereof on the behalf of
our Sovereign Lord the King, as also to the Jurors that shall pass upon the
Trial of the said Sir P. H. for the same; That then this Recognizance shall be
void, or else stand in full force, etc.

Nets, Dogs and Conies.
A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting-dogs, upon the Statute of 7 Iacobi.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of Parliament 7 Iac. c. 11. 2 Justices, and their
hands.
in that behalf made, These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to authorize
and command you, and every of you, to enter into and search the house or houses
of any person or persons within the said Hundred, other then such person or
persons which have Free Warren, or is Lord of a Manor, or is such Freeholder
which is seized in his own right or the right of his Wife, of Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments, to the clear yearly value of forty pounds or more by the
year, (over and above all charges and reprises) of some estate of inheritance;
Or of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, in his own right, or in the right of
his Wife, (for term of life or lives) of the yearly value of fourscore pounds,
(over and above all charges and reprises) Or which is worth in Goods or
Pheasants, etc. to be taken only between Michaelmas and Christmas.
Chattels four hundred pounds, suspected to have Setting-dogs, or Nets (for the
taking of Pheasants and Partridges.) And that wheresoever you, or any of you,
shall find any such Setting-dog or Nets, the same you take, carry away, and
detain, kill, destroy, and cut in pieces, as things prohibited by the Act
aforesaid, and forefeited to such of you as shall find out and take the same as
aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at
M. in the said County the, etc.

The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. 22 and 23 Car. 2. 1 Justice (under his hand and seal.)

Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, These
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to authorize and command you, and every
of you. (in the day time) to search the houses, outhouses, or other places, of
any person or persons (within the said Hundred,) other then of such person as
has Lands and Tenements, or some other estate of inheritance, (in his This may
be directed to any special person or persons, (as well as to the Officers.
own or in his Wife's right) of the clear yearly value of one hundred pounds
per annum, or for term of life, or which has a Lease or Leases of ninety nine
years (or for any longer term) of the clear yearly value of one hundred and
fifty pounds, or which is the Son and Heir apparent of an Esquire, (or other
person of higher degree,) or which are Owners or Keepers of Forests, Parks,
Chases or Warrens, (being Stocked with Deer or Conies, for their necessary use,
in respect of the said Forests, Parks, Chases or Warrens) as upon good ground
shall be suspected to have or keep in his or their custody any Guns, Bows,
Greyhounds, Settingdogs, Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other Dogs, (to destroy Hares
or Conies) Hays, Tramels, or other Nets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or
other Engines for the taking and killing of Conies, Hares, Pheasants,
Partridges, or other Game, and such Guns, Bows, Greyhounds, Setting-dogs,
Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other such Dogs, as aforesaid, Hays, Tramels or other
Nets, Low-bells, Hare-pipes, Snares, or other Engines aforesaid, as you, or any
of you, shall so find, to seize, detain, and keep, to and for the use of the
Lord of the Manor or Royalty where the same shall be so found, or taken, or
otherwise to cut in pieces or destroy, as things by the said Act prohibited to
be kept by persons of their degree. And what you shall do in the premises,
you shall make known unto me (with all convenient speed.) Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Mittimus against persons that refuse to enter into Recognizance, to appear
at Sessions for their keeping Ferrets, and Nets to kill Conies.
To the Constables, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. and C. D. of E. in the County aforesaid, being
this present day brought before me by Warrant by the Constable of E. aforesaid,
and being examined did upon their examination confess that they had kept and
used Nets and Ferrets for the taking and killing of Conies by the space of a
year last past, contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided. And
being required to enter into Recognizance for their appearance at the next
general Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County they did
both refuse so to do: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) straightly to
charge and command you, that you receive into your Custody the Bodies of the
said A. B. and C. D. whom I send you by H. T. one of the Constables of E.
aforesaid, and them safely to keep, until they shall enter into such
Recognizance as aforesaid, or that they be otherwise discharged according to
Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal, etc.

A Warrant for one that Hunts with Spannels in Eared Corn.
To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as complaint has been 23 Eliz. cap. 10.
made unto me, That A. B. of your Town of C. Gent. did in September last past
Hunt with his Spannels in the Ground of R. H. where Corn did then grow, at
which time the same Corn was Eared or Codded, and Standing, (without the
consent of the said R. H. then Owner of the same Ground) contrary to the
Statute in that case made and provided, by which he has forfeited forty
shillings to the said R. H. the Owner of the said Ground: These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to command you, and every of you, that some or one of
you, do warn him the said A. B. to come before us at T. the second day of June
next, to answer the premises, and to be then there your self with this
Warrant. Given under our hands and seals, etc.

If he appear not, then say, to put in Sureties for his appearance at the next
general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County, to answer the said
offense, and pay the penalty. And in case he refuse so to do, that then you,
some or one of you, safely convey him to the Gaol of, etc. and him there
deliver to the Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding
also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there
safely to keep, until he shall find Sureties as aforesaid. Given under my hand
and seal, etc.

Oaths.
The Oath which is usually ministered to a Justice of the Peace in the several
Counties of England.
YE shall Swear, that as Justice of the With this is to be taken the Oath of
Supremacy.
Peace in the County of K. in all Articles in the King's Commission to you
directed, you shall do equal right to the Poor and to the Rich, after your
cunning, wit and power, and after the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and
Statutes thereof made: And ye shall not be of Council of any Quarrel hanging
before you: And that you hold your Sessions after the form of the Statutes
thereof made: And the Issues, Fines, and Amercements that shall happen to be
made; and all Forfeitures which shall fall before you, ye shall cause to be
entered without any concealment (or imbeziling,) and truly send them to the
King's Exchequer; ye shall not let for gift, or other cause, but well and
truly you shall do your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf: And
that you take nothing for your Office of Justice of the Peace to be done, but
of the King, and Fees accustomed, and Costs limited by the Statute: And ye
shall not direct, nor cause to be directed, any Warrant (by you to be made) to
the parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bailiffs of the said County, or
other the King's Officers (or Ministers,) or other indifferent persons, to do
Execution thereof.

So help you God, etc.
The Oath of Supremacy.
I A. B. of, etc. do utterly testify and declare in 1 Eliz. c. 1.
my Conscience, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second is the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other His Highness Dominions and
Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as
Temporal. And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate has,
or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence or
Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm. And therefore I do
utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities
and Authorities. And do promise that from henceforth I shall bear Faith and
true Allegiance to the King's Highness, His Heirs and lawful Successors. And
to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminences and Authorities, granted or belonging to the King's Highness, His
Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

So help me God.
The Oath of Allegiance.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, 3 Iac. c. 4.
profess, testify, and declare in my Conscience before God and the world, That
our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second is lawful and rightful King of
this Realm, and of all other His Majesty's Dominions and Countries, and that
the Pope neither of himself nor by any authority of the Church or See of Rome,
or by any other means with any other, has any power or authority to depose the
King, or to dispose of any of His Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to
authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him, or His Countries, or to
discharge any of His Subjects of their allegiance and obedience to His Majesty,
or to give license or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to
offer any violence or hurt to His Majesty's Royal Person, State, or
Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects, within His Majesty's
Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration
or Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted, or to be made
or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any authority derived, or
pretended to be derived, from him, or his See, against the said King, His Heirs
or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their obedience. I
will bear says and true allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
and Him and Them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all
Conspiracies and Contempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to disclose and make
known unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous
Conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of to be against Him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as
impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever. Upon this Oath the party taking it shall
subscribe his name or mark.


And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation or
mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever. And I do make this
recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true
faith of a Christian.

So help me God.
A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Allegiance.
To the Keeper or Jailer, etc.
WE A. B. and C. D. two of His Majesty's 2 Justices, one of the Quorum.
Justices of the Peace for the County of K. whereof A. B. is of the Quorum, do
hereby commit to your custody the Body of E. F. for refusing to take the Oath
of Allegiance. Requiring you to take and safely in Prison to keep him, till he
shall be delivered by due course of Law, and for so doing this shall be your
Warrant. Given under our hands and seals this second day of June, etc.

The Oath of Abjuration.
YOU shall swear, That you shall depart out 35 Eliz. cap. 1. Stam. 119. Wilk.
40.
of this Realm of England, and out of all other the King's Majesty's
Dominions, and that you shall not return hither, or come again into any of His
Majesty's Dominions, but by the License of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
or of His Heirs.

So help you God.
The Oath of an Excise-man.
[ With this must be taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy.]

YOU shall swear to execute the Office of 12 Car. 2. cap. 23. 2 Justices, who
must certify (the taking of this Oath) to the next Quarter Sessions there to
be Recorded.
(name the place) truly and faithfully, without favor or affection, and shall
from time to time true account make and deliver to such person or persons as
His Majesty shall appoint to receive the same; and shall take no fee or reward
for the execution of the said Office, from any other person then from His
Majesty, or those whom His Majesty shall appoint in that behalf.

The under Sheriffs Oath touching the Impannelling of Iuries.
I A. B. shall not use or exercise the Office 27 Eliz. cap. 12. before two
Justices, one of the Quorum. The Oath of Supremacy must be also taken by him,
or forfeit 40 li.
of under Sheriff corruptly, during the time that I shall remain therein;
Neither shall or will accept, receive, or take, by any color, means, or device
whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of Fee or Reward of any
person or persons for impanelling or returning of any Inquest, Jury or Tales in
the said Court for the King, or betwixt party and party above two shillings, or
the value thereof; and such Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; But will according to my power truly and
indifferently, with convenient speed, impanel all Jurors, and return all such
Writ or Writs touching the same as shall appertain to be done by my Duty or
Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office.

So God me help.
The Oath of a Bailiff.
I I. D. shall not use nor exercise the Office 27 Eliz. cap. 12. This Oath and
that of Supremacy ought to be taken by every Bailiff that executes any Writ, or
forfeit 40 li.
of one of the Bearers of the Verges of His Majesty's Household, and one of the
Officers and Ministers of the Court of our Sovereign Lord the King, of the
King's Palace of Westminster corruptly, during the time that I shall remain
therein: Neither shall or will accept, receive, or take by any color, means,
or device whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of Fee or Reward
of any person or persons for impaneling or returning of any Inquest, Jury, or
Tales in the said Court, for the King, or betwixt party and party, above two
shillings, or the value thereof, and such Fees as are allowed and appointed for
the same by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; But will according to my power
truly and indifferently, with convenient speed, impanel all Jurors, and return
all such Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appertain to be done by my
Duty or Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office.

So help me God. Iurat' ad utraque Sacrament' supra dict' duodecimo die Maij,
Anno Dom. 1680. coram nobis. A. B. C. D..

The Oath usually given to Churchwardens.
YOU shall execute the Office of Churchwarden in the Parish where you are
chosen for this ensuing year, according to His Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical;
So help you God.

Or thus:
You shall execute the Office of Churchwarden in the Parish where you are
chosen, according to your discretion and skill in His Majesty's Laws
Ecclesiastical; So help you God.

The Oath of Obedience Canonical.
I A. B. do swear that I do approve the Can. 6. of 1640.
Doctrine and Discipline, or Government established in the Church of England as
concerning all things necessary to Salvation: and that I will not endeavor by
my self, or any other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine
contrary to that which is so established, nor will I ever give my consent to
alter the Government of this Church; by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and
Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought to
stand; nor yet ever to subject it to the Usurpations and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome: And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same
words, without any equivocation, or mental evasior, or secret reservation
whatsoever; And this I do heartily, willingly and truly upon the Faith of a
Christian: So help me God in Jesus Christ.

If any Ecclesiastical person refuse this Oath, the Bishop shall give him a
months time to inform, which if then denied, to be suspended ab officio, upon
refusal at a second month granted, to be suspended, ab officio and beneficio;
and after a third month granted, to be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical
Promotions whatsoever, and execution of his Function which he holds in the
Church of England.

The High Constable's Oath.
YOU shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the Office of a Constable: You shall see and cause His Majesty's Peace
to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your power: You shall
arrest all such Persons as in your sight and presence shall ride or go armed
offencely, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of His
Majesty's Peace. You shall do your best endeavor (upon complaint made) to
apprehend all Felons, Barrettors, and Rioters, or Persons riotously assembled:
and if any such Offenders shall make resistance (with force) you shall levy Huy
and Cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken. You shall do your best
endeavor, that the Watch, in and about your Hundred be duly kept, for the
apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, Night-walkers, Eves-droppers, Scouts, and
other suspected Persons, and of such as go armed, and the like; And that Huy
and Cry be duly raised and pursued according to the Statute of Winchester
against Murderers, Thieves, and other Felons; And that the Statutes made for
the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and such other idle Persons as come
within your Bounds and Limits be duly put in execution: You shall have a
watchful eye to such Persons as shall maintain or keep any common House or
Place, where any unlawful Game is or shall be used; as also to such as shall
frequent, or use such Places, or shall use or exercise any unlawful Games
there or elsewhere contrary to the Statutes. At your Assizes, Sessions of the
Peace or Leet, you shall present all and every the Offenses done contrary to
the Statute made 1 Iacobi, 4 Iacobi and 21 Iacobi Regis, to restrain the
inordinate haunting and tippling in Inns, Alehouses, and other Victualling
houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness; You shall there likewise true
presentment make of all Bloudsheddings, Affrays, Outcrys, Rescues, and other
Offenses committed or done against the King's Majesty's Peace within your
Limits; You shall once every year during your Office present at the
Quarter Sessions all Popish Recusants within your Liberty, and their Children
above 9, and their Servants (scil. their monthly absence from Church) 3 Iac. 4.
You shall well and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed from
the Justice of Peace of this County, or higher Officers; You shall be aiding to
your Neighbors against unlawful Purveyances: In the time of Hay or Corn
Harvest, upon request, you shall cause all Persons to meet to serve by the day
for the In this Oath is briefly comprehended the whole Duty of a Constable, and
principal matters of his Office.
mowing, reaping, or getting in of Corn or Hay; You shall in Easter-week cause
your Parishoners to choose Surveyors for the mending of the Highways in your
Parish or Liberty; and you shall well and duly according to your knowledge,
power and ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the Office of
a Constable, so long as you continue in the said Office. So help you God.

The Oath taken by the Officers of the Marshal's Court.
YOU shall well and truly behave your self in the Office which you now
undertake of one of the Bearers of the Virges of the Household of our Sovereign
Lord the King, and one of the Officers and Ministers of the Court of our
Sovereign Lord the King of His Majesty's Palace of Westminster; you shall well
and truly execute all process of the said Court that shall come to your hands,
and which may be by you executed with as much expedition as possibly you can;
you shall execute no Writ but such as is signed and sealed with the sign and
seal of this Court. You shall take no bribe, reward, or other gratuity for the
executing of any process of this Court, other than the Court will allow of, or
the Parties themselves without exaction shall willingly afford you; you shall
make a true and just return of all such Writs of this Court as shall be by you
sued the next Court day after the same are executed. You shall not disclose any
process of the said Court to the Defendant or any other whereby he may have
intelligence thereof; you shall not conceal any wrong or injury done or offered
to the said Court, but shall forthwith disclose the same to the Judges thereof,
and shall be ready with all diligence to perform the uttermost; you shall be
commanded by the Judges of the Court aforesaid.

So help you God.
The Oath of a Constable.
YOU shall well and truly serve the King's Majesty in the Office of a Constable
of the Parish of A. all Commissions, Precepts and Warrants that are directed to
you, and shall come to your hands, you shall to the best of your power cause to
be duly and truly executed, all Riots and Misdemeanors and breach of the Peace
suppress. You shall punish all Rogues, Vagrants and idle persons, according to
the Laws of this Land in that case made and provided; you shall diligently
pursue all Hues and Cries; you shall see that the King's Majesty's Watch
within the said Town of A. be duly and truly set according to His Majesty's
Laws; you shall also do your best endeavor to suppress Drunkenness within the
said Pa^ish, and to see the Laws and Statutes concerning the same to be duly
put in execution; and all other things belonging to the Office of Constable, so
long as you shall continue in your Office, you shall well and truly perform and
do so near as you can.

So help you God.
The Oath of an Ale-caster.
YOU shall swear that you shall well and truly serve the King's Majesty in the
Office of an Ale-caster or an Assiser of that Liberty or Hundred for this year
to come; you shall duly and truly see from time to time, that the Bread brought
to be sold be truly weighed, and that the same do contain such weight according
to the prizes of Wheat, as the Statute in that case has provided; likewise you
shall have diligent care during the time of your being in office, to all
Brewers and Tiplers within your Liberty; that they and every of them do make
good and wholesome Bear for man's Body, and that the same be not sold before it
be assayed by you, and then to be sold agreeable to the prices limited and
appointed by the King's Majesty's Justices of the Peace; and all faults
committed and done by the Bakers, Brewers and Tylers, or by any of them, you
shall make known and present the same at the next general Sessions to be holden
for the said County; you shall likewise present all Offenses of Drunkenness and
haunting of Inns and Alehouses by the Inhabitants of the Parish, or of any
other neighboring Parishes whereby due punishment may be inflicted upon them
for their Offense accordingly; and in every other thing you shall well and
truly behave your self in the said Office for this year to come; so help you
God, and by the Contents of that Book.

The Oath of a Commissioner of Sewers.
YE shall swear, that you to your cunning ^3 H. 8. cap. 5.
wit and power, shall truly and indifferently execute the Authority to you
given by this Commission of Sewers without any favor, affection, corruption,
dread or Malice to be born to any manner of Person or Persons; And as the case
shall require, ye shall consent and endeavor your self for your part to the
best of your knowledge and power, to the making of such wholesome, just, equal
and indifferent Laws and Ordinances as shall be made and devised by the most
discreet and indifferent number of your fellows being in Commission with you,
for the due redress, reformation and amendment of all and every such things as
are contained and specified in the said Commission; and the same Laws and
Ordinances to your cunning, wit and power cause to be put in due execution
without favor, meed, dread, malice or affection, as God you help and all
Saints.

The Oath of a Searcher in the Custom House.
YE shall swear, That ye shall serve the King well and truly in the Office of
the Searcher-ship in the Port of N. and do the King's Profits in all things
that belongs to you to do by way of your Office, and well and truly ye shall
make due search of all the Ships and Vessels, coming in or passing out of the
said Port, and truly answer the King of all that shall belong unto him in your
said Office without fraud or malign, after your wit and power, As God help you.

The Oath given to a Jury, before Evidence given in against a Prisoner at the
Bar.
YOU shall true deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the
Prisoner at the Bar, as you shall have in charge according to your Evidence, as
near as God shall give you Grace. So help you God, and by the Contents of this
Book.

The Oath given to a Bailiff or Sergeant that attends on any Jury or Inquest
at an Assise.
YOU shall well and truly keep this Inquest from Meat and Drink, Fire and
Candle; you shall not suffer any man to speak with them, neither shall you your
self speak with them, more than ask them if they be agreed, until such time as
they be agreed. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath of him who craves the Peace against another.
YOU shall swear that the surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is
not for hatred or malice which you ^ear him, but for safety of your Body from
harm, which you fear he will do or procure to be done unto you.

So help you God.
Or thus.
YOU shall swear that the surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is
not of any private malice, hatred or evil will, but merely that you are afraid
of your life, or the hurting or maiming of your Body, or the burning of your
houses.

So help you God.
Another Oath to give a man upon examination or upon information.
YOU shall true answer make to all such matters as shall be demanded of you
concerning the beating of A. B. you shall speak the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth.

So help you God.
The Oath of him that gives Information.
THE Information that you shall give on the King's Majesty's behalf against A.
B. shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

So help you God.
Sometimes you pump a Witness by this Oath, thus.
YOU shall true answer make to all such questions as by me shall be demanded of
you.

So help you God.
The Oath to be given to any Jury, by whom a Nisi prius is to be tried.
YOU shall truly try this Suit of Nisi prius between Party and Party, according
to the Evidence as shall be given you in Court, as near as God shall give you
Grace.

So help you God, etc.
The Oath to be given to such as are to give Evidence between a Party and Party
at a Nisi prius.
THE Evidence that you shall give to this Inquest concerning the matter in
varience, shall be the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth so
near as God shall give you Grace.

So help you God, etc.
The same Oath that your Foreman has sworn, you of your part shall well and
truly keep.

So help you God, etc.
The Oath of a great Inquest.
YOU shall truly enquire and due presentment make of all such things as you are
charged withal on the King's behalf, the King's Council, your own, and your
fellows, you shall well and truly keep; and in all other things the Truth
present.

So help you God, etc.
The Oath of those that give Evidence upon Bills of Indictment.
THE Evidence that you shall give to the Inquest upon this Bill shall be the
truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; and you shall not let
so to do for malice, hatred or evil will, nor for meed, dread, savor or
affection.

So help you God, etc.
Officers.
The Nomination of Officers by Justices of the Peace.
Kane. ss. WE His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, whose
hands and seals are hereunto set, do nominate and appoint A. B. of the Township
of C. in the said County, Bailiff of the Township aforesaid, and D. E. of the
said Township under-Bailiff of the same; commanding each of them to take upon
him his respective Office aforesaid, until he shall be from thence lawfully
discharged, and forthwith to repair to one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the County aforesaid, before him to take his Oath for the Faithful
execution of the said respective Office. Given under our hands and seals at F.
in the said County the tenth day of Sept. 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
Secundi 31.

Orchards.
A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of A. in the said County, etc. 43. El. c. 7.
1 Justice, 1 Witness, or Consession.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved before me, That A. B. of your
Town of A. Weaver, has within three months last past, robbed the Orchard or
Garden of C. D. of your Parish, and carried away great quantities of Apples,
etc. or dug up or pulled up his Fruit Trees or cut or carried away his Corn,
Grain or Hay growing, or cut his Hedges, Pales, Rales, or Fences, or cut and
spiled his Woods or Underwoods, Pools or Trees standing in A aforesaid.
to the value of 50 s. And that F. G. of your said Town, Baker, has procured
and abetted him so to do, and received and bought of him diverse of the same
things, to the great damage of the said C. D. contrary to the la^e Act of
Parliament in that case made and provided. I do therefore hereby order and
require, That the said A. B. shall within six days after notice to him given of
this my Order, pay the said C. D. 20 s. and that the said F. G. do within six
days after notice to him given of this Order, pay unto the said C. D. 30 s. in
recompense to him for his wrongs aforesaid; and that these payments he made in
the presence of the said Constable hereby commanded upon request to see it
done; and hereof you are forthwith to give them notice, and if either of them
shall not pay the same, that then you do give me notice thereof, to the end
they may be farther proceeded against according to the said Statute. And hereof
fail not, etc. Given under our, etc.

Upon non-payment, to be whipped.
To, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly The Officer upon neglect to suffer
imprisonment till the Offender be punished.
proved before me, That A. B. of your Town of A. Weaver, has within three
months last past, robbed, etc. (as before) so made and provided; Wherefore the
premises considered, and that I judge the said Offenders A. B. and F. G.
unable to make satisfaction for the said wrong, I do hereby order that they be
forthwith committed to the said Constable of A. to be whipped, the which you
are hereby required forthwith to do at your peril. Given under our hands, etc.

Peace.
A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at B. in the
County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. has this 1 Justice by the first Assignavimus
of the Commission of the Peace. Any of these causes are sufficient. Lamb. 47. 3
Ed. 1. c. 9. W. 1. 1 R. 2. c. 2. 1 H. 4. c. 1. 2 H. 4. c. 1. 7 H. 4. c. 1.
present day taken his corporal Oath before me, that C. D. of, etc. That he is
afraid that A. B. of C. will beat, wound, maim, kill him, or burn his house.
That A. B. of. C. has already assaulted, beaten, bruised him; and farther,
has threatened him in such sort, that he is afraid that the said A. B. will
beat, wound, maim, kill or do him some other bodily harm. That A. B. has
already threatened that he will beat, wound, maim, kill or do him some other
bodily harm. Or burn his house. And that he is afraid that he will accordingly
so do. Where the Warrant is against two; for the Peace say, As well for their
respective personal appearance, etc. And that they respectively will in the
mean time, etc. And if they or either of these A. B. and C. D. shall refuse so,
etc. Convey them or him so refusing to the Gaol aforesaid, etc. And them or him
so conveyed, there to deliver, etc. To receive them or him so delivered, unto
the said Gaol, and them or him so delivered there safely, etc. Until they or
he so delivered shall find, etc.
And has therewithal prayed Surety of the Peace against the said C. D. These
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and
Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said
C. D. to come before me or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
of the said County, to find sufficient Security, as well for his personal
appearance at the next general Session of the Peace to be holden for the said
County at T. aforesaid, then and there to do and receive as by the said Court
shall be enjoined, as also that he will in the mean time keep His Majesty's
Peace toward His said Majesty and all His liege People, and especially toward
the said A. B. and if the said C. D. shall refuse so to do, that then (without
expecting any further or other warrant) you, some or one of you, do safely
convey him to the Gaol aforesaid, and him there deliver to the said Keeper of
the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, to
receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep until he shall
find such sufficient Security as aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace where an Assault is made upon an
Officer in discharge of his Office.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint was this day made unto us by W. W. Borsholder of
the Borough of the Town of C. in the said County, That R. L. of C. in the said
County, Gent. and I. W. the younger of C. aforesaid, Shoemaker, did in the
month of February last past at C. aforesaid, within the Borough aforesaid,
assault and beat several Persons, and the said W. W. then Borsholder of the
Borough aforesaid, being then and there present, did then and there (in His
Majesty's name) command the said R. L. and I. W. to keep His Majesty's Peace,
yet notwithstanding they did continue in breaking the same in his presence, and
then and there assaulted him, and threatened to kill him, all which he has
maintained upon his Oath before us, and that he is afraid that the said R. L.
and I. W. will kill, wound, beat, or do him some bodily harm, and has prayed
Security of the Peace to be by us granted unto him against the said R. L. and
I. W. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you the said
Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do bring the said R.
L. and I. W. before us, some or one of us, or some other of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace of the said County, to find several and respective
sufficient Security for their several and respective personal appearance at the
next general Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at
M. aforesaid, then and there to do and receive as by the Court shall be
enjoined; and in the mean time to be of good behavior, as well toward our
Sovereign Lord the King, as all His liege People. And in case that they the
said R. L. and I. W. or either of them shall refuse so to do, that then
(without expecting any further or other Warrant) you do convey him or them so
refusing to the Gaol aforesaid, and them or him to deliver to the Keeper of the
same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper (in His
Majesty's name) to receive them or him so delivered unto you into the said
Gaol, and them or him there safely keep until they or he shall give such
Security as aforesaid. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace.
To all Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other his
Majesty's Officers (to whom it shall or may concern) within this County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as R. I. of H. has personaly appeared before me, and has
found two sufficient Sureties, viz. A. B. of C. and E. F. of G. either of them
in the sum of ten pounds, and the said R. I. in twenty pounds, which they have
acknowledged before me, by Recognizance to His said Majesty's use, upon
condition that the said R. I. shall appear at the next general Sessions of the
Peace to be holden for this County, and in the mean time to keep the Peace
toward His said Majesty and all His liege People; and especially toward L. M.
of, etc. Therefore these are (in His Majesty's name) to command and require
you, and every of you, That you do forbear and surcease to arrest, attach,
take, imprison or otherwise by any means, (for the said occasion) to molest the
said R. I. And if he be or hereafter shall be, for the said occasion, and for
none other taken, or imprisoned, that then immediately, upon sight hereof, you
do cause him to be delivered and set at liberty without further delay. Given
under, etc.

A Mittimus for breaking the Peace.
Kent ss. I Send you herewithall the Body of A. B. whom I charge and require
you, (in His Majesty's name) to take into your safe custody for diverse
Misdemeanors committed by him against His said Majesty's Peace). until he
shall procure two good and sufficient Sureties to be bound with him in a
Recognizance (to His said Majesty) either of them in the sum of ten pounds,
and himself in twenty pounds to appease His said Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, at the next Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County; and in
the mean time to be of good behavior toward His said Majesty and all His hege
People. Whereof fail not, etc. Given under, etc.

A Release of the Peace.
Kanc. ss. MEmorandum, Quod Tricesimo die Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Nostri
Caroli secundi Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. Tricesimo, praefatus, A. B. venit coram
me praedicto C. D. and Gratis remisit and relaxavit (quantum in ipso est)
praedictam securitatem pacis, per ipsum versus infra nominatam Prudentiam Pell,
coram me petitam, die and anno supradictis.

The Condition of a Recognizance See Title Recognizance.
to appear at Sessions and keep the Peace.
THE Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within bound A. B. do
personally appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for
the within named County of Kent at Maidstone in the County aforesaid, then and
there to do and receive as by the said Court shall be enjoined, and do in the
mean time keep His Majesty's Peace toward His said Majesty and all His liege
People, and especially toward C. D. of, etc. That then this Recognizance shall
be void, or else to stand in full force.

Plague.
A Pass or certificate in the time of Plague.
To the Constables, Borsholders, and all and every other His Majesty's
Officers within the said County, to whom these Presents shall come respectively.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. of C. having occasion to go unto F. and several other
Places in the said County to dispatch business in which he is employed, has
this day desired a Pass from us, that he may go and return without molestation
or interruption. These are therefore to certify all whom these Presents may
concern, that the Parish of C. aforesaid is free from the Infection of the
Plague; And also to will and require you, and every of you to permit and suffer
the said A. B. peaceably and quietly to go into and return from F. aforesaid,
and such other Places as the said A. B. shall go unto by reason of his business
aforesaid. The said A. B. in his passage to and from the Places aforesaid,
demeaning himself civilly, without disturbing or interrupting the King's
Majesty's Peace. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

Poor.
A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to account and name other fit persons.
To the Constable and Borsholders of A. in the Hundred of B. and to every of
them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Justices, 1 of the
Quorum. Within one month after Easter.
name) to command you to give notice to the Churchwardens and other the
Overseers of the Poor of A. that they are by us required personally to appear
before us at the house of S. M. in C. etc. upon Monday the tenth day of May, at
nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to make and yield up unto us
a true and perfect account in writing of all sums of money by them received,
43 E. 2.
or rated and assessed and not received, for and toward the relief of the Poor
of B. and also of such stock (to set the Poor on work) as is in their hands, or
in the hands of any of their said Poor to work, and of all other things
concerning their said office; And that hereof they fail not at their perils.
And you are farther hereby commanded to signify unto them, that they do then
and there also certify unto us the names of such other substantial Householders
of A. as are thought meet Dalt. 364.
to be Overseers of the Poor there for the year ensuing. Fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at the, etc.

A Warrant for the making new Overseers of the Poor.
Kent ss. ACcording to the form of the 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Justices. Quorum unus.
Statute in such case made and provided, We whose names are hereunto subscribed
(His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County) do nominate and
appoint you (whose names are hereunder written) to be (together with the
Churchwardens of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid) Overseers of the
Poor of the said Parish for the year to come, (and to do and perform all such
things in and touching the said Office as by Law is required.) Whereof you are
not to fail at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at Maidstone in the
County aforesaid, the tenth day of September, etc.

A. B. C. D. etc.

A Warrant to make Overseers of the Poor, impowering them, and the
Churchwardens to collect the Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to destrain.
Kent ss. WHereas by virtue of an Act of 43 Eliz. cap. 2.
Parliament, entitled, An Act for Relief of the Poor, in the 43. year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth; We whose names are subscribed, His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County of K. and one of us of the
Quorum dwelling in or near the Parish of Saint A. B. in the said County of K.
have nominated and appointed A. B. and C. D. (together with K. L. Churchwarden
for the time being) according to the said Act of Parliament, to be Overseers
for the Poor of the said Parish; and receiving of the several sums of money
taxed and assessed by them, on the several persons on the nineteenth day of
June instant: These are therefore, according to the said Act of Parliament, to
authorize you the said Churchwarden and Overseers of the Poor, or any of you,
to collect and receive all such sums of money as aforesaid, and the same
respectively to levy of all such persons as shall refuse to pay the aforesaid
Assessment by way of distress and sale of their Goods for so much, rendering the
overplus, if any be, to the party or parties destrained, and for default of
distress, We require all Constables and other Officers to bring before us or
some other His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County the Bodies of
all such persons where no distress can be had, that further course may be taken
with them according to Law. Dated the 23. day of June, in the 32. year of His
now Majesty's Reign, Annoque Dom' 1680.

A. B.

A Confirmation of the Rates for the Poor.
Kent ss. SEen, ratified, and allowed by us whose names are hereunder written,
two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County aforesaid. And we
do hereby authorize the present Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor
within the Parish of A. and every of them, to levy by way of distress and sale
of the Goods of all such persons, as shall refuse or neglect to pay the several
Taxations aforesaid (upon them imposed) rendering to the Owners the overplus,
which shall remain upon the said Sale according to the Statute in that case
made and provided. Given under our hands and seals, etc.

A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish) from the former Overseers
Account, by Distress.
To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A.
in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as (upon your complaint) 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Justices, 1
Quorum.
it appears unto us, That A. B. and C. D. Churchwardens of the Parish
aforesaid, and E. F. and G. H. Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish in the
year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty six, upon their Account by them
made and yielded of and for the moneys by them received and disbursed for and
in execution of their said Office, (according to the form of the Statute in
that case made and provided) were in arrear and behind to the said Parish five
pounds, and have not yet paid the same over unto you^: These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you do levy the
said five pounds by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. C. D.
Refusing to account, to be committed to Gaol.
and E. F. (rendering to them the overplus) And in default of such Distress,
that then you do forthwith certify the same unto us, to the end that we may
farther do therein as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not. Given under
our hands and seals at, etc.

A Warrant against an Overseer of the Poor for not keeping of Monthly Meetings.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the
said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Justices. 1 Quorum.
proved before us, That A. B. (one of the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish
aforesaid, for the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy six) did
for the space of, etc. within the said year, absent himself from such monthly
Meetings as (by the duty To meet monthly on Sunday evening, or forfeit 20 s.
for each default allowing a just excuse.
of his aforesaid Office) he was (by the Statute in that he half made)
enjoined, (contrary to the Statute aforesaid) whereby he has forfeited five
pounds for his absence aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
to command you, that you, some or one of you, do levy the aforesaid five pounds
by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. and the same
to employ and dispose of to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, and such
other uses as by the said Statute is appointed; And in case of default of such
Distress, do you certify the same to us, to the end that there may be such
farther proceedings touching the premises as by Law is required. Given under
our hands and seals at, etc.

A Warrant to distrain for the Poors Tax.
To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B.
in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint has been 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 2 Justices, 1
Quorum. All things that are real, and a ^early Revenue must be taxed to the
Poor. Dalt. 165. The causes of Taxes are three. 1. To set the Poor a Stock. 2.
To relieve the Impotent money. 3. To put out Apprentices. Dalt. 150.
made by you unto us, That the several persons here under-named have refused to
pay unto you the several sums of money adjoining to their several names,
(being assessed upon them severally for and toward the necessary Relief of the
Poor of the said Parish, (according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and provided:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command
you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said several and
respective sums of money by Distress and Sale of the several and respective
Goods of the said several and respective Offenders, rendering to the parties the
overplus; And in defect of such Distress, that then you, some or one of you,
do certify the same unto us, to the end that there may be such farther
proceeding touching the premises as to Justice does appertain. Given under our
hands and seals at A. the, etc.

A. B. 1 s. 6. d. C. D. 1 s. 8. d.


A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to Distrain.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appears unto 2 Justices, 1 Quorum.
us, That A. B. of, etc. was assessed and rated at the sum of, etc. for and
toward the necessary Relief of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the
form of the Statute in that case made and provided) and that for his refusal of
payment of the same a Warrant was (according to the form of the said Statute)
directed to the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the
Parish aforesaid under the hands and seals of E. F. G. H. etc. His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid; and for that it now appears
unto us, that the said A. B. has no Goods or Chattels by Distress and Sale
whereof the said moneys can be levied, nor will he yet pay the moneys
aforesaid: We therefore do send you herewithall the Body of the said A. B.
commanding you to receive him into the said Gaol, there to remain (without Bail
or Mainprise) until he shall pay the moneys aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish.
To the Churchwardens and others the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H.
in the said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint has been ^4 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Justices. 1 of the
Quorum, upon complaint to ^ Justice.
made by you to us, (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided) That A. B. has within forty days before the said Complaint come into
your said Parish to settle there in a Tenement under the yearly value of ten
pounds, and that he is likely to be chargeable to the Parish aforesaid, and was
last legally settled at B. in, etc. by the space of forty days at the least as
a Native Native, Householder, S^journer, Apprentice, o^ Servant.
there: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require and authorize
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do remove and convey the
said A. B. to B. aforesaid, where he was so last legally settled, unless he
give sufficient Security for the discharge of your said Parish (to be allowed
by us.) Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to her Husband, in the Parish from whence
they came.
To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and to
every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint has been 2 Justices.
by you made unto us, That H. the Wife of R. D. (an Inhabitant in the Parish of
C. in the County aforesaid) is lately come into your said Parish of H. and has
brought with her thither a Male-child (of the said R. and H.) of the age of,
etc. (or thereabouts) and that both the said H. and Child are likely to be
chargeable to your said Parish, and you have thereupon craved from us such
Relief (touching the premises) as by Law is appointed: These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to authorize and require you, that you, some or one of
you, do convey the said H. and Child to the said Parish of C. and there to
deliver them to the said R. (in case you can there find him) to be with him
settled according to Law; And in case that you cannot there find him, then to
deliver the said H. and Child to the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish
of C. to be disposed of according to Law. Given under our hands and seals the,
etc.

A Warrant for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from which he was
removed.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas A. B. in May last legally 1^ Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Justice.
settled as a, etc. in the Parish of T. came into the Parish of V. to settle in
a Tenement there under the yearly value of ten pounds, and likely to be
chargeable to the said Parish, was upon complaint thereof made by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, (according to the
form of the Statute in that behalf made) by Warrant to the said Churchwardens
and Overseers (according to the Statute aforesaid) directed, by them removed
and conveyed to the aforesaid Parish of T. there to remain (according to the
said Statute;) since which the said A. B. did return (of his own accord) to the
said Parish of V. (from whence he was so removed:) These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the
said A. B. to come before us, some or one of us, at the house of T. Inn-holder,
called the George Inn in the said County, the fifth day of June next ensuing,
at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to show cause why he
returned to the said Parish of V. and farther to do and receive as to Justice
does appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals
the, etc.

Against those who come to Work, and return not at the end of their Work.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the
said County, and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint has been 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 2 Justices. If he
shall not return when his work is finished, or shall fall sick or impotent
whilst he is in the said work.
made by you unto us, That A. B. an Inhabitant in C. came into your Parish to
work, and is not returned upon his finishing thereof: These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to require and authorize you, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do convey the said A. B. to C. aforesaid, there to remain
an Inhabitant as formerly he was. Given under, etc.

A Mittimus to the House of Correction of one that refuses to be removed after
his Work finished.
To the Constables and Borsholders, etc. and to the Keeper of the House of
Correction, etc.
Kent ss. WHereas upon complaint (according 14 Car. 2. cap. 4. 1 Justice. Vide
in the Margin of the Precedent Warrant.
to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) That A. B. an
Inhabitant in D. came into the Parish of C. in the said County to work, and was
not returned upon his finishing thereof. And thereupon the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish were (according to the Statute
aforesaid) required and authorized to convey the said A. B. to D. aforesaid,
there to remain an Inhabitant as formerly he was. Nevertheless the said A. B.
(though lawfully required) refused to go thither. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to require you the said Constables and Borsholders, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to
the aforesaid House of Correction, and there to deliver him to the aforesaid
Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you the said
Keeper to receive him into the said House, and there punish him as a Vagabond.
Hereof fail you not at your peril. Given, etc.

A Warrant and Mittimus for one who runs away, and leaves his Family upon the
Parish.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at Maidstone in
the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly 7 Iac. c. 4. Such person is adjudged
an incorrigible Rogue. 2 Justices of that Division. Fit to have 2 Witnesses
upon Oath.
proved before us that A. B. of the Parish of H. being able to labor, and
thereby to relieve himself and his Family, did nevertheless lately run away out
of this said Parish, and leave his Family upon the Parish: These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and
every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him
safely convey to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper
of the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper,
to receive him into the Gaol aforesaid, and him there safely keep until he
shall be from thence delivered by due order of Law. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

A Mittimus on the foregoing Warrant.
To the Keeper of the House of Correction.
WE send you herewithall the Body of A. B. of, etc. for that he did run away,
and left his Wife and two small Children in the said Parish which are become a
Parish charge to the said Parish of, etc. straightly charging and commanding you
the said Keeper to receive the said A. B. into the said House of Correction, to
be dealt with as an incorrigible Rogue, and him there safely keep, until he
shall be thence delivered by order of Law. Hereof, etc.

A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay Arrears, and continue weekly
Relief to Poor persons.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. and to
every of them.
K. ss. WHereas complaint has been made unto me by A. B. of your said Town,
That you I. S. and K. S. the now Overseers for the Poor of your said Parish
formerly paid unto the said A. B. the sum of 1 s. 6 d. per weeek, for and
toward the maintenance of herself and Children, and that you do now suspend
the payment thereof, whereby the said A. B. is utterly disabled to provide for
herself and Children. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge
and command you the said Overseers that presently upon sight hereof, you, or
some, pay unto the said A. B. all such Arrears as are accrued since your
forbearing the payment of it, and that you continue to her the former allowance
of 1 s. 6 d. unto her for the future, or forthwith to show cause why you refuse
to make the same. And hereof, etc.

A Warrant to levy Relief for the Poor.
To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. and to
every of them.
K. ss. WHereas complaint has been made unto me, That S. G. of your said Town
who is a very Poor woman is now very sick and weak, and is utterly disabled to
provide for herself, or her Children, so that all of them are in danger of
perishing for want of Sustenance. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
straightly to charge and command you, and every of you, that immediately upon
sight hereof, you, or some of you, do by a general Levy throughout the whole
Town, or otherwise, make such an allowance to the said S. G. as may be
convenient for and toward the Relief of herself and Children; or forthwith
show cause, if you can, why you refuse to make the same. And hereof, etc.

A Bond and Condition to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor to save a
Town harmless upon inhabiting there.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos R. J. de P. in Com. N. Agricol. and H. B.
de T. praedict. pastor. tenen. and firmiter obligar. S. C. de M. in Com. N.
praed. Agricol. and T. G. de M. praedict. Agricol. in sexagint. Libris bonae
and Legalis monetae Angl. solvend. eisdem S. C. and T. G. seu eorum alteri vel
eorum certis Atturnat. Executoribus Administratoribus vel Assign. suis ad quam
quidem solutionem been and fidelit. facien. Obl^gamus nos and utrumque nostr.
Haeredes, Executores, Administrator. nostros firmiter per praedict. sigil.
nostr. sigillat. dat. Sexto die Maij, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi,
Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, etc.

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas one E. I. Labourer, is
now lately come to inhabit and dwell within the said Parish of M. and likely to
be chargeable to the same. If therefore the said R. I. and H. B. or either of
them, their or either of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
every ot any of them do, and shall from time to time, and at all times
hereafter fully and clearly acquit, discharge, save harmless and indempnifie,
as well the within named S. T. and T. G. Churchwardens of the Parish Church of
M. aforesaid, and the now Overseers for the Poor of the said Parish, and their
Successors, as also all the Inhabitants and Parishioners of the said Parish,
which now are, or at any time hereafter shall be there resident, and every of
them, of and from all, and all manner of costs, charges, payments, taxes and
expenses whatsoever, which shall or may at any time hereafter, in any manner of
wise arise, happen, come, grow due, or be imposed upon them, or any of them,
for or by reason or means of the said E. I. his Wife or Children, or any of
them, their or any of their residing, living, or inhabiting in the said Parish
of M. and of and from all troubles, charges and demands whatsoever concerning
the same, That then this Obligation to be void, and of none effect, or else to
remain in full force and virtue.

Sealed and delivered, etc.

A Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that paid five pounds to be
freed from keeping a Bastard Child.
To all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, We E. C. of A. in
the Parish of K. in the County of N. Gent. and E. W. of K. aforesaid, Baker,
the now Overseers of the Poor for the said Parish of K. send greeting. Whereas
there was lately a Bastard Child born within the said Town of K. begotten on
the body of one F. P. And whereas R. E. of B. in the County of C. Tailor, is
adjudged the reputed Father thereof; And whereas it is agreed by and between
the said E. C. and E. W. and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said Town of K.
and the said R. E. That for and in consideration of the sum of 5 li. of
lawful money of England, to be paid to us the Overseers for the Poor, by the
said R. E. We the said Overseers, and our Successors, and the rest of the
Inhabitants of the said Town of K. should provide for, take care of, and
maintain the said Child, and save harmless and indempnifie the said R. E. of
and from the keeping and maintaining it, and of and from all taxes, charges and
payments, now already or hereafter to be taxed or charged upon the said R. E.
for or in respect thereof. Now know ye, That we the said E. C. and E. W. have
according to and in full of the said Agreement had and received of the said R.
E. the sum of 5 li. and do, by and with the consent and direction, and for
and on the behalf of our selves, and the rest of the Inhabitants of the said
Town of K. acquit, release, and for ever discharge, and free him the said R. E.
of and from the said sum of 5 li. and from the keeping or maintaining the
said Child, and of and from all charges, taxes and payments, now already or
hereafter to be charged or taxed upon him the said R. E. to or for the same. In
witness whereof we the said E. C. and E. W. have hereunto set our hands and
seals, etc.

Prisoner.
To allow a poor Prisoner Relief.
To A. B. Gent. Treasurer for Relief of the Prisoners in His Majesty's Gaol
for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas T. S. (now Prisoner in the said Gaol) is in very great
necessity for want of present Relief for his subsistence there: These are
therefore (so far forth as in us lies) to appoint and authorize you the said
Treasurer, to allow unto the said T. S. competent Relief (during his necessity)
in the said Gaol. Given under our hands and seals the third day of June, Anno
Dom. 1679.

A Discharge of a Prisoner to a Jailer.
To the Jailer or Keeper of the common Gaol at A. in the County aforesaid.
K. ss. WE R. K. and A. B. Esquires, two of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County aforesaid, greeting. Forasmuch as A. H. of C. etc. Barber,
has found sufficient Sureties before us for his personal appearance at the
next Quarter Sessions to be holden at C. aforesaid. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to require and authorize you, that forthwith upon sight hereof
you discharge the body of A. H. aforesaid, if he be detained, for no other
cause but upon A. B. and C. D. their Warrant, and this shall be your Discharge.
Given under our hands and seals at A. etc.

Or thus:
To the Jailer or Keeper, etc.
Where Is A. B. being by me committed to your Custody in your Gaol, till he put
in Sureties for the Peace or good Behavior, as the case requires. These are
therefore, etc. as before.

For a Prisoner to be Bailed.
THese are to charge and require you, that immediately (upon your Receipt of
this) you bring before me the body of A. B. now in your Custody to be Bailed,
as Law requires.

A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give Evidence.
To the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol of N. or his Deputy.
YOU are hereby required to bring the body of T. S. in safe Custody to
Westminster, upon Monday next being the seventh day of this instant February,
by one of the clock in the afternoon of the same day, to testify the truth
according to knowledge in a certain Cause now depending in the Court of King's
Bench, and there to be tried by Nisi prius before the Lord Chief Justice of the
said Court, Between P. Earl of C. Plaintiff, and G. B. Defendant, in a plea of
Trespass on the case on the part of the Plaintiff, and after his Evidence given
to remove him back safe to your Gaol. Hereof fail not. Given under my hand and
seal this fifth day of February, 1675.

Quakers.
A Mittimus of Quakers.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at B, in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received information, 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 1. 1
Justice.
That A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and I. K. being persons commonly called Quakers,
and every of them of the age of sixteen years or upward, have lately departed
from the places of their several habitations, and assembled themselves at T. in
the said County, (under pretense of joining in a Religious Worship not
authorized by the Laws of this Realm: These are therefore (in His Majesty's
name.) to will and require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do cause the said A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.
and I. K. to come before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the said County with sufficient Securities to be bound with them to
appear at the next Quarter Sessions, in order to their Conviction of the
Offense aforesaid; and in case of their, or any of their refusal, or neglect so
to do, that then you do convey such of them so refusing or neglecting, to the
aforesaid Common Gaol, and deliver them or him so refusing or neglecting to the
aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you,
the said Keeper, to receive them or him into the said Gaol, and them or him
there safely to keep, until they or he shall be bound with such Securities as
aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the,
etc.

Upon Conviction by verdict or Confession, The first Offense a Fine not
exceeding 5 li. The second Offense 10 li.

Upon every Offender on non-payment, first Offense 3. months imprisonment,
second Offense 6 months, the third Offense, abjure the Realm. But upon taking
the Oaths, Conforming, and giving Security not to meet in such unlawful
Assemblies, to be discharged of all the penalties.

Rape.
A Warrant concerning a Rape.
To the Constables and Borsholders, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as we received Information 13 Ed. 1. 24. 2 Justices.
and Charge against A. B. of C. etc. touching a certain Felony, (that is to
say) with the carnal Knowledge and Ravishment of M. the Wife of C. D. of, etc.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, and every of you,
that, you some or one of you do attach the body of the said A. B. and bring him
before us, or some of us, to the house of, etc. on the twelfth day of this
instant May, at one of the clock in the afternoon, to be examined touching the
premises, and to be further dealt with according to Law. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under, etc.

Rates for Hay, Oats, etc.
A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, etc. upon His Majesty's passing
through any place.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A- in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. WHereas we have received notice from the Green-cloath, that His Majesty
will shortly pass through the Road 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 2 Justices.
in this County leading between B. and C. We therefore (according to the form
of the Statute in that case made and provided) do set down and appoint the
Rates and Prices to be paid during His Majesty's abode within this Division,
for Hay, Oats, and other Accommodations for Horses, as is here under written:
(which Rates are to be observed and kept and obeyed by all persons concerned at
their perils.) And we do will and require you and every of you, that you, some
or one of you, do in the Market Town within the said Hundred, on the Market Day
now next ensuing, cause to be proclaimed the Rates aforesaid; as also that you
do in the like manner cause to be proclaimed the Rates aforesaid, in all the
Towns and Villages within the said Hundred within, etc. days now next ensuing;
to the end that notice may be taken of the same Rates and Prices. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

For a Bushel of Oats, etc.

And so ratably for every greater or lesser quantity, etc.

A Warrant for levying the Penalty forfeited for not observing the Rates
aforesaid.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved 13 Car. 2. cap. 8. 1 Justice.
Lodging, Horsemeat, Stable-room, or other Accommodations.
before me, That A. B. of C. in the said County, Innkeeper, has taken of C.
D. Yeoman of the Guards, more for his Lodging, etc. during His Majesty's late
abode within this Division than by the Justices of the Peace of this County was
(according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided) set down
and appointed, (contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid:) These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do levy (to the use of the said C. D. by Distress
and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.) 40 s. by him forfeited to
the said C. D. for the Offense aforesaid, returning the overplus to the said
A. B. (the charge of the Distraining being first deducted.) Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Recognizances.
When you take a Recognizance of any Directions thereupon.
it must be in Latin; set down the time of making it, the Principal's name and
dwelling Place, and his Trade or Calling, and so of the others his Sureties,
and bind them (in a sum of money) to the King; and that being done, you read
the same Recognizance in English thus, (viz.) for the Peace.
YOU A. B. of C. etc. do acknowledge your self to owe unto our Sovereign Lord
the King's Majesty twenty pounds. And you C. D. of H. etc. and E. F. of I. etc.
his Sureties do likewise each of you acknowledge to owe unto our said Sovereign
Lord the King's Majesty ten pounds apiece to be levied of your several Goods
and Chattels, Land and Tenements to His said Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
upon condition, That if the said A. B. shall personally appear before our said
Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty's Justices A Condition for the Peace.
of the Peace at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this
Borough of A. and do then and there make answer unto all such matters which on
His Majesty's behalf shall be objected against him, and in the mean time to
keep the Peace toward our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty and all His
Liege-people, but especially toward one G. H. and do not depart thence without
License from the Court, then your Recognizance to be void or else to stand in
full force.

The Recognizance being made is to be engrossed Directions.
in Parchment, and subscribed with the Justice's hand only, But he that enters
into it, need not put his hand or seal to it.

Note, All Recognizances for the Peace are to be styled, At the next Sessions
of the Peace; And for Felony, At the next Jail-deliver.

The manner of entering the note of Recognizances in your Book of Recognizances.
A. B. de C. etc. xx li. ad Comparendum ad proximam Sessionem Pacis and
conservare versus C. D. etc. E. F. de C. etc. x li. and G. H. de C. etc. x li.
Subscribe the Cause thus.
Bound over for the suspicious stealing of a [ Cow] being the Goods of A. H.
etc. [as the Case requires.]

R. P. de Paroch. A. etc. Victular 10 li. The Recognizance for the License of
an Alehouse.


R. S. de Paroch. A. etc. Victular 5 li.

P. S. de Paroch. A. etc. Victular 5 li.

Sub Condition quod praedict' R. P. been and fideliter observavit omnes and
singulos Articulos in Licentia sua pro Tipulatione Content' Capt' and Recogn'
XX die Maii Anno Dom. 1680. Coram Nobis, etc.

The Recognizance must be certified to the 3 H. 7. c. 1. 1 and 2 Ph. and M. c.
13. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. c. 10.
next Sessions or Jail-deliver where he or they is, are, or has been
Justices; that the Party so bound may be called: And if the Party make default,
the same then there to be recorded; and the same Recognizance, with the Record
of that default shall be sent and certified in the Chancery, the King's Bench,
or into the Exchequer.

Every Condition of a Recognizance must have these things.
1. It may be in English. 2. It may have the first words [ The Condition of
this Recognizance is such, That if the above bounden A. B. etc.] 3. It must
show what he is bound to do, As [ personally to appear at the next
Quartersessions to be holden for the County of K. and in the mean time to be of
Good behavior toward Behavior.
our Sovereign Lord the King and all his People,] or as the case requires. 4.
The Close thus [ That then this Recognizance to be void or else to stand in
force.]
All this may be done on the back of the Recognizance or underneath it.

A single Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod tertio die Aprilis anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli
Secundi, Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensoris, etc. venerunt coram A. B. and C. D. Armig. Just. dicti Domini Regis
ad Pacem in Com. K. conservand. Assig. R. H. de S. in Com. praedict. Yeoman,
and T. H. de eodem Carpenter, ac R. S. de F. in Com. praed. Mercer, and
Recognover. se debere dicto Dom. Regi, (viz.) quillbet Manucaptor praed.
Quinque libras and praed. R. H. december libras bonae and legalis monetae Angliae
(solvend. eidem Dom. Regi in Festo Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae
proximo futuro post datum praesent.) Et nisi fecerint, concesserunt pro se
Haered. Executor. and Administrator. suis per praesentes, quod dictae separales
summae leventur and recuperentur de Maneriis, Messuagiis, Terris, Tenementis,
Bonis, Catallis and Haereditamentis ipsorum R. H. T. H. and R. S. haered.
Executor. and Assign. suorum, ubicunque fuerint invent. Dat. etc.

Another single Recognizance.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Januarii Anno Regni Dom. nostri Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, etc. A. B. de C. in Com. praed. Yeoman,
personaliter venit coram R. K. Armig. uno Just. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in
Com. praedict. Conservand. Assign. and Recognovit se debere dicto Dom. Regi
december libras bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, de Bonis and Catallis, Terris
and Tenementis suis fieri and Levari, ad opus dicti Dom. Regis, Haered. and
successor. suorum, si defecerit in Corditione indorsat.

A Recognizance to prefer an Indictment, or to prefer a Bill, and give Evidence.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die September. anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensoris, etc. A. B. de C. in Coin. K. Yeoman* in propria persona sua, venit
coram me R. K. uno Iusticiariorum dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in dicto Com.
conservandam necnon ad diversas Felonias, Transgressiones, and alia malefacta
in eodem Com. perpetranda audiendum, and determinandum assignat. Et cognovit se
debere dicto Domino Regi Quadraginta Libras de Bonis and Catallis, Terris and
Tenementis suis ad opus dicti Domini Regis levandas, sub Condition indorsata,
viz.

A Recognizance for two to give Evidence.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod decimo die Februarii anno Regni Dom. nost. Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensoris, etc. W. B. de S. in Com. praedict. Husbandman, and W. R. de S. in
eodem Com. Husbandman, in propriis personis suis venerunt coram me R. K. uno
Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem, in Com. praed. conserv. necnon ad
diversas Felonias, Transgressiones, and alia Malesacta in eodem Com.
perpetrand. audiend. and determinand. assignat. Et quilibet uterque eorum per
se cognovit, se debere dicto Domino Regi viginti libr. de Bonis, and Catallis,
Terris and Tenementis suis ad opus dicti Domini Regis levandas, sub condition
indorsata.

A Recognizance to give in Evidence against a Prisoner.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo tertio die Maii anno Regni Domini nostri
Caroli Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, etc. T. R. de E. in praed. Yeoman, venit
coram me R. K. uno Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praed.
conservand. assignat. and cognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi Quinque libr.
legalis monetae Angliae, sub condition, quod si ipse personaliter comparebit
coram Just. dicti Domini Regis ad proximam generalem Gaolae delib. in Com.
praed. tenend. ad tunc and ibidem ostendendum in Evidenc. secundum formam stat.
verse. A. B. nuper de C. in Com. praed. qui modo attach. and suspect. Feloniae
Gaolae dicti Domini Regis Com. praedict. commissus existit; quod tunc, etc.
alioquin, etc.

For the Good behavior.
MEmorandum, Quod R. A. de C. in Com. praed. Genesis B. A. de W. in eodem Com.
Genesis S. A. de W. praed. Yeoman, B. R. de W. praed. Yeoman, and A. C. de W.
praed. Yeoman, veniunt coram me W. M. Armig. uno Iusticiar. Domini Regis nunc
ad Pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. and quilibet praed. B. A. S. A. B.
R. and A. C. manucepit pro dicto R. A. in viginti libris legalis monetae
Angliae, and praed. R. A. manucepit pro seipso in viginti libris consimilis
monetae, viz. quod dictus R. A. a modo se been gerat erga dictum Dominum Regem
and cunctum populum suum, and praecipue erga T. P. de S. in Com. praedict.
Husbandman, pro uno anno nunc proxim. futur. ita quod ipse non inferet nec
inferri procurabit, per se nec per alium, nomine suo eidem T. P. seu alicui de
populo dicti Domini Regis damnum aliquod seu gravamen de Corporibus suis per
insidias, insultus, seu aliquo alio modo quod in laesionem seu perturbationem
Pacis dicti Domini Regis cedere valeat quovismodo: quas quidem separales
pecuniarum summas praedictas, quilibet manucapt. praedictorum per se, ac dictus
R. A. per se recognov. se debere dicto Domino Regi and concessur. eas de
terris, tenementis, and catallis suis, and cujuslibet eorum, ad opus dicti
Domini Regis levand. si dictus R. A. in praemissis, seu in aliquo praemissorum
deliquerit, and inde legitimo modo convictus fuerit. Dat. decimo die Aprilis.
Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, etc.

Another.
K. ss. MEmorandum, etc. and quod ipse A. B. interim se been geret erga Dom.
Reg. and cunctum populum suum, and praecipue erga L. M. Et quod ipse non
inferet nec inferri procurabit per se nec per alios, damnum aliquod seu
gravamen praefato L. M. seu alicui de populo ipsius Dom. Regis de Corporibus
suis, per insidias, insultus, seu aliquo alio modo, quod in laesionem seu
perturbationem pacis dict^ Dom. Regis cedere valeat quovis modo, viz. uterque
praedict. D. E. and H. J. sub poena Quinquagint. libr. and praedict. A. B. sub
poena Cent. libr. etc.

A Recognizance to give in Evidence against one that is suspected of Felony.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo die November. Anno Regni Dom. nostri Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensor', etc. Tricesimo R. T. nuper de C. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, venit
coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com.
praedict. conservand. assignat. and Recognovit se debere dict. Dom. Reg.
Quinque libras legalis monetae Angl. sub condition, quod ipse personaliter
comparebit coram me and sociis meis Justice. praed. ad proximam generalem Gaolam
in Com. praed. tenend. Et ad tunc ibidem ostend. in Evidenc. secundum formam
Statuti versus D. E. in Com. praed. qui modo attach. and suspect. Feloniae
Gaolae dict. Dom. Reg. Com. praed. commissus existit quod tunc, etc. alioquin,
etc.

A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod quarto die October. Anno Regni Dom. nostri Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia Angliae, etc. vicesimo tertio venerunt coram nobis R. K. and
H. W. Armig. Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem dict. Dom. Reg. in Com. E.
conservand. necnon alia malefacta ac diversas transgress. perpetrat. audiend.
and terminand. assignatis A. B. de E. in Com. praed. L. and R. A. in Com.
praed. H. and W. T. de eadem in eodem Com. Weaver, Et Manuceperunt, viz.
quilibet manucapt. praedict. sub paena Quinquagint. solid. Et praedict. M. T.
assumpsit pro se sub poena Quinque libr. quod ipse W. T. been gerat Tabernam
secundum formam Statuti. Quas quidem seperales summas quilibet eorum cognovit
se debere dict. Dom. Reg. Atque volunt, and concedunt de Terris and Tenementis,
Bonis and Catallis suis and cujuslibet eorum fieri and levari, si praedict W.
T. defecerit.

A Recognizance for one that is Bail for a Boy that lay under a Bed in the
Night.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo septimo die Martii Anno Regni Regis Caroli
secundi Dei gratia Angliae, etc. vicesimo T. H. de B. in Com. K. Tailor, in
propria persona sua venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini
Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. K. conservand. assignat. and manucepit pro T. H.
de B. praed. filio suo quod ipse praedict. T. H. filius comparebit coram
Iusticiar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in dicto Com. conservand. assignat. ad
proximam generalem Sessionem pacis in Com. praed. tenend. ad respondend. F. D.
pro fractione and intratione in domum Mansionalem ipsius F. and omnibus quae
versus ipsum tunc and ibidem objicientur sub poena manucapt. praed. quadragint.
libr. quam quidem summam quadragint. libr. praed. manucapt. recognovit se
debere dicto Dom. Regi de terris and tenementis, bonis and catallis suis ad
opus dicti Domini Regis haered. and suceessorum fieri and Levari si contingerit
ipsum T. H. filium praemissa in aliquo infringere in cujus rei Testimonium ego
praedict. W. P. sigillum meum apposui dat. die and Anno supradict.

A Recognizance for Bastardy where two are Manucapters for the man in custody.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod septimo die Augusti Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi
Angliae, etc. Tricesimo primo Annoque Dom. 1679. M. F. de S. in Com. praed.
Victualler, and E. W. de S. praed. Genesis venerunt Coram me R. K. Armig. uno
Justice. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. Et
manuceperunt and uterque eorum manucepit pro H. I. de parochia D. in Com.
praed. Husbandman, sub poena vigint. libr. legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem
summas dict. Domino Regi debere concesserunt and uterque eorum concessit de
bonis and catallis, terris and tenementis suis fieri and levari ad opus and
usum dicti Dom. Regis haered. and successor. suorum si praefat. H. I. defecerit
in condition indorsat. etc.

A Recognizance for a married Woman upon a Rescue.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod tricesimo die Julii Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi,
etc. Angliae, etc. vicesimo quarto Anno Domini 1672. W. M. de E. in Com. praed.
and R. G. de F. in Com. praed. Genesis venerunt coram me R. K. Armig. uno
Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand. assign. Et
manuceper. and uterque eorum manucepit pro Anna If 3. quilibet eorum.
uxore T. C. de I. infra Parochiam S. in Com. praed. Tailor, sub poena vigint.
libr. legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem summas dicto Domino Regi debere
concesserunt and uterque eorum concessit de bonis and catallis, terris and
tenementis suis and utriusque eorum ad opus and usum dicti Domini Regis fieri
and levari si praefat. A. C. defecerit in condition indorsata.

Capt. and Cogn. die and Anno supradict. coram me.
A Recognizance for one that has hurt another, and on the Warrant of Behavior.
MEmorandum, Quod quarto die Mail Anno Regni Regis Caroli Secundi, etc.
Angliae, etc. Annoque Domini, etc. venerunt coram me R. K. Armig. uno
Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com praedict. conservand. assign.
apud N. in Com. praed. W. H. de B. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, and R. H. de eadem
and assumpserunt pro seipsis sub poena ducentarum libr. legalis monetae Angliae
and E. L. de eadem villa praedict. Malster, and E. L. de M. in Com. praedict.
Yeoman, tunc and ibidem in propriis personis suis similiter venerunt and
manuceperunt and uterque eorum seperatim manucepit pro praefat. W. H. and R. H.
sub poena sexagint. libr. legalis monetae Angliae, quas quidem separales summas
dicto Domino Regi debere concesserunt and quilibet eorum concessit de bonis and
catallis, terris and tenementis suis, and cujuslibet eorum fieri and levari ad
opus and usum dicti Dom. Regis haered. and successor. suorum si praefat. W. H.
defecerint in Condition indorsat.

For the Peace.
MEmorandum, Quod R. W. de S. in Comitatu 1 Justice.
praedicto Labourer, J. B. de S. praed, Husbandman, and R. C. de W. in dicto
Comitatu Com. Husbandman, ven. coram me E. Littleton Armig. uno Iusticiar.
Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in Comitatu praedicto conservand. assign. apud W. in
Comitatu praedicto, and quilibet praedictorum. J. B. and R. C. manuceperunt pro
dicto R. W. in december libris legalis monetae Angliae, and dictus R. W. manucepit
pro seipso in viginti libris consimilis monetae Angliae, viz. quod dictus R. W.
comparebit ad generalem Sessionem Pacis in Comitatu praed. proxim. tenend. and
quod ipse interim Pacem dicti Domini Regis erga ipsum Dominum Regem and cunctum
populum suum, and praecipue erga J. A. de S. in Comitatu praedict. Yeoman,
conservabit: quas quidem separales pecuniarum summas praed. quilibet eorum
recognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi, and eas concessur. de terris,
tenementis, bonis, and catallis suis, ad opus dicti Domini Regis levand. si
dictus R. W. in aliquo praemissorum deliquerit, and inde legitimo modo
convictus fuerit. Dat. decimo die Jan. Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Caroli
Secundi Dei gratia, etc.

For Felony.
MEmorandum, Quod 20 die Maii Anno 1 Justice.
Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi Dei gratia, etc. R. C. de L. Gent. E. C. de
L. praedict. Gent. J. B. de eadem, Gent. and M. C. de eadem, Yeoman, veniunt
coram me J. H. Armigero uno Iusticiar. dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com.
praedict. conservand. assign. and manuceperunt pro R. B. de L. in Com praedict.
Gent. viz. quilibet eorum Corpus pro Corpore, quod idem R. B. personaliter
comparebit coram praefat. Iusticiar. and sociis suis, ad proximam generalem
Sessionem Pacis, in Com. praedicto tenend. ad stand. recto in Cur. si quis
versus eos tunc loqui voluerit de diversis Feloniis and transgress. unde idem
R. B. indictatus existit (ut dicitur) and ad respond. dicto Domino de eisdem,
prout debet. Datum, etc.

A Release of a Recognizance written under the Recognizance thus, by the same
Justice, or by some other, etc.
EGO praefatus A. B. qui supra nominatum C. D. de Preston ad securitatem Pacis
inveniendam ex mea discretione compuli, eandem securitatem de se been gerendo
quantum in me est ex mea discretione; sexto die Maii, Anno Domini 1680. Remisi
and Relaxavi, In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Relaxationi meae sigillum
meum apposui Datum.

The Parties Release of the Peace.
MEmorandum, Quod tertio die Julii Anno 32. Regis Caroli Secundi, etc. A. B.
venit coram me R. K. Armig. uno Iusticiariorum Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem, etc.
and Gratis Remisit and Relaxavit (quantum in se est) praedictam securitatem
pacis per ipsum versus supra nominatum T. H. petitam. In cujus rei testimonium
ego praefatus R. K. etc. Dat. apud, etc.

And in like sort the Justice or Justices of Peace may do, which took Sureties
for Good behavior if they see cause.

Riot.
A Precept to the Sheriff to return a Jury to inquire upon a Riot, Rout, or
unlawful Assembly.
Kent ss. W. B. and R. R. Esquires; 2 Justices. 13 H. 4. cap. 7. To be inquired
within one month after the Riot. 19 H. 7. cap. 13.
two of His Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in the County
aforesaid; to the Sheriff of the said County, Greeting. On the behalf of our
Sovereign Lord the King we command you, that you do cause to come before us at
H. in the Parish of G. in the said County, upon Thursday the 10. day of June
next ensuing, four and twenty honest, sufficient and lawful men, dwelling
within the said County, (whereof every of them have to Lands and Tenements
within the County aforesaid, to the yearly value of twenty shillings of
Charter-hold or Freehold, or twenty six shillings eight pence of Copyhold, or
of both, over and above all charges) for to inquire for His Majesty of some
Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies, committed and done at S. in the said
County, (as it is said.) And that you do return upon every Person so by you
impannelled in issues, at the first day twenty shillings, at the second day
forty shillings to be by them forfeited if that they appear not, and be sworn
to inquire the premises at the first day: All which you shall in no case omit
upon pain of twenty pounds. which you shall forfeit to His said Majesty (if you
shall make default in not returning the said Persons or issues in form
aforesaid.) And have you then the names of the said Jurors, and this Precept.
Given under our hands and seals at T. in the said County, etc.

The like Precept in Latin.
K. ss. T. C. and R. K. Armigeri (duo Iusticiariorum 2 Justices. 13 H. 4. cap.
7. (To be inquired within a month after the Riot.) 19 H. 7. cap. 13.
Dom. Regis ad pacem in Com. suo praed. conservand. assign. necnon ad diversas
felonias, transgressiones and alia malefacta in eodem Com. perpetrat. audiend.
and terminand. assignat.) Vic. ejusdem Com. salutem. Ex part Dom. Regis tibi
praecipimus, Quod venire facias coram nobis apud S. in Com. praed. die Iovis 26
die Aprilis prox. sequen. ad horam octavam ante meridiem ejusdem diei viginti
and quatuor probos, sufficientes and legales homines infra Com. praed.
commorantes, quorum quilibet habeat terras and tenementa infra eundem Com. ad
valentiam viginti solidorum per chart. tent. sive liberi tenementi, vel viginti
and sex solidorum and octo denariorum terrae per copiam rotulorum Curiae tent.
(ultra omnia onera) Ad inquirend. pro Dom. Rege super sacram. suum de quibusdam
Riotis, Routis, and illicitis aggregationibus commiss. and perpetrat. apud H.
in Com. praed. (ut dicitur) Quodque retornes super quamlibet personam per te
impanellat. in exitibus viginti solidos per ipsos forisfaciend. si non
compareant ut jurati sint ad inquirend. de praemissis ad diem illum, omnia quae
nullatenus omit. sub paena viginti librar. quam noveris te forisfactur. eidem
Dom. Regi si defalt. feceris in non retorn. personas pr^d. sive exit. in forma
praed. Et habeas ibi tunc nomina Iur. ill. and hoc praeceptum. Dat. sub
Sigillis nostris, apud S. ultim. die Martii, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli
Secundi (Dei gratia) Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis (Fidei
Defensor. etc.) 27.

A Warrant for certain Riotous Persons.
To the Constables, etc.
Kent. ss. FOrasmuch as I am credibly informed His Majesty shall bear the
losses that the Justice of Peace shall sustain in the execution of the Statute.
13 H. 4. cap. 7. Of Riots, etc. 2 H. 5. c. 8.
by A. B. Gent. that C. D. etc. and diverse and sundry other Persons unknown,
have come upon the Ground of the said A. B. in M. aforesaid, and there have
been aiding and assisting to these Persons hereunder named, in forceable
manner, to carry away the Wood and Timber, etc. there of late growing, being
the Wood and Timber of A. B. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you, and every of you, to arrest as well the said Parties hereunder
named, as the said Parties unknown, being showed unto you by the said A. B. and
to bring the same before me, and this shall be your Warrant and Discharge.
Given under, etc.

Rogues.
For Apprehending and Committing a dangerous Rogue.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a Rogue, Vagabond, wandering, idle or disorderly
Person
was 1 Iac. c. 7. 2 Justices.
found and apprehended at C. in the Hundred and County aforesaid, in a general
privy Search by our command made (according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided) and brought before us this present day at our Assembly
at T. in the County aforesaid: We do therefore (in His Majesty's name) command
you the Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do (at the
charge of the said Hundred) convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House of
Correction, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, (together
with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into
the said House, and there set him to work and labor, or otherwise to deal with
him according to Law, until he shall be from thence lawfully delivered. Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at A. aforesaid the,
etc.

A Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a wandering 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 2 Justices of the Quor.
Rogue does appear to be dangerous Dangerous to the inferior sort of People,
or one that will not be reformed of his roguish kind of life by any other
provision contained in the Statute in that behalf made.
We do therefore (in His Majesty's name) charge and command you the said
Constable and Borsholders, that you, some or one of you, do safely convey the
said A. B. to the Gaol aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of
the same, (together with this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper,
to receive him into the said Gaol, and him there safely to keep until the next
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the said County at A.
aforesaid, that he may then and there be farther dealt withal according to the
Law. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under, etc.

Sacrament.
A Certificate for Receiving the Sacrament and Oath.
Kent ss. WE A. B. Minister of the Parish Church 25 Car. 2. cap. 2.
of C. in the County of D. and E. F. Churchwarden of the same Parish and
Parish Church, do hereby certify, That M. N. of O. in the County of P. Gent.
upon the Lord's day, commonly called Sunday, the 10. day of June, immediately
after Divine Service and Sermon, did in the Parish Church aforesaid receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the usage of the Church of England.
In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our hands the 10. day of, etc.

A. B. Minister of the Parish and Parish Church of C.

E. F. Churchwarden of the said Parish and Parish Church.

H. I. of K. in the County of K. Gent. and L. M. of, etc. do severally make
Oath, That they do know M. N. in the above written Certificate named, and who
now present has delivered the same into this Court; and do farther severally
make Oath, that they did see the said M. N. receive the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper in the Parish Church of C. etc. in the said Certificate mentioned, and
upon the day, and at the time in the said Certificate in that behalf certified
and expressed; and that they did see the Certificate above written subscribed
by the said A. B. Minister of the said Church, and E. F. Churchwarden there;
and farther, that the said H. I. and L. M. do say upon their respective Oaths,
that all other matters or things in the said Certificate recited, mentioned or
expressed, are true, as they verily believe.

A Certificate of Receiving the Sacrament according to the Act.
K. ss. MEmorandum, That at the Quartersessions for the said County holden at
C. in the County aforesaid, upon Tuesday the 22. day of July in the year of our
Lord one thousand six hundred seventy three, and from thence adjourned to M. in
the said County, and there holden (by the same Adjournment) upon Monday the 28.
day of July aforesaid, R. W. of the Parish of M. in the County aforesaid Esquire
did (upon the said 28. of July in the said Court of Quarter Sessions there)
deliver into the said Court a Certificate under the hands of I. P. Clerk,
Minister of the Parish and Parish Church aforesaid, and I. M. Churchwarden of
the same Parish and Parish Church, by which they certified, that the said R. W.
upon the Lord's day (commonly called Sunday) the 18. day of M, in the said year
of our Lord one thousand six hundred seventy three, (immediately after Divine
Service and Sermon) did (in the Parish Church aforesaid) receive the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper according to the usage of the Church of England.

A Testimonial upon the Receiving the Sacrament according to the Act.
Kent ss. MEmorandum also, That at the time and place of the said delivery of
the said Certificate, A. B. C. D. and E. F. did (upon enquiry made by the said
Court) then and there severally make Oath, that they did know the said R. W. in
the said Certificate named; and that they were present, and delivered the same
into that Court; and that they did see the said R. W. receive the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper at the time, day and place, and in the manner in the said
Certificate certified; and that they did also see the Certificate aforesaid
subscribed by the said Minister and Churchwarden; and that the said R. W. did
upon the 20. day of May then last past (and for several years before) inhabit,
and then did inhabit in the above named Parish of H. and County of Kent.

A Declaration to be subscribed according to the Act.
I A. B. do declare, That I do believe that 25 Car. 2. cap. 2.
there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or
in the Elements of Bread and Wine at, or after the Consecration thereof by any
person whatsoever.

Scavingers.
A Warrant for Scavingers to Distrain.
To the Constables and Headboroughs, and other His Majesty's Officers of the
Liberty of A. etc.
Kent ss. WHereas Complaint has been made unto us, That the several Persons
whose names are hereunder written, being Inhabitants in the Liberty of A. have
refused, and yet do refuse to pay the sums of money hereunder mentioned, being
respectively rated, assessed and taxed on them for and toward the scouring and
clensing of the Streets according to the form of the Statute in that case made
and provided: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and
command you, and every of you, to bring the said Persons so refusing before us
to show cause for such their refusing; And if they or any of them shall refuse
to come before us, or shall absent themselves, or refuse to be spoke withal,
due notice in writing being left at their respective Houses, That then you
immediately levy all and every the said several sums unpaid, and all the
Arrearages thereof of all and every the said Persons so refusing by Distress
and Sale of the Offenders goods, you rendering to the Parties the overplus that
shall remain upon the Sale of the said Goods, if any shall be. And for your so
doing this shall be your Warrant. Given under our hands and seals this, etc.

Search.
A Warrant to Search for stolen Goods.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as I have received Information ^ Justice.
by A. B. that two Sheep were lately feloniously taken and stolen from him:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that immediately
upon receipt hereof you do make diligent Search for the said Sheep in all and
every such suspected Houses and Places within the said Hundred as you and the
said A. B. shall think convenient; And if upon your said Search you find any of
the said Sheep, or other just cause of suspicion, that then you bring all such
suspected Persons before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the said County, to be examined touching the premises. And farther to
do and receive as to Justice does appertain. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant to make general Search for Rogues, Vagabonds, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's 7 Iac. c. 4.
name) to command you, and every of you, that (taking assistance of sufficient
men of the said Hundred) you do (in the night before the twentieth day of
October next ensuing) make a general privy Search within every of the Parishes,
Villages and Hamlets within the same, for the finding out and apprehending of
all Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering and idle persons, in and about the said
Parishes, Villages, and Hamlets; And that such Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering
and idle persons, as you shall then find and apprehend, (in the said Search)
you do bring before us, or some of us, on the aforesaid twentieth day of
October, at the house of John Price in C. at nine of the clock in the forenoon
of the same day, there to be examined of their idle and wandering life, and to
be farther dealt withal according to Law; And that you do then and there also
give unto us an account and reckoning (upon Oath, in writing, and under the
hand of the Minister of each respective Parish) what Rogues, Vagabonds, and
wandering and disorderly persons you have apprehended, both in the same Search,
and also since the last like general Search made, and how many have been
punished, or otherwise sent to the House of Correction. (All which you are not
to neglect upon forfeitures of such fines, pains and penalties as (by the
Statute in such case made and provided) may be by us inflicted upon you for
such your neglect.) We do likewise hereby (in His Majesty's name) farther
command you, and every of you, to bring before us, or some of us, (at the time
and place aforesaid) all such persons (within the said Hundred) as be
masterless (or live out of Service,) or be common Alehouse-haunters, or
expenders of their moneys in riotous living, (not duly laboring for their
living whereby so to maintain them) to the end that we may proceed against them
as to Justice does appertain; And that you your selves be then and there also
personally present, to give account of the execution of this our Warrant.
Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

Servants.
For sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed, to prevent
Charge on the Parish.
To the Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as you have complained 2 Justices, 1 Quorum.
unto us, That B. C. being retained into Service by D. E. of T. etc. for on^
year (not yet expired) is come out of he or she.
her Service in the said Parish of T. and likely to be chargeable to the same:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, and every of you,
that you, some or one of you, do forthwith convey the said B. C. to her said
Master (or Mistress) and deliver her unto him (or her) to remain with him (or
her) until she shall be from him (or her) lawfully discharged; and in case of
refusal of the said D. E. to receive the said B. C. accordingly, That you, some
or one of you, do forthwith certify us, or one of us of the same, to the end
that such farther proceedings may be thereupon had as by Law is required.
Hereof fail not. Given under our hands and seals at A. the, etc.

A Mittimus against one that returns into a Parish after he was removed.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas upon complaint (according to the form of the 14 Car. 2. cap.
12.
Statute in that behalf lately made) That A. B. an Inhabitant Native,
Householder, Sojourner, Apprentice, or Servant. Last legally settled in, etc.
as, etc.
in D. came into the Parish of H. in the County aforesaid, To work if the case
be so, otherwise leave these words out. To settle in a tenement there under the
yearly value of 1^ li.
to work, and was not returned, and thereupon the Churchwardens and Overseers
of the Poor of the said Parish, did (according to the Statute aforesaid) convey
the said A. B. to D. aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as formerly he
was; after which said conveying, the said A. B. did return of his own accord to
the aforesaid Parish of H. from whence he was removed: These are therefore (in
His Majesty's name) to require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and
every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him
convey to the aforesaid House of Correction, and there deliver him to the
aforesaid Keeper of the same, (together with this Precept.) Requiring also you,
the said Keeper, to receive him into the said House, and there punish him as a
Vagabond. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Master for putting away his Servant before the
end of his term.
To the Constables and Borsholders of A. etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appears unto us 5 Eliz. 4.
this day upon Oath, That A. B. of your Town of A. Yeoman, has put C. D. his
Servant (lawfully retained with him) out of his service, before the end of the
term agreed, contrary to the Law of this Realm. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, forthwith upon
the receipt hereof that you levy the sum of 40 s. (by him the said A. B. 20 s.
to the King, and 20 s. to the Prosecutor.
forfeited by the Statute for his offense) by way of Distress and Sale of the
Offender's Goods, upon his not payment thereof, rendering to the said A. B. the
overplus, (if any be) And that you bring with you the said 40 s. at the next
general Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for these parts of K. except
the said A. B. shall show good cause to the contrary, to His Majesty's Justice
of the Peace at A. aforesaid, upon Thursday next being the twelfth day of this
instant December. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given at the general
Quarter Sessions of the Peace at B. the second day, etc.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.

For not paying Wages.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. THese are in (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some
or one of you, do cause A. B. to come before me, or some other of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid, to answer unto such
matters as shall be objected against him by C. D. touching his detention of 20
s. due unto C. D. (as he says) for wages, and farther to do and receive as to
Justice does appertain, unless the said A. B. shall forthwith pay unto the said
C. D. the wages aforesaid, or do otherwise give satisfaction unto him for the
same; And you are hereby also farther required to give unto the said C. D.
convenient notice of the time, places when, and whither, and before whom you
shall cause the said A. B. to come (in execution hereof) to the end that he may
be also then and there present to make appear his due to the wages aforesaid.
Hereof fail not, etc.

A Warrant for Relief of a Manservant that is out of Service.
To the Constables, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as complaint is made 43 Eliz. cap. 2.
unto me by A. B. That he being lawfully retained in the Service of C. D. of
your Town of E. Yeoman, at Lady day was twelvemonth, and being discharged his
Service at Lady day last, has been at the Statute Sessions, and cannot find
himself a Service, and being destitute of means whereby to relieve himself.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) straightly to charge and command
you, and every of you, that presently upon the receipt hereof you do receive
the said A. B. into your Town, and see him set on work and provided for
according to the Statute in that case made and provided. Hereof fail not, etc.

A Warrant against one that departs out of Service before his time expired.
To the Constable and Borsholders, etc.
Kent ss. THese are (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do attach C. D. of E. and bring him before me, or some other
Justice of the Peace of and within the said County, to answer for that he is
departed out of Service from A. B. of C. (his time of Covenant with him made
being not expired,) contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided. And
farther to ^e dealt with according to Law. Hereof, etc.

To fetch back a Servant.
To all Constables, Borsholders, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. a Servant to C. 5 Eliz. 4.
of D. Joyner, has gone from his said Master without his lawful License or
Testimonial, in the County of E. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
to require and command you, some or one of you, that forthwith upon sight
hereof you go with the Bearer hereof, and as speedily as may be apprehend the
said A. B. and him to bring before me, or some other of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the said County, to the end that such farther proceedings may
be thereupon had as by Law is required. Hereof fail not, etc. Given under, etc.

A Discharge of a Servant from his Service within the time agreed, upon his
absenting himself.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it appears unto 1 Justice.
me, That A. B. was retained by C. D. to serve him for a term (not yet
expired.) And the said A. B. without consent of him the said C. D. has for the
space of, etc. now last past absented himself from the said Service, and is
gone into some place unto the said C. D. unknown. I therefore upon the
consideration of the premises, and of the equity thereof, on the part of the
said C. D. allow the cause and matter aforesaid to be reasonable and sufficient
to discharge the said C. D. from any farther keeping the said A. B. in his said
Service, and do accordingly discharge the said A. B. from his Service
aforesaid. Given under my hand and seal at T. the twenty second day of May, etc.

A Testimonial for the discharge of a Servant.
MEmorandum, That A. B. Servant to C. D. 5 Eliz. 4.
of E. Husbandman or Tailor, etc. in the said County, is licensed to depart
from his said Master, and is at his liberty to serve elsewhere, according to
the Statute in that case made and provided. In witness whereof, etc.

In a Town, to be under the Seal of the Town and two Householders there; if in
the Coun^y, under the Seals of the Constable or Constables, and two Householders
there, where he last served.

A Master that retains a Servant without such a Testimonial forfeits 5 li.

It must be Registered by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the Parish who is to
have 2 d. for doing thereof.

Silk-Throsters.
An Order for the payment of moneys to a Silk-Throster by his Workman who
imbezils his Silk.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the complaint 14 Car. 2. cap. 15. 1 Justice.
of A. B. of C. Silk-Throster, made that he having delivered to C. D. of E.
Silkwinder, or Doubler, or Iournyman.
of Silk to be by him Silkwinded or Silk-doubled.
for the said A. B. and the aforesaid C. D. has Unjustly or deceitfully and
falsely purloin-imbezil, pawn, sell, or detain. Buyer or Receiver.
parcel thereof, which complaint upon my examination of the same (according to
the form of the Statute in that case made) has been made, apparent unto me to
be true, I have thereupon determined the offense aforesaid, and do hereby order
and appoint, that the said C. D. shall give and pay to the said A. B. the sum
of 40 s. for his damages, losses, and charges thereabouts, within fourteen days
now next ensuing. Given under my hand and seal, etc.

Against an Offender for not performing the Order before mentioned.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the complaint of A. B. of C. Silk-Throster, to me made,
That he having delivered to C. D. (a) to be by him (b) for the said A. B. As
before.
And that the aforesaid C. D. had (c) parcel thereof, which complaint upon my
examination of the same (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf
made) was made appear unto me to be true. And I did thereupon determine the
offense aforesaid, and did by Warrant under my hand and seal order and appoint,
that the said C. D. should give and pay to the said A. B. for his damage, loss,
and charges thereabouts, 40 s. within fourteen days then next ensuing. And
forasmuch as the said C. D. did not within the said fourteen days, nor at any
time since, make such Recompense or Satisfaction to the said A. B. as was by me
as aforesaid ordered and appointed, although he had convenient notice so to
do. These are, etc. to will and require you, that you, some or one of you, do
apprehend and whip the said C. D. or set him in the Stocks, in the place where
the same offense was committed, or in some Market in this County near unto the
place aforesaid. Given under my hand, etc.

The like Warrant against the Receiver, Buyer, or Taker to pawn.

Soldiers.
A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a certain day, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of S. and to every of them.
K. ss. BY Command from the Right honorable H. Earl of W. (Lord Lieutenant of
the said County) I require you to warn all the persons mentioned in a List
hereunto annexed, to appear completely Armed and Furnished with Coats
(according to former Orders) at S. near C. upon Monday the twelfth day of this
instant September, at eleven of the Clock in the forenoon of the same day (at
the furthest;) And every of them is to bring with him four days pay, and the
Mustermaster's Salary. The Musketeers to bring with him one pound of Powder,
and Match and Bullets proportionable, then and there to receive further Orders.
And you the said Constable to be then and there present, to make appear what
you have done in execution hereof, of what is here commanded. No person
concerned herein is to fail at his peril. Given under my hand and seal the
seventh day of May 1681. 33. Regni Regis, etc.

A Certificate for a Trained Soldier.
THese are to certify you, That A. B. the Bearer hereof is a Trained Soldier
of the Borough of S. for his Majesty's service appointed under my command,
and therefore not otherwise to be charged or molested, as you will answer the
contrary at your perils. Given under my hand at, etc.

To order an Allowance to a poor Soldier out of the Stock for Maimed Soldiers.
To the Treasurer of the said County for maimed Soldiers.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Officer, Soldier, or Mariner, maimed, indigent,
aged, or disabled in body for work in the service of His late Majes^y, or His
Majesty that now is, or under the late Wars, or so impoverished by his
sufferings under any the late usurped Powers, as that he is* dissolute of any
competent subsistence or livelihood.
has according to the form of the 14 Car. 2. cap. 9. 2 Justices.
Statute (in that behalf lately made) made appear unto us, that he has
continued faithful to his trust, and not deserted the same by taking up Arms
against His late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, or otherwise; And has
repaired to W. in the said County, (being the place where he wa^ last settled
before he took Arms: We do therefore (according to the said Statute) assign for
his Relief until the next Quarter Sessions to be holden for the County of K.
which you are hereby required to pay unto him. Given under our hands and seals,
etc.

The like for Allowance to Wife or Orphan.
To the Treasurer of the said County for maimed Soldiers.) 14 Car. 2. cap. 9.
2 Justices.

Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. Widow or Orphan of such person as is described in
the Margin of the last before going Warrant.
has (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made) made
appear unto us, that A. B. late of C. continued faithful to his trust, and not
deserted the same by taking up Arms against His said late Majesty, or His
Majesty that now is, or otherwise: We do therefore (according to the said
Statute) adjudge that over and besides such relief as she or they.
shall gain by her or their.
work and labor, and shall be allowed by the charity and benevolence of the
Parish of A. where she or they.
is now settled. Given under our hands and seals this, etc.

Swearing.
To pay 1 s. for Swearing in the presence of a Justice of the Peace.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of D. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the
Parish of B. in the County aforesaid, and to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of, etc. in the ^1 Iac. cap. 20. 1 Justice, within
20 days after the Offense, by Consession, or 2 Witnesses.
County aforesaid, Butcher, (being of above the age of twelve years) did in my
hearing this present day (in the Parish aforesaid) profanely swear one Oath,
for which Offense he forefeited and was to pay (to the use of the Poor of the
Parish) the sum of 12 d. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to
command you to levy to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, the aforesaid 12
d. by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. (rendering to him the
overplus.) And in defect of such Distress, that you the said Constable do set
the said A. B. in the Stocks, by the space of three whole hours. Hereof fail
not, etc.

A Warrant to levy Moneys for profane Swearing.
To the Constables and Borsholders, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it was this present day proved before me, that A. B. of,
etc. did in the said Parish offend by profane Swearing four Oaths, by reason
whereof he has forfeited to the use of the Poor of the said Parish the sum
of, etc. that is to say, 3 s. 4. d. for every time he did so offend, according
to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided. These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do
forthwith levy the said forfeiture of, etc. upon the Goods and Chattels of the
said A. B. by Distress and Sale of the same, returning the overplus. And that
forthwith after your levying of the said forfeiture of, etc. you pay the same
to the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish,
or to some or one of them to the use of the Poor aforesaid. And in case no
sufficient Distress shall be found, and that the said A. B. shall not pay the
said forfeiture, or give security for the same. That then you do set him in the
Stocks there to remain the space of three whole hours Hereof fail not, etc.

A Certificate of Conviction for Swearing.
Kent ss. I R. K. Esquire, one of His Majesty's Justices, etc. do hereby
certify to the Clerk of the Peace of the County of K. that the persons whose
names are hereunto subscribed were, since the last Sessions, committed before
me for Swearing one profane Oath a piece. Given under my hand and seal this,
etc.

Tax.
A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament for Royal
Aid.
K. ss. BY virtue of an Act of this present Parliament, entitled, An Act for
granting a Royal Aid unto the King's Majesty of 2477500 li. to be raised,
levied, and paid in the space of three years in manner following, (that is to
say) 68819 li. 9 s. by the month, for thirty six months, beginning from the 25.
day of December. 1664. These are to will and require you, and every of you, whose
names are hereunder written for the purpose aforesaid, for the second and third
quarterly payments of the said six months Assessments, with all care and
diligence to assess on all Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Annuities, Rents,
Parks, Warrens, Goods, Chattels, Stock, Merchandise, Offices, (other than
Judicial and Military Offices, and Offices relating to the Navy, under the
command of the Lord High Admiral, and Offices within His Majesty's Household)
Tolls, Profits, and all their Estates both real and personal, within the
Limits, Circuits and Bounds of your Hundred of A. the full and just sum of,
etc. by a pound rate wherein you are to assess the Tenant, one sixth part of
the whole in respect of his stock upon Land, and you are to assess all other
persons for their personal estate, (other then their stock upon Lands and
Household Stuff) for every 20 li. proportionably to 1 li. by the year in Lands.
And you are to take especial care that therein you assess not any part of the
said moneys upon the Rents and Revenues due, and payable to either the
Universities, or any other Colleges, Halls, Hospitals, Almes-houses or
Free-schools. Nevertheless you are to assess the Tenants of all such Lands and
Tenements for so much as the same are worth by the year, over and above what
Rents or Revenues they pay to the said Universities, Colleges, etc. And you are
hereby further willed and required that you bring the said Assessment fairly
written, exactly cast up, and by you signed unto us at the house of, etc. (tali
die) by two of the clock in the afternoon of the same day; Of all which you nor
any of you, are to fail, upon pain of 20 li. Given under our hands and seals at
A. the, etc.

To A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H.
The Preamble of the Tax Book.
The Hundred of A. etc.
Kent ss. A Tax made the second day of May, Anno Dom. 1664. and in the
sixteenth year, etc, by us whose names are hereunder subscribed, in pursuance
of a Warrant to us directed under the hands and seals of A. B. C. D. E. F.
Esquires, and others, Commissioners, nominated in an Act of this present
Parliament, entitled, An Act for granting, etc. ( as before.) We are required
to assess upon the said Hundred, on all Lands, Stock, Goods, etc. the sum of,
etc. by a pound rate wherein the Tenant is to be assessed one sixth part of the
whole which we have accordingly assessed, viz* the Landlord at 5 d. in the
pound Rent, and the Tenant 1 d. on the pound in respect of his Stock, upon the
said Lands, and for all other Goods, Stock, etc. for every 20 li.
proportionably to 2 s. per annum, on Lands as follows. viz. A Borough


Tenants. Rents. per Annum. Tax on Lands. Tax on Stock Lands and Landlords.
Trade. C. D. 20 li. 0. 08. 04. 0. 1. 8. A. B. Esquire E. F. J. K.
G. H. 50. 1. 00. 10. 0. 4. 2. L. M. 80. 1. 13. 04. 0. 6. 8.

Abatement to be allowed to the Landlord, in respect of the Water, In-lets, and
other Charges imposed on the said Lands.

A Warrant to the Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid.
Kent ss. BY virtue of an Act of this present Parliament, entitled, An Act for
granting a Royal Aid unto the King's Majesty of 2477500 li. to be raised,
levied, and paid in the space of three years. These are to will and require
you, and every of you, whose names are hereunder written, to collect all and
every the sums of money mentioned in the Assessment hereunto annexed, so that
you duly pay the sum (which you are hereby required so to do) unto A. B. of,
etc. whom we have nominated and appointed head Collector of the moneys
aforesaid, at his house in A. aforesaid, in manner following, (that is to say)
one Moiety thereof (being the second quarterly payment of the said three years
Assessment) on or before the twentieth day of, etc. next ensuing, and the other
Moiety thereof, (being the third quarterly payment of the said three years
Assessment) on or before the twentieth day of October then next following* And
in ^ase any person or persons shall neglect or re^se to pay any sum of money
whereat he is in the said Assessment rated or assessed, then you, and every of
you, are hereby authorized and required to levy the sum assessed by Distress
and Sale of the Goods of such person or persons so refusing or neglecting to
pay, deducting the sum assessed and reasonable charges of Distraining; and you
shall restore the ever plus to the Owner thereof. Yo^, and every of you, are
hereby likewise authorized to break open in the day time any House, Trunk,
Chest, Box, or other thing where any such Goods are, and to call to your
assistance the Constable, Tithing-man, and Headburrough within the place where
any such refusal, neglect, or resistance shall be made, which said Officers are
by the said Act required to be aiding and assisting in the premises, as they
will answer the contrary at their perils. And in case any person or persons
shall refuse or neglect to pay his or their Assessment, and convey his or their
Goods, or other personal Estate, whereby the sum of money so assessed cannot
be levied according to the said Act, that then you certify to us, or any two
of us, the name or names of such person or persons so refusing, or neglecting,
or conveying as aforesaid. To the end such proceedings may be had thereupon
against him, her, or them, as by the said Act is directed. And in case any
Lands or Houses within your Hundred shall lie unoccupied, and no Distress can
be found on the same, by reason whereof your said Hundred is forced to pay and
make good the Tax assessed upon such Lands lying unoccupied, Then you, and
every of you, are hereby authorized and required, at any time after, with the
assistance of the Constable or Tithing-man within your Hundred for the time
being, to enter and distrain upon the said Lands and Houses when there shall be
any Distress thereupon to be found, and the Distress and Distresses (being the
proper Goods of the Owner, or any claiming any Estate, Interest, or Profit
under him) if not redeemed within fourteen days, by paymen^ of the Tax and
Charges of Distraining, to sell, rendering the overplus to the Owner or Owners
of such Distress. And you are hereby enjoined to distribute the money raised by
the Sale proportionably to the parties who contributed to the Tax of the said
unoccupied Lands, you, and every of you, are hereby further enjoined, that
where any Wood-land shall be Assessed and no Distress can be had, that in such
case, with the assistance of the Constable, Headburrough, or Tithing-man, you
cut and sell to any person or persons so much of the Woods growing on the said
Wood-lands as will pay the Assessment or Assessments so behind and unpaid, and
the charge incident thereunto. And the person or persons and his Assigns, to
whom such Woods shall be sold, are by the said Act authorized to fell, cut
down, dispose, and carry away the same to his own use, rendering the overplus
(if any be) to the Owner thereof. You, and every of you, are hereby likewise
authorized, that where any Tax or Assessment within your said Hundred shall be
laid upon Tiths, Tolls, Profits of Markets, Fairs, or Fisheries, or other
annual Profits not distreinable, in case the same shall not be paid within
fifteen days after such Assessment so charged, or laid, and demanded, That then
you, or any of you, seize, take and sell so much of the said Tithes, Tolls, and
other Profits so Charged as shall be suffidient for the levying of the said Tax
and Assessment, and all Charges occasioned by such non payment thereof,
rendering the overplus to the Owner (if any be) of all which you, nor any of
you, are to fail upon such pains and penalties as by the said Act may in such
case be inflicted on you. And lastly, we do hereby declare unto you, that upon
your Collection of the whole sum appointed to be Collected by you, and
payment thereof as is hereby appointed: you are to have* and receive for your
pains in collecting and paying the moneys one penny in the pound, which the
said head Collector is by us authorized, to pay unto you accordingly. Given
under our hands and seals at A. the, etc.

To A. B. C. D. E. F. Collectors for the Hundred of A. in the said County.
A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon the Collectors for neglecting to collect their
Assessment.
To the Constable and Borsholders, etc.
Kent ss. WHereas complaint has been made unto us this present day by A. B.
of, etc. high Collector of the second and third quarterly payments of the Royal
Aid granted to His Majesty, That the several Persons whose names are hereunder
written, being petty Collectors of the said two quarterly payments within your
said Hundred, have wilfully neglected and refused to pay unto the said A. B.
the several sums of money charged upon them to collect and pay unto the said
high Collector on the several days and times to them limited and appointed for
the payment of the same notwithstanding* several Warrants have been issued out
unto them to make payment thereof as they would avoid the Penalties to be
inflicted upon them by the Law for their non-payment thereof. These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do immediately upon receipt hereof levy upon the several Persons whose
names are hereunder written upon each of them the sum of 5 li. for such his
neglect and refusal as aforesaid by way of distress and sale of his Goods,
according to the Act of Parliament in that case made and provided. Hereof fail
not at your perils. And for so doing this shall (...) your sufficient Warrant.
Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

Testimonials.
A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who has been punished.
A. B. a sturdy Vagrant Beggar (of middle personage, Black haired, having a
Scar in the right Cheek) aged about 30 years, was this 10. day of November. in
the 32 year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second over
England, etc. openly whipped at T. in the said County (according to Law) 39
Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Justice and Constable hands and s^als. But by Lamb. Justice, p.
206. 1 Justice sufficient.
for a wandering Rogue, and is assigned to pass forthwith from Parish to Parish
by the Officers thereof the next straight way to R. in the County of H. where
(as he confesses he was born (or dwelled last by one whole year, etc.) if the
case be such,) and he is limited to be at R. aforesaid within twelve days now
next ensuing at his peril. Given at T. under the hand and seal of R. K.
Esquire, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County of
Kent, and R. H. the Constable of T. aforesaid.

A Testimonial for one that has suffered shipwreck.
R. K. of M. in the County of Kent Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices, etc. To
all Constables, Borsholders, etc.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as the Bearer hereof A. B. aged about, etc. having lately
been at Sea in a Ship called, etc. has suffered Shipwreck and got to land at
G. in the 1 Justice dwelling near the place of his landing.
said County of K. upon the 10. day of March last past (as I am credibly
informed as well by the report of the said A. B. as also by the testimony of
diverse of the Inhabitants of G. aforesaid;) and for that the said A. B. has
not wherewithal to relieve himself in his travel homewards to T. in the County
of S. where he says he was born (or has a dwelling, etc.) These are therefore
to pray you, and every of you, to whom these Presents shall come, not to molest
or trouble the said A. B. in his travel to T. aforesaid, where he is limited to
be within 20 days next after the date hereof, but to desire you rather to
relieve him in his necessity, as to you shall seem meet; and withal you the
Constables and Borsholders of every Town where he shall come to help him with
Lodging in convenient time, so that he travel the direct way to T. aforesaid,
not doing any thing contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. Given
under my hand, etc.

The like may serve (with alterations) for a poor Soldier, etc.

Tiling.
A Deputation for Tile-searchers.
Kent ss. WE whose names are hereunto 17 Ed. 4. cap. 4. 2 Justices. To pay the
Searchers for every 1000 of Plain-tiles 1 d. Every 100 of Roof-tiles ob. and
for every 100 of Corner or Guttertiles q.
written, His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, do
(according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made in the seventeenth
year of the Reign of the late King Edward the Fourth) ordain, assign and depute
A. B. of C. and D. E. and either of them (during our wills and pleasures) to
search and examine the digging, casting, turning and ordering of Earth for all
Plain-tile, Roof-tile, Corner-tile, and Gutter-tile, to be made [ within the
Division of the seven Hundreds] in the County aforesaid; and to search and
examine all the Tiles aforesaid, that the same be good, reasonable, and very
sufficient, and thoroughly whited and anealed, and do contain such length,
breadth, thickness and deepness as by the said Act is required; and generally
to do and perform all such other things as to the Office of Searchers do (by
virtue of the said Act) appertain; and to receive and have such Fees and
Salaries for their and either of their labor in the premises as by the said
Act is appointed. Given under our hands and seals at, etc.

Trespass.
A Warrant upon Hedg-breaking, etc. where the Party's not able.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it was this present 43 Eliz. cap. 7. 1 Justice where the
Offense is committed, or the Party apprehended. Confession, or 1 Witness.
Justice not to act herein in his own case.
day duly proved before me, That A. B. has lately unlawfully ( a) of C. D. at
H. (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided.) And
forasmuch as upon hearing and determining of the said matter, I have ordered
and appointed, That the said A. B. should forthwith give and pay unto the said
C. D. etc. of lawful money of England, in and for recompense and satisfaction
for his damages which he has sustained by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid;
And forasmuch as the said A. B. is thought in my discretion not able nor
sufficient to make such recompense or satisfaction as aforesaid: These are
therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of
you, do whip the said A. B. for the Offense aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant or Order to pay where he is able.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as it was this present 43 Eliz. cap. 7. 1 Justice, as
before.
day duly proved before me, That A. B. has lately unlawfully ( a) of C. D. at
H. (contrary to the form of the Statute made and provided:) Now upon hearing
and determining of the said matter, I do order and appoint, That the said A. B.
shall within ten days now next ensuing give and pay unto the said C. D. etc. of
lawful money of England, in and for recompense and satisfaction for his
damages which he has sustained by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid. Given
under my hand and seal at, etc.

To whip where not paid according to Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of K. and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas upon the 10. day As before.
of June it was duly proved before me, That A. B. had then lately unlawfully
Cut or taken away
Corn or Grain of 43 Eliz. cap. 7.
A. B. growing at, etc.
Robbed
Orchard, Garden.
Break, Cut,
Hedge, Pale, Rale, Fence.
Dig, pull up, take up,
Fruit-tree, in Orchard, Garden, or elsewhere; To the intent to take and carry
the same away.
Cut, Spoil,
Woods, Standing. Underwoods, Standing. Poles, Standing. Trees, Standing.
Not being Felony.

The Procurer or Receiver knowing the same.


of C. D. at H. (contrary to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided:) And whereas upon hearing and determining of the said matter, I did
then order and appoint, That the said A. B. should within, etc. then next
ensuing, give and pay unto the said C. D. etc. of lawful money of England, in
and for recompense and satisfaction for his damage which he has sustained by
occasion of the Trespass aforesaid; And forasmuch as it does now sufficiently
appear unto me, that the said A. B. has not hitherto given or paid unto the
said D. the aforesaid, etc. according to my said order and appointment: These
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) ^o command you, that you, some or one of
you, do whip the said A. B. for the Offense aforesaid. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

A Warrant from the Justices at a Quarter Sessions for apprehending one
indicted for a Trespass.
To all Constables, Headboroughs, and all other His Majesty's Officers and
Ministers within the County of K. and to every of them whom it may concern.
Kent ss. THese are to will and require you, and (in His Majesty's name)
straightly to charge and command you forthwith upon receipt hereof, to bring
before us, and other His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County to the
Sessions of Peace holden for the County of K. at A. in the said County, the
Body of T. R. etc. standing indicted for a Trespass (if the Court there be then
sitting,) or if not, before some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the said County, then and there to answer the same, and all such matters as
on His Majesty's behalf shall be objected against him; and if he cannot be
taken during this present Sessions, that then so soon after as he shall be
taken you bring, or cause to be brought before us, or some other of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County to find sufficient Sureties for
his personal appearance at the next Sessions of Peace to be holden for the said
County to answer as aforesaid, and farther to be dealt withal according to
Justice. Hereof you are not to fail at your perils. Dated in open Sessions at
A. aforesaid, the one and twentieth day of April, etc. Annoque Dom. 1680.

Uagrants.
A Warrant for apprehending Beggars and other Idle persons.
To the Constable and Headboroughs, and others His Majesty's Officers of any
the Parishes in the said County, and to all others whom this does or may
concern.
M^dd. ss. WHereas the Suburbs of London 2 Justices.
and Places adjacent are now infected with many Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy
Beggars, and other Idle persons that can give no good account of their life and
conversation, to the danger of the Inhabitants, and contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) straightly
to charge and command you, and every of you, That at all convenient times
hereafter taking with you a convenient aid and assistance, you make diligent
search in the several Places aforesaid, and in all other suspected Places
within any the Parishes in the said County for all such Rogues, Vagabonds and
sturdy Beggars, and other suspected and Idle persons; And them to apprehend and
bring before us, or one of us to be examined and dealt with according to Law.
Hereof fail not, etc. Given under our hands, etc.

A Testimonial or Pass for him to the 1 Iac. c. 7. 39 Eliz. cap. 4. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 12. 1 Justice.
place of his Birth.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, middle stature, aged about 30 years, was this
present day taken Taken ^gging Va^nt, wandering, or misordering himself, ^pped
naked from the middle upwards, and be openly whipped until his (...) be ^oudy.
at B. in the County aforesaid, and then and there by my appointment punished
(according to the form of the Statute in that case provided;) And he is to be
conveyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next
straightway to the Parish of T. where (as he confesses) he was born (there to
put himself to labor as he ought to do;) and he is limited to pass thither
within, etc. days now next ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal
at, etc.

This must be signed by the Justice and Minister, Constable, etc. or two of
them.

The like where the Place of his Birth is not known.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, of low stature, aged about 20 years, was this
present day taken As ^ovesaid.
at T. in the County aforesaid, and then and there by my appointment punished
(according to the form of the Statute in that case provided;) And for that the
Parish where he was born is not known, (though it be demanded of him,) And for
that also he did last dwell before the same punishment by the space of one
whole year in the Parish of T. etc. (as he confesses:) He is therefore to be
conveyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next
straight way to the said Parish of T. there to put himself to labor (as he
ought to do;) And he is limited to pass thither within, etc. days now next
ensuing, at his peril. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

The like where neither the Place of his Birth, nor last abode is known.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagrant, of middle stature, aged about 40 years, was this
present day taken As abovesaid.
at T. in the said County, and then and there by my appointment punished
(according to the form of the Statute in that case provided;) And for that
neither the Parish where he was born, nor the Parish where he did last dwell
before the said punishment by the space of one whole year, is known (though
both were by me demanded of him:), He is therefore to be conveyed from Parish
to Parish by the Officers of every of the same the next straight way to the
Parish of B. in the, etc. (through which he last passed without punishment, as
he says,) and he is to be from thence conveyed by the Officers of the said
Parish (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided,)
and is limited to pass thither within, etc. days now next ensuing, at his
peril. Given under my hand and seal at, etc.

The like where the Vagrant is apprehended in a general privy Search.
Kent ss. A. B. a Vagabond, of small stature, ^ Iac. c. 4. 2 Justices.
aged about 20 years: was sound and apprehended at T. in the said County, in a
general privy Search by our command made (according to the form of the Statute
in that case made and provided) and brought before us this present day at our
Assembly at V. and by our appointment punished according to Law: And he is to
be conveyed from Parish to Parish, etc. [as before in one of the three
precedent Warrants, according to the Case.]

To pay two shillings for apprehending a Vagrant.
To the, etc. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid. 14 Car. 2.
cap. 12. 1 Justice.

Kent ss. WHereas A. B. did lately apprehend and bring unto me C. D. Rogue,
Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar.
which did pass through your aforesaid, etc. in the Parish aforesaid
unapprehended: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require
you forthwith to pay to the aforesaid A. B. 2 s. for each.
2 s. for his said apprehension of the C. D. aforesaid (according to the form
of the Statute in that case lately made.) Hereof fail not at your peril. Given
under our hand and seal at, etc.

Upon not payment of the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the aforesaid County,
and to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas A. D. did lately apprehend 14 Car. ^. cap. 12. 2 Justices.
The forfeiture is by 1 Iac. c. ^. The power to levy it is by 39 Eliz. cap. 4.
and bring unto T. H. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said
County, C. D. which did pass through the, etc. in the Parish of T. in the
County aforesaid, un-apprehended; of which said place of apprehension A. B. was
then Borsholder or Constable.
And thereupon the aforesaid Justice did (according to the form of the Statute
in that behalf made) require the said A. B. to pay to the aforesaid A. D. two
shillings for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. Nevertheless the
said A. B. has neglected to pay the same: These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of
you, do levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B.
ten shillings by him forfeited and lost for not (...) the aforesaid C. D. to be
punished and convicted (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf
made,) And that out of the moneys by you so levied, you do pay to the said A.
D. the aforesaid 2 s. and, etc. more which we think fit to allow unto him for
loss of his time, and that you do employ and dispose of the residue of the said
10 s. to the relief of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under our hands and seals the, etc.

A Certificate of apprehending a Vagrant in the confines of another County.
To A. B. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County of C.
Kent ss. THese are to certify you, That 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. ^ Justice.
C. D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar.
having passed through the Parish of T. in the said County of C.
un-apprehended, was upon the second day of June apprehended at T. in the said
County of C. in the confines of the County aforesaid, by R. W. Given under my
hand the, etc.

To pay the two shillings thereupon.
To, etc. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas I have received a 14 Car. ^. cap. ^2. 1 Justice.
Certificate under the hands of A. B. one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of K. That C. D. Rogue, Vagrant, or sturdy Beggar.
having passed through the Parish of T. in the said County of C.
un-apprehended, was upon the second day of June apprehended at T. in the said
County of C. in the confines of the County aforesaid by R. W. which said Parish
of T. was then in your Hundred or Borough. 2 s. for each.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to will and require you forthwith
to pay to the aforesaid R. W. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the aforesaid
C. D. (according to the form of the Statute in that case lately made.) Hereof
fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Upon non-payment of the same.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. WHereas I lately received a 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Justice.
Certificate under the hand of A. D. one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the County of K. That C. D. having passed through the Parish of, etc.
in the said County of K. un-apprehended was apprehended at T. in the said
County of K. in the confines of the County aforesaid, by R. W. of which said
Parish A. B. of C. was then Constable or Borsholder.
And whereas I did (according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately
made) by warrant under my hand and seal require the said A. B. to pay the
aforesaid R. W. two shillings for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D.
(according to the Statute aforesaid) nevertheless the said A. B. has neglected
to pay the same: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to require you,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by Distress and Sale of
the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. ten shillings by him forfeited and
lost by not causing the aforesaid C. D. to be punished and conveyed The
forfeiture and power to levy is by 39 Eliz. cap. 4.
(according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made) And that (out of
the moneys you have so levied) you do pay to the said R. W. the aforesaid 2 s.
and, etc. more which we think fit to allow him for his expenses and loss of
time; and that you do employ and dispose of the residue of the said 10 s. to
the relief of the Poor of the said Parish of T. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Wagons and Carts.
An Affidavit to be made before a Warrant granted, for destreining for 40 s.
forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart, or Wagon.
K. ss. G. R. of the Parish of, etc. in the 22 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Justice. 1
Witness.
County of, etc. Upholster, making Oath, That I. D. did upon the fourth day of
this instant Febr. travel his Wagon through the common Highway in the said
Parish of, etc. drawn with six Horses at length, contrary to an Act of
Parliament made in the 22. year of His now Majesty's Reign, entitled, An
additional Act for the better repairing of the Highways and Bridges. And that
the Wagon was not employed in and about Husbandry, and managing of Lands, nor
in the carrying of Hay, Straw, Corn unthrasht, Coal, Chalk, Timber for
Shipping, Materials for building, Stones or such Ammunition or Artillery as
shall be for His Majesty's service.

G. R.
Iurat' 15 Feb. 1680.
A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Wagon or Cart, drawn with
six Horses at length.
To the Constables, Surveyors of the Highways, and other the Officers of the
Parish of K. whom these may concern.
Kent ss. WHereas G. R. of the Parish of, etc. in the County of, etc. Yeoman,
has this present tenth day of Feb. made Oath before me, one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, that M. D. of the said Parish
of K. did upon the fourth day of this instant Feb. travel with his Wagon
through the Parish of, etc. in the said County, drawn with six Horses at length
(contrary to the Statute in that case made and provided,) for which offense he
has forfeited the sum of 40 s. These are therefore to authorize, and (in His
Majesty's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, forthwith to levy
the said sum of 40 s. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said M. D. rendering
to him the overplus, if any be, (reasonable Charges of Destraining first
deducted.) And the same moneys so by you levied, you are to pay as follows,
viz. one Third part to the Surveyors of the Highways within your said Parish,
to be employed in the repairs of the said Highways, one other Third part you
are to pay to the Overseers of the Poor within your said Parish, to be to the
use of the Poor there; and the other Third part you are to pay to the said G.
R. for discovering the same. Hereof fail not. Given under my hand and seal
this, etc.

Watch and Ward.
A Warrant to the High Constable for putting in Execution the Statute of 13
Car. 2. (Renting the Statute,) and for keeping good Watches (upon His
Majesty's going to Oxford.)
To A. B. one of the High Constables of the Hundred of C. in the County of M.
M. ss. WHereas His Majesty having 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.
commanded us whose names are hereunder written, and others, His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex, to attend him in Council the
25. day of February last past, did by Himself, and the Right Honorable the
Lord President, acquaint us, That His Majesty was in a short time to remove His
Court to Oxford, and did require and command us to use our utmost endeavors,
with care and industry, to preserve the Peace of this important County, during
His Majesty's absence, and in particular to put in Execution the Statute made
in the 13. year of His now Majesty's Reign, For the preservation of His
Majesty's Sacred Person, (whom God preserve with long life) in and by which
said Statu^e it is enacted, That if any person or persons whatsoever during the
natural Life of our most gracious Sovereign Lord the King that now is, shall
within this Realm, or without, compass, imagine, invent, devise, or intend
death or destruction, or any bodily harm tending to death or destruction, maim
or wounding, imprisonment or restraint of the Person of the same our Sovereign
Lord the King, or to deprive or depose him from the Style, Honor, or Kingly
Name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or of any other His Majesty's
Dominions or Countries, or to levy War against His Majesty within this Realm,
or without, or to move or stir any Foreigner or Stranger with force to invade
this Realm, or any other His Majesty's Dominions or Countries, being under His
Majesty's Obeisance, and such compassings, imaginings, inventions, devices or
intentions, or any of them shall express, utter, or declare, by any Printing,
Writing, Preaching, or malicious and advised Speaking, Every such Person and
Persons so as aforesaid offending, shall be deemed, declared, and adjudged to
be Traitors, and shall suffer pains of Death, and also lose and forfeit as in
cases of High Treason. And that if any Person or Persons at any time, during
His Majesty's Life, shall maliciously and advisedly publish or affirm the King
to be an Heretic, or a Papist, or that he endeavors to introduce Popery, or
shall maliciously and advisedly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other
Speaking, express, publish, utter, or declare any words, sentences, or other
thing or things, to incite or stir up the people to hatred or dislike of the
Person of His Majesty, or the established Government, Then every such person
and persons, being thereof Legally convicted, shall be disabled to have, enjoy,
or exercise any Place, Office, or Promotion Ecclesiastical, or Civil, or
Military, or any other Employment in Church or State, and shall be likewise
liable to such further and other punishments as by the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm may be inflicted in such Cases. And we having taken into consideration
His Majesty's most gracious Speech then made unto us, and his commands laid
upon us, Do therefore hereby will and require, and strickly charge and command,
That you do forthwith issue forth your Warrants to the several petty Constables
within your Division, thereby commanding them, that they do with their utmost
diligence and endeavors, apprehend and secure all persons so as aforesaid
offending against the said Statute, and bring such person or persons before us
the said Justices, at our petty Sessions to be held weekly on Tuesday in every
week, at or in A. etc. in the said County of Mid. by nine of the clock in the
forenoon of the said days, to the intent they may be proceeded against
according to Law and Justice. And we do hereby will and require you, that you
do survey the Watches that are kept by the petty Constables in your Division,
and order them the said petty Constables, that they do within their respective
limits for the future keep their Watches from nine a clock at night until six
in the morning, to the intent that the King's Peace may be the better secured.
And we hereby further will and require you, that you do in your said Warrants
command the said petty Constables, that they do for the future take an Account
in writing of all the names of those persons they Summon to be upon the Watch,
and that they take particular notice of all and every person that shall after
such Summons given make default, and not appear himself, or send some able and
fit person to watch in his stead. And that they bring the said Account fairly
written to us, who shall be assembled at the said petty Sessions, to the intent
they may be proceeded against according to Law. And hereof you and the said
petty Constables are not to fail at your perils. Given under our hands and
seals the fourth day of March, in the year of our Lord, 1680. and in the 33.
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of
God, of England, etc.

Another Warrant upon the same Statute.
To all Constables and other His Majesty's Officers whom these may concern
within the Parish of, etc.
M. ss. THese are (in His Majesty's name) 13 Car. 2. cap. 1.
to will and require you to take notice of, and to apprehend and bring before
us at our weekly Meetings, all manner of persons that shall maliciously and
advisedly publish or affirm the King to be an Heretic, or a Papist, or that he
endeavors to introduce Popery, or that shall maliciously and advisedly by
Writing, Printing, Preaching, or other Speaking, express, utter, or declare any
words, sentence, or other thing or things, to make or stir up the People to
hatred of the person of His Majesty, or the established Government, to be dealt
with according to Law. And further from time to time to appoint and settle
sufficient Watches, (to meet at nine at night, and not to depart till six in
the morning, amongst whom a competent number of good Housekeepers are always
to be present.) And you, and every of you, are to bring us the Names and
Conditions of your respective Watches at our said weekly Meetings, that the
performance of your Duties herein may be the better known and taken notice of,
His Majesty (in Council) having given us strict command herein. You are
likewise to give us an Account of all such as Arm themselves beyond their
Qualities, and to use your utmost endeavors, by all the ways imaginable, to
preserve His Majesty's Peace during his absence from this City. Dated this
eighth day of March, 1680.

A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to apprehend idle persons.
To the High Constable of the Hundred of A. and the petty Constables, etc.
within the said Hundred.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as information has 2 Justices. 13 Ed. 1. cap. 4. Watch and
Ward to be kept in every Town, from Michaelmasday to Ascensionday.
been given unto us, that very many suspicious idle persons do wander about the
Country without Controlment or Question, for the better prevention thereof for
the future, and of Robberies, and other Misdemeanors often occasioned thereby.
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, and
every of you, to look to your Offices herein, and to see that you keep and
cause Watches to be duly kept in all the Parishes and places within your said
Hundred of A. by able and well-armed men every night, and Ward by day from Sun
to Sun, and command them that they do apprehend all such Rogues, Vagabonds,
sturdy Beggars, and other wandering and idle suspicious persons, as you shall
apprehend by day or night, and conceive to be more than ordinary dangerous, and
bring them before us or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the said
County to be examined and dealt with according to Law. And all persons
whatsoever are hereby commanded to be aiding, assisting, and obedient to you
herein. Hereof fail not. Given under our hands, etc.

A Warrant by order of Quarter Sessions to set Watch and Ward.
To the High Constable of the Hundred of A. and the petty Constables and
Borsholders within the same Hundred.
K. ss. WHereas there has been of late several Robberies, Felonies, and
Burglaries committed within this County, it was ordered at the last general
Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at M. That for the
prevention thereof for the future, you do from henceforth cause Watching and
Warding to be continued, duly set, and kept in all and every usual place and
places within your Hundred, by honest and able men within your several
Precincts and Divisions, and that you do therein apprehend all and every
suspicious person and persons, and bring them before us, or some or one of us,
or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of, etc. within the said
County, to the end he, she, or they may be examined, as also proceeded against
according to the Law. And you are further required to give in to us, or some
other Justice of the Peace of the said County, weekly an Account of your
Service. And hereof you nor any of you are to fail, as you will answer the
contrary at your perils. Given, etc.

Weights and Measures.
A Warrant to warn in all Tradesmen, and others, to have their Weights and
Measures examined by the Standard.
To the Borsholder of the Borough of F.
Kent ss. THese are to will and require you, 2 Justices, 1 of the Quorum may
(by Examination or Enquiry) hear and determine the faults of head Officers in
Cities, Buroughs and Market Towns, that do not twice yearly view and examine
Weights and Measures, and Break and Burn the Defective. As also the defaults of
Buyers and Sellers by false Weights and Measures, and may Break and Burn the
Defective Weights and Measures, and Fine the Offenders at their discretion, and
make process against them as if they were indicted of trespass against the
Peace. 11 H. 7. c. 4. and 12 H. 7. c. 5.
and (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, that you warn all
persons inhabiting within your said Borough, which have or use any Weights or
Measures to be by me tried and examined by His Majesty's Standard, at the late
Market place near H. in the County of K. on Thursday the 28. day of this
instant Month of August, by eight of the clock in the forenoon of the same day.
And that you also warn to be at the time and place aforesaid fifteen sufficient
men of your said Borough, that they, and every of them, personally appear
before me to do and perform such things as for His Majesty's service shall be
then and there enjoined them: And that you your self be there also personally
present with this Precept, and have there the names of all Clothi^rs,
Corn-Masters, Farmers, Vintners, Innkeepers, Alehouse-keepers, Millers,
Bakers, Butchers, Chandlers, Mercers, Grocers, Weavers, Drapers, Tailors,
Tanners, Land-measurers, Smiths, Glovers, Malsters, and of all other
Artificers, Tradesmen, and other persons whatsoever within your said Borough,
having or using any Weights or Measures whatsoever. Hereof fail not at your
peril. Given under my hand and the seal of the said Manor the, etc.

The Clerk of the Market's Warrant.
To all and every of the Constables of the Parish of A. etc.
Kent ss. THese are in the King's Majesty's A. B. Clerk of the Market.
name, etc. to will and require you, and every of you, upon sight hereof, to
summon and cause the several Inhabitants within your respective Wards that buy
and sell by Weight or Measure to have their respective Weights and Measures (as
well Yards and Else, as others used by them) to be tried and examined before me
on Monday the first day of September next, by the hour of eight in the forenoon
at the George Inn in A. and that at the said time and place you deliver unto me
in writing the Christian-name and Surname of every such Inhabitant with their
respective Callings. Whereof you and every of you are not to fail, etc. Dated
under my hand and seal the 23. day of August, Anno Dom. 1680. and in the 32
year of His now Majesty's Reign.

Witnesses.
A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of H. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K.. ss WHereas I have received information, That A. B. was lately robbed at D.
in the County aforesaid; And whereas I am informed that E. F. of, etc. can give
information (on His Majesty's behalf) touching proving the Robbery aforesaid:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or
one of you, do cause the said E. F. forthwith to come before me, to give such
information and evidence (as he knows) touching the said Robbery, to the end
that I may farther proceed touching the same as to Justice does appertain.
Given under my hand and seal at H. in the County aforesaid, the first day of
March 1679. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi 3^.

For a Witness to appear and give Evidence at the Sessions.
To the Constable, etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of, etc. Barber, is thought to be a fit and
necessary Witness to be examined on His Majesty's behalf. These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to command you, that you, some or one of you, do
forthwith warn him the said A. B. personally to appear before the Justices of
the Peace at the next Sessions of the Peace to be holden for this County at H.
then and there to testify his knowledge on the behalf of His said Majesty, to
and upon such matters as he shall be then and there examined of. Hereof fail
not, etc.

Wood.
A Warrant against one that stole Wood, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of T. etc.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it appears unto me 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. 1 Justice.
by the confession of A. B. of your said Town of T. That he the said A. B. has
lately unlawfully cut down certain Sticks of Wood within your said Parish
belonging to E. F. of your said Town, Gent. contrary to the form of the Statute
in that case made and provided. And whereas it further appears unto me upon
Oath, that the said Sticks of Wood were worth to be sold five shillings. These
are therefore (in His Majesty's name) straightly to charge and command you, and
every of you, that in case the said A. B. do not forthwith pay unto the said E.
F. the said sum of five shillings, that then you do immediately cause the said
A. B. to be publicly whipped about the said Town of T. Hereof fail not at your
perils. Given under, etc.

To make a general Warrant to search for stolen Wood, etc.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it is observed in these 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Justice.
parts of the said County, That Woods, Underwoods, Poles, Young-trees, Bark or
Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, Hedge-wood, Broom, and
Furze, are unlawfully cut, stolen, spoiled and taken away from the lawful
Owners of the same, (contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled,
An Act for the punishment of unlawful cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of
Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timber Trees:) These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, and every of you, that you
do (with all convenient speed) enter into and search the Houses, Outhouses,
Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the houses, (within the said
Hundred,) of all and every person or persons which you shall suspect to have
any kind of such Wood, Under-wood, Poles, or Young-trees, or Bark or Bast of
any Trees; or any such Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood,
Broom, or Furze: And wheresoever you shall find any such, to apprehend or cause
to be apprehended all and every person and persons suspected for the cutting or
taking of the same, and them and every of them, in whose houses or other places
belonging to them, any such Wood, Under-wood, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark or
Bast of any Trees; or any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, or Hedge-wood,
Broom, or Furze shall be found, to bring before me or some other of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County, to be proceeded against
as by the said Act is directed. Hereof fail not, etc.

A Warrant to search for stolen Wood, etc. upon a particular Complaint.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as Complaint has been 15 Car. 2. ca^. 2. 1 Justice.
made unto me by A. B. That Wood Underwood, Poles, Youngtrees, Bark or Bast of
Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedgewood, Broom, or* Furze.
were within five days now last past taken out of his Lands in L. in the said
County, and has prayed such relief from me therein, as by an Act of Parliament
in such cases lately made I am authorized to give. These are therefore (in His
Majesty's name) to will and command you, and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do enter into and search the Houses, Outhouses, Yards, Gardens, or
other places belonging to the houses within the said Hundred, of all and every
person or persons which you shall suspect to have any of the said Wood
Underwood, Poles, Youngtrees, Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts,
Pales, Railes, Hedgewood, Broom, or* Furze.
And wheresoever you shall find any such, to apprehend or cause to be
apprehended, all and every person or persons suspected for the cutting and
taking of the same; And them, and every of them, as also those in whose houses
or other places belonging to them, any such Wood Underwood, Poles, Youngtrees,
Bark or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedgewood, Broom,
or* Furze.
shall be found, to bring before me or some other of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of the said County, to be proceeded against as by the said Act is
directed. Hereof fail not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the,
etc. 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Justice. Person apprehended by


An Order against a person apprehended with Bundles, etc. of Wood, etc. to make
satisfaction, etc. for the same to the Owner. The first Offense.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as A. B. of C. was within five days last past apprehended
by Officer or Inbabitant, having or carrying, or any ways conveying a Burden
or Bundle of
having a Bundle of any kind of Wood, Under-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or
Bast of any Trees, Gates, Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedgewood, Broom or Furze.
and this day brought before me to give account how he came by the said any
kind of Wood, Under-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates,
Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedgewood, Broom or Furze.
by the consent of the Owner (according to an Act of Parllam t^ lately made,
entitled, An Act for the punishment of unlawful cutting, or stealing, or
spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroying of young Timber Trees:) And for
that he did not give such account thereof as did satisfy me, nor produce the
party of whom he bought the same, or any other credible Witness to depose upon
Oath such Sale thereof, whereby he is (according to the said Act) by me deemed
and adjudged as convict of the Offense of cutting and spoiling of the said any
kind of Wood, Under-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates,
Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedgewood, Broom or Furze.
within the meaning of another Act of Parliament, which was made in the third
and fourth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, (entitled, An Act to
avoid and prevent Misdemeanors in idle and lewd persons:) And forasmuch as it
appears unto me, That C. D. of, etc. was lawful Owner of the said any kind
of Wood, Under-wood, Poles, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any Trees, Gates,
Rails, Pales, Posts, Hedgewood, Broom or Furze.
I do therefore (according to the said first before mentioned Act) order and
appoint, That the said A. B. shall within six days now next ensuing, give the
said C. D. of lawful money of England for recompense and satisfaction for his
damages, and that the said A. B. shall (over and above) pay down presently unto
the Overseers for the use of the Poor of the Parish of T. in the said County
(where the said Offense was committed) Any sum not exceeding 10 S.
of lawful money. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

For not obeying that Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders o^ the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the Cou^ aforesaid.
K. ss. WHereas A. B. of C. within eight 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Justice.
days last past, was apprehended by (a) as before
having a Bundle of (b) as before
and lately brought before me to give account how he came by the said (b) as
before
by the consent of the Owner, (according to an Act of Parliament lately made,
entitled, An Act for the punishment of unlawful cutting, or stealing, or
spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timbertrees:) And for
that he did not give such account thereof as did satisfy me, nor did produce
the party of whom he bought the same, or any other credible Witness to depose
upon Oath such Sale thereof, whereby he was then (according to the said Act) by
me deemed and adjudged as convict of the Offense of cutting and spoiling of the
said (b) as before
within the meaning of one other Act of Parliament, which was made in the third
and fourth year of the Reign of the late Queen Eliz. (entitled, An Act to
avoid and prevent diverse Misdemeanors in idle and lewd persons:) And whereas
it then appeared unto me, That C. D. of, etc. was Owner of the said (b) as
before
and I did therefore (according to the said first before mentioned Act) order
and appoint that the said A. B. should within six days then next ensuing, give
the said C. D. etc. o^ lawful money of England, for recompense and
satisfaction for his damages: And that the said A. B. should (over and above)
pay down then presently to the Overseers for the use of the Poor of the Parish
of T. in the said County, (where the said Offense was committed,) and ^. (c) as
before
of like money: And forasmuch as the said A. B. did not (according to the said
order and appointment) give or pay the moneys aforesaid: These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, the said Constable and
Borsholders, and every of you, forthwith to convey the said A. B. to the
aforesaid House of Correction, and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same,
(together with this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, ^o receive
him into the said House, and him there detain by the space of Any time not
exceeding a month.
days next after such your receipt of him. Hereof fail not at your perils.
Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Note, The Justice may (if he think fit) not send the Offender to the House of
Correction, but may make a Warrant to the Constable, etc. to whip him, which
may be made with the same recitals as in the last precedent Warrant, till you
come to these words, These are therefore, etc. And then say thus.

These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you to whip
the said A. B. for the said Offense. Hereof fail not, etc.

Note, This is only for the first Offense.

Now for the second Offense, thus.

A Mittimus to the House of Correction for the second like Offense.
To the Constable and Borsholders* of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County aforesaid at B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss. WHereas, etc. As in the former ^5 Car. 2. ^p. 2. ^ Justice.
Warrant, till you come to these words, And whereas it then appeared, etc.
Instead of which you go on thus, And forasmuch as the said A. B. was once
before convict of the said Offense, and was thereof so convicted as before:
These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, the
said Constable and Borsholders, to convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid House
of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with
this Precept.) Commanding also you, the said Keeper, to receive him into the
said House, and there keep him one month to hard labor. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

An Order against the Buyer of stolen Wood, etc. to pay treble the value thereof.
Kent ss. FOrasmuch as upon examination 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Justice.
by me this day, (according to an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An
Act for the punishment of unlawful cutting, or stealing, or spoiling of Wood
and Under-wood, and destroyers of young Timber Trees:) it appeared unto me,
That A. B. of, etc. did within six days last past buy Any Burdens of Wood, or
any Poles, or sticks of Wood, Underwood, young Trees, Bark or Bast of any
Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Railes, Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze.
of E. F. (being a person justly suspected to have unlawfully come by the same,
and that the same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of,
etc. and was of the value of, etc. of lawful money of England:) I do therefore
(according to the said Act) award that the said A. B. shall pay to the said C.
D. etc. of lawful money of England, (being the treble value of the (a)
aforesaid
Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Warrant to distrain for non-payment of the Money according to the foregoing
Order.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them.
K. ss. WHereas lately by examination by me taken (according to an Act of
Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act for the punishment of unlawful
cutting, or 15 Car. 2. c^p. 2. 1 Justice.
stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Under-wood, and destroyers of young
Timber Trees:) it appears unto me, That A. B. of, etc. did (within, etc. days
last past) buy (a) as before
of E. F. being a person justly suspected to have unlawfully come by the same,
and that the same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of,
etc. and was of the value of, etc. of lawful money of England: I did therefore
(according to the said Act) award that the said A. B. should pay to the said C.
D. etc. of lawful money of England, (being the treble value of the (a) as
aforesaid
And forasmuch as the said A. B. has not paid to the said C. D. the aforesaid,
etc. (according to my said award:) These are therefore (in His Majesty's name)
to charge and command you to levy the said, etc. by Distress and Sale of the
Goods of the said A. B. (rendering to him the overplus) and after you have so
levied the said, etc. forthwith to pay the same to the said C. D. Hereof fail
not at your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

A Mittimus against the Buyer of stolen Wood, etc. for want of Distress.
To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of His Majesty's Gaol for the County
aforesaid at T. in the said County.
Kent ss. WHereas lately, etc. (as in 15 Car. 2. cap. 2. 1 Justice.
the last before mentioned Warrant, till you come to the words [Hereof fail
not, etc.] then go on thus.) And forasmuch as you the said Constable have
returned unto me, That in default of such Distress you cannot levy the
aforesaid sum of, etc. These are therefore (in His Majesty's name) to charge
and command you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, to attach
the said A. B. and him safely convey to His Majesty's Gaol aforesaid, at his
own charge, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, (together with
this Precept.) Commanding also you the said Keeper, to receive him into the
said Gaol, and him there safely keep one month without Bail. Hereof fail not at
your perils. Given under my hand and seal the, etc.

Woollen.
A Certificate for burying in Woollen.
K. ss. A. B. of the Parish of C. in the 30 Car. 2.
County of D. Gent. makes Oath, that E. F. of the Parish of G. in the County
of H. Gent. lately deceased was not put in, wrapped or wound up, or buried in any
Shirt, Shift, Sheet or Shroud made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold
or Silver, or other then what is made of Sheeps Wool only, nor in any Coffin
lined or faced with any Cloth, Stuff, or any other thing whatsoever made or
mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or any other material but
Sheeps Wool only. Dated the 2. day of July in the one and thirtieth year of
the Reign o^ our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, etc. Annoque Dom. 1679.

Sealed and subscribed by us who were present Two Persons must witness the
Certifier's swearing.
and Witnesses to the swearing of the aforesaid Affidavit. A. B. C. D.

I H. B. Esquire (one of the King's Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
of D.) do hereby certify, That the day and year abovesaid the said A. B. came
before me, and made such Affidavit as is above specified, according to the late
Act of Parliament, (entitled* An Act for burying in Woollen.) Witness my hand
the day and year first above written.

H. B.

Or this.
I P. S. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County) do
hereby certify, That A. B. came before me this present second day of June 1679.
and made Oath, that C. D. deceased was not put in, wrapped or wound up, or buried
in any Shift, Shirt, Sheet, or Shroud made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk,
Hair, Gold or Silver, or other then what is made of Sheeps Wool only, or in
any Coffin lined or faced with any Cloth, Stuff, or any other thing whatsoever
made or mingled with Flax, Hemp, Silk, Hair, Gold or Silver, or any other
material but Sheeps Wool only.

P. S.
Sealed and signed by us Witnesses that were present, and did hear this Oath
made.

A. B. C. D.



The Minister's Certificate for being buried in Woollen.
I A. B. Rectour of the Parish Church of C. 30 Car. 2.
in the County aforesaid, do hereby certify, That the day and year abovesaid
the said C. D. came before me and made such Affidavit as is above specified,
according to a late Act of Parliament, (entitled, An additional Act for
burying in Woollen.) Witness my hand the day and year first above written.

A. B.

A Minister's Certificate of not bringing an Affidavit of a Corp's being buried
in Woollen.
To the right Worshipful R. K. Esquire (one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Kent,) the humble Certificate of me A. B. Rectour of
the Parish Church of C. in the County aforesaid.
I Humbly certify, That C. D. was lately buried 13 Car. 2.
in the Parish aforesaid, viz. on the

As by the Register Book kept for the same Parish does appear; And further,
That (according to the Act of Parliam^ in this behalf) I did forthwith after
the (...) (...) the (...) C D. cause notice ^o be given (...) my hand to the
Churchwarden of the said Parish to bring unto me the said A. B. an Affidavit
concerning the burial in Woollen of the said C. D. (according to the direction
and appointment of the said Act) And I further certify, That by the space of
eight days next after the said Interment of the said C. D. no Affidavit has
been brought to me the said Rectour concerning the burial of the said C. D. in
Woollen, as by the said Act is required. Witness my hand this 10. day of May in
the year of our Lord. 1^81.

A Warrant for levying the 5 li. for not burying in Woollen according to the
Act.
K. ss. FOrasmuch as it appears unto me 30 Car. 2.
by the Certificate of A. B. Minister, officiating in your said Parish, to you
the Churchwardens and Overfeers of the Poor of the same Parish, That the Corpse
of the Person of C. D. deceased (but not of the Plague) was buried in Linen
(contrary to the Act hereafter mentioned) on Monday the second day of June, and
that such an Affidavit and Certificate concerning the Parties being interred
according to the direction of a late Act of Parliament (entitled, An Act for
burying in Woollen) was not brought to him within the time limited by the said
Act; And forasmuch as by reason thereof, the forfeiture and penalty of five
pounds of lawful money of England is incurred, and the Goods and Chattels of
the deceased by the said Act made liable to the aforesaid forfeiture, to be
levied by way of Distress and Sale thereof, by Warrant of the chief Magistrate
in any Town-corporate, or any Justice of the Peace, or in default thereof, by
like Distress and Sale o^ the Goods of the Person in whose house the said Party
died, or of any that had a hand in putting such Person in any Shirt, Shift,
Sheet, Shroud, or Coffin, contrary to the said Act, or did order or dispose the
doing thereof; and in case such Person were a Servant, and that he or she died
in the family of his or her Master or Mistress, that the same be levied upon
the Goods and Chattels of his or her said Master or Mistress; and if such
Person died in the family of his or her Father or Mother, that then the same be
levied upon the Goods and Chattels of his or her Father or Mother, in manner
and by Warrant as aforesaid: These are therefore (in His Majesty's name, and
by the Authority of the said Act of Parliament) to will and require you, or
some of you, to levy the said forfeiture by distress and sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the said deceased, or in default thereof, of the Goods and Chattels
of such other Parties as aforesaid, rendering the overplus thereof to the
Parties whose Goods you shall so distrain, (all reasonable charges being
deducted.) And for your so doing, this (by the Authority of the said Act) shall
be your Warrant. Given under my hand and seal the 10. day of June in the 31.
year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, (by the grace of
God) of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Dom. 1679.

To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of, etc.

Additional Presidents to the former.
The form of the Record that is returned of the Alehouses that are licensed.
K. ss. MEmorandum, Quod vicesimo tertio die Februarii Anno Regni Domini nostri
Caroli secundi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defens. vicesimo septimo apud W. in Com. K. praed. R. K. and G. P. Armig.
duobus Iusticiariis dicti Domini Reg. ad pacem in Com. praed. conservand.
assignat. and quilibet*person. infra nominat. Victual. in person. praesent.
tunc and ibidem per nos dict. Iusticiar. Licenc. ad vendend. panem and
Cervisiam in Condition infra scrip. recognoverunt se debere dicto Dom. Regi
seperal. summas december librar* bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, and quilibet
personarum infra nominat. and manucapt. pro praedict. person. licenc. and in
person. praesent. tunc and ibidem recogn. se debere dicto Dom Regi sum.
quinque librar. and pro praed. person. Licenc. and non in pers. praesent. in
december libr. consimilis monetae Angl. de Bonis and Catallis, Terris and
Tenementis suis and cujuslibet eorum ad opus and usum dicti Dom. Regis haered.
and successor. suorum fieri and leva^i si defecerint in condition sequorum.

THE Condition of these Recognizances are such, That whereas the above and
within named Justices have licensed and allowed all and every the
Alehouse-keepers and Victuallers whose names are under and within written, to
sell Ale and Beer in the Town and Houses where they now inhabit and dwell for
the space of one whole year next ensuing the date hereof and no longer. If
therefore they and every of them shall during their time of keeping Alehouses
sell good wholesome Ale and Beer a full Ale-quart of their best for one Penny,
and of their smallest second sort two full Ale-quarts for a Penny, nor shall
suffer any disorder or unlawful Games to be used in or about their Houses or
Grounds, nor lodge any Strangers above one day and one night without giving
notice thereof to the Constable or his Deputy, nor dress nor cause to be
dressed in or about their Houses any manner of Flesh to be eaten or sold at
any time prohibited by Law. Nor receive into their Houses any manner of Persons
suspected or defamed of or for Theft, Murder, Drunkenness or Incontinency, nor
shall buy nor take to pawn any stolen Goods, nor shall suffer any to be taken to
pawn, nor shall suffer any Persons to be drinking in their Houses on the Lord's
day nor Holy days during Divine Service, nor after nine of the Clock at night,
nor at any other time than the Statute does permit. And if they the said
Alehouse-keepers, and every of them, shall likewise keep good Rule and Order in
their several Houses, and do and perform all other things according to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that case made and provided. Then these
Recognizances to be void and of none effect, or else to remain and be in full
force and virtue.

Hundred de, etc. Hundred de H. W. B. Victualler, debere in december librar. T. K.
de R. 6. li. and I. de eadem manit. 6 li. Write at the bottom of all, Capt. and
Recogn. coram nobis. R. K. W. P. E. H. At the same time when the Licenses are
granted the Overseers Books are passed, and you write in their Books at the
foot of the Account. If money due to the old Overseers, you say, Due to be paid
from the new to the old Overseers 10 00 etc. 11 April 1670. seen and allowed by
us R. K. W. P. If money due to the new Overseers, you say, Remaining in the old
Overseers hands to be paid to the new ones 10 00 00 11 April seen and allowed
by us R. K. W. P. At the bottom of every Overseers Warrant put what is due from
the one to the other.

Overseer's Warrant.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed Justices of the Peace for this County
of K. do approve and appoint I. S. and T. D. of, etc. to be new Overseers for
the Poor of the said Parish for the space of one whole year next ensuing the
date hereof, commanding them, together with the Churchwardens, to provide for
the said Poor (according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided.) Given under our hands and seals, etc. Anno Regni Regis, etc. Anno
Domini 1670.

Remaining in the old Overseers hands to be paid to the new ones 10 00 00

The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another.
A. M. miles infra script. praestitit seperalia infra mentionat. juramento
quinto die Decembr. Anno Domini 1681. virtute brevis infra script. mihi direct.
dat. Anno and die supradict. A Seal to the side.


R. K.

The Examination of a Felon himself.
The Examination of J. C. taken before R. K. Esquire, one of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the said County of K. the 25. day of July Anno Domini
1678. and Regni Regis Caroli Secundi nunc Angl. etc. XXX.
K. ss. THE said I. C. being charged by E. M. of the Parish of D. Victualler,
That he the said I. C. lately came into the Dwelling House of him the said E.
M. situate in the said Parish of D. and did then and there feloniously take and
steal out of the said House one silver Cup of the Goods and Chattels of the
said E. M. to the value of forty shillings. He the said I. C. upon his
Examination before me the said 25. day of July does confess that he stole the
said silver Cup from out the House of the said E. M. and sold it to one M. B.
in the City of London, Goldsmith, for 24 s. and 6 pence.

And further says not. R. K.

The Information of the Witness when no Confession.
The Information of A. B. of the Parish of C. against D. E. taken upon Oath
before me R. K. Esquire, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
said County, the 25. day of May Anno Dom. 1677. and Regni Regis Caroli Secundi
nunc Angl. etc. xxix.
Kent ss. THE said A. B. being this day examined upon Oath before me, says,
That, etc.

And further deposes not.
A Mittimus for Whores.
To the Keeper, etc.
K. ss. WHereas the Persons hereunder named are of Evil same, and are accused
for resorting to Houses, reputed Houses of common Bawdery: These are therefore
(in His Majesty's name) to charge and command you, That presently upon sight
hereof you receive and take them into your Custody, and them safe to keep
until they shall be thence discharged by due course of Law. Hereof fail you
not. Given under my hand and seal this, etc.

Law-Cases relating to the foregoing Subject.
IF the Warrant be to bring before him, or Co^. Rep. 5. fol. 59.
any other Justice, it is at the election of the Officer, to which Justice he
will go.

A Warrant may be made to bring before a Foster's cas. Ibid. Cok. Rep. 9. fol.
119. b. In Lord Samhur's case. 2. Brown. 41. Legate's case.
particular Justice.

Justices not imprison, but in the Common Gaol.

One Justice of the Peace connot commit Ienkins 174.
canother Justice for breach of the Peace.

Sessions of the Peace may.

If a Justice pursue not the Statute, there Jones 170. Cole's case.
his Act is void: But if he pursue it, then neither B. R. nor Justices of the
Peace can discharge him.

Apprentice.
3. Bulstrode 164. Brown's ca. 1. Brownl. 67. Coventry. Goldsborough 161.
March. 3. Noy 105.
Must be bound out by Indenture.

Master cannot send Apprentice beyond the Sea (except go with him:) But may
send him to any place in England.

Action of account is not maintainable against an Apprentice.

By custom of London a man may turn over his Apprentice to any other within the
City.

Action lies by Master for enticing an Apprentice to depart from his Service,
so if entice Richmond.
to take money, or play.

Bastard-child.
If the two next Justices make not provision Jones 330.
for Bastard, the Sessions must settle it, as the two Justices ought to have
done.

Sessions cannot originally make order to Style 475. Denton.
keep Bastard, but it ought to be made by the two next Justices to the place
where the Child was born.

Maintenance of Bastard by Mother and reputed Ienkin. 47. pl. 90.
Father is by these modern Laws of 18 Eliz. cap. 3. and 7 Iac. cap. 6. the
former Laws were only for punishment.

Not questioned for having one Bastard. 2. Bulstrode 398.
Then she had another, she is not to be proceeded against by 7 Iac. (as for a
second Offense.)

The two next Justices are not to commit 2. Bulstrode 342. Thekins and Smith.
2. Bulstrode 393. Bowler's case. 2. Bulstrode 341. 2. Bulstrode 341. Twyning.
Noy 79. Iermin.
for not obeying their Order, but to take bond for their appearance at Sessions.

Neither Sessions nor Assizes can meddle touching Bastardy, but upon Appeal:
(otherwise the two Justices must order.)

If two Justices make an Order, if Party refuse to perform, or enter into bond
to appear at the next Sessions, they may commit him without Bail.

If (by practice and design) a Child be born in a Parish, the Parish where the
practice was, shall keep the Child.

Bound to pay 20 d. per week for keeping a Bastard, Defendant cannot plead that
there was no Order made.

Behavior.
Justice cannot bind to Good behavior upon Style 16. Bronker's case. Moore
606. numb. 837. 3. Croke 680. Dean's case. 3. Croke 78. Latch. 5.
a general information, or commit him for not finding Sureties upon such
information.

May break house upon warrant for the Good behavior.

If Justice (for want of Sureties for Good behavior) commit (without good
cause) false imprisonment.

To say of a Major, he is a Fool, breach of Good behavior.

So to threaten Witnesses.

Conventicles.
These are against the Statute of 16 Car. 2. Vide the Statute.

House of Correction.
If delivered of a Child in the House of Correction, 2. Bulstrode 358.
the Child must be sent to the Parish, from which the Mother was sent.

A Rogue must not be sent to the House of 2. Bulstrode 358.
Correction, but whipped, and sent to the place where last settled (if known)
else to the place of birth. But the House of Correction is for the Poor of the
Parish that refuse to work.

Deer.
Heir shall have them in the Park, and not Owen 20. Greg. 2. Leonard 222.
Executor.

Waste cannot be assigned for killing Deer, except he kill them all.

Drunkenness.
If twice drunk, and convicted, bound to Ienkins 173. Godbold 514. Roll 409.
Tailor.
Good behavior.

Drunkard may be punished in Ecclesiastical Court, or by justice of Peace.

Being a Drunkard, cause to remove a Magistrate.

Gaol.
Every County has two Gaols, one for Debt, Latch. 16.
which may be in any house where the Sheriff will. The other is for the Peace,
and matters of the Crown, which is the County Gaol.

Jailer shall be answerable for Escapes, and Cok. Rep. 9. fol. 96. b. in
Reins. 3. Cr. 815.
if not sufficient, respondet superior.

If Gaol broken by Thieves, Jailer is chargeable, (otherwise if by Enemies.)

Highway.
1. Cr. 366. Sir Edw. Duncomb. 1. Crook 266. Popham 142. Earl of
Northumberland's case.
If enclose part of the Highway, must maintain it (though the Parish did it
before.)

To stop one way (which was foul) and lay out another (without public
Authority) not justifiable.

Cannot lay Logs in the Highway, though there is sufficient room for
Passengers beside it.

Style 130. Moore 180. Cok. Rep. 9. fol. 33. a. William's case.
Justice may upon his view present want of repair of Highway, and before the
Fine can be taken off, the presented must certify the Amendment.

Action for stopping or incroaching upon Highway, not maintainable without
particular damage, for the usual way is by Indictment.

If to repair the Highway, ratione tenurae, it Keilway 53 a. pl. 4.
need not be prescribed, but ratione residentiae must.

Indictment in Highway ad nocumentum prope inhabitantium (naught) it should
have been Roll 406. The King and Hornsey.
omnium ibidem transeuntium.

Huy and Cry.
Statutes of 13 Edw. 1. and 27 Eliz. are concerning it.

The Party robbed ought to give convenient Noy 155.
notice so soon as he can.

Though know the Robber, yet shall have March 10. pl. 18.
Action against the Hundred, by 13 Edw. 1.

The Party robbed is not bound to lend his Horse to pursue the Thief, nor is he
bound to go and pursue the Thief presently.

Robbery after daybreak, and before Sunrising 2. Crook 106.
(Hundred must answer,) so that after Sunset, and before it is dark.

Oath of a Robbery before a Justice of the 1. Crook 211.
County, though taken out of the County, good.

Poor.
Assessment for them ought to be made according Ienk. 327. pl. 49.
to the visible Estates of the Inhabitants there (both real and personal.) But
not for any Estate they have elsewhere. The Occupiers of the Lands (and not the
Landlords) are to be taxed.

The Grandmother (being of ability) had Style 283.
a poor Grandchild relieved by the Parish, who marries; her Husband is liable
toward keeping the Child, for that his Wife was of ability when he married
her: otherwise if she had not been of ability. And the Sessions must order what
he shall contribute toward the charge.

Peace.
1000 li. bond may be required for the Style 322.
Peace, (as the case may stand) viz. if the Person be dangerous.

If he which is bound to the Peace break his Style 369.
Recognizance, he may be indicted for it, for it is a new Offense.

Bound to the Peace upon malice, or for Style 364.
vexation, may be discharged by the King's Bench.

Justice may take money to lie in deposito for 1. Croke 446.
security of the Peace, and if break the Peace, the money to be forfeited to
the King.

Two Justices (though neither of the Quorum) 2. Leonard 184. pl. 223.
may inquire of unlawful Assemblies, though they cannot determine the same.

Rogue.
Is not to be sent to the House of Correction, 2. Bulstrode 358.
but to be whipped, and sent where last settled (if known,) otherwise to the
place of his birth. But the House of Correction is properly for those that will
not work.

If Inhabitants of the County go with Ienkins 318.
Wares to sell at Houses in that County, they are Rogues.

Riot.
Fine upon Riotors cannot be less than 10 li. Style 303.
for the principal, and four marks a-piece for the rest.

Information against two Justices for not inquiring Style 245.
of a Riot, found against one of them (good.)

Stage Players may be indicted for Riot, and Roll 109.
unlawful Assemblies.

Soldiers.
If Soldiers pressed to serve the King, depart 2. Anderson 151.
out of the service, it is Felony by 7 Hen. 7. 3 Hen. 8. and 2 Edw. 6.

The Captain is he who is to command, 1. Croke 71. Hutton 134.
and the Conducter is he who is hired to guide the Soldiers in the way to
their Captain, and departing from him is Felony.

Justices of the Peace may try the Offense at their Sessions, and so may
Justices of Oyer and Terminer.

THE TABLE.
Alehouses.
A License to keep an Alehouse Page. 1 Another Page. 2 A License to Brew, and
keep an Alehouse Page. 3 A Recognizance thereupon, with Condition Page. ibid.
Another Recognizance for an Alehouse-keeper, and Condition Page. 4 and 5 A
Warrant against an Innkeeper, Alehousekeeper, etc. suffering to tipple Page. 5
-- to levy money for tippling Page. 6 A Mittimus (for an Alehouse-keeper
suffering to tipple^ for (...) of Distress Page. 7 For an unlicensed Alehouse
Page. 9 The like upon the Statute 3 Car. the first Conviction Page. 10 The like
for the second Conviction Page. 11 -- for the third Conviction Page. 12 A
Warrant for Witnesses against an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper. Page. 13 -- for
suppression of an Alehouse for disorder Page. 14 -- for renewing Licenses of
Alehousekeepers Page. ibid. -- against an Alehouse-keeper for selling less than
measure Page. 15 A Mittimus for selling less than measure for want of Distress
Page. 16 A Warrant for suppressing an Alehouse after suppression at the
Quarter Sessions Page. 18 A License to keep an Alehouse, with Articles Page. 19
The form of a Record that is returned of the Alehouses that are licensed and
conditioned, etc. Page. 377
Apprentices.
A Warrant to put out poor Children Apprentices Page. 22 An Indenture for an
Apprentice so put out Page. 23 A Warrant against them which refuse to take
Apprentices Page. 25 -- against a Master for abusing his Apprentice Page. 26 A
Warrant against a disorderly Apprentice Page. ibid. A Discharge of an
Apprentice Page. 27 A Warrant against one that departs out of Service before
his time expired Page. ibid. Law-Cases thereon Page. 383
Bail.
Recognizances for Bail Page. 28 A Condition to prefer a Bill and give Evidence
Page. 29 A Condition to give Evidence Page. 30
Bastards.
A Warrant for the apprehending and conveying the Woman to the House of
Correction Page. 32 A Mittimus of the Mother of a Bastard-child to the House of
Correction Page. 33 A Warrant against the Mother (for the second Offense) to
commit to the House of Correction, and find Sureties of Good behavior Page. 34
-- to convene the Mother and reputed Father Page. ibid. -- against the reputed
Father of a Bastardchild Page. 36 An Order for Relief of the Parish touching a
Bastard-child, and for punishing the Mother and reputed Father Page. 37 A
Warrant to be written under the Order aforesaid for giving notice thereof to
the Mother and reputed Father Page. 40 -- for the punishment of the Mother and
reputed Father of a Bastard-child Page. ibid. -- and Mittimus against the
reputed Father for not obeying the Justices Order Page. 43 An Order for relief
of the Parish in case of a Bastard-child out of the Estate of the reputed
Father Page. 45 A Warrant for punishment of the reputed Father of a
Bastard-child for not keeping the Child and obeying the Order Page. 46 -- for
sending a Bastard-child (found wandering) to the Place of its birth Page. 48 --
for apprehending a Woman on suspicion of having murdered her Bastard-child
Page. 49 A Condition of a Recognizance for the appearance of the reputed Father
of a Bastardchild Page. 50 -- of a Recognizance of one charged to be the Father
of a Bastard-child before its birth, to appear at Sessions Page. ibid. -- to
discharge Churchwardens and Parishioners of a Child born in the Parish Page.
51 Law-Cases thereon Page. 384
Good behavior.
A Warrant and Mittimus for Good behavior Page. 52 Causes for Good behavior
Page. 53 Another Warrant for Good behavior Page. 54 A Mittimus to the Gaol for
one that refuses to find Sureties for his Good behavior Page. 55 A Supersedeas
for the Good behavior Page. 56 A Recognizance thereupon Page. 57 A Condition
of a Recognizance for the same Page. ibid. Another Condition Page. 58 --
Condition Page. ibid. Law-Cases thereon Page. 385
Bridges.
A Warrant to a Hundred for assessing a proportionable rate of a Tax (appointed
by the Body of the County) toward repair of the County Bridges Page. 59 -- to
make a Tax for County Bridges repaired Page. 61 -- to collect a Tax for
repairing County Bridges Page. 62 -- for not paying the same Page. 63
Burying see Title Woollen.

Carriages for the King.
A Warrant to provide Carriages Page. 64 Another Warrant for provision of
Carriages for the King's use Page. 65 -- to levy the Penalty for not appearing
with Carriages for the King upon notice Page. 66 A Mittimus for one that does
impress or take away any Cart or other thing from the Owner under pretense of
power from the Green-cloath, for carriage of His Majesty's Provisions, without
lawful Authority Page. 67
Certificates.
A Certificate from the Minister and chief Inhabitants of the Parish of a man's
Honesty Page. 68 -- for continuing of an Alehouse-keeper Page. 69 -- for the
time of the Birth of a Child Page. ibid. -- for one that has not been touched
of the Evil Page. 70
Chimney-money.
A Mittimus for disturbing a Collector Page. ibid.
Church.
A Warrant for not coming to Church Page. 71 -- to levy the forfeiture for not
coming to Church Page. 72 A Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church
(for want of Distress) Page. 73 A Warrant to distrain for a Church-Tax Page. 74
-- a Minister for not reading Prayers, etc. once in a month Page. 75 A Mittimus
for Preaching whilst disabled Page. 76
Coals.
A Warrant upon complaint touching Coals Page. 77 -- for delivery a moity of
such Coals as are sold contrary to the Statute to the Informer Page. ibid. --
touching Prices of Coals Page. 78
Constables Charges.
A Warrant for making of Constables Page. 79 Another Page. ibid. A Warrant for
a Tax for the Constables Charges in the execution of his Office Page. 80 -- to
appear and show cause for their not paying the said Charges Page. 81 -- for
refusing to appear to show cause for not paying the said Charges Page. 82 -- to
levy the Charges upon their refusing to pay the same Page. 83 The Condition of
a Recognizance to appear and answer the not paying the same at next Sessions
Page. 84 A Warrant for levying 3 s. 4 d. upon a Constable for neglect of his
Duty in giving an account of Rogues and Vagabonds Page. ibid. -- to sell the
Goods of an Offender that refuses to bear his own Charges to the Gaol Page. 85
-- to make a Tax for conveying a Felon to the Gaol Page. 87
Conventicles.
A Condition of a Recognizance in case of an Appeal made touching Conventicles
Page. 87 A Record of a Conventicle Page. 89 -- concerning Conventicles where
several Persons are convicted Page. 90 -- of the Conviction of certain Persons
taken at a Conventicle Page. 92 Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle Page. 95
A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Offense Page. 97 -- upon the second Offense
Page. 98 -- upon the third Conviction Page. 99 A Record against one that
suffers a Conventicle, etc. to be kept in his House Page. 101 A Mittimus
thereupon upon the first Conviction Page. 102 -- thereupon upon the second
Conviction Page. 103 -- thereupon upon the third Conviction Page. 104 A Warrant
to levy the Penalty of the Statute upon the Teacher of a Conventicle Page. 105
-- Pro testes to prove the Conventicle Page. 106 -- to levy the money upon the
Offenders Page. 108 -- to levy the money upon the Offenders Page. 109 -- to
levy money upon a Jailer, etc. for suffering one committed (upon this Act) to
go at large Page. 114 The like for suffering one at large to join with the
Offender in custody in the exercise of Religion Page. 115 A Warrant against a
Peer of the Realm for being at a Conventicle, the first Conviction Page. 116 --
upon the second Conviction Page. 117 -- against a Peer for suffering a
Conventicle, etc. to be kept in his House, etc. the first Conviction Page.
ibid. -- upon the second Conviction Page. 118 A Mittimus for a Nonconformist,
etc. Page. 119 A Certificate to the Militia, etc. for aid in case of a
Conventicle Page. 120 -- made by a Justice where the Offenders live in a
Corporation Page. 121 -- for the taking the Oath according to the said Act
Page. 122 Law-Cases thereon Page. 385
Corporations.
A Certificate upon taking the Oaths and subscribing the Declarations mentioned
in the Act for regulating Corporations Page. 123
Court Leet and Court Baron.
A Precept directed to the Bailiff of the Manor by the Steward of the
Court Baron to warn the Court Page. 124 -- to warn a Jury for a Court Leet
Page. 125 -- for a Borsholder, or other Officer, to take upon him the said
Office, and to repair to a Justice of Peace to take his Oath for his faithful
execution of the same Page. 126 -- to bring in a Scold to be tried at a
Court Leet Page. 127 The manner of making up of Court-Rolls Page. 128 The
manner of making up of Estreats Page. 136
Customs.
A Warrant against those who abuse an Officer of the Customs, in the due
execution of his Office Page. 140 -- against carrying away Goods without paying
Custom, etc. Page. 141 A Mittimus upon the precedent Warrant for the first
Offense Page. 142 -- upon the second like Offense Page. 143
Deer.
A Warrant for Deer-stealing Page. 144 -- to levy 20 li. for stealing Deer
Page. 145 A Mittimus to the House of Correction for want of Distress Page. 146
Another Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress Page. 147 A Warrant for a
Buck Page. 148 Law-Cases thereon Page. 385
Drunkenness.
A Warrant for Drunkenness the first Conviction Page. 148 -- the second
Conviction Page. 149 Law-cases thereon Page. 386
Excise.
A Certificate upon taking the Oath about Excise Page. 151 A Warrant to summon
those who refuse to pay the Excise Page. 152 -- for Distress on
Alehouse-keepers for not paying Excise Page. 153 A Mittimus where not
sufficient to pay Excise Page. 154 A Warrant to levy the forfeiture for not
making a due Entry Page. 155 -- to levy the double value of the Excise on a
Brewer for not paying according to Entry made Page. 156 Loss of allowance for
making false Entries Page. 157 A Warrant upon complaint of false Entry to
appear Page. 158 -- not sufferage to gage the Vessels Page. ibid. -- against
one that procures a false Return to be made in the Office of Excise Page. 160
A Mittimus to the Gaol for want of Distress Page. 161 A Warrant (against
several Persons) to distrain for the duties of Excise, etc. Page. 162
Felony.
A Warrant to apprehend a Felon Page. 165 A Mittimus of a Felon Page. ibid.
Another Page. 166 A Warrant to search for a Felon on suspicion Page. 167 -- for
apprehending of one that has dangerously hurt another Page. 168 A Liberate to
deliver a Prisoner committed for Felony Page. 169 A Warrant to bind Persons to
give in evidence against a Felon Page. 170 Another Page. ibid. A Condition of a
Recognizance to prefer a Bill and give evidence against Principals and
Accessory in case of Felony Page. 171 -- of a Recognizance where two Felonies
are committed to give evidence Page. 172 A Condition to give evidence for
Felony Page. 173 -- of a Recognizance to appear upon Felony Page. ibid. -- to
appear upon suspicion of Felony Page. 174 A Bond Page. ibid. A Condition to
save one harmless who was bound for the appearance of a Person suspected for
Felony Page. 175 A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Felony Page. 30 The
Examination of a Felon himself Page. 381
Fire.
A Testimonial from Justices of the Peace for poor men that have had loss by
fire Page. 176 A charitable Request made by certain Justices of the Peace to
the Inhabitants of a Division for relief of F. S. who had been there lately
ruined by fire Page. 178
Forceable Entry.
A Warrant to return a Jury to inquire of a Forceable Entry Page. 179 A Record
of Forceable Entry Page. 180 A Warrant to the Sheriff for Restitution Page. 182
A Mittimus upon view of Forceable Detainour Page. 183
Foreign Wares.
A Warrant to search for and seize Foreign Manufactures prohibited, etc. Page.
184
Gaol.
Law-Cases Page. 386
Highways.
A Warrant to levy 5 li. on the Inhabitants of a Parish for not choosing
Surveyours of the Highways Page. 185 -- to distrain for Highway Tax Page. 186
-- for not sending in Teams to work in the Highways Page. 187 -- against those
that refuse or neglect to work in the Highways Page. 188 -- to empower the
Surveyours to dig Gravel, etc. upon Wastes or Commons out of the Parish Page.
189 -- to appoint what shall be paid by the Surveyours for digging Gravel, etc.
in any man's Ground Page. 190 -- against Surveyours for not accounting Page.
191 -- against Surveyours who have not paid the moneys in their hands to the
next Surveyours Page. 192 Law-Cases thereon Page. 386
House of Correction.
A Warrant and Directions for general privy Search Page. 193 A Mittimus of a
Rogue thither, taken in the general Search Page. 197 -- of an idle Person out
of Service, etc. Page. 198 -- to the House of Correction of an idle Person,
that would run away, and will not work to maintain his Family Page. 199 A
Liberate from thence Page. 200 Law-Cases thereon Page. 385
Huy and Cry.
The Examination of a Person robbed on the Highway praying an Huy and Cry
Page. 201 Another Page. 202 The Examination of a Person robbed on the Highway
by three Persons, one of which he knew Page. 203 A Huy and Cry upon the escape
of a Prisoner from the Constable Page. 204 A Warrant for a Huy and Cry after a
Felon Page. 205 -- to search for a Person (who has committed a Robbery) and
for Goods stolen Page. 206 Law-Cases thereon Page. 387
Inns of Court.
A Warrant from one of the Judges, a Member of an Inns of Court, against one of
that Society, for refusing to observe the Order of the House Page. 208
Irish Cattle.
A Warrant to seize certain Cattle imported from foreign Parts into England
Page. 210 -- to deliver to the Owners certain Cattle seized, as forfeited for
being imported from foreign Parts, upon proof that they were not so imported
Page. 211 -- to kill the said Cattle Page. 212 -- to levy 40 s. upon the
seisour or Churchwardens that shall fail in killing or making distribution as
aforesaid Page. 213
Lent.
A Warrant for observing of Lent Page. 214
Licenses.
A License for a Badger of Corn Page. 215 A License for a petty Chapman Page.
216 A License or Pasport for a poor man to his Friends for relief Page. 217
Another Page. 218 A License to beg Page. ibid. -- to travel by Water on the
Lord's day Page. 219 Another Page. 220 A License to travel on the Lord's day
Page. 221
Misdemeanors.
A general Warrant for the same retornable before a particular Justice Page.
221 Another Page. 222 The like retornable before any Justice, and the Accuser
to have notice Page. ibid. A Condition of a Recognizance for misdemeanour Page.
223
Murder.
A Condition of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment to give evidence
at the next general Jail-deliver, alias Assizes, to both Juries in case of
Murder Page. 224 -- of a Recognizance to prefer a Bill and give evidence at
Assizes Page. 225 A Condition-recognizance to prefer a Bill of Indictment and
to give evidence to both Juries at the next general Jail-deliver, alias
Assizes in case of an Abbettor in Murder Page. ibid.
Nets, Dogs and Conies.
A Warrant to search for Nets and Settingdogs upon the Statute of 7 Iacobi
Page. 226 The like upon the Statute of 22 and 23 Caroli Secundi Page. 227 A
Mittimus against Persons that refuse to enter into Recognizance to appear at
Sessions for their keeping Ferrets and Nets to kill Conies Page. 229 A Warrant
for one that hunts with Spaniels in Eared-corn Page. 230
Oaths.
The Oath which is usually ministered to a Justice of the Peace in the several
Counties of England Page. 231 The Oath of Supremacy Page. 232 The Oath of
Allegiance Page. 233 A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of Allegiance Page. 235
The Oath of Abjuration Page. ibid. The Oath of an Excise man Page. 236 The
Under-sheriffs Oath touching the impannelling of Juries Page. ibid. The Oath of
a Bailiff Page. 237 The Oath usually given to Churchwardens Page. 238 Another
Page. ibid. The Oath of Obedience Canonical Page. ibid. The High-constables
Oath Page. 239 The Oath taken by the Officers of the Marshals Court Page. 241
The Oath of a Constable Page. 242 -- of an Ale-caster Page. 243 -- of a
Commissioner of Sewers Page. 244 -- of a Searcher in the Custom-house Page. 245
The Oath given to a Jury before Evidence given in against a Prisoner at the Bar
Page. 245 -- given to a Bailiff or Sergeant that attends on any Jury or
Inquest at an Assize Page. 246 -- of him that craves the Peace against another
Page. ibid. Another Page. 247 Another Oath to give a man upon examination or
upon information Page. ibid. The Oath of him who gives information Page. ibid.
Another Page. 248 The Oath to be given to any Jury by whom a Nisi prius is to
be tried Page. ibid. -- to be given to such as are to give evidence between a
Party and party at a Nisi prius Page. ibid. -- of a great Inquest Page. 249 --
of those that give evidence upon Bills of Indictment Page. ibid.
Officers.
The nomination of Officers by Justices of the Peace Page. 250
Orchards.
A Warrant against Robbers of Orchards Page. 251 -- upon non-payment to be
whipped Page. 252
Overseers see Title Poor.

Peace.
A Warrant to find Sureties for the Peace Page. 253 -- to find Sureties for the
Peace where an Assault is made upon an Officer in discharge of his Office Page.
255 A Supersedeas of a Warrant for the Peace Page. 257 A Mittimus for breaking
the Peace Page. 258 A Release of the Peace Page. ibid. The Condition of a
Recognizance to appear at Sessions and keep the Peace Page. 259 Law-Cases
thereon Page. 388
Plague.
A Pass or Certificate in the time of Plague Page. 260
Poor.
A Warrant for the Overseers of the Poor to account and name other fit Persons
Page. 261 -- for the making new Overseers of the Poor Page. 262 -- to make
Overseers of the Poor, impowring them and the Churchwardens to collect the
Poors Tax, and upon non-payment to destrain Page. ibid. A Confirmation of the
Rates for the Poor Page. 263 A Warrant to levy the Arrears (due to the Parish)
from the former Overseers Account, by Distress Page. 264 -- against an Overseer
of the Poor for not keeping of monthly Meetings Page. 265 -- to destrain for
the Poors Tax Page. 266 A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to destrain
Page. 267 A Warrant for removing one come to a Parish Page. 268 -- to send a
Wife and Child to her Husband in the Parish from whence they came Page. 269 --
for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from whence he was removed
Page. 270 -- against those who come to work and return not at the end of their
work Page. 271 A Mittimus to the House of Correction of one that refuses to be
removed after his work finished Page. 272 A Warrant and Mittimus for one who*
runs away, and leaves his Family upon the Parish Page. 273 A Mittimus on the
foregoing Warrant Page. 274 A Warrant to the Overseers of the Poor to pay
Arrears, and continue weekly relief to poor Persons Page. ibid. -- to levy
Relief for the Poor Page. 275 A Bond and Condition to the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Poor to save a Town harmless upon inhabiting there Page. 276 A
Release (from the Overseers of the Poor) to one that paid five pounds to be
freed from keeping a Bastard-child Page. 277 The manner of se^ling and making
up the Overseers Accounts in their Books Page. 370 Overseers Warrant Page. 380
Law-Cases thereon Page. 387
Prisoner.
A Warrant to allow a poor Prisoner relief Page. 279 A Discharge of a Prisoner
to a Jailer Page. ibid. Another Page. 280 A Warrant for a Prisoner to be bailed
Page. ibid. A Warrant from a Judge to bring a Prisoner from a Gaol to give
evidence Page. 281
Quakers.
A Mittimus of Quakers Page. 282
Rape.
A Warrant concerning Rape Page. 283
Rates for Hay, Oats, etc.
A Warrant to appoint Rates for Hay, Oats, etc. upon His Majesty's passing
through any Place Page. 284 -- for levying the Penalty forfeited for not
observing the Rates aforesaid Page. 285
Recognizances.
Directions thereupon Page. 286 A Condition for the Peace Page. ibid. The
manner of entering the note of Recognizances in your book of Recognizances Page.
287 Directions for drawing Conditions of Recognizances Page. 288 A single
Recognizance taken before Justices of the Peace Page. 289 Another single
Recognizance Page. 290 A Recognizance to prefer an Indictment, or to prefer a
Bill, and give evidence Page. ibid. -- for two to give evidence Page. 291 -- to
give in evidence against a Prisoner Page. ibid. -- for the Good behavior Page.
292 Another Page. 293 A Recognizance to give in evidence against one that is
suspected of Felony Page. ibid. A Recognizance for keeping of a Tavern Page.
294 -- for one that is bail for a Boy that lay under a Bed in the night Page.
295 -- for Bastardy where two are Manucapters for the man in custody Page. 296
-- for a married Woman upon rescue Page. ibid. -- for one that has hurt
another, and on the Warrant of Behavior Page. 297 -- for the Peace Page. 298
-- for Felony Page. 299 A Release of a Recognizance written under the
Recognizance thus, by the same Justice or by some other, etc. Page. ibid. The
Parties Release of the Peace Page. 300
Riot.
A Precept to the Sheriffs to return a Jury to enquire upon a Riot, Rout or
unlawful Assembly Page. 301 The like Precept in Latin Page. 302 A Warrant for
certain riotous Persons Page. 303 Law-Cases thereon Page. 399
Rogues.
A Warrant for apprehending and committing a dangerous Rogue Page. 304 A
Mittimus of a dangerous Rogue Page. 305 Law-Cases thereon Page. 388
Sacrament.
A Certificate for receiving the Sacrament and Oath Page. 306 -- for receiving
the Sacrament according to the Act Page. 307 A Testimonial upon the receiving
the Sacrament according to the Act Page. 308 A Declaration to be subscribed
according to the Act Page. ibid.
Scavengers.
A Warrant for Scavengers to distrain Page. 309
Search.
A Warrant to search for stolen Goods Page. 310 -- to make general search for
Rogues, Vagabonds, etc Page. 311
Servants.
A Warrant for sending a Servant to his Service to serve the time agreed to
prevent charge on the Parish Page. 311 A Mittimus against one that returns
into a Parish after he was removed Page. 312 A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the
Master for putting away his Servant before the end of his Term Page. 313 -- for
not paying wages Page. 314 -- for relief of a Manservant that is out of
service Page. 315 A Warrant against one that departs out of service before
his time expired Page. 316 -- to fetch back a Servant Page. ibid. A Discharge
of a Servant from his service within the time agreed, upon his absenting
himself Page. 317 A Testimonial for the discharge of a Servant Page. 318
Silk-Throsters.
An Order for the payment of moneys to a Silk-Throster by his Workman who
imbezils his Silk Page. 319 A Warrant against an Offender for not performing
the Order beforementioned Page. 320
Soldiers.
A Warrant to warn in a Muster at a certain day Page. 321 A Certificate for a
Trained-souldier Page. 322 A Warrant to order an Allowance to a poor Soldier
out of the Stock for maimed Soldiers Page. ibid. The like for Allowance to
Wife or Orphan Page. 323 Law-cases thereon Page. 389
Swearing.
A Warrant to pay 1 s. for swearing in the presence of a Justice of the Peace
Page. 324 -- to levy moneys for profane swearing Page. 325 A Certificate of
Conviction for swearing Page. 326
Tax.
A Warrant to the Assessors to make a Tax upon an Act of Parliament for Royal
Aid Page. 326 The Preamble of the Tax-book Page. 328 A Warrant to the
Collectors of the Tax upon the Royal Aid Page. 329 A Warrant to levy 5 li. upon
the Collectors for neglecting to collect their Assessment Page. 332
Testimonials.
A Testimonial for conveying a Rogue who has been punished Page. 333 A
Testimonial for one that has suffered shipwreck Page. 334
Tiling.
A Deputation for Tile-searchers Page. 335
Trespass.
A Warrant upon Hedge-breaking, etc. where the Party's not able Page. 336 A
Warrant or Order to pay where he is able Page. 337 -- to whip where not paid
according to Order Page. 338 -- from the Justices at a Quarter Sessions for
apprehending one indicted for a Trespass Page. 339
Uagrants.
A Warrant for apprehending Beggars and other idle Persons Page. 341 A
Testimonial or Pass for him to the Place of his birth Page. 342 The like where
the Place of his birth is not known Page. ibid. The like where neither the
Place of his birth nor last abode is known Page. 343 The like where the Vagrant
is apprehended in a general privy search Page. 344 A Warrant to pay 2 s. for
apprehending a Vagrant Page. ibid. Upon non-payment of the same Page. 345 A
Certificate of apprehending a Vagrant in the Confines of another County Page.
346 A Warrant to pay two shillings thereupon Page. 347 -- upon non-payment of
the same Page. ibid.
Wagons and Carts.
An Affidavit to be made before a Warrant granted for destreining for 40 s.
forfeited for drawing with six Horses in length in a Team, Cart or Wagon Page.
349 A Warrant to destrain upon such as travel with a Wagon or Cart drawn with
six Horses at length Page. 350
Watch and Ward.
A Warrant to the High-constable for putting in Execution the Statute of 13
Car. 2. (reciting the Statute) and for keeping good Watches (upon His
Majesty's going to Oxford) Page. 351 Another Warrant upon the same Statute
Page. 354 A Warrant for Watch and Ward, and to apprehend idle Persons Page. 355
-- by order of Quarter Sessions to set Watch and Ward Page. 356
Weights and Measures.
A Warrant to warn in all Tradesmen and others to have their Weights and
Measures examined by the Standard Page. 358 The Clerk of the Markets Warrant
thereupon Page. 359
Whores.
A Mittimus for Whores Page. 382
Witnesses.
A Warrant for Witnesses touching Felony Page. 360 -- for a Witness to appear
and give evidence at the Sessions Page. 361 The Information of a Witness when
no Confession Page. 382
Wood.
A Warrant against one that stole Wood Page. 362 A general Warrant to search
for stolen Wood Page. 363 A Warrant to search for stolen Wood, etc. upon a
particular complaint Page. 364 An Order against a Person apprehended with
Bundles of Wood, etc. to make satisfaction for the same to the Owner the first
Offense Page. 365 A Warrant for not obeying that Order Page. 366 A Mittimus to
the House of Correction for the second like Offense Page. 368 An Order against
the buyer of stolen Wood, etc. to pay treble the value thereof Page. 369 A
Warrant to distrain for non-payment of the money according to the foregoing
Order Page. 370 A Mittimus against the buyer of stolen Wood, etc. for want of
Distress Page. 371
Woollen.
A Certificate for burying in Woollen Page. 372 Another Page. 373 The
Minister's Certificate for burying in Woollen Page. 374 A Minister's Certificate
of not bringing an Affidavit of a Corp's being buried in Woollen Page. ibid. A
Warrant to levy 5 li. for not burying in Woollen according to the Act Page. 375
The Return made by one Justice of Peace when he swears another Page. 380
THE END.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Parson's Monitor, consisting of such Cases and Matters as principally
concern the Clergy. Collected from the Statute and Common Laws; as also the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical: Confirmed 1o Jac. Anno Dom. 1603.
Together with the Articles of Religion, Authority of the Convocation, Privilege
of Churches and Churchyards, Payment of First Fruits and Tenths: In whose Name
and Style Ecclesiastical Courts are to be kept, and the Process issuing out of
the same are to run in, and with what Seal to be sealed. With several other
Matters (never before Extant) very material and necessary to be known by the
Clergy in general, and all persons concerned either as Patron o^ Incumbent. By
G. Meriton, Gent.

Newly printed for R. Tonson. 1681.


