Sr. William Killigrew HIS ANSWER TO THE FENNE MEN'S OBJECTIONS Against the
Earl of Lindsey his Drayning in Lincolnshire.

Printed at London, 1649.

The Fen-mens Objections against the Earl of Lindsey and his Participants.
FIrst, Our Adversaries do object, That some Commissioners who are named in
the body of the Decrees; have not set their Hands and Seals unto the said
Decrees, being engrossed into parchment.

2. They say, The Earl did bribe the late King and his Lords, to take away
their Fennes.

3. They say, The Earl did dreyne these Fens by prerogative power, by the
Kings Letters, and by the Lords Orders.

4. They say, That the ancient Commissioners of the Country were put out, and
Strangers put into Commission.

5. They say, That the Dreyners were parties, and Judges.

6. They say, That the Fens, in question, were not drowned, and did therefore
need no dreyning

7. They say, That if the Fennes did need to be drayned? yet not by such
Malignants as we.

8. They say, That the Earl did undertake the work against the Countries
consent.

9. They say, The Earl did take the best land, and left the worst land for the
Country.

10. They say, That the Fennes between Bourne and Kimeeae are the worst for
drayning.

11. They say, That Kesteum side is drowned by the bank of our great River,
which does secure our own lands, and does thrust up the waters on the land left
unto the Country.

12. They say, That the Earls banks do cut off the ancient Sewers of the
Country, which otherwise would have drayned their Fennes.

13. They say, The Earl took possession by force of Arms, and kept
possession by Troops of Horse, by great Guns, and by murdering the people.

14. They say, That the Commonners were imprisoned by the Lords Orders.

15. They say, That the Country was denied the benefit of the Land by the
Earls privilege of Parliament.

16. They say, That this Parliament has declared against the drayning of Fens
as a grieveance to the Commonwealth.

17. They say, That Sir Robert Barkhams case was judged in Parliament against
me.

18. They say, That the Earl and his Participants have drayned the dry Fens
toward Bourne, and not meddled with the drowned Fens toward Lincoln.

19. They say, That the Country was defrauded by the Commissioners, who sold
the Earl too much Land by his Contract.

20. They say, That the Earl has taken more Land then was allotted him.

21. They say, That the Earl has exchanged certain Lands, which the Country
will not allow of.

22. They object, That the Drayners have fought against the Parliament.

23. They say, That my Father Sir Robert Killigrew, did by his Will dispose of
two hundred Acres of these Fens to his two younger Sons, before the Earls
work was begun.

24. They say, That I was nominated an undertaker with the Earl, and did
relinguish my right.

25. It has been also objected, That the Countess of Exeter has the Brovage
on many of the Fens in question, and does conceive her Interest to be
prejudiced by the drayning.

26. It has been also objected, that the Earl did give to Mr. Robert Long
500.l. a year to manage his work.

27. They do farther say, That the Earl did smother a Verdict, by which the
Jury found, that the Fens in question, were not surrounded.

Sir William Killigrews answer unto the Fen-mens Objections, at the Committee
for the Earl of Lindsey his Level, concerning the matter of Fact.
Mr. Goodwin,
I Suppose our Council has fully showed, that we do claim our title to the
Fens in question, by the authority of the decrees of Sewers, read before this
honorable Committee, and remaining before you: And have fully proved those
decrees to be according to the directions of the Laws and Statutes of this
Land, and according to the Presidents of former times, for works of this kind:
And by those Decrees, it is evident, that our contract was legal, and that we
have performed our works according to our contract; by which we have brought
honor and profit to this Nation: And I say this, least by any witty
exposition, the letter of the Law should be now construed to a different sense
from what those times understood it; by which this letter of the Law, may now
prove a mote point, that was then clear. If so, we hope that equity will take
place; for it concerns every man that has an estate as well as us, that all
equity be not devoured by the strict letter of the Law, and chiefly in such
cases of profit to the State; where the law is doubtful or short, it is proper
for the Parliament to take care in equity; and in our case the Royal assent
being had to our Decrees; the words of the Statute are, That the Parliament
only can repeal them. And to the Parliaments order we do as gladly submit, as
our adversaries would willingly decline.

In the next place I observe, that our opposers do endeavor to blast the
credit of our just title of right, by pretended miscarriages in the matter of
fact, in those that managed this business for the Earl of Lindsey; and by
throwing several scandalous aspersions on the persons of the Dreyners, which
makes me think it very necessary to give the Committee such answers to our
opposers objections, as I hope will vindicate the Earl and his Participants
from being guilty of any wilful crimes, or from any mistakes of consequence,
or any project, or any thing like a project. For it is evident, that the Earl
did undertake this dreyning at the suite of the Country (as appears by Sir
Anthony Erbyes and the other Commissioners Letter to the late King) and in
pursuance of many ancient Records of that County, showing him the endeavors of
their Ancestors to have dreyned the same Fens, by new works, by general taxes,
in the same method, and in the same places as he now has done, which was never
heretofore blemished with the name of a project; and all this grounded on
several invitations of former Parliaments to encourage private men to
undertake those public works, which this present Parliament has also
approved, by settling of Bedford Level by an Act, and therefore we hope, that
we having walked in our Predecessors steps, by the advice of learned men in the
laws of Sewers; and having brought our works by a great charge and hazard, to
the highest perfection of any such works in this Nation, we shall have the
protection of this Parliament, since in their wisdom they have thought fit to
settle Bedford Level.

1. Our Adversaries do object, That some Commissioners who are named in the
body of the Decrees, have not set their hands and seals unto the said Decrees,
being engrossed in parchment.

We answer, That when a great number of Commissioners, have unanimously made a
Decree, and the Clerks books perfected, it is the constant use when the
Sessions is ended, for the Commissioners to go home, and for the Cleark of the
Sewers a week, or a fortnight after to ingrosse the Decrees in Parchment, and
then to ride unto the Commissioners houses that made the Decrees, to get their
Hands and Seals; and having such a number as the Law requires, being fix, the
Clerk does not trouble himself to ride over the whole Country to have every
Commissioners hand that made the Decree; nor is it necessary for all to sign,
it is enough that their names in the body of the Decree do show it to be their
Act. And if one man, or more, should dissent, they are included by the major
part, so that the major part be a number warranted by the Statute: If any doubt
be made of this, we do undertake to prove it all.

2. They say, The Earl did bribe the King and his Lords, to take away their
Fens.

We answer, That the Earl might dispose of his Lands as he pleased, whether he
gave them, or sold them, I conceive concerns not the drayning, nor those that
adventured with the Earl, if any injustice was done for bribes, let that
appear, and let them that did it answer for it.

3. They say, The Earl did drain these Fens by Prerogative Power, by the Kings
Letters, and by the Lords Orders.

We answer: That the Earl and we do claim our Interest by the Laws of
Sewers, as by the Decrees before you is proved, and do disclaim all Title, or
Right, by any Prerogative Power, and do say that the Kings Letters did only
excite the Commissioners to proceed in a public good work, which was his
duty, as it now is the Parliaments, to further such a beneficial undertaking,
to enrich the State; and we say those Letters did but recommend the Earl to be
the undertaker, but did not injoyne the Commissioners to accept him. We further
say, that by the date of all the Lords orders, those from the Star Chamber,
from the Councell-Table, and lastly, from the Parliament, it does appear that
no such order These Orders were after the Earl had possession.
was used by the Earl to procure the drayning, but to preserve the works
doing, and done. The first order was long after the work was begun, and others
after the Earl had possession, to preserve Corn from being destroyed, and
houses from being pulled down, and to deter such rioters. See the Orders and
the Letters, and observe their Dates.
By all this, we conceive it is clear, that the Earl did not force the
Country to consent to draining, by Prerogative Power, as is alleged.

4. They say, the old Commissioners of the Country were put out, and strangers
put into Commission.

We answer: That the Commission used of course to be renewed every three, or
five years: And it was at the Lord Keepers pleasure to change the
Commissioners: And it was just and reasonable to put the chief of the Drayners
into the Commission, who were become a part of the Country by that interest:
And we further say, that the Lord Keeper might be informed by the Earl, that
some eminent men of the Country, who at first did seek to advance this work,
were turned against it, because they could not have such shar^s in the
adventure with the Earl as they desired, or for some other private grudge,
which we conceive a just cause for the Lord Keeper to leave out such as would
hinder a public good for private ends: And we further say, that it is likely
that some did desire to be put out for their own case, which is very usual;
however, it is evident, there was no evil intended by altering the Commission,
because there are above two hundred able and sufficient Gentlemen (most) of
that Country in the Commission, See the names in the Commission.
by which authority, the Earls contract was made with the Country; and but two
strangers, who could not overruled that great number, to prejudice their own
Country by any unjust act.

5. They say that the Drayners were Parties and Judges.

We answer: That when the Tax of 13s. 4d. was laid on every acre drowned, there
could be no parties, because the Earl had no interest, nor at making the
contract of 24000 acres, until it was made, the Earl had no interest; and
then, of them that did make that contract between the Country and the Earl,
there was only two that had any relation to the Earl; for the now Lord Cobham,
Sir Edward Heron, and Mr. William Langton, did some years after his Decree,
become purchasers of their own Fens, at 40s. an Acre, at which price those
lands were publicly offered to any of the Country to adventure for, and only
these three Gentlemen did think those drowned lands to be so much worth in
those days. The dates of these three Gentlemen's deeds will show how long after
the contract they became Purchasers, and therefore cannot be justly called
Judges and Parties at the making of the Contract, or laying the Tax three
years before the Contract was made: Nor can Sir Peregrine Bartu, nor Mr.
Long's sitting on the Bench, (who were the only two that were afterward
concerned in the Earls interest) be reasonably thought to overruled the other
thirty Commissioners that did make the Decree of Contract, See the Law of the
Contract.
where the words are that no one man did dissent.

6. They say, That the Fens in question were not drowned, and therefore did
need no drayning.

We answer: That by several Records of that County now in Court, it appears
that the Fens in question have been ever hurtfully surrounded with waters; and
that it has bin for some hundreds of years the constant endeavors of the
Commissioners of that Country, and of many other eminent men, See the Books.
to have drayned the same Fens, in the same manner, and by new works in the
same places where the Earl has made his Draynes; It does also appear by our
adversaries books lately printed, and distributed to the Members in Parliament,
that a little before the Earls undertaking, the Country did proffer Sir
Anthony Thomas, and Sir William Aylisse, a fifth part to drayne these very Fens
in question, and that they demanded a fourth part, by which it appears that
these Fens were drowned, and that the Country did desire to have them drayned,
and was sufficient argument to persuade the Earl to undertake the work, and
therefore no Project, and may satisfy all indifferent men, that the Earl had
no Prerogative Power, nor needed any; nor Lords Orders to force the Country to
a compliance with him: See their printed Books.
It also appears by our adversaries other printed books, distributed to the
Members of Parliament, that our opposers themselves do desire to become
drayners of the Fens in question, by all which, it is evident that these Fens
did require drayning.

7. They say, That if the Fens did need to be drayned, yet not by such
Malignants as we.

We answer: That when we became Drayners, there was no cause to call us so, and
we were fit to be drayners, because in those days none in the Country did
understand the Art of drayning, which is evident by the unusefull drayns of the
Country, before the Earls undertaking, and by their wilful and ignorant
cleansing of their old crooked draynes this last year, hoping by so doing, to
have showed the world that our works were needless, to which end they have to
this day damned up the Earls great Rivers, and by so doing, have now drowned
all the Fens, to the great damage and discontent of the Country, as appears by
the presentiments of Sewers this last Summer, in which those dams are presented
as common nusances, and are ordered to be taken up, but yet do still remain,
and do keep the Fens drowned, by which it seems our opposers did not
formerly, nor do yet understand drayning, and therefore not so fit to be
Drayners as the Earl, See the Presentiments in Court.
by whose works the Fens were kept dry, until they maliciously destroyed them,
on purpose to drown what he had drayned.

8. They say, The Earl did undertake the work against the Countries consent.

We answer, That the Contract was made by 32. Commissioners, many of them Lords
and owners of the said Fens, and this at a public Session of Sewers in
Sleaford, in the presence of many thousands of the people, all hearing the
Contract debated openly in the Church, because the great Hall could not receive
the Assembly, and the people did express much joy to have the Earl undertake
it, and did unanimously work in his Drayns, See the several Pettions from the
Country in the Drayners behalf which lie before you in Court.
and hereby enriched themselves, nor was here any appearing dissent in the
Country, until our Adversaries persuaded them, that they might have all the
Earls Lands for asking.

9. They say, The Earl did take the best Land, and left the worst for the
Country.

We answer, That by the Map it will appear, that the Earl has allotted to him
that Land which was worst, the lowest, and most drowned, the very Pan of all the
Fens, and lies most remote from all the Towns, so that if those Lands that
were worst, be now become best, it is a good evidence, that the Earl has done
his work well; for the truth is, those worst Lands which were ever drowned
before the drayning, are by our works made good winter Corn Lands; And yet to
let the world see how unjust this complaint is, the Earl did offer the Country
to exchange all his Lands for so much of theirs; and they refused it, at a full
hearing in the Lords house. The truth is, that the wit of man cannot set out
the Earls proportion in any other place so profitable for the Country.

10. They say, That the Fens between Bourne and Kime-eae are the worse for
drayning.

We answer, That those Fens are improved by drayning from 2 s, 3 s, 4 s, an
Acre, to 8 s, 10 s, and 13 s. the Acre, as appears by testimony before this
committee. We say also, that the Earl did at a hearing in the Lords house,
offer the Country to become Tenant to the Country for all the remaining Common,
at 10 s. the Acre, which they refused, and by all Records, as well as by
several testimonies it appears, thoso Fens were not worth a forth part so much
before the draining; therefore now improved to the great advantage of the
Country.

11. They say, That Kesteven side is drowned by the bank of our great River,
which does secure our own Lands, and thrusts up the waters on the Land left
unto the Country.

We answer, That if Kesteven side, or any other Fens in the Earls Level, do
lie forty days under water, the Country may re-enter on all his Lands, for not
performing his Contract with them. And for the bank of the complained of, it is
true, that when that River is full upon great sudden Floods, that bank does
thrust up the waters upon the edges of the Commons next to the River, more or
less, as the Floods do happen, but when the I'ide turns, within few hours,
that water is carried off again; but suppose the waters should upon very great
Floods in winter, be thrust up by this bank over half the Commons on Kesteven
side, for some hours, or some few days, 'twere no harm to the Commons, nor
breach of Contract in the Earl, unless the whole Commons do lie forty days
under water, then we confess they may re-enter, and we do refer our selves to
the Earls Contract for this particular; It is worth the noting: that they say,
this bank, complained of, does preserve our own Lands dry, winter and summer
against all Floods (and we acknowledge it does so) and do answer, that all
Holland Fens, which do all lie behind our lands, are as well secured by this
bank, complained of, as our own Lands are, for when the waters shall break over
this bank, it must run over all our Lands before it can come into Holland Fens;
so that those of Holland, who are our chief opposers, ought not to complain;
nor have those of Kesteven any cause, since we have performed our Contract with
them; and over performed it with those of Holland: But the business is, they
do all grudge to see the Drayners Lands bear winter Corn, and Rape-seed,
Hemp, and Flax, and will not allow us to improve our enclosed Lands above the
Commons, which is very unjust, for it those of Kesteven side do please, they
may enclose one half of their Commons into small parcels as the Drayners have
done; and those of Holland may inlose all their Commons, and be as dry as our
Lands are, but this subdivision of their Commons is no part of the Earls
Contract; we desire the Contract may be strictly observed, and it will appear
that the Earl has overdone his work, rather then been short in any part of
it; and no man injured by it, but those that complain most have most benefit.

12. They say, That the Earls banks do cut off the ancient Sewers of the
Country, which otherwise would have drayned their Fens.

We answer, That if their old Drayns could have drayned them, how came the
Country to lie drowned, so many hundreds of years? and how came we to find so
many Records extant, that show several attempts to have drayned the Fens in
question, by new works, if their old Draynes would have done the work? We do
acknowledge, that our great River does cut off all those old country Drayns, on
Kesteven side; which ever did, and still do bring down the rain waters from
the high Country into the Fens, by which the Fens were always drowned, and by
our taking of those waters into our River, we carry them into the Sea, which
formerly did lie most part of the year on the Fens, because they had no
sufficient vent by the old out-fals; and by this means only were those Fens
capable of being drayned (as by the Map appears) so that we have cut off their
old Drayns which did drown the Fens, but not meddle with their old Drayns,
which did drayn them as they pretend: for by their old out-fals to the Sea,
they could only drayn, and all those old Drayns, and out-fals to the Sea, do
lie behind the banks complained of, and behind all our enclosed Lands on
Holland side; and we have not cut off those old Draynes, nor out-fals to the
Sea, but have left them for the use of Holland Severals: and that the world may
see how unjust this complaint is, we will prove, that the current of waters,
which did formerly run by their old Drayns, through Holland's Severals to the
Sea, do now run backwards into our Drayns, and we do carry those waters by
our Rivers into the Sea another way; by which it is clear, that our Drayns are
of use, and their old Drayns are of no use. And by this it is also clear, that
the Lands allotted to us, are the lowest Lands in the Level; because both from
Kesteven side, and from Holland side, the waters do run into our Rivers, and
by them into the Sea. And by this also it appears, that the Earls 14000.
Acres, being the lowest, were the most drowned, and so the worst, before the
drayning; and now the said Lands bearing good winter Corn, it is as evident that
the Earl has done a good work, and performed his Contract fully, when that
which was worst of the Fens, is made the best by him: and that Holland Fens are
as well drayned as his own, so that two parts of three, See the Contract.
is better drayned, then by his Contract he was obliged, and Kesteven being the
other third part, is as well as art can make it, and as well drayned, as by his
Contract he was bound to do.

13. They say, That the Earl took possession by force of Arms, and kept his
possession by Troops of Horse, and great Guns, and by murdering the people.

We answer, That we have proved our coming peaceably into possession, by
authority of a Decree of Sewers; and that we did build, plow, In all the time
of Mr. Ellis his Committee, our Adversaries do not once mention our taking
possession by force, and if any force were, 'twas to keep the possession at our
ejection: as by the date of the year appears by their own proofs.
and reap two years crops quietly, and part of the third summer crop also, in
all which time, there were neither Troops, or Guns used, or any man slain: we
have also proved, that our houses were pulled down, our Corn burned, our
Draynes spoiled, our Tenants thrown out, and our possession taken from us by
violence, while we made no resistance, For while my house was pulled down, the
Sheriff and a Justice of peace looked on, and did use entreaties, but no
force, to make the riotters desist. What was done by Sir Edward Heron when he
was high Sheriff, I know not, for we were then driven out of the Country, only
I have seen several orders from the Parliament, to require him to quiet our
possession, and I believe, by his place he might call aid to assist him, for
preserving the peace of the Country, which our adversaries now call a force:
Nor do I know what happened by Troops in the following war, which was after
our being ejected. I do undertake to prove, that my brass Gun, so much talked
of, was a raritle made by my Father, which I did for many years remove from
house to house, where ever I dwelt, as an ornament to stand in my Hall. I also
say, that my self was out of the Country, when my house was pulled down, and
never since have seen the place it stood on, till this last Summer 1649.

14. They say, That the Commoners were imprisoned by the Lords Orders.

We answer: That when any of the Commoners were indicted for riots, proved
before the Commissioners on oaths, that the Jurie did still acquit them, which
did encourage those ill affected, to hire some poor man to cut the Earls
draines, by which, in one night great quantities of Corn was drowned: To
prevent this evil, the Earl was constrained to petition the Lords, and to
seek a speedier remedy then to sue a poor man not worth a groat, for a 1000l.
damage, during which suit the evil would still be acted by others.

15. They say, That the Country was denied the benefit of the law, by the
Earls Privilege of Parliament.

We answer: That in the days of the Lords House, the Earl had such a
Privilege, and yet he did decline his Privilege, and submit to the judgment
of a Committee of this Honorable House, and while the cause did depend in
hearing before them, he was thrown out of his right by those who now complain
against us, which was a higher contempt against this Parliament, than ever was
done before to a Parliament, and a mighty oppression upon us by our adversaries.

16. They say, That this Parliament has declared against the drayning of Fens,
as a grievance to the Commonwealth.

We answer: That we believe it is a mistake in our adversaries, and that if
there be such a Declaration, it was on some other Fens, and on misinformation,
or before they were fully informed what great benefit the State would receive
by drayning, as appears by their subsequent Act for the settling of Bedford
level, in the preamble of which Act, they recite what benefit the
Commonwealth receives by draining.

17. They say that Sir Robert Barkham's case was judged in Parliament against
me.

We answer: That Sir Robert Barkham's case concerns Sir Anthony Thomas his
level, and is for his ancient enclosed severalls on the title of melioration,
and is in no kind agreeing with our case in question; for we claim only
commons, and have not touched any severalls, nor yet demanded any meliorations,
though they be due unto us.

18. They say the Earl and his Participants have drained the dry Fens toward
Bourne, and not meddled with the drowned Fens toward Lincoln.

We answer: That the Earl has drayned above one half of his Level, and
according to his contract, had 14000 acres set out by the Commissioners, that
he might, by re-imbursing part of his money, be enabled to go through with
his whole undertaking; but the Country having by force taken the 14000 acres
from him, how is he able to go on with his work? They beat us out of the
Country, and now complain that we do not finish our work: And yet in this too
they are mistaken in what they say; for the Earl has made his Sluices, and his
Rivers, at the out-fall of a double capacity, for his first level from
Bourne, on purpose to receive and carry off the waters of the second level
from Lincoln, so that a great part of that second work is done, which they
understand not, that say the Earl has not begun his works toward Lincoln.
There is also a forty foot Drayn of 8 miles long, made with a particular Sluice
to it for the level toward Lincoln, and two 15 foot drains more for the same
level to Lincoln.

19. They say, That the Country was defrauded by the Commissioners, who sold
the Earl too much land by his Contract.

We answer: Note that the whole Land found hurtfully surrounded in this Level,
is 71000. acres, so that the Earls 24000. acres is a just third part.
That the Fens in question, were before the draining, worth but 40s. an acre,
and so the Earl sold those lands at the time to all that would buy of him: And
we say, that if by our labor, charge, and hazard, the same land be now worth
ten pound an acre, they do complain unjustly, and may by this rule, value a
ship returned from the East Indies; at the rate it was set out, which were a
good way to overthrow all industry in a Commonwealth.

20. They say, That the Earl has taken more land then was allotted him.

We answer: That our Lands were set out by sworn Surveyors, and we desire that
they may be new surveyd, so that those men will bear the charge, if they have
without cause complained.

21. They say, That the Earl has exchanged certain Lands, which the Country
will not allow of.

We answer: That those exchanges were made by a Commission of Sewers, and is
rather a benefit to the Country, then a prejudice, and only some do in a
peevish humor dislike it: But if no reason will satisfy them, the lands shall
be re-exchanged.

22. They object, That the Drayners have sought against the Parliament.

We answer, That many Participants with the Earl of Lindesey have not fought
against the Parliament: and those that have, are now admitted to composition,
and by that to grace and; so that our actions in the War (being not now in
question) ought to be forgot, and our behavior since only to be looked on: But
our Adversaries urge our delinquency, as if that were a sufficient argument to
deny us justice, in which the Honor of the Parliament is more concerned, then
we in profit. This Objection puts me in mind on a old Proverb, That there is
more confidence to be put in a reconciled Enemy, thon in a disaffected Friend.

23. They say, That my Father Sir Robert Killigrew did by his Will dispose of
200. Acres of these Fens unto his younger Sons, before the work was begun.

I answer, That this Objection is a mistake, for by his Will there is none of
these Lands disposed.

24. They say, That I was nominated an undertaker with the Earl, and did
relinguish my right.

I answer, That it was as lawful for me to be an undertaker, as for any man:
and I was by reason of my Fathers sickness made undertaker in his right; and
until my Fathers death, I never saw Lincolne-shire; when the Earl did some
years after desire me to relinguish my title of being Drayner, that his
Lordship might be sole Drayner, as a person most acceptable to the Country, by
which I hope I have committed no crime.

25. It has been also objected, that the Countess of Exceter has the Brovage
on many of the Fens in question, and does conceive her interest to be
prejudiced by the drayning.

We answer: That those Fens on which she has Brovage, are improved to a treble
value by the drayning, and consequently her Brovage is so too: But to avoid all
disputes, let the Countess show what profit her self, or her predecessors
have ever made by the Brovage, and we will be liable to make her an increase of
profit, that she may have benefit by the drayning.

26. It has been also objected, that the Earl did give to Mr. Robert Long
500l. a year to manage his work.

We answer: That if the Earl had given him a 1000l. a year, his pains and
care might deserve it: But if that Gentleman have committed any errors in
ordering the business, let them be proved; or if he have injured any man in
his management of this drayning, let the drayners Estates make satisfaction:
But let not our opposers lay his particular actions to our charge, that had no
hand in the ordering of the business. I say this, because my self am often
named, as if I had directed all the proceedings concerning this work, who did
never look after it until now, that want of bread made me search into the old
papers, that showed me the Earls proceedings at the first Committee, before
the war begun; and from those papers I have what I do know of this business.

27. They do further say, that the Earl did smother a Verdict, by which the
Jury found that the Fens in question were not surrounded.

We answer: That the Verdict which they mention, was six years before the
Earls undertaking began, and the next day after, the Commissioners had laid a
Tax of ten shillings the acre on the said Fens, and at the instant time when
the Commissioners were in treaty with Sir Anthony Thomas, and Sir William
Aylisse, to undertake the drayning; so that it is evident this Verdict was a
practice by some private interested parties, to interrupt that Treaty, and no
way concerned the Earl of Lindsey, who many years after did become Drayner. We
leave it to the judgment of judicious men, whether that Jury might not as well
have returneda Verdict, that the Sun never shined in England, as that the Fens
between the Rivers of Gleane and Witham, were not surrounded, when so many
Records in Court do show those Fens to have been many hundred years hurtfully
surrounded, and the endeavors of all Ages to get them drayned, which the Earl
has now done in perfection, beyond all works of this kind in this Nation.

As to the many printed papers of our Adversaries concerning this work of
drayning, they are so full of malice, and impertinencies, that I rest confident
in the judgments of all prudent men, they carry their answers with them, and
therefore I have not considered them.

What benefit the Commonwealth receives by this drayning
1 THe Commonwealth will receive all the benefit by the Earl of Lindseys
draining, that it receives by the Earl of Bedfords drayning, and does merit an
Act to settle it equal with Bedford Level, and we desire it on the same
terms; in which Act there is provision made for all grievances immaginable.

2 The State will receive present benefit, by the increase of the Customs, to
many thousands pounds a year, when these new Plantations are settled.

3 Thirdly, when the 14000 acres belonging to the drainers shall be employed
for Corn, The City of London will not be forced (as it now is) to send 300000
li. a year out of the land to buy in Corn.

4. In perfecting of the works, and in husbandry, when all is finished many
thousands of poor people will be employed, and several Manufactures be set up,
by using Flax, and making of linen Cloth.

5. The State will receive honor by improving so much useless ground to so
great profit; and by doing justice to the Drayners who have ruined there own
Estates, by bringing benefit to the State.

The Drayners humble desires.
1. THe Drayners do humbly desire, that personal recriminations may not
prejudice their just title to the Fens.

2. That since the Parliament has admitted us to composition, and by that to
grace and, we hope our actions in war will be forgot, and our behavior since
only looked on, as in other men's cases, in like condition.

3. We humbly desire, that those few men who do oppose us, and have not
authority from the major part of the Country to hold up this contest against
us, may be looked on as ungrateful persons, because the most violent of them
are those that have destroyed the wealth of the land, that have against al law
and equity, ruined our works, pulled down our houses, and burned our Corn,
while this suit depended before a Committee of this Parliament: and this done
in contempt of the Speakers Letter, which was read, while my house was pulling
down, as is proved by testimony.

4. I say, that the chief of our opposers be those rich men whom the poor
Commoners do petition against, for over stocking their Commons, and do oppose
us that they may still oppress the poor Commonners.

5. We desire that they may be looked on as men, that ever have, and still do
decline the justice of this Committee, and Parliament, as appears by their many
Petitions, to leave them to law Courts, when they know the Parliament is the
only competent Judge of the case in question and our Decrees not reversable but
in Parliament.

6. That they may be looked on as men that do abuse the trust reposed in them,
by those of the Country, who do employ them with false reports of their
proceedings at the Committee, and do seek private interest under color of a
public good; their main design being to out us that have done the work, and
to become Drayners themselves, who have drowned the Fens at this day, as
appears by the last summers presentiments now before you.

7. The Drayners do humbly desire, that if it should have happened, that any
miscarriage in the Earls overseers of his work, or if there should have been
any mistake of a word in law, that may make our title a mote point, that for
this, all we who are adventurers and purchasers with the Earl of Lindesey, may
not on so nice a point be utterly ruined, with our whole families, after the
expense of 80000 l. by which the Commonwealth is much enriched.

8. We humbly desire, that if any man have received prejudice by the drayning,
or any been injured by the Drayners, or their Agents; that such injuries may be
proyed, and we do submit to make such satisfaction as this Committee, or the
Parliament shall appoint.

9. We do also humbly desire the like justice and satisfaction from those that
have destroyed us and our works, by such unexampled ryots: I may say, by such
ingratitude and so barbarous a malice, that no civilized nation can parallel;
and it is worthy consideration, that if multitudes of men shall be suffered to
pull down houses at their wills, which were erected by the authority of a Decree
of Sewers, they may do as much against a Decree of Chancery, and then where is
our property so much talked of.

10. We humbly desire, that Sir Iohu Maynard may be considered as a man that
has no interest in those Fens now in question, but does oppose us, in hope
after our overthrow, if this design take effect, to repeal Bedford Act, but we
do hope the Commonwealths good, will be preferred before his private designs;
and that an Act of Parliament will not be so easily blown away by him.

11. And whereas some men do say, That the Drayners are much enriched by this
work.. I do acknowledge that my self has the greatest share of all the
Participants; and I do only desire to pay my just debt due before this war
began, to provide for my Wife and Children in a very moderate way, and to have
but two hundred pounds a yea^ for myself; If any man, that envize my estate
will do this, I will quit all my interest in the Fens, to him, and whatever
else I have in England; and account him the best friend I ever met with.

12. And lastly, We humbly desire, that we may be restored to our possessions
in those Fens between Bourne and Kime-eae, and set in the same condition we
were, when the first complaint was preferred to the Parliament: and that the
Earls undertaking may be confirmed by an Act of Parliament, as in justice it
should be; we having as much meritted an Act as Bedford Level, or any other,
which has from time to time been confirmed by former Parliaments.

W. KILLIGREVV.

Postscript.
IN the fifth Objection they say Some of the Commissioners were parties and
Judges, because they did purchase land of the Earl some years after his
Contract was made.

By this Rule, if any Member of this Parliament shall (now after Bedford Act is
passed) adventure any money for land in that Level, our Adversaries may as
well say, that such adventurers were Parties and Judges, who did design to
become adventurers before they made the Act: which is just the case of our few
Commissioners here complained of.

FINIS.

