Tam Marti, Quam Mercurio.

The Ho. ble and learned Knight

Sr. Walter Raseigh.

To Vaughan (...)



SIR WALTER RALEIGH'S OBSERVATIONS, TOUCHING Trade and Commerce with the
HOLLANDER, and other Nations, as it was presented to K. JAMES.

Wherein is proved, that our Sea and Land Commodities serve to enrich and
strengthen other Countries against our own.

With other Passages of high Concernment.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to be sold by WILLIAM SHEERES, at the sign of
the 3 (...), over against the North door of S. (...), 1653.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
Reader:
THou have here presented to thy view, a most rare and excellent Piece, both
for judgment and experience, by a most incomparable hand, showing the
commodities of all Christian Nations, their Traffic with one another,
together with their several Merchandises, as also the value of their several
Coins. It was in the beginning of K. James his time presented un^o him, and
being at that time laid aside, in regard of more urgent affairs, it was (after
diverse years) again presented; but though then wanting a good prosecutor, the
Author being taken away by death, it was carefully preserved by the hands of a
very learned Gentleman, my singular good friend, until this time: Who
esteeming very highly of so rich a Jewel as this, was very hardly persuaded to
suffer the same to be exposed to public view. But by my extraordinary
solicitation, and for that I was very sorry the World should be deprived of so
excellent a Piece, and for the benefit of this Nation, in regard of the (...)
Commodities for Trade and Traffic, which other Countries want, and do receive
from us, as also what benefit our own Merchants might make, to their more far
advantage, and to the setting many thousands of our poor people on work, he was
the more willingly induced to hearken to divulging of the same. Wherein what
benefit thou shall find from hence (which I know to be exceeding great) thou
must assuredly acknowledge the same to proceed from him who has so freely
imparted it to thee for thy great benefit and satisfaction. Let me entreat thee
therefore (good Reader) to peruse it over, and I doubt not but thou shall find
extraordinary profit and contentment. And in the perusal whereof, consider
likewise with thy self, what an innumerable benefit might have been raised
since these few Observations were presented, had they been carefully put in
execution, for the great good, and infinitely enriching of this Nation, the
mighty increase of Shipping and M^rriners; the neglect of which, or the like
good observations, has been the occasion of the height of other petty States,
and the impoverishing of our own, as sad experience tells us.

As also what infinite vast sums of Treasure has been gained by S^rangers
fishing upon our Coasts, which Fish has been carried all the world over, as
also diverse other of our Land-commodities, to the great enriching of them that
have none of their own, and a great scan^ll to our Nation, so that scarce the
name of our own commodites is attributed unto us. I heartily wish, that those
who govern our Stern would but take notice hereof, and accordingly apply such
wholesome remedies as their Wisdoms should think meet, for prevention of so far
grown a mischief, and for the future to hearken to these or the like
Directions, which would make our Nation infinitely flourish, and abate the
insolences of such as have been sheltred and grown rich and potent by the
only means of this Nation. Thus (gentle Reader) desiring, and heartily wishing
the good and welfare of my Country, I have sent this s^ all Piece (though
great in worth) into the World, for thy benefit, wishing thee to accept it with
as good a heart as it is presented, by him who is Thine to serve thee. T. H.

May it please your most excellent Majesty.
ACcording to my ^ie, I am imboldned (...) yourMajesty in mind, that about
fourteen or fifteen years ^ast, I presented you a Book of such extraordinary
importance, for honor and profit of your Majesty and posterity, and doubting
that it has been laid asid^ and not considered of, I am encouraged (under your
Majesty's pardon) to present unto you one more, consisting of five
propositions, neither are they grounded upon vain or idle grounds, but upon
the fruition of those wonderful blessings, wherewith God has endued your
Majesty's Sea and Land; by which means, you may not only enrich and fill your
Coffers, but also increase such might and strength (as shall appear, if it may
stand with your Majesty's good liking to put the same in execution in the true
and right form:) so that there is no doubt but it will make you in short time
a Prince of such power so great, as shall make all the Princes your neighbors,
as well glad of your friendship, as fearful to offend you. That this is so, I
humbly desire that your Majesty will vouchsafe to peruse this advertisement
with that care and judgment which God has given you.

Most humbly praying your Majesty, that whereas I presented these five
Propositions together, as in their own natures, (...) depending one of another,
and so linked together, as the distraction of any one will be an apparent maim
and disabling to the rest. That your Majesty would be pleased that they may not
be separated, but all handled together jointly and severally by Commissioners,
with as much speed and secrecy as can be, and made fit to be reported to your
Majesty, whereby I may be the better able to perform to your Highness that
which I have promised and will perform upon my life, if I be not prevented by
some that may seek to hinder the honor and profit of your Majesty for their
own private ends.

THe true ground, course, and form herein mentioned shall app^are how other
Countries make themselves powersull and rich in all kinds, by Merchandise,
Manufactory, and sulnesse of Trade, having no Commodities in their own Country
growing to do it withal.

And herein likewise shall appear how easy it is to draw the wealth and
strength of other Countries to your Kingdom, and what royal, rich, and
plentiful means God has given this Land to do it (which cannot be denied) for
support of trafficque and continual employment of your People for replenishing
of your Majesty's Coffers.

And if I were not fully assured to improve your native Commodities, with other
traffic, three millions of pounds more yearly then now they are, and to bring
not only to your Majesty's Coffers within the space of two or three years near
two millions of pounds; but to increase your Revenues many thousands yearly,
and to please and greatly profit your people, I would not have undertaken so
great a work: All which will grow by advancement of all kind of Merchandising to
the uttermost, thereby to bring Manufactory into the Kingdom, and to set on
work all sorts of people in the Realm, as other Nations do, which raise their
greatness by the abundance of your native commodities: whilst we are parling
and disputing whether it be good for us or not.

May it please your most excellent Majesty.
I Have diligently in my Travels observed how the Countries herein mentioned
do grow potent with abundance of all things to serve themselves and other
Nations, where nothing grows, and that their never dried fountains of wealth,
by which they raise their estate to such an admirable height, as that they are
at this day even a wonder to the world, proceedth from your (...) Seas and
Lands.

I thus moved, began to dive into the depth of their policies and circumventing
(...), wh^reby they drain and still covet to exhaust the wealth and coin of
this Kingdom, and so with our own commodities to weaken us, and finally beat
us quite out of trading in other Countries; I found that they more fully
obtained these their purposes by their convenient privileges, and settled
constitutions, then England with all the Laws, and superabundance of hombred
commodities which God has vouchsafed your Sea and Land: And these, and other
mentioned in this book, are the urgent causes that provoked me in my love and
bounden duty to (...) and my Country, to addr^sse my former Books to your
princely hands and consiideration.

By which Privileges they draw multitudes of Merchants to Trade with them, and
many other Nations to inhabit amongst them, which makes them p^pulous, and
there they make Storehouses of all foreign Commodities, where with upon every
occasion of scarcity and dearth, they are able to furnish foreign Countries
with plenty of those (...), which before in time of plenty they engrossed, and
brought home from the same places, which does greatly augment power and treasure
to their State, besides the common good in setting their poor and people on
work.

To which privileges they add smailnesse of custom, and lib^rty of Trade,
which makes them flourish, and their Country so plentiful of all kind of
Coin and Commodities, where little or nothing grows, and their Merchants so
flourish, that when a loss comes they scarce feel it.

To bring this to pass, they have many advantages of us, the one is, by their
fashioned Ships called Boye^s, Hoybarks, Hoyes, and others, that are made to
hold great bulk of Merchandise, and to sail with a few men for profit: For
example, though a English Ship of two hundred Tuns, and a Holland Ship, or any
other of the petty States of the same burden be at Danske, or any other place
beyond the Seas, or in England, they do serve the Merchant better cheap by one
hundred pounds in his freight, than we can, by reason he has but nine or ten
Mariners, and we near thirty; thus he saves twenty men's meat and wages in a
voyage, and so in all other their ships, according to their burden, by which
means they are fraighted wheresoever they come, to great profit, whilst our
Ships ly still and decay, or go to Newcastle for Coals.

Of this their smallness of custom inwards and outward, we have daily
experience; for if two (...) ships, or two of any other Nation be at Bordeaux,
both laden with wine of three hundred Tuns a p^ce, the one bound for Holland,
or any other petty States, the other for (...), the Merchant shall p^y about
nine hundred pound custom here, and other duties, when the other in Holland,
or any other petty States, shall be cleared for less then fifty pound, and so
in all other wares and (...) accordingly, which draw^s all Nations to traffic
with them; and although it seems but small duties which they receiv^, yet the
multitudes of all kind of Commodities and Coin that is brought in by (...) and
others, and carried out by themselves and others, is so great, that they
receive more custom and du^ies to the State, by the greatness of their
commerce in one year, then England does in two years; for the one hundredth
part of Commoditi^s are not spent in Holland, but vented into other Countries,
which makes all the Country Merchants, to buy and s^ll, and increase Ships
and (...) to transport them.

My travells and meaning is not to diminish (neither has been) your Majesty's
Revenues, but exceedingly to increase them, as shall appear, and yet please
the people, as in other parts they do.

Notwithstanding, their Excises brings them in great Revenues, yet whosoever
will adventure to (...) but for six Tuns of Wine, shall be free of Excise in
his own house all the year long; and this is done of pu^pose to annimate and
increase M^rchants in their Country.

And if it happen that a Trade bestopped by any foreign Nation, which they
heretofore (...) had, or (...) of any good Trading which they never had, they
will hinder others, and s^ek either by favor, money, or force, to (...) the
gap of Traffic for advancement of Trade amongst themselves, and employment of
their people.

And when there is a new course or Trade erected, they give free custom
inwards and outward, for the better maintenance of Navigation, and
encouragement of the people to that business.

Thus they and others gleane the wealth and strength from us to themselves, and
these reasons following procures them this advantage of us.

1. The Merchant Staplers which make all things in abundance. by reason of
their Storehouses continually replenished with all kind of Commodities. 2.
The liberty of free Traffic for strangers to buy and sell in Holland, and
other Countries and States, as if they were freeborn, makes great
int^rcourse. 3. The small duties levied upon Merchants, draws all Nations to
trade with them. 4. Their fashioned Ships continually fraighted before ours by
reason of their few Mariners, and great bulk, serving the Merchant cheap. 5.
Their forwardness to further all manner of trading. 6. Their wonderful
employment of their Busses for fishing, and the great returns they make. 7.
Their giving free Custom inwards and outward, for any new erect^d Trade, by
means whereof they have gotten already almost the sole Trade into their hands.
All Nations may buy and sell freely in France, and there is free custom
outward twice or thrice in a year, at which time our Merchants themselves do
make their great sales of English Commodities, and do buy and lade their great
bulk of French Commodities to serve for the whole year; and in Rochell, in
France, and in Britain, free custom all the year long, except some small
Toll, which makes great Traffic, and makes them flor^sh,

In Denmark to inc^urage and enrich the Merchants, and to increase Ships and
Mariners, free custom all the year long for their own Merchants, except one
M^neth between Bartholomew tide and Micha^lmass.

The Haunce Towns have advantage of us, as Holland, and other petty States
have, and in most things imitate them, which makes them exceeding rich and
plentiful of all kind of Commodities and Coin, and so strong in ships and
Mariners, that some of their Towns have near one thousand sail of Ships

The Marchandiz^s of France, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Turkey, East and West
Indies, are transported most by the Hollanders and other petty States into the
East and North-East K^ngdomes of Pomerland, Spruceland, Poland, Denmark,
Sweathland, Leisland, and Germany, and the Merchandises brought from the last
mentioned Kingdoms, being wonderful many, are likewise by the Holland^rs and
other petty States most transported into the Southern and Western Dominions,
and yet the situation of E^gland lies far better for a Storehouse to serve the
Southern East and North-East Regions, than theirs does, and has far better
means to do it, if we will bend our course for it.

No sooner a dearth of F^sh, Wine, or Corn here, and other Merchandise, (...)
forth with the Embdoners, Hamburgers, and Hollanders, out of their Storehouses
lade fifty, or one hundred ships, or more, dispersing themselves round about
this Kingdom, and carry away great store of coin and wealth for little
commodity in those times of dearth, by which means they suck our Commonwealth
of their riches, cut down our Merchants, and decay our Navigation, not with
their natural commodities which grows in their own Countries, but the
Merchandises of other Countries and Kingdoms.

Therefore it is far more easier to serve themselves, hold up our Merchants,
and increase our Ships and (...), and strengthen the Kingdom, and not only
keep our money in our own R^alme, which other Nations still rob us of, but
bring in theirs who carry ours away, and make the bank of Coin and
Storehouse to serve other Nations as well and far better cheap than they.

Amsterdam is never without seven hundred thousand Quarters of Corn, besid^s
the plenty they daily vent, and none of this grows in their own Country: a
dearth in England, France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, and other places, is truly
observed to enrich Holland seven years after, and likewise the petty States.

For example, the last Dearth six years p^st, the Hamburgers, Embdeners, and
Hollanders out of their Storehouses furnished this Kingdom, and from
Southampton, Exeter, and Bristow, in a year and a half they carri^d away near
two hundred thousand p^unds from these parts only; then what great quantity
of coyns was transported round about your Kingdom from every Port Town, and
from your City of London, and other Cities cannot be esteemed so little as two
millions, to the great decay of your Kingdom, and impoverishing your people,
discredit to the Company of Merchants, and dishonor to the Land, that any
Nation that have no Corn in their own Country growing, should serve this
famous Kingdom, which God has so enabled within it self.

They have a continual Trade into this Kingdom with five or six hundred Ships
yearly, with Merchandises of other Countries and Kingdoms, and store them up
in store-hous^s here until the prices rise to their minds, and we trade not
with fif^ ships into their Country in a year, and (...) said number are about
thi^ R^ every (...) wind for the most ^rt to lade Coals and other (...).

Unless there be a scarcity (...) dearth, or high prices, all Merchants do
forbear that place wh^re great impositions are laid upon the Merchandise, and
those places slenderly shipp^d, ill serv^d and at deer ra es, and oftentimes in
scarci^y, and want employment for the people; and those petty States finding
truly by experience that small duti^ imposed upon M^rchandize draw^th all
Traffic unto them, and free liberty for strangers to buy and sell does make
continua'l Mart; therefore what Excizes or Impositions are laid upon the
Commonpeople, yet they still ease, uphold and maintain the Merchants by all
possible means, of purpose to draw the wealth and strength of Christendom to
themselves; whereby it appears though the duties be but small, yet the
customs for going out and coming in does so abound, that they increase their
Revenues greatly, and make profit, plenty, and employment of all sorts by Sea
and Land to serve (...) and other Nations, as is admirable to behold: And
likewise the great commerce which grows by the some means, inableth the
common people to bear their burden laid upon them, and yet they grow rich by
reason of the great commerce and Trade, occasioned by their convenient
privileges, and commodious consti^utions.

There was an intercourse of Traffic, in Genoa, and there was the flower of
commerce, as appears by their ancient Records, and their sumptuous buildings,
for all Nations traded with Merchandise to them, and there was the storehouse
of all Italy and other places; but after they had set a great custom of xvi.
per cent. all Nations left trading with them, which made them give themselves
wholly to usury, and at this day we have not three ships go^ there in a year:
but to the contrary, the Duke of Florence builded Ligorn, and set small custom
upon Merchandise, and gave them great and pleasing privileges, which has made
a rich and strong City with a flourishing State.

Furthermore touching some particulars needful to be considered, of the mighty
huge fishing that ever could be heard of in the world, is upon the coasts of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; but the great Fishery is in the Low Countries,
and other petty States, wherewith they serve themselves and all Christendom,
as shall appear.

In four Towns in the East Kingdoms within the Sound, Quinsbrough, Elbing,
Statten, and Dausick, there is carried and vented in a year, between thirty or
forty thousand Last of Herrings sold but at fifteen or sixteen pounds the Last,
is about 620000. l. and we none.

Besides, Denmark, Norway, Sweathen, Leifland, Rye, Nevill, the Narve, and
other Port Towns within the Sound, there is carried and vented above 10000.
Lasts of Herrings sold at fifteen or sixteen pounds the Last, is 170000.
pounds; more yearly in such request are our Herrings there, that they are
oftentimes sold for 20. 24. 30. and 36. pound the Last, and we send not one
barrel into all those East Countries.

The Hollanders sent into Russia near fifteen hundred Lasts of Herrings, sold
about thirty shillings the barrel, amounts to 27000. pound, and we but about
twenty or thirty Lasts.

To Stoade, Hambrough, Breame, and Embden upon the River of Elve, Weaser, and
Embs, is carried and vented of Fish and Herrings about 6000. Lasts, sold about
fifteen or sixteen pound the Last, is 100000 l. and we none.

Cleaveland, Gulickland, up the River of Rhine to Cullen, Frankford, or the
Maine, and so over all Germany is carried and vented of Fish and Herrings near
22000. Lasts, sold at twenty pound the Last, is 440000. l. and we none.

Up the River of M z^, Leigh, Mastrith, Vendlow, Sutphin, Deventer, Campen,
Swoole, and all over Lukeland is carried and-vented 7000. Lasts of Herrings,
sold at twenty pound the Last is 140000 pound, and we none.

To Gelderland, Artois, Henault, Brabant, Flanders, up the River of Antwe^p,
all over the Arch Dukes Countries, is carried and vented between eight or nine
thousand Lasts sold at eighteen pound the Last is 171000 l. and we none.

The Hollanders and others carried of all sorts of Herrings to Roane only in
one year, (...) all other parts of France, 50000. Lasts of Herrings sold at
twenty pound the Last, is 100000 l. and we not one hundred Last thither: they
are sold often times there for twenty, and four and twenty, and thirty pound
the Last.

Between Christmas and Lent, the duties for Fish and Herrings came to 15000
Crowns at Roane only that y^re, the la^ Q^n (...); Sir Thomas Parrie was Agent
there then, and S. Savors his man knows it to be true, who handled the
business for pulling down the Impositions then, what great sums of money
came to all in the Port Towns to enrich the French Kings Coffers, and to all
the Kings and States throughout Christendom to enrich their Coffers; besides
the great quantity vented to the Straights, and the multitude spent in the
Low Countries, where there is likewise sold for many a hundred thousand pound
more yearly, is necessary to be remembered; and the stream to be turned to the
good of this Kingdom, to whose Sea coasts God only has sent and given these
great blessings and multitude of riches for us to t^ke, howsoev^r it bath been
neglected to the hurt of this Kingdom, that any Nation should carry away out
of this Kingdom yearly great (...) of money for Fis^ taken in our Seas, and
sold again by them to us, which must needs be a great dishonor to our Nation,
and hindrance to this Realm.

From any Port Town of any Kingdom within Christendom, the Bridgemaster or
the Wharemaster for twenty sh^llings a year will deliver a tr^e Note of the
number of L^sts of Herrings brought to their Wharfes, and their pric^s commonly
they are sold at, but the number brought to D^nske, Cullen, Rotterdam, and ^sen
is so great, as it will cost three, four, or five pound for a true Note.

The abundance of Corn grows in the East Kingdoms, but the great
Storehouses for grain to serve Christendom and the Heathen Countries in time
of dearth, is in the LowCountreyes, wherewith upon every occasion of scarcity
and dearth they do enrich themselves seven years after, employ their people
and get great fraights for their Ships in other Countries, and we not one in
that course.

The mighty Vineyards and store of Salt is in France and Spain; but the great
Vintage and Staple of Salt is in the Low-Countreyes, and they send near one
thousand sail of ships with Salt and Wine only into the East Kingdoms
yearly, besides other places, and we not one in that course.

The exceeding Groves of Wood are in the East Kingdoms, but the huge piles of
Wainscot, Clapboard, Firdeale, Masts, and Timber is in the Low-Countreyes,
where none grows, wherewith they serve themselves, and other parts, and this
Kingdom with those Commodities; they have five or six hundred great long ships
continually using that Trade, and we none in that course.

The Wool, Cloth, Lead, Tin, and diverse other Commodities are in England, but
by means of our Wool and Cloth going out ruff, undrest, and undied, there is
an exceeding manufactory and (...) in the LowCountreys, wherewith they serve
themselves, and other N^tions, and advances greatly the employment of their
people at home, and (...) abroad, and puts down ours in foreign parts, where
our M^rchants trade unto, with our own Commodities.

We send into the E^st Kingdoms yearly but one hundred sh^ps, and our Trade
chie^ly depends upon three Towns, E^binge, Kingsborough, and Danske, for
making our Sails, and buying their Commodities sent into this Realm at dear
rates, which this Kingdom bears the burden of.

The Low-Countreyes send into the East Kingdoms yearly about three thousand
ships, trading into every City and Port Town, taking the advantage, and venting
their Commodities to exceeding profit, and buying and lading their ships with
plenty of those Commodities, which they have from every of those Towns 20. per
cent. better cheap then we by reason of the (...) of the Coin, and their fish
yields ready money, which greatly advances their Traffic, and dec^yeth ours.

They send into France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, from the East Kingdoms that
passes through the Sound, and through your narrow Seas, yearly of the East
Country commodities about two thousand ships, and we none in that course.

They trade into all Cities, and Port Towns in France, and we chiefly to five
or six.

They traffic into every City and Port Town round about this Land, with five
or six hundred ships yearly, and we chiefly but to three Towns in their
Country, and but with forty ships.

Notwithstanding the Low-Countryes have as many ships and vessels as (...) of
Christen^om h^ve, let E^gland be o^, and build (...) year near one thousand
ship^, and not a timber tree growing in their own Country, and that also all
their homebred commodities that grow in their Land in a year, ((...) then one
hundred good ships are able to carry them away at one time,) yet they handle
the matter so for setting them all on work, that their Traffic with the
Haunce Towns exc^ds in shipping all Christendom.

We have all things of our own in superabundance to increase Traffic, and
Timber to build ships, and commodities of our own to lade about one thousand
ships and (...) at one time, (besides the great fishing) and as fast as they
have made their voyages might re-lade again, and so year after year all the
year long to continu^, yet our Ships and Mariners d^cline, and Traffic and
Merchants daily decay.

The main^ bulk and Mass of (...) from whence they raise so many mi^lions
yearly that enrich other Kingdoms, Kings and States Coffers, and lik^ise their
own people, proceeds from your S^s and Lands, and the return of the
Commodities and Coin they bring home in exchange of fish and other Commodities
are so huge, as would require a large (...) apart; all the amends they make us
is, they beat us out of Trade in all parts with our own Commodities.

For instance, we had a great The in Russia (...). and about (...) p^st we s^nt
st^ of (...) sh^ps to trade in those p^s, and (...) p^st we s^t o^ ^t f^ and
this last year two or three; (...) to the contrary the (...) about twenty
years (...) traded (...) with two ships only, yet now they are increas^d to
about thirty or forty, and one of their ships is as great as two of ours, and
at the same time (in their troubles there) that we decreased, they increased,
and the chiefest Commodities they carry with them thither, is, English Cloth,
Herrings taken in our Seas, English Lead and Pewter made of our Tin, besides
other Commodities; all which we may do better then they. And although it be a
cheap Country, and the Trade very gainful, yet we have almost brought it to
naught, by (...) trading, joynt-stock, and the Merchants banding themselves one
ag^nst ^r.

A^ ^o (...) s^ w^ us^d to have 8. or 9. (...) s^s (...) a f^sh n^ to Wa^ us^,
and this year but one, and so per rato ^y (...) in all kind of ^shing and
marchandizing in all (...) by r^ason they spare no cost, (...) ny no
privileges that may (...) of trad^ and (...).

Now if it please, and with your Majesty's good liking stand,
TO take notice of these things, which I have conceived to be fit for your
Majesty's consideration, which in all humbleness (as duty binds me) I do
tender unto your Majesty, for the unfeigned zeal I bear to the advancement of
your honor and profit, and the general good of your Subjects, it being
apparent that no three Kingdoms in Christendom can compare with your Majesty
for support of Traffic, and continually employment of your people within
themselves, having so many great means both by Sea and Land to enrich your
Coffers, multiply your Navy, enlarge your Traffic, make your Kingdoms
powerful, and your people rich; yet through idleness they are poor, wanting
employment, many of your Land and Coast Towns much ruinated, and your Kingdom
in need of Coin, your Shipping, Traffic, and Mariners decayed, whilst your
Majesty's Neighbor Princes, without these means, abound in wealth, enlarge
their Towns, increase their Shipping, Traffic, and Mariners, and find out
such employment for their people, that they are all advantageous to their
Commonwealth, only by ordaining commodious constitutions in Merchandising, and
fullness of Trade in Manufactory.

God (...) blessed your Majesty with incomparable benefits:
AS with Copper, Lead, Iron, Tin, Al um Copperas, (...), F^lls, and diverse
other native Commodities, to the numb^r of about one hundred, ^d other (...)
vendible to the (...) of about one thousand, (as shall (...)) besides Corn,
whereof great quantity of B^ is made, and most (...) by strangers, as also
Wool, whereof (...) is (...) forth (...) into (...) loath or (...), and Cloth
(...) undr^st and undied, which does employ and (...) n^r fif^y (...) in (...)
parts your (...) wanting the (...) in England, many of them (...) enforced to
live in great want, and s^k it beyond the Seas.

Col^s which does employ hundreds of (...) ships yearly to (...) them out of
this King^me, whilst we do not employ (...) ships in that (...).

I on (...), which is a jewel of great (...), far mo^e than it is accounted,
by reason that no other Country could ever attain unto it, although they have
(...) it with great charge.

Your M j sty ^ath timber of your own for (...) of Sh^ps, and (...) plenty to
lad^ them, which (...) other (...) want, yet your (...) in Shipping, (...), and
Mariners.

These Inconveniences happen by three causes especially.
1. The unprofitable course of merchandising. 2. The want of course of full
Manufactory of our homebred commodities. 3. The undervaluing of our Coins,
contrary to the rules of other Nations.
For instance.
THe Merchant Adventurers by overtading upon credit, or with money taken up
upon exchange, whereby they lose usually ten or twelve, and sometimes fifteen
or sixteen per cent. are enforced to make sale of their clothes at under-rates,
to keep their credit, whereby clothes being the jewel of the Land, is
undervalued, and the Merchant in short time eaten out.

The Merchants of Ipswich whose Trade for E^ing is c^fly (...) fine clothes,
and some few (...) c^ths all died and dressed within (...), do for the most part,
buy their fine clothes upon Time, and by r^on they go so much upon cred^, they
are enforced (not being able to stand upon their Markets) to sell, givi^g
fifteen or eighteen Months day of payment for their clothes. ^d having sold
them, they then pr^sently sell their bills so taken for c^, allowing after the
rate of (...) or fifteen, and sometimes twenty per cent. which money they employ
forth with in wares at (...) prices, and lose as much more that way by that
time their wares be sold at hom^: Thus by overrunning themselves up^ credit,
they disable (...) and others, inhancing the prices of foreign (...), and
pu^ling down the rates of our own.

The W st C^untry M (...) that trade wi h clothes into (...) ^r Sp^n, do usual
y employ th (...), (young men of sm^ll (...) who (...) cu^ing combining of the
(...) and Sp^nish M (...), are (...), that when all customs and charges be
accounted, their Masters shall hardly (...) t^ (...) moneys. As for (...) out
of France, th^r silver and gold is so (...) rate^, that ou^ M (...) c^t (...)
it home. (...) to great loss^; therefore the ^nch Merchants set higher rates
upon their commodities, which we must either buy dear, or let our mo^s lie
dead there a long tim^, u^ill we may (...) employ the same.

The (...) Merchants of York, Hull and Newcastle, trade only in white K^s and
(...), dozz^ns, and (...) M (...) be his Adventure (...) so sm^l, does for the
most part, send over an (...) y^h unfit for (...) z^g, which br^ngeth to the
(...) great (...); but to his (...) and common (...) great (...); for they
(...) their goods be (...), go to (...) str^r, and ^uy such (...) of Iron ^ax,
Co^, (...) other (...), as they (...) bound to (...) th^i ships (...), which
ships (...) to relade within the was, or a month, and do give (...) the
Merchant (...) asks, because he gives them credit, and lets them ship away
their Iron, Flax, and other commodities, before they have sold their Kersies,
and other commodities, by which means extraordinary dear commodities are
returned into this Realm, and the servant also enforced to s^ll his clothes
underfoot, and often times to loss, to keep his c^dit, and to make payment for
the goods before shipped home, having so^ twenty day^s, or a months respite to
sell the clothes, and to give the Merchant satisfaction for his I^on, Flax, and
other wares; by which extremities our homebred commodities are abased.

Touching Manufactory.
THere has been about fourscore thousand undrest and undied clothes yearly
transported.

It is therefore evident, that the Kingdom has been yearly deprived of about
400000 l. within this five and fifty years, which is near twenty millions that
would have been gained by the labor of poor workmen in that time, with the
Merchants gains for bringing in dying stuffs, and return of clothes dressed and
died, with other benefits to the Realm, besides exceeding enlarging of
Traffic, and increase of Ships and Mariners.

There would have been gained in that time about three millions by increase of
custom upon commodities returned for clothes dressed and died, and for dying
stuffs, which would have more plentifully been brought in and used for the same.

There has been also transported in that time yearly by Bayse, Northern and
Devonshire Kersies white, about 50000 clothes, counting three (...) to a
cloth, whereby h^h b^n lost about five millio^s by those s^s of (...) in (...)
time, which would have com^ to (...) workmen for (...) ^ur, with the customs
for dying stuff and the peoples profit f^r bringing them in, with (...) of
other (...) and fraights for shiping.

B^yse are transported white into Amsterdam, and being there dressed and died,
are shipped into Spain, Portugal, and other Kingdoms, where they are sold in
the name of Flemish Baize, setting their own Town Seal upon them, so that we
lose the very name of our homebred commodities, and other Countries get the
r^putation and profit there of: Lamentable it is, that (...) ^ld be deprived of
so (...) Millions, and (...) of c^th (...) of God (...) natural (...), (...)
so (...) and (...), should be driven ^o (...) s^ll advantage of (...) and
profit to your (...) and people and so much impr^v d and (...) by strangers,
considering that God has in^d, and (...) your M^sty power to advance (...) and
dying, and transporting of (...) your clothes, within a year or two; I speak
it knowingly, to show how it may be done (...), lawfully and approved to be
honorable, s^asable, and profitable.

All the Companies of your Land transport their clothes dressed and died, to the
good of your Kingdom, except the Merchant Adventurers, whereby the Eastland
and Turkey Merchants, with other Companies, do increase your Majesty's customs
by bringing in, and spending dying stuffs, and setting your people on work, by
dressing before they transport them; and they might increase far more custom
to your Majesty, and make much more profit to themselves, and this Realm, and
set many thousands of poor people more on work for dressing and dying, and
likewise employ more ships and Mariners, for bringing in dying stuffs, were it
not for the Merchant Adventurers, who transport their clothes white, rough,
undrest, and undied, into the Low Countries, where they sell them to the
strangers, who afterward dress, die, and stretch them to such unreasonable
lengths, contrary to our Law, that they prevent and fore stall our Markets, and
cross the just prohibitions of our State and Realm, by their Agents and
Factors lying in diverse places with (...) clothes, to the great decay of this
Kingdom in general, and discredit of our clothes in particular.

If the account were truly known, it would be found that they make not clear
profit, only by cloth transported rough, undrest, and undied, sixty thousand
pounds a year: But it is most apparent your Majesty in your customs, your
Merchants in their sales and prices, your Subjects in their labors, for lack
of not dressing and dying, your Ships and Mariners in not bringing in of dying
stusfs, and spending of Alum, is hindered yearly near a million of pounds, so
that trade is driven to the great hindrance of your Majesty and people, by
permiting your native commodities to pass rough, undrest, and undied, by the
Merchant Adventurer.

Touching Fishing.
THe great Sea business of Fishing does employ near twenty thousand ships,
and vessels, and four hundred thousand people are employed yearly upon your
Coast of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with sixty ships of War, which may
prove dangerous.

The Hollanders only have about three thousand ships to fish withal, and
fifty thousand people are employed yearly by them upon your Majesty's coasts of
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

These three thousand fishing ships and vessels of the Hollanders, does employ
near nine thousand other ships and vessels, and one hundred and fifty thousand
persons more by Sea and Land to make provision to dress and transport the Fish
they take, and return commodities, whereby they are enabled, and do build
yearly one thousand ships and vessels, having not one timber tree growing in
their own Country, nor homebred commodities to lade one hundred ships, and
yet they have twenty thousand ships and vessels, and all employed.

King Henry the seventh, desirous to make his Kingdoms powerful and rich by
increase of Ships and Mar^ners, and employment of his people, sent unto his
Seacoast Towns, moving them to set up the great and rich fishing, with
promise to give them needful privileges, and to furnish them with loanes of
money, if need were, to encourage them, yet his people were slack. Now since I
have traced this business, and made mine endeavors known unto your Majesty,
your Noblemen, able Merchants, and others, (who having set down under their
hands for more assurance) promised to disburse large sums of money for the
building up of this great and rich large Sea-City, which will increase more
strength to your Land, give more comfort, and do more good to all your Cities
and Towns, than all the Companies of your Kingdom, having fit and needful
privileges for the upholding and strengthening of so weighty and needful a
business.

For example, twenty Busses built and put into a Seacoast Town where there is
not one ship before there must be to carry, re-carry, transport, and make
provision for one Busse three ships; likewise every ship setting on work
thirty several trades and occupations, and four hundred thousand persons by
Sea and Land, insomuch as three hundred persons are not able to make one Fleet
of Nets in four months for one Busse, which is no small employment.

Thus by twenty Busses are set on work near eight thousand persons by Sea and
Land, and an increase of above one thousand Mariners, and a Fleet of eighty
sail of Ships to b^long to one Town, where none were before to take the
wealth out of the Sea to enrich and strengthen the Land, only by raising of
twenty Busses.

^en what good one thousand, or two thousand will do, I leave to your
Majesty's consideration.

It is worthy to be noted, how necessary Fishermen are to the Commonwealth,
and how needful to be advanced and cherished, viz.

1. For taking Gods blessing out of the Sea to enrich the Realm, which
otherwise we lose. 2. For setting the people on work. 3. For making plenty and
cheapnesse in the Realm. 4. For increasing of shipping, to make the Land
powerful. 5. For a continual Nurcery for breeding and increasing our
M^riners. 6. For making employment of all sorts of people, as blind, lame, and
others by Sea and Land from ten or twelve years upwards. 7. For enriching your
Majesty's Coff^rs, for Merchandises returned from other Countries for Fish and
(...). 8. For the increase and inabling of Merchants, which now dr^p and daily
decay.
Touching the Coin.
FOr the most part, all Monarchies and free States, both Heathen and Christian,
as Turkey Barbery, France, Poland, and others, do hold for a rule of
never-failing profit, to keep their Coin at higher rates within their own
Territories, than it is in other Kingdoms.

The Causes.
1. To preserve the Coin within their own Territories. 2. To bring unto
themselves the Coin of Foreign Princes. 3. To enforce Merchant strangers to
take their commodities at high rates, which this Kingdom bears the burden of.
For instance.
THe King of Barbafy perceiving the Trade of Christian Merchants to increase in
his Kingdom, and that the returns out of his Kingdoms was most in Gold,
whereby it was much inhanced, raised his Ducket (being then current for three
ounces) to fo^e, five, and six ounces; nevertheless it was no more worth in
England, being so raised, then when it went for three ounces.

This Ducket current for three ounces in Barbery, was then worth in England
seven shillings and six pence, and no more worth, being raised to six ounces,
since which (time adding to it a small piece of gold) he has raised it to
eight, and lastly to ten ounces, yet at this day it is worth but ten shillings,
and one penny, notwithstanding your Majesty's late raising of your gold.

Having thus raised his gold, he then devised to have plenty of silver brought
into his Kingdom, raised the royal of eight, being but two ounces to three,
and three pence h^lf penny, which caused great plenty of silver to be brought
in, and to continue in his Kingdom.

France.
THe English Jacobus goes for three and twenty shillings in Merchandising.

The French Crown for seven shillings and six pence.

Also the King has raised his silver four Sowce in the Crown.

North-Holland.
THe double Jacobus goes for three and twenty shillings Sterling.

The English shilling is there eleven stivers, which is two shillings over in
the pound.

Poland.
THe King of Poland raised his Hungary Ducket from 56 to 77 Polinsh groshes,
and the Rich Dollor from 36 to 47 and groshes, the Reich Dollor worth in Poland
47 and groshes, is by account valued at 6 s. 4 d. Sterling, and here in England
is worth but 4 s. 7 d. The Hungary Ducket 77 is worth by account in Poland 10
s. 4 d. and in England is worth but 7 s. 10 d The Jacobus of England here
current for 22 s. in Poland 24 s. at the rate of 7 s. 10 d. for the Hungary
Ducket.

Now to turn the stream and riches raised by your Majesty's native commodities
into the natural channel, from whence it has been a long time diverted;

May it please your Majesty to consider these points following.
1. Whether it be not fit that a State-Merchant be settled within your
Dominions, which may both dispose more profitably of the riches thereof, and
encounter policies of Merchant strangers, who now go beyond us in all kind of
profitable Merchandising.

2. Whether it be not necessary that your native commodities should receive
their full Manufactory by your Subjects within your Dominions.

3. Whether it be not fit the coals should yield your Majesty and Subjects a
better value, by permitting them to pasle out of the Land, and that they be in
your Subjects shipping only transported.

4. Whether it be not fit your Majesty presently raise your Coin to as high
rates, as it is in the parts beyond the Seas.

5. Whether it be not necessary that the great Sea-business of Fishing be
forthwith set forward.

If it please your Majesty to approve of these considerations, and accordingly
to put them in a right course of execution, I assure my self (by Gods help) in
short time your Majesty's Customs, and the continual commings into your
Coffers, will be exceedingly increased, your Ships and Mariners trebled, your
Land and waste Towns (which are now run out of Gates) better replenished, and
your people employed, to the great enriching and honor of your Kingdom, with
the applause, and to the comfort of all your loyal Subjects.

May it please your Majesty.
I Have the rather undergone the pains to look into their policies, because
I have heard them profess they hoped to get the whole trade and Shipping of
Christendom into their own hands, as well for transportation, as otherwise
for the command and master of the Seas, to which end I find that they do daily
increase their traffic, augmenting their Shipping, multiplying their
Mariners, strength, and wealth in all kinds, whereat I have grieved the more,
when I considered how God has in^ed this Kingdom above any three Kingdoms in
Christendom with diverse varieties of homebred commodities, which others have
not, and cannot want, and endued us with sundry other means to continue and
maintain trade of Me^andizing and Fishing beyond them all, whereby we might
prevent the deceivers, ingrosse the commodities of the ingrossers, enrich our
felves, and increase our Navigation, Shipping, and Mariners, so as it would
make all Nations to veil the Bonnet to England, if we would not be still
wanting to our selves in employment of our people.

Which people being divided into three parts, two parts of them are mere
spenders and consumers of a Commonwealth, therefore I aim at these points
following.

To allure and encourage the people for their private gain, to be all workers
and erecters of a Commonwealth,

To enrich and fill your Majesty's Coffers by a continual coming in, and make
your people wealthy, by means of their great and profitable trading and
employment.

To vent our homebred commodities to far more reputation, and much more
profit to the King, the Merchant, and the Kingdom.

To return the Merchandises of other Countries at far cheaper rates than now
they are, to the great good of the Realm in general.

To make the Land powerful by increasing of Ships and Mariners.

To make your peoples takings in general to be much mo^ every day, than now
they are, which by Gods help, will grow continually more and more by the great
concourse and commerce that will come by settled (...) and convenient
privileges, as in other p^ts they do by this their great freedom of Trade.

All this, and much more is done in other (...), where no hing grow^th, so that
of nothing they make great things,

Then how much more mighty things might we make, where so great abundance, and
variety of home bred commodities, and rich materials grows, for your people
to work upon, and other plentiful means to do that withal, which other
Nations neither have, nor cannot want, but of necessity must be furnished from
hence? And now whereas our meichandizing is wild, utterly confused, and out of
frame, as at large appears, a State-Merchant will roundly and (...) bring all
the premises to (...), fill your H^vens with ships, those ships with Mariners,
your Kingdom fu'l of Merchants, their (...) f^ll of out landish commodities,
and your Coff rs full of coin, as in other parts they do, and your (...)
shall have just cause to hold (...) happy memory, that your Majesty was the
(...) of so profitable, praiseworthy, and renowned a work, being the true
Philosophers stone to make your Majesty a rich and potent King, and your
Subjects happy people, only by settling of a State-Merchant, whereby your
people may have fullness of Trade and Manufactory, and yet hold both honorable
and profitable Government without breakings of Companies.

And for that in the settling of so weighty a business many things of great
consequence m^st necessarily fall into consideration; I humbly pray that your
Majesty may be pleased (for the bringing of this great service to light) to
give me leave to nominate the Commissioners, and your Majesty to give them
power to call before them such men as they shall think fit to confer with
upon oath, or otherwise, as occasion shall offer; that the said Commissioners
with all speed, for the better advancement of this honorable and profitable
work, may prepare, and report the same unto your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most loyal and true-hearted Subject.

THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT.
That the Seat of Government is upheld by the two great pillars thereof, viz.
Civil Justice, and Martial Policy, which are framed out of Husbandry,
Merchandise, and Gentry of this Kingdom.

THey say, that the goodliest Cedars which grow on the high mountains of
Libanus, thrust their roots between the clifts of hard rocks, the better to
bear themselves against the strong storms that blow there. As Nature has
instructed those Kings of Trees, so has Reason taught the Kings of Men to root
themselves in the hardy hearts of their faithful Subjects. And as those Kings
of Trees have large Tops, so have the Kings of men large Crowns, whereof as the
first would be soon broken from their bodies, were they not under-borne by
many branches, so would the other easily totter, were they not fastened on
their heads, wi^h the strong chains of Civil Justice, and Martial Discipline.

1. For the administration of the first, even God himself has given
direction, Judges and Officers shall thou make, which shall judge the people
with righteous judgment.

3. The second is grounded on the first Laws of the World and Nature, that
force is to be repelled by fo^ce. Yea Moses in the 20. of Exodus, and
elsewhere, has delivered us many Law^s and Polices of War. But as we have
heard of the neglect and abuse in both, so have we heard of the decline and
r^ine of many Kingdoms and States long before our day^s; for that Policy has
never yet prevailed (though it has served for a short season) where the
counterfeit has been sold for the natural, and the outward show and formality
for the substance. Of the Emperor Cha^les the Fourth, the Writers of that Age
witness, that he used but the name of Justice and good order, being more
learned in the Law, than in doing right, and that he had by far, more
knowledge than conscience. Certainly the unjust Magistrate that fancieth to
himself a sollid and untransparable body of Go^d, every ordinary wit can
vitrifie, and make transparant pierce, and discern their corruptions;
howsoever, because not daring, they cover their knowledge, but in the mean
while it is also true, that constrained dissimulation, either in the proud
heart, or in the oppressed, either in public estates, or in private persons,
where the fear of God is not prevalent, does in all the leisure of her lurking,
but sharpen her teeth, the voluntary being no less base, than the forced
malicious. Thus it fared between the Barons of England, and their Kings,
between the Lords of Switzerland, and their people, between the Sicilians,
and the French, between the Dolphine and John of Burgoign, between Charles the
ninth, and the French Protestants, and between Henry the third, his Successor,
and the Lords of Guise; and hereof in place of more particulars, the whole
world may serve for examples.

It is a difficult piece of Geography, to delineate, and lay out the bounds of
Authority; but it is easy enough to conceive the best use of it, and by which
it has maintained: it self in lasting happiness, it has ever acquired more
honor by persuading, than by beating; for as the bonds of Reason and Love are
immortal, so do all other chains or cords, both rusty and rot noble parts of
their own royal and politic bodies.

But we will forbear for a while to stretch this first string of Civil
Justice; for in respect of the first sort of men, to wit, of those that live by
their own labor, they have never been displeased where they have been
suffered to enjoy the fruit of their own travells, Meum and Tuum, Mine and
Thine is all wherein they seek the certainty and protection. True it is, that
they are the Fruit. Trees of the Land, which God in Deuteronomie commanded to
be spared, they gather honey, and hardly enjoy the wax, and break the ground
with great labor, giving the best of their grain to the easefull and idle.

For the second sort, which are the Merchants, as the first feed the Kingdom,
so do these enrich it, yea their Trades, especially those which are forcible,
are not the least part of our Martial policy, as hereafter proved; and to do
them right, they have in all ages and times assisted the Kings of this Land,
not only with great sums of money, but with great Fleets of Ships in all their
interprises beyond the Seas. The second have seldom or never offended their
Princes, to enjoy their trades at home upon tolerable conditions, has ever
contented them for the injuries received from other Nations give them but the
Commission of Reprisall, they will either right themselves, or sit down with
their own loss without complaint.

3. The third sort, which are the Gentry of England, these being neither seated
in the low^st grounds, and thereby subject to the biting of every beast, nor in
the highest mountains, and thereby in danger to be ^orne with tempest; but
the valleys between both, have their parts in the inferior Justice, and being
spread over all, are the Garrisons of good order throughout the Realm.

OBSERVATIONS Concerning The Causes of the Magnificency and Opulency of CITIES.
THat the only way to civillize and reform the savage and barbarous Lives,
and corrupt Manners of such people, is,

1. To be dealt withal by gentle and loving conversation among them, to
attain to the knowledge of their Language, and of the multitude of their
special discommodities, and inconveniences in their manner of living. 2. The
next is to get an admired reputation amongst them, upon a solid and true
foundation of Piety, Justice, and Wisdom, conjoined with fortitude and power.
3. The third is, discreetly to possess them with a knowledge of the condition
of their own estate. Thus Orpheus, and Amphion were said to draw after them
the beasts of the field, etc.
And this must be first wrought by a visible representation of the certainty,
truth, and sincerity of these, together with the felicity of a reformed estate.

All which is but to give foundation, bottom, and firm footing unto action, and
to prepare them to receive wholesome and good advice, for the future profit and
felicity of themselves and their posterity.

For the more commodious effecting of this Reformation in a rude and barbarous
people, they are to be persuaded to withdraw and unite themselves into several
Colonies; that by an interchangeable communication and commerce of all things
may more commodiously be had, and that they may so live together in civility,
for the better succor and welfare of one another: And thereby they may more
easily be instructed in the Christian Faith, and governed under the Magistrates
and Ministers of the King, or other superior power, under whom this
Reformation is sought; which course the Stoic tells, that Thesius took, after
he had taken upon him the Government of the Athenians, whereby he united all
the p ^ple into one City, that before lived dispersedly in many villages. The
like is put in practice at this day by the Portugalls, and Jesuits, that they
may with less difficulty and hindrance reform the rough behavior and savage
life of the people of Brazeel, who dwell scattered and dispersed in Caves and
Cottages made of boughs and leaves of the Palm Trees.

Alexander the Great, built more than seventy Cities; Seleucus built three
Cities, called Appanice, to the honor of his wife; and five called Laodicea,
in memory of his mother; and five called (...), to the honor of himself.

Safety for Defense of the People and their goods, in and near the Town.
IN the situation of Cities, there is to be required a place of safty, by some
natural strength, commodiousnesse for Navigation and Conduct, for the
attaining of plenty of all good things, for the sustenance and comfort of man's
life, and to draw trade and intercourse of other Nations, as if the same be
situate in such sort, as many people have need to repair thither for some
natural commodity, or other of the Country, which by traf^k and
transportation of commodities, whereof they have more plenty then will supply
their own necessity, or for receiving of things, whereof they have scarcity.
And much better will it be, if the place afford some notable commodity of it
self, from whence other Nations may more readily, and at better rate attain
the same. Likewise, and withal, be so fertile, pleasant, and healthful of it
self, that it may afford plenty of good things, for the delight and comfort of
the (...).

In former times, great Nations, Kings, and Potentates have endured sharp
conflicts, and held it high policy, by all means to increase their Cities,
with multitudes of inhabitants. And to this end the Romans ever furnished
themselves with strength and power, to make their neighbor people, of
necessity, willing to draw themselves to Rome to dwell, and overthrow their
Towns and Villages of mean strength, down to the ground.

So did they for this cause utterly destroy many Cities, bringing always the
vanquished Captives to Rome, for the augmentation of that City.

Romulus, after a mighty fight with the Sabines, condescended to peace, upon
condition that Tacius their King should come withal their people to dwell at
Rome: Tacius did accept, and made choice of the Capitol, and the Mount
Quitinalis for his seat and Palace.

The same course held Tamberlaine the Great, whereby he enlarged the great
Sarmacauda, still bringing unto it the richest and wealthiest Citizens he had
subdued.

And the Ottomans, to make the City Constantinople rich and great, brought to
it many thousand Families, (...) out of the (...) Cities (...) as (...) Great
from (...), (...) the First from Cairo, and So^n from (...).

Authority and necessity, without the consideration of the conveniences and
(...) of situation abovementioned, are of small m^ment in the (...) of a City,
thereby only it would be unlikely, either to grow or (...) in magnificency or
opul^ncy; for if profit, height, and delight, go n^ companions therewith, no
authority or necessity can retain much people or wealth.

But if the pl^ce whereupon a City is to be founded, be commodious for the
aforesaid conveniences, which help greatly for the felicity of this life, then
no doubt, the same is likely to draw much abundance of people and riches unto
the same, whereby it may, by the help of Arts and (...), in time become
magnificent and glorious.

FINIS

