PANDORA, A Comedy.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, For John Pleyfere, at the White Bear, in the
Upper-Walk of the New-Exchange; And Thomas Hors-man, next Door to the Sign of
the Three Kings in the Strand, 1664.

Imprimatur,

May the 3d. 1664. Roger L' Strange.

THE Prologue.
LOvers to You I come, without a Bribe,
From one y^ boosts himself of your own Tribe,
And therefore hopes, that your good Natures may
On his behalf, above your Judgments sway:
What you will see here is natural, all pretense
He disavowes, to Wit, or Eloquence:
With Friendship he presents you, and with love,
Such as are wont in his free breast to move,
Such possions as he feels, our Author writes,
And humors such, as he observes, indites:
From Conversation bringing to the Stage,
What he does think, will please the present Age.
And if you do not grudge your time here spent,
He will accept it for a Complement.
The Names of the Actors.
The Prince of Syracusa. Theodocia his Daughter. Pandora, a great Lady of the
Prince his Family. Lindamira, a Lady of Quality. Lonzartes, Right Heir to the
Principality. Clearcus, a Lord of the Prince his Kindred. Silvander, a Young
Lord of the Court. Three Councillors.
Aristonicus, Clothero, Ormuseus.
Ladies Attending the Princess.
Teretia, Philora.
For Pandora.
Three more Attending Ladies. And Lindamira.
Men-Dancers. Women-Dancers. Lacquies.
Sanga, and Geta.
An Old-Woman.
PANDORA: THE Scene in Syracutia.
FIRST ACT.
Enter Lonzartes and Clearchus in long Gray Cloakes over their Rich Clothes,
with Sanga and Geta, two Lacques carrying Lanthorns, the two Lords Enter a
private House, the two Servants stay. San. COme Geta, our Lords have no more
use of us, we may go sleep!


Geta. It Is a fair time indeed to sleep, when day begins to break? -- this is a
lewd life, that our Lords do lead.


San. Why man? the Night was made for laborers to rest; and for great Lords to
Revel in, come away.


Geta My Lord, is not half so ill as thine.


Sanga. What Is that to thee, or me, come away; we will go to Beggars Hall, and be
as merry as our Lords.


Geta. No, no, I will no more sully my credit, in thy company; I converse with
our ^all Dary-Maid, who a^^^rds me Honors, thou can not guess at Sanga! Oh
the great Fe^^cities! that do belong to chaste embraces?


San. I like ^mbraces well.


Geta I mea^ ^y Wed-lock man.


San A Cox-comb thou art, and a Cuckold thou (...) be; a^^^w Fool.


Geta. A^^^w Rogue.


E^eunt severally. A noise within, Re-enter Clearcus, and Lonzartes, in the
Dark. Clearcus. ^otts on thy ^^^ppery heels; we are undone!


Lonzartes. Let us draw, and stand upon guard, I hear some call within!


Cle. What was that strange noise, you made?


Lon. At the bot^om of the ^^^^rs, I fell, which gave the Al^rum to the dogs,
and they waked all the Fami^y!


Enter Old Woman Woman Oh my Lord! what have you done? all the House are up,
pray stand close a while, -- are you alone?


Cle. Yes, yes.


Exeunt Old Woman. Lonzartes. Thou art a very Villain Clearcus, thus to betray
a poor Wench, that loves thee; and to force me accept a Favor, ^ a^hor to
think on.


Cle. Be the blame mine, I have no joy in any thing, unless my Friend
Participate; -- if I have any skill in Woman; you will thank me for this
favor, and say, you never had the like of Angelica.


Lon. Suppose she will not consent? must I ravish her? -- you say she knows not
of my coming


Cle. I swear she does not.


Lon. Would I were out again, these Romances please not me; -- pray how must I
proceed?


Cle. Thus, she is in Bed, the Room is dark, I Will entertain her with discourse,
while you undress; then I Will retire, and soon return with Light, to let her see
my friend and I, must be as one man to her.


Lon. I wonder all women do not hate thee, thou do abuse all them that trust
thee.


Cle. You are deceived Lonzartes, such silly girls, do take it for a
complement, to recommend them to a Noble Friend!


Lon. Well, I must now be subject to thy will, and do submit to do, what I
detest! -- me thinks this is a kind of Rape I undertake; -- thou art too wild
for my Converse Clearcus.


Clear. Hold your peace.


Enter Old Woman. Woman. Hist, hist, my Lord!


Cle. Here, here.


Wom. Give me your hand, softly, softly, follow me.


Exeunt Woman leading them off, holding hands. Enter the Old Prince of
Syracusa, with Silvander, Aristonicus, Clothero, Ormuseus, and ^rain. Prince
How does Lonzartes bear his Suppression Aristonicus? now he is full-man grown.


Ari. Like a w^se man s^r, that will not seem to see, what he cannot remedy


Pri. I have better thoughts for him, then he has for himself; if Clearcus
spoil him not!


Ari. When more years have overcome some evils, incident to youth, I hope he
will be worthy your highest favors Sir.


Pri. Some of you should advise him to a little more sobriety, then Clearcus
will allow of; -- I app^ehend Silvander, that the Corinthian will quarrel, for
my refusing to treat his Marriage with Theodosia, whom I design another way; --
-- she has a^ersion to him.


Sil The Princes may be excused for her dislike, unto so sierce a man, the
Corinthian Prince, is all fire, and fury, which does fright, not win ^ffection.


Pr. If Theodosia will be advised by me, I shall provide be^ter for her; -- you
know Lonzartes right Silvander! if he were reclaimed, I would wish him to my
Daughter.


Sil. I have some thoughts Sir, that Lonzartes does Consort with wild Clearcus,
and complies in all his Vanities, only to avoid your Jealousy, of his higher
thoughts of interest in the State! he is no fool Sir.


Pr. I wish it prove not too much his Nature, to be so debauched, for he has
not higher thoughts of State interest, then I have for him; he has been wronged
Silvander, and I will endeavor to do him right if he will be worthy of it.


Exeunt Omnes* Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus in a Garden. Cle. Why, this grave
face to me Lonzartes?


Lon. Thou are so wild, that I have lost my credit by conver^^ng with thee,
which I must redeem, by keeping ^etter company hereafter.


Cle. Wisely resolved, and in good time declared; -- I have indeed observed,
that you of late converse with Ladies, and delight in rich laced Satin, and in
^ilver Petticoates; as if you meant to turn Apostate, from the freedom we have
(...), and now seek your game in secret, my Lonzartes.


Lon. If I should, pray which is most Honorable? And most suitable to my
Quality? The daily terror of getting such diseases, as ^nhabit your dark
houses, has frighted me into better purposes.


Cle. Your Quality! I with your Prince sh^p had all the Ladies you desire, so I
might have like freedom with their Maids.


Lon. I shall not spoil your Market, but leave you those cheap ^attel, at your
own price.


Cle. See the difference now, between your Pride, and my Humility; you have
studied, learned discourses to such as must justify your conversion (as you
call it) but have never weighed the difference of our crimes; -- such thoughts
Lonzartes, do move, my tender Cons^^ence, to take what ^ can find, for ready
money; which I freely enjoy, without those frights you daily feel.


Lon. Thou do mistake me, and exclaimest against crimes, I never understood.


Cle You can counterfeit I know, and may cozen all the World but me! I will not
give my freedom up, to such follies as you serve, to be Master of all your
wishes.


Lon. I shall not labor to convert you, but will take leave to despise your
mean ways, while you envy mine.


Cle. Envy! by Violin^s eyes, I do despise you, and your ways, and will wager
any thing you dare, that I enjoy this night a beauty more exact, then any
cloath-of-Gold-Dame you treat with, I en^y you! no, I pit^y you Lonzartes, that
after such experience, at your years, you should be fooled so; -- confess now
seriously, if you have ever met a better shape, a softer, or a whiter skin, or
any more sweet, or more bewitching fair, and lovely, then my Ang^lica.


Lon. If I have not! what then?


Cle. Why? she shall be Fine, and rich a^aid, when I so please! I can call her
S^ltaness too! and by my fancy, raise her above those, the World allows of.


Lon. I do believe thee, and thy fancy, alike Extravagant.


Cle. But why so serious on the sudden? and so dull? you shall have good
Cheer, and good Company to night, at the old place.


Lon I shall ^et an ill Conscience by it!


Cle. That sauce, agrees not with the Dainties we must feed on, pray lay by
your Conscience, until morning.


Lon. I wish I were well rid of thee, all thy Rhe^^rick, shall never engage me,
to meet such company again.


Cle. Why pray, how can you spend your time better?


Lon. I do begin to hate my self, and will love thee no longer


Cle. Very good; -- Are not you the most debauched man in Syracusa? (except my
self!) how come you by this Impudence? to blush for going to a merry meeting?
Is not your own Lodging, beyond a Scandal? are not all the Wenches in that
Street, your Pentione^s? -- not love me! I will study to scorn you, and your
love for ever; I despise a man that does forsake his Principles.


Lon. I begin to hate thy overmuch lewdness, and to see my own Deformities.


Cle. Not love me!


Lon. Come, I do love thee, too well I love thee, shall we go home, and put off
this meeting?


Cle. Lonzartes, though I do love your Friendship, I do hate this Humor in
you, that thus would lay a blemish on me.


Enter to them Lindamira and Tere^^a, not at first seen. Ter See Lindamira, the
two wild Princes are in our way, how shall we get by ^^m?


Lin. Put on a confidence beyond theirs, and (...) will amaze them!


Ter. Can that be?


Lin. I Will be your Forlorn Hope, do but second me, and I Will secure your pass
this time; -- You Will see them start, shoot aside, as from a Baza^iske! the
honest woman!


Ter. Barbarous! -- I have heard indeed, they shun all virtuous women!


Lin. They always look over us, as if they saw us not; but where they have an
interest, or hope to gain it, they can like subtle Serpents, humbly creep, to
flatter and betray.


He n^w sees the Ladies. Cle. A prize, a prize Lonzartes, each of us one; let
us reconcile for this booty, and dispute at leisure; -- you close walk invites;
-- which will you assault?


Lon. Neither, they are both virtuous?


Cle. Who knows that? have they done sucking?


Lin. Do thou think there be none virtuous, beyond their infancy!


Cle. Yes, much too many, but I hope better of these; give me the woman, and
keep her virtue to your self: -- I Will charge 'um both, there may be a Critical
minute for me; -- fair Ladies.


Lin. Hold my Lord, you are out at first, one of us is very brown I assure you.


Cle. You do not think your self so, or if you do, you think brown the best
Madam.


Lin. I do indeed, think my beauty such, as may prejudice your Lordship, if you
dwell on it; which gave me boldness, to interrupt your set Speech; least you
engage past retreating; -- our (...) is to find the Princess.


Cle. And ours, to entertain those, who have nothing else to do.


Lin. How would you entertain us my Lord?


Cle. As young Gallants, use to treat fair Ladies; with love, and our best
service.


Lin. I have no employment for so great a Servant as your Lordship, and for
love, I understand it not.


Cle. That you may do is my ambition.


Lin. Nay, if you be come to ambition already! I guess your love will grow to
such a Monster, in a moment, that I dread the thought on it.


Cle. You cut me off so short, you ^^nnot apprehend, what I would say.


Lin. Therefore I do it, because I do not care to hear.


Cle. What have I done Madam, to merit this neglect from you?


Lin. In the behalf of all our sex, I am the chosen Champion, against all men,
who do believe, all Women do admire 'um.


Cle. When shall I have leave to speak? that I may inform you better.


Lin. When I have done.


Cle. When will that be?


Lin. When I am gone.


Cle. How can you be informed in absence?


Lin. As much as I desire to know, I know already; -- my good wishes shall
attend your Lordship; -- come Teretia; we may find the Princess in the other
walk^.


Exeunt. Lon. Now Sir, how do you like this Ladies mettle?


Cle. Why well, I like her, and her humor very well.


Lon. You thought her a sure prize.


Cle. I did but hope so at the first, now I am sure of her, she is my own, if
ever we do meet alone; -- by this severity, she has cozened Teretia, and yo^,
and confirmed me.


Lon. I must laugh, to think how thou art mistaken, in this innocent freedom
virtuous women use, and would give a good sum, to see thee but conver^e a
month or two, with persons of Honor, which I believe would reclaim thee, and
fix those virtues, now ^ost in a Chaos of wild actions.


Cle. I marry, if you could show me a woman, that would not be won; I would
fancy (...) delight, to pass away an hour or two, at ^^de times, but all that I
do meet with, are mine, before I wish it; so that I am always forced to stand
upon my guard amongst 'um.


Lon. That's no wonder, amongst those women you converse with; -- shall I choose
you a mistress? and if you get her! let the reproach be mine.


Cle. Shall she be worth my pains? if so! I will think on it, when I have time
to throw away; -- come will you go with me yet?


Lon. I Will stay here a while.


Cle. I Will go before then, and make ready for you.

Exit.
Lon. What pity it is, such parts should be so drowned! --

Though I resolve to quit, I Am gui^ty still
If longer I do countenance his ill.

Enter to him, as in the Garden, Theodocia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and
Ladies, and Silvander. Theodocia. Lonzartes I have been laughing at Lindamiras
relation of Clear^us humor; she (...) ^he has abused him his own way, in the
(...) all honest women, whom he declares against.


Lon. The encounter indeed was pleasant, (...) the success is beyond her
guess! for the (...)* that her neglects, have dashed his hopes, by which he is
grown confident, that her seeming scorns, were only to dazzle our eyes, while
he doubts not to gain an interest.


Lin. I wish him joy my Lord, of his quick Victory, the next encounter, will
decide this difference of Opinions.


Pan. But how dare you Lindamira, enter the lists of wit? with young Clearcus,
who has the sharpest tongue in Syracusa.


Lin. There is no contest so easy, his whole discourse to women, is ever of
love, or something like it! and does believe that all our souls, delight in
nothing else, which makes me interrupt him still as he begins, and never hear
him out.


Sil. I^ that civil, to a person, of his Quality?


The. Is he not angry, when you slight him so?


Lin. No Madam, I am his m^rth, and he is mine.


Lon. If Pandora would permit! I do fancy his conversion might be wrought by
her, and his Eclipsed virtues, made to shine brighter then his vices do


Sil. 'Twill be a noble undertaking Madam.


Lin. I wish he were with^n my cure.


Pan. We Will join our forces Lindamira, for I shall easily consent unto so good
a work, as may reclaim so great a person as Clearcus; a man so near alied unto
the Duke! -- but how must this Charitable work be done?


Lon. If you Madam, will admit his visits? for a Month or two, the cure of
course will follow; for he who never yet conversed with civil woman, will
surely be concerned when he shall see the harmless mirth, that virtue does
allow, to persons of your Quality!


Pan. So, I be obliged no further then to civil visits, his birth does require
that for him, which I deny to no man.


Lin. Leave the rest to me.


The. How happy are you Cousin, that may dispose of your self as you please! I
must speak, and look, and move, as my Father, and the State directs me.


Pan. Great Princes ^^deed, are bound to some strict Rules, most Subjects
understand not?


Lin. Your Highness complains without a cause, we hear the Duke will leave you
to your own choice, only he will recommend.


The. When Parents recommend, it is so like command, it frights me to think whom
it may be.


Pan. Now you are safe from the Corinthian, have no fear until you see
occasion for it.


The I wish my dear Cousin, you would marry too, I should then like it be^ter I
now dread to put on that yoke, by all the World so much desired?


Pan. Will my being in the pound, get your Highness out off it? why would you
have me run the hazard, to loose that happiness! now am sure of? by a single
life* -- If men did ever appear in their own likeness! we might choose someone,
amongst many, worth the having, but in our sights, they are always disguised
in such shapes, and humors, as they believe we like best, and so cozen us, and
themselves too; for if they make us unhappy, it seldom fails, but we make
them so.


Lin. No Oracle ever spoke truer; I am of your Sect Madam, (as to matters of
Faith!) yet I would gladly have a Husband, though it be dangerous to put my
heart into another keeping (And as my learned Author saves,) to give my
freedom up, unto I know not whom! (nor ever can do, (...) I have him) -- this
were a sadd condition Madam* if we had not the same Arts to cozen them, that
think to cozen us.


The. Would! could get a merry heart, like yours Lindamira.


Lin I Will present your Highness with a piece of mine, I have enough for both.


Enter Messenger. Messenger. Madam, The Prince calls for you;


The. I attend him, pray Cousin go with me to my Father.


Exeunt Ladies. Lon. A few such Excellent women would make this World a
Paradise! -- how have I walked in the dark, till now? how strangely been
misled, by my affection to Clearcus? that have approved, and acted in all his
ills; begun upon design, and led on, till custom has almost changed my nature,
but will no more.


Enter Clearcus to him. Cle. How now Lonzartes? walking alone? take heed the
Devil find thee not at leisure.


Lon. A greater then thy self can hardly find me.


Cle. Very gravely replied, if I mistake not, you are whimpering after some
great lady, and now practizing to play the fool wisely, to spend your time,
adoring you know not who, nor why.


Lon. Thou are still in the wrong.


Cle. Let us meet then, at the old place to night.


Lon. That Is a freedom, I shall never take more, you have converted me, beyond
all the Homilies I ever read, you have made me ashamed of my self for being so
long like you.


Cle. Oh Hypocrite! what new piece have you got? that I must not be trusted
with; come tell me, and I Will cry up your Austere purpose, and rail at your
conversion, as if I did believe it.


Lon. When you see me next in ill company, I am then that Hypocrite you
mention.


Cle. Out upon these tender Consciences, they spoil more mirth, then they are
worth; let old folks hear Homilies, while we enjoy the time we have, and not
whine away our youth, on dreams of virtue, which signify we know not what.


Lon. Peace Clearcus, thou art not half so ill as thou appearest; but do
glory in talking worse, then thou can be.


Cle. What should we talk of more then what we most delight in?


Lon. Of nothing less, because we often do delight in what we ought not own; --
Is It not enough to offend the Gods through frailty, which perverse nature does
invite us to; but we must provoke Heaven, beyond sense, and appetite, by our
discourse, as if we studied to de^^e those Powers, we ought to tremble at.


Cle. I hate Hypocrisy.


Lon. And I abhor to aggravate my crimes, by such unnecess^^y boastings, as thy
wild brain delights in; when I offend I am sorry for it, do thou all honesty
despise, all virtue slight?


Cle. How Lonzartes, will you confine honesty, and virtue, to the fruition of
one woman only? Fie, what a scandal is this to mankind, as if there were no
honesty, nor virtue but in such chaste breasts as yours? what an affront to this
good company, pray speak Gentlemen, is any here of his opinion? can you
Lonzartes show me one young man, that looks as he were guilty? or any so old,
who would be thought so weak? -- Is this a fit design, to set up your Title to
the Dukedom?


Lon. I see this is not the hour for your Conversion.


Cle. Nor shall ever live to see that hour, I hope.


Lon. Nor you I fear, ever live to taste, and relish the tr^e felicity obtained,
by such a conquest on thy self; but I will pray for thee, and thy conversion.


Cle. I had rather your Lordship were at Jerusalem, then see that day of my
conversion; what have I done Lonzartes? to deserve such ill from you, do not
provoke me to a revenge.


Lon. Revenge, for what?


Cle. Can you ask for what? suppose the gods should hear your prayers, and
turn my heart, how miserable a man were I, how should I spend my time, for
forty years to come; Is it not enough to forsake your cause, but you must
seduce me too? Lonzartes, if you pray for me, I shall curse you heartily; I
dare stay no longer with him.

Exit Clearcus.
Lon. If this brave man this humor could expel, His virtues would his vices
far excel.

I have put on this Cloak of wantonness only to avoid being thought a serious
man, least the Duke grow jealous of my pretentions to his Crown; -- while the
Duke is civil and I am safe; -- he shall be so too? -- But if I find designs
against me; I have Friends, and force enough, to gain my right by this; -- Oh
but Theodocia does unman me quite; -- when I look on her, all these high
thoughts do vanish, and I become the humblest creature in the Court: --

I have no Title, that I ere shall own,
Unless she daine to raise me to the Throne.

THE SECOND ACT.
Enter Lonzartes alone, Clearcus harkening at the Door. Lon. OH Cloris, Cloris!
what stange unwonted pains I feel? what fears? what new disease conceales my
blood? -- if it be love, twill not offend the gods, because my soul does now
rejoice to find, Beauty and Virtue so divine, that both may be well worshipped
at one Shrine.


Clearcus chaps him hard on the Shoulder. Cle. Are you talking in your sleep
Lonzartes? or is it some divine meditation, thus transports you?


Lon. You are too rude Clearcus.


Cle. I cry you mercy Sir, you can be angry then I see; I thought your
conversion, had set you above such passions, as we wicked men are subject too.


Lon. I do confess thou did make me start, and speak hastily, but I am not
angry, nor can be with thee.


Embraces him. Cle. I Will try your temper presently, -- Oh! Beauty and Virtue so
Divine, both may be worshipped in one shrine; Ha, ha, ha.


Lon. What of this, you heard me repeat an old Song.


Cle. An old Song to a new Tune Lonzartes: do thou pray for my Conversion
this way? must I get a Cloris to sigh after? -- as thou do; -- I have heard
all, and have observed thee too, I and do guess who Cloris is, -- come, tell me
quickly, that way to oblige me to silence; for if by my own skill, I do
discover her, I Will lay thee open to the World, tell me who Cloris is, least I
tell thee; Adieu.

Exit.
Lon. How can he discovee that I love, when I know it not yet my self? -- Yet I
may admire her, and by my adoration of her virtues --

Be by them, from all meaner passions freed,
When this new virtue, shall my vice exceed.
Exit.
Enter Geta. Geta. What the Devil ailes my Lord? his wonted mirth is changed
into hey^oes, and twenty times a day, he sends me on sleeveless Errants, that
he may be alone; I think Lord Clearcus will prove the wisest man at last; -- I
have been five times this morning to enquire, if the Princess be in health! if
she be stirring, or if near ready! if she go to the Temple! -- And after dinner
I must enquire, if she have dyned! if she comes forth in public! if she ride
abroad; and thus twenty times a day, he tires me, with the^e silly Errants,
when I might ask them all at once, and save much labor; I Will try if I can
find some way to contract these Embassies; -- it is well for my Lord, that his
man is wiser then himself.

Exit.
Enter Silvander with Lindamira, and her Maid. Sil. Do not my looks Lindamira
enough express what I would say?


Lin. Yes, to me, who do discern your passion thus suppressed, more clear, then
by those loud noyse^, which some Lovers most delight in.


Sil. But how shall I be assured, this is not ^aliery?


Lin. Cannot you judge by my looks, as well as I by yours? what kind of
security do you require? I have no Citizens that will be bound for my good
behavior!


Sil. A serious word or two, with a kind look confirmed, will secure me against
the World.


Lin Will this look serve? and I am yours, suffice for words? with this hand
given from my heart! engage beyond your wish.


Sil. It does, may I be --


Lin. Nay, no strange lines I beseech y^u, make me not jealous by professing
more then I expect.


Sil. I am confirmed.


He Kisses her hand. Lin. I shall try your temper, if my merry humor hold!


Sil. It Is that free Innocence, I most adore.


Lin. And that I can afford enough off, at an ea^^e rate.


Enter Clearcus to them, Silvander goes off. Lin. Your Lordship was going
another way, pray let not me divert you, my lodging is far off.


Cle. Madam, I have long sought an opportunity to kiss your hands there.


Lin. You may do it here, and save the labor of going so far for nothing.


Cle. Do you call that honor nothing, which I do prize above the World? and
would give all my interest on Earth, to purchase one kiss of your fair hand, by
a free consent.


Lin The World is little beholding to your Lordship, for so low a value, that
will give all your interest on Earth, for a kiss of my hand, and this I must in
civility, look, as if I did believe.


Cle. I Will swear it Madam.


Lin. That's as easily done, as said, but I am hard of Faith.


Cle. How shall I obtain more credit?


Lin. I Will show you a short way; bring me a conveyance of half your Land, and
you shall have two kisses of my hand, three if you please; and as you like your
Market, you may have more, for the other half of your Estate! and this is much
cheaper then to give all the World for such an honor.


Cle. Why do you mock me? who truly love, and honor you above all women! by
those (...) eyes I do.


Lin. How can I believe it? when I know you (...) thus to every woman that you
meet.


Cle. May my hopes nere prosper, if you are not the only object of my heart.


Lin. No touching good my Lord, my Affairs calls me away, I must be gone.


He proffers to kiss her hand. Cle. And I must wait on you home Madam.


Lin. ^le rather stay here this Twelvemonth, then give your Lordship that
trouble.


Cle. Am I such a Monster, in the opinion of all Women, as you make me?


Lin. I must take care you make not me one; -- Oh happy deliverance!


Enter to them, Theodocia, and Pandora, and Silvander. Cle. This is such a
piece of nic^^y, as I nere met before; -- these are no company for me.

Exit.
The. Stay ( learcus, I would speak with you; -- my Cousin Pandora tells me,
you Court Lindamira, which her self does not much deny.


Cle. I am pract^zing I must confess, how to talk to Ladies, and have learnt
some Speeches to that purpose, whereof Lindamira has had her share.


The. You have mocked her then! and intend her only for your (...)!


He makes a leg. Lin Methinks his silence, and that leg, shows more love to
me, then I know what to do with.


Sil. Excellent Girl! how she plays with his wanton humor!

Aside.
Enter to them Lonzartes. Cle. Nay, if Lonzartes fall on me too? I shall be
overwhelmed with wisdom.


Lon. Now there is some hope of him, his look is Civillized already.


Pan. Are you not pleased Clearcus? to see the whole Court concerned for you?
to see your self so valued, methinks it should stir up the Noble Blood of your
great Ancestors, to set you on to such actions, as may outshine their stories,
and not loose one day more, in your wild ways.


Cle. Madam, Your Language, and your Looks, agree with your great soul; I can
be proud to be so taught, when the Princess Theodocia, and you direct, twere
great stupidity to show neglect; -- but in my Opinion Madam, one of a Family is
enough to be a Saint; -- ^twould take from great Lonzartes credit, and render
his conversion no rarity; if I should become virtuous too.


The. Pandora, and I, are much obliged to you, for your good opinion of us, I
wish all our Sex were so too.


Cle. My opinion and my practice, differ very much Madam; I do honor virtue in
your Sex, as much as any man; but my Tallent lies the other way, Lonzartes does
enough Illustrate the Platonnick Name, and Eminently maintain, that high
Serassick flame, which is above my reach.


Lon. Tell me now Clearcus, is there not more relish in this Conversation? then
with your Getinas, and your Angelinas! -- that blush shows well, there is some
hopes of grace in that blush


Cle. Hold your prattling, my conversion does not belong to you.


Lon. I hope I may direct you to a Lady, that will work that wonder.


Cle. Hold your peace then, till we be alone.


The. We Will be gone Pandora, and not hinder so good a work; -- you shall neither
of you go with us, -- but if you please Clearcus, Lindamira may walk with you a
little longer.


Cle. No Madam, I have enough of her already, she out-wits me; we shall nere
agree.


Lin. I have got credit enough for a young Soldier, by my honorable Retreat,
from so hot a charge.


Exeunt Silvander, and Ladies. Lon Let us now pursue our Argument, for thy
Conversion.


Cle. It comes on a pace; -- what a fine Gentleman are you grown, since the
Spirit of Chastity has possessed you? and I must live chaste, that I may have the
Honor, and Felicity to be in love! -- to be a fool! to entangle my self in
(...) that I shall nere get out of! I Will none of it.


Lon. Let my old Friend-ship so far prevail, that on my request you will
sometimes converse with Pandora, if thy visits do engage her to undertake thy
cure! and she do work that Miracle! she (...) ^^lue what her self has made
worthy of her self; for so will thou be, if thy wandering fancy, were once fixed?


Cle. So then all this bussle, is to make me in love; though you know, I have
been a thousand times in love already.


Lon. I Clearcus, I know thy thousands, but I would have the^ once in love.


Cle. I never will be mad, as you are; yet to give you, and the World
satisfaction in this point; I will condemn my self to one Months penance, and
make experiment to look, and talk as idly with Pandora, as you do with your
Divinest Cloris! -- If I were sure Pandora were not to be won; I could fancy a
pretty kind of pastime, by raising my desires to hopes of what I cannot have!
but I could never meet a woman yet, that was impregnable; and my nature is not
capable of being converted, by any that I can conquer; -- Pray Sup at my
Chamber this night.


Lon. I will not fail, if you will go with me unto Pandora? --

And visit her, while this good motion's warm,
Against all your fears, I Will fit you with a charm.

Cle. I go.


Exeunt. Enter Pandora with Lindamira and Ladies in her Chamber, and Silvander.
Pan. Lindamira you must be my second, they will be two, to one else.


Lin. Gladly Madam, I cannot wish a gentler Enemy, then him that thinks he has
me at his mercy.


Pan. But if you be over-sharp upon him, you may hinder the great work, we
undertake! and make him hate all honest Women for our sakes.


Lin. I shall use him with more Art, and lead him on with hopes, that all our
Sex do scramble for him; -- if I can fit his Fancy, and his Wit, T'le engage
him in a concern for you, and then manage my young Gallant to my will, till I
confute his common places, so often urged to the prejudice of Ladies, I cannot
fancy better sport, then to see him mad in love with you Madam.


Pan. The gods forbid, I would not cure him at that rate, for my own sake, and
his; least that prove a greater evil, then he now has; I shall be very careful,
to give him no encouragement, for thoughts of that nature, my undertaking is
not beyond a common civillity, as to all others of his Rank.


Lin. That will do it, if I mistake not; -- and catch you both I hope, -- here
he comes?


Enter Lonzartes, and Clearcus. Lon. Madam, I have brought my Friend to kiss
your hand.


Cle. Thus far Madam, in order to my engagement, I have given you the trouble
of the first visit, I ever made against my will.


Pan. Your Lordship, does me honor; came you now from Court?


Cle. Yes Madam, and left the Princess Theodocia in great complements with her
kind Father, who has now declared against the proud Corinthian, and given
Theodocia her free choice where she please.


Pan. You tell me News, beyond my hopes, this will raise the Princess drooping
Spirits again; I wonder she is not here by this time.


Lon. The Duke and she, are not yet parted Madam; -- how now Lindamira, are you
tonguetyed? no welcome for my Friend, to encourage him to like of civil
company; -- You look as if you feared to loose your Gallant.


Cle. No, no, she knows she has too fast hold of my heart, to part so easily.


Lin. ^Tis Honor enough for me, to be in the number of your Martyrs Sir.


She Sighs. Pan. How long have you two been acquainted?


Lin. Ever since last night Madam.


She Sighs. Pan. And do thou sigh already?


Lin. It Is only to give you warning, by my harms.


Pan. I thank your care, but I am armed against the World.


Cle. That Is good News Lonzartes, there is some hope, she has made firm
resolves against Wedlock; that I may assault her with security. --

Aside.
Lon. You may, you may.


Cle Madam, You speak, as if you held mankind at a defiance.


Pan. By way of Marriage, I do, but I can value all men that I see worthy.


Cle. He must be a bold man, who does design beyond the favors you a^low, but
have you made vows against marriage Madam?


Pan. No vows, but such resolves, as are unchangable.


Lon. You are severe to men.


Lin. If all Women were of your opinion Madam? how should the World be Peopled?


Cle. I marry Madam, that was well urged.


Pan. I thought Lindamira you would have been on my side.


Lin. So I am, when you are in the right, this is our common cause; Suppose you
bring these two Lords, and they bring twenty more, to be of your judgment, and
this Heresy should spread; what will become of us, who think of nothing else
but Marriage?


Lon. She tells you true Madam, when her own concern is at stake, you may
excuse her.


Pan. I do, and will make good my argument alone.


Cle. Never to Marry Madam?


Pan. Never my Lord, is my full resolve.


Cle. You are the happiest, and the wisest Lady living! and I the joyfullest
man, if you will permit me to adore you at this distance, for I am of your own
opinion Madam.


Lin. Two Fannaticks well met.


Pan So long as your respects be free from love, my house is open to you.


Cle. You are all witnesses, that this Lady does adopt me her avowed Gallant,
on the conditions before mentioned: -- you give me leave Madam to talk of love,
and to carry up this jest, as high, as he who really does love.


Pan I do, so it be ever in Public; all private visits, and all whisperings
are excepted.


Cle. It Is enough Madam; -- This is a pretty kind of Entertainment, I never
thought of: Lonzartes thou art in the right, this will be sport beyond my hope.


Lon. But how does Lindamira like, to see her new Gallant, thus taken from her?


Cle. It Is her ^wn fault, she might have fixed me another way, if she had been
wife.


Pan Indeed Lindamira, I thought not of your concern, and did conclude too
rashly, but I will use my interest on your behalf.


Lin 'Twill not be needful Madam, I know all his professions to you, are meant
to me.


Cle Very prettily contrived, -- This is a new kind of wit* I never heard of;
so then you are to love me, in spite of your teeth, and I you, in spite of
mine; what will this come to at last?


Lon. Mirth man, all the year a constant mirth: -- Is not this better then
spending your time in a smoaky house, with your old Acquaintance?


Silvander, and Lindam^ra do converse while the others talk. Cle. I cannot tell
you that, till I have tried this, as long as I have the other.


Lin. Pray my Lord, do not persuade your Friend, all this earnest is a jest, I
allow you as much mirth as you please, so the conclusion be serious.


Pan. We leave the success unto the Fates; -- Clearcus may in time have pity
on you Lindamira, he does not yet believe, you are in earnest.


Cle. Nor ever shall do Madam, till I see her heart break, and then 'twill be
too late.


Lin. He dissembles well, for so young a Scholar Madam.


Lon. We have done all well me thinks, and now it is time that we retire.


Cle How soon may I make my next visit to you Madam?


Pan. As often as you please my Lord, at public hours.


Exeunt Silvander, and two Lords. Lin. How did I perform my part Madam?


Pan. You fell too soon into your humor, he sees you mock him.


Lin. That Is all I aim at, he has too much wit to be abused; my only business
is to let him see, that he cannot cozen me; -- I believe you will see this
Scene changed, at his next visit, if I have any skill, you will be troubled
with him.


Pan I am armed at all points, against all men, and him most.


Enter Theodocia, and Ladies. The. Oh Cousin! I am freed from all my fears, and
come to rejoice with you.


Pan. I have rejoiced already Madam, and have begun a Scene of mirth, will hold
us long; -- Had your Highness come a little sooner, you had sound the late
Convert Lonzartes, and his Friend Clearcus here, who is become my a vowed
Gallant, and looks as if he liked our company already.


The. Then you have hopes to cure him; -- Pray order it so, as I may come to
your next meeting, my heart is now so light, that I could play with any thing;
-- Can I have no part in your Comedy?


Lin For two reasons, your Highness can only be a looker on ^tis petty Treason
to make love to you, though in jest; and then your beauty is too dangerous to
be dallied with; these be edge-tools, too sharp for us to play with.


The. Why may not Princes participate in such innocent mirth? we make stricter
Rules then need; true virtue will shine through such thin clouds without a
prejudice, and be above the reach of vile tongues.


Pan. I Madam, if you could show a rule, to distinguish between Innocence and
Guilt; -- But we often see that Angelical virtues are aspersed, by malicious
tongues, and no quality exempt, from rude censures.


Lin. I differ in opinion, Princes may enjoy harmless mirth, as freely as we;
to be too much reserved, does look like disguise.


The. I would be so merry Lindamira. as should defy all scandal, and with an
open face justify it to the world; to wear always a stiff-state face, is
intolerable.


Pan Private persons may be bold that way, when few eyes observe, -- But
Princes are (...) on Pirameds, for all to see, an ^ immitate.


The. You shall not fright me from your mirth, with this grave lecture, are
they not, both my near Relations, whom you endeavor to reclaim^ why may not I
share in so worthy a design? -- I fear Lindamira she doubts least I may gain
her Gallant from her.


Lin She may well be jealous, if your Highness undertake him, I shall have
small hopes, if you two quarrel for him.


The. Why Lindamira? is Silvander vanished?


Lin. No Madam, the more Trophies I can fairly get by Victories on others, will
raise his Conquest higher, who gains me from the rest.


The. Thou art safe, and m^yest say any thing, Silvander is thy security
against all scandal, though you carry it thus unconcerned, the secret spread.


Lin. It Is time it should do so, now we do own
Our love, it is fit the secret should be known.
Your Highness may assist, while you look on,
Though only we, the active part do own.

The. Let us retire to council then.


Exeunt. Enter Teretia, and Geta. Ter. What is thy business honest Geta? How
does Lonzartes thy brave Lord?


Geta. My Lord is in good health of body Madam, his brains are only out of
order.


Ter. How meanest thou Geta, has he got a blow on his head?


Geta. Only some fumes from his heart Madam, makes his head addle, it is called
the Spleen of late, and much in fashion; his Lordship does desire to know the
Princess mind this morning, what she means to do all day?


Ter. This will be a hard question to the Princess fasting, why would he know
all this now?


Geta. Because he has some great affairs for me to manage, and cannot spare me
to ask, so often as I use to do


Ter. Of what nature, be thy particular queries Geta?


Geta. He would know how she slept last night? in what health now? by what hour
she will be dressed? when to her devotions? and then, where she walks this
morning? and if she dine in public? then how she intends to pass her time
till night? else I must come twenty times, for what you may at once dispatch me.


Ter. And does Lonzartes send thee, to enquire all this at on^e?


Geta. These women are so silly, they Aside. cannot reach a deep design; -- No
but he does every day make me trou^le my self, and every body that I meet, to
ask these questions severally, which I would do at once, to show him I am a man
of quick dispatch.


Ter. Oh! is that the matter? I can fit thee with one answer to all these; --
Tell thy Lord, the Princess did take cold last night, and will keep her bed all
day.


Geta I like it well, and wish her Highness would do so this month.


Ter. Out Traitor, I Will make thy Lord brain thee for that wish.


Geta Why Madam? I meant no harm, 'twas but to save you the trouble, and me the
same questions to morrow, and so on till Doomsday, I think.


Ter Well Sir, for this time, 'le not complain of you, this Jest shall excu^e
your knavery.


Geta. This will be a play day for me, I like this lying a Bed well.


Exeunt. THE THIRD ACT.
Enter Lonzartes, and Clearcus. Cle. TEll me then who Cloris is?


Lon. I dare not trust thee yet.


Cle. I will know now, or break all Friendship with you.


Lon. I swear I must not yet.


Enter to them Theodocia, Pandora, L^ndamira, Te^etia, and Ladies, and
Silvander. Cle. Then look to your self, least I discover Cloris.


The. Where did you leave my Father Lonzartes?


Lon. I have not seen the Prince to day Madam.


The. I was told, that you were walking with him just now.


Cle. That may well be Madam, for his brains do crow of late; -- do ye see how
he stands; -- Lonzartes the Princess speaks to ye.


Lon. To me, does your Highness command me anything?


Silvander, and Lindamira entertain themselves in whisper. Cle. Did not I tell
you Madam, that his brains are turned he neither hears, nor sees of late; --
The Idea of his Seraffique love, takes him wholly up, from all converse with us
mortals.


Lon. Hold your prateing, or I shall be angry.


Pan. What has made you so grave of late Lonzartes? all your wonted mirth is
gone.


Lon. No man is always in good humor Madam.


Cle. He Is in love Madam, on my knowledge, over head and ears in love.


Pan. In love, Lonzartes, I thought you had not been at leisure, to be in love;
-- It Is your fault Clearcus, that have not counseled your Friend better.


Cle. Thus am ^ chid for your folly; who reject all my councels, and refuse
all my approv'^ Antidotes, which do preserve me against that Serpent (you call
love) while he conversed with me, he was safe Madam.


Lon. Thou have fooled enough Clearcus, the Princess and al^ the company are
weary of it: -- If your Highness allow him this freedom, he will grow
troublesome.


The. Is it Love Lonzartes? or is Clearcus only merry with you?


Lon. Your Highness* knows him too well, (...) credit all he says this way, he
is at thi^ time, very angry that I have chid him for his lewd life, an^ have
withdrawn my self from his ill company* which he imputes to my being in love.


Cle I say he is in love, most seriously in love^ shall I unmask this grave
Reformado, and (...) you the Lady now?


The. If Lonzartes be content, I would gladly see her, whom he thinks worthy of
his heart.


Cle. No matter for his consent Madam so you like it. -- And thus I begin my
trial; -- By your good leave Lady -- It Is not here; -- nor is it this; -- nor is
it you Lady?


He holds them a'd to Lonzartes, one by one. Lin. I lament the loss of such an
honor.


Lon. Thou art become a pretty fool Clearcus, do thou not observe how all the
Court do laugh at thee?


Cle. Yes, and shall make them laugh at you, (...) have done; if Pandora will
make the next trial.


Pan I am content to try, what this will come to.


Cle. Now Sir, have at you; -- It Is not your good fortune neither Madam.


The. How can you make Lonzartes an amends, for all this abuse.


Cle. I will give him present satisfaction, if your H^ghness will permit me to
bring him to you?


The. To me! think you Lonzartes is in love with me?


Cle. It Is a Cloris in the clouds, one much above his reach, which you only are
Madam.


The. With all my heart, I shall be proud to own his conversion, as a Trophie
of my honor.


Cle. See if his guide do not make him avoid the trial; -- stop him there; --
Lonzartes the Princess calls you.


Lonzartes is going out. Lon. I Will cut thy throat.


Cle. He threatens me, -- guilty I Will (...); -- now Madam, do you see no (...)
in his face? -- no change yet? -- speak all, -- you are all assistants in this
Judgment.


Lonzartes throws him off in anger. Lon. It will disturb a Saint, to be thus
subject to the fancies of a fool.


The. Be not disturbed Lonzartes, you take this in earnest, which we look on as
a jest, only to pass the time; Clearcus has more wit, then to be in earnest.


Lon. I hope your Highness will not prefer his follies, before my professions,
who disclaim such (...) presumption.


The. If you turn this jest to earnest Lonzartes, I shall believe Clearcus; --
I take it now as R^llier^; -- I wonder Lindamira you get not hold of some young
lovers heart?


Lin I have twenty in store Madam, more then I know what to do with.


Pan Then you allow as many lovers, as you can get, and mean to choose the best.


Lin I think it is credit for women to be admired and honored by worthy men; it
shows a value, to move so many to a general Esteem, and must ^e the woman's
(...) if she deserve a censure.


The. You are in the right Lindamira, men may design, ^ut wo^en may destroy,
faster then they ^an (...); my thanks unto Clearcus for our mirth.


^le. Mirth ought to be our business Madam. --

The an^ry gods aff^rds cross Fates to give
Us (...) enough, and troubles while we live.

^xeunt Lonzartes and Clearcus ^everally. Enter the Prince and Lords, who meet
the Ladies going off. Prince. We were now discoursing of your Gallant Pandora,
have you hopes to work this miracle?


Pan. This Lady and I, have ventred our credits on this conversion Sir.


Prince. To recl^im him, were a good work; but suppose he fall in l^ve with
either of you.


Pan. At his pe^il that, let Lindamira look to her self, I am safe.


Lin. I have a sure retreat Sir, it is but see^ing to comply, and (...) give ore;
for he can love none that he can conquer, and I am resolved rather to be
vanquished, then not to be rid of him when I see my time.


Sil. Could all her Beauty with my love expire
Her flowing Wit, would s^ill create new fire
[Aside.
Enter to them Clearcus and Lonzartes. Prince. You two I know, come now from
exercizing of your ^roopes.


Cle. No Sir, we went hence just now; I wish my Troop hereto guard me.


Prince. Have you an Enemy in view Clearcus?


Cle. I have many Sir, that have ^ob'd m^ of my peace; I cannot sleep of late,
but have a thousand fancies, which do set my brains on fire.


Prince. Take heed it prove not love.


Cle. That is the danger Sir, for if Pandora do keep her resolve for single
life; I may be in love; for I do feel strange alterations that I know not what
to make of.


Lin. Have you no affection left for me my Lord? can you so soon forget your
last nights professions?


Cle. Now Sir, you see how I am assaulted, I shall be pulled in pieces
presently.


Prince. Si'vander and I, will secure you from Lindamira.


Cle. If I were assured you could Sir, I should like her wit, and humor well,
-- but I fear, -- if I should be in earnest, she would be so too.


Lin. You see his inclination is for me Madam, so that what ever he shall say
to you hereafter, is meant to me.


Cle. Nor so, nor so, sweet Lady, I do respect Pandora, above all her Sex; you
throw out hoocks to catch young Gallants, the neglects those are laid for her,
that's my danger.


Princ^ What riddle is this ^learcus? do thou desire, that thy desires may
not be answered?


Cle Yes Sir, from some persons, for if my love ^e returned, all ends in the
fruition, (as most ^^amples show,) But if Pandora keep her resolve for single
life, then I can raise my fancy while I live* to ^doration of her beauty, and
that virtue, with a continual delight, which will last while I last.


The. You are then my Lord, the happiest lover living, for you will find my
Cousin, just as you wish.


Pan. Pray Madam, answer not too fast for me, for if I find Clearcus a person
of such Noble Nature, beyond what I did ever hope to meet in man; I may change
my Opinion of men for his sake; and therefore it is best to find some other
sport, least we destroy each other.


He starts. Cle. Look you now? I am Treypand.


The. Start not Clearcus, she but mocks you, you are both engaged for this
month to Entertain us, and your selves, no going off now.


Pan. I shall not break Covenants.


Cle. Nor I Madam, though I do sometimes reminde you of your resolve against
Marriage, whereon depends my bliss, secure me but of that, and I am ever yours.


Pan I shall endeavor what I can, to give you that satisfaction


Cle. I kiss your fair hand on that word, which has given new life to my
doubtful heart, and now I do de^ie Lonzartes gravity, to put his heart in a
more loving dress, then mine shall be hereafter.


Prince. If Lonzartes can love too, my wonder ceases.


The. He is my servant Sir, and has a chief part in the Comedy.


Prince. I like your pastime well, but me thinks Lonzartes looks as if he were
compelled unto his part, and will do it s^urvily.


Lin. That Is the sport Sir, and will afford the more variety.


Lon. I shall be glad Sir, if I might be excused.


The. By no means Servant, what an affornt is this, that I must beg your
favor, in the face of the whole Court to own me?


Prince. You must not be so grave Lonzartes, all is for our mirth.


Cle. Now Sir, have not I done your work for you?


Lon. Would thou were hanged, hold thy peace.


Cle. Give me better words, or I Will talk aloud.


Lon. Was ever man thus hampered, between jest and earnest?


Lin. They are comparing notes in private; there is Treachery in their faces;
I Will play no more.


Prince. When begins the love Clearcus? this is only talking of it.


Cle. It is begun already Sir; if I had not valued this Excellent Lady above
the World; I had not ^aine this care to secure my interest to a perpetuity.


Lin. Madam, you are not to believe a word of this, for he has with the same
grave face, sworn the same to me but Yesterday.


Cle. That was in jest Madam, but now every action of my life, shall justify
each syllable I utter unto you.


Pan. I shall endeavor to believe it my Lord, and yet allow you the same
Christian liberty with Lindamira, and the rest, as you had before.


Cle. Madam, you speak, as though you did not value my respects, now my whole
soul is set to serve, and honor you alone.


Pan. I must confess, I cannot change my faith, so fast as you do your
discourse; -- And then as I remember my lesson, is to keep my distance, least I
loose my lover.


Cle. True Madam, as to comply, but you are to see, and credit my ambitious
love, and to admit it with the same Esteem, I serve you.


Pan. How can I do that, and not return you love for love? and then you will
despise me; pray my Lord, at your next visit, bring my part in writing, that I
may not err in it.


Prince. She is in the right Clearcus, you now seem to seek such
contradictions, as all the Court will laugh at; consult with Lonzartes against
your next visit.


Exit Prince and Train. Lon. If he will follow my advise, he may do well Sir;
-- now we are alone, tell me what crotchets next? prithee make me understand
what thou would have Pandora do?


Cle. I think you were best release me the residue of my mon^h, that I may go
se^k my wits, where I last left them; -- must I see none of my old Friends,
until this month be over?


Lon. If you consider your promise, not see one of them.


Cle. Then shall I be lost, if those preservatives be all forbid me; I do find
already love will be Predominant.


Lon. The better for you if it be; -- let us now talk seriously; -- suppose
Pandora may be won, can you fancy a happiness on Earth, beyond having her?


Cle. Yes, I do fancy that having twenty, is better then any one in ^hristendom.


Lon. Thou do not love then, else, that one beloved, has more variety then a
thousand.


Cle. Make but that good, I Will marry her to morrow.


Lon. You think then she is already at your dispose.


Cle. When she once sees that I am in earnest, she will be, what I will have
her; and the truth is Lonzartes, I do like her best of all I ever talked with,
and have great fear that I shall be like other men, who never value what they
have, which makes me cover what I cannot get.


Lon. Suppose some other do obtain her, while you are thus long resolving?


Cle. Nay, I am resolved no other shall ever have her.


Lon. And you resolve for her too.


Cle. Yes, she cannot in Honor engage to any, while I pretend.


Lon. Art thou turned fool, to think thus? be more serious, or thou will be
dispis'd.


Cle. Why do you not allow me some relief then? to live a whole month honest,
will put my blood into a flame; I have tempted all I meet, and all within these
Walls prove honest.


Lon. By your own Experience then, you will find that Courts are Nurseries of
virtue, and are only scandalized by such vilde persons, as would have the
clearest innocence aspersed, that their own guilts might be no wonder; -- you
find few virtuous persons, amongst Centurers.


Cle. That Is true, but take heed Lonzartes, you do not lead me into snares that
will destroy me, for I already find some inclinations toward Pandora, which I
am ashamed to own, least I be laughed at.


Lon. You have reason, for there can none of us believe thee.


Cle. You have made me a fine Gentleman in a few days; -- if Pandora be of
your mind, adieu to your Philosophical love.


Lon. I hope thou art too fast to free thy self. --

Thou playest with flames which undiscovered burn,
Until they do thy heart to Ashes turn.

Exit Lonzartes. Cle. Did ever man betray himself as I have done? by putting
setters on in jest, which already are become so fixed, I cannot shake 'um off;
but must humbly beg to be allowed to worship that Divine Nature I so much
dispis'd in virtuous women, and must now confess: --

If I do neither Faith, nor Favor find,
The god of Love is Just, though he be blind.
Exit.
Not^, that all the Play through, when Silvander and Lindami^a (...) Enter
Theodocia and Lindamira. Lin. If your Highness do consider Lonzartes's Worth,
and his great Birth, as it deserves; whose Ancestor was not many Ages ^ince, by
yours put by this Dukedom, on a nice point. (as I have heard;) so that to me
Lonzartes's love, looks like a Divine direction, to his Restoration.


The. I am of Pandora's mind for single life, and have as sm^ll a value for
that idle passion you call love, as she.


Lin. Your Highness may as well judge what they do in China, as guess at our
Felicities that love? -- I can kiss the ground that my Silvander trea^s on,
with more re^sh, then all other joys can bring me.


The. You have high fancies that lead you on to hopes, which you may never find.


Lin. These hopes are more delightful then an Age of dull life without them;
if your Highness did converse as much with me, as with Pandora, I should
convert you.


The Why do you not then change her severity against men?


Lin. I had not the Honor to be known to her, before her heart was set another
way; but yet l'le try what I can do.


The. I wish Silvander may answer your expectation Lindamira; but if such
honor, and such bliss accompany your loves, why thus long carried on in the
dark? and why not yet avowed?


Lin. It Is now avowed unto the Duke, though I took time to know my Gallant,
before I did admit his love, and on long trial found his silent looks, did
speak more truth, then such loud noyses, as most passions make


The. You praise Silvander as if you meant to sell him.


Lin. He is no Prince Madam, and is therefore safe from you.


The. The less safe, if I so pleased; -- do you believe his virtue, and his
love so great, that I could not win him from you for a Friend of mine?


Lin. I do, and shall not think him a loss, who can be won from me, by the
greatest Princess of the World?


The. If I could once see such a man, I might change my opinion.


Lin Why don't you try ^onzartes?


The. He is too much concerned to be played with; -- you dare not venture your
fine man then?


Lin. I dare, and do desire it withal my heart, and do voluntarily engage, not
to work against your Highness.


The. And I am resolved to try his faith to you, it may cure Lonzartes to see
himself neglected, when another chosen, though but in jest, for I can pity,
though I do not love him.


Lin. And it is my desire to have Silvanders faithful love, made Eminent by this
temptation.


Enter Lonzartes, and Silvander to them. The. In what humor le^t you Clearcus
(...) Lords?


Lon. In such as does become his greatness Madam.


The. Most brave men are often puffed up with vain glory, that does Eclipse
those virtues, which themselves do overvalue.


Lin. Your Highness is severe to men, but all are not so vain.


The. Most are, when we do value them too much; -- yet I confess I am well
pleased, when I find men worthy my Esteem.


Lin. How does that appear? when your Highness does despise mankind by your
resolves against them.


The. To show how much you are mistaken; unpin this Jewel; -- wear this
Silvander for my sake; I Will own it to the World, that I do value men of Worth.


Sil. Madam, I understand not what this kind of favor means; I hope your
Highness does not choose me for mirth.


The. Do you Silvander raise mirth from my Favor? -- come with me Lindamira;
-- I do command you to stand near us within hearing; -- I will not run the
hazard of any Censure, by this trial to satisfy my curiosity concerning
lovers, such high Romantic lovers, who soar above the re^ch of all temptations.


Lin. I shall obey you Madam, though I desire it not.


[Exeunt Ladies. The Men stand amazed. Sil. Can you guess Lonzartes, what this
tends to?


Lon. It Is a Riddle far beyond my understanding.

[Exit Lonzartes.
Lindamira Reenters to Silvander. Lin. Wake, wake Silvander, the Sun shines
bright upon thee; Theodocia dotes on thy virtues, and will advance thy youth,
much faster then thy own wishes can propose.


Sil. How Lindamira, have you so mean thoughts of me?


Lin. So high thoughts, why may not the Princess neglect the Corinthian for
you? such things have been in story.


Sil. You speak, as if you wished it.


Lin. Can I wish you well, and not appla^d it?


Sil. You cannot fancy me a greater curse, unless your own heart be turned
against me.


Lin. The Princess desires your Company in the next Room; I can stay no longer.

[Exit Lindamira.
Sil. I have so much to think on, that I know not what to say; -- the Princess
unexpected favors, with Lindamira's no concern, begets such wonder, as does
amaze me -- I will not go; -- and yet I must, or make my self Ridiculous, by
judging what I cannot guess at.

Exit.
Enter Lonzartes. Lon. Have I thus long adored the Princess? and still
approached her with the same trembling, I draw near the Altar, for this scorn
at last, -- before my face, to court a man, she knows engaged unto another, a
man of so much lower quality then I; this I confess does make my Faith stagger;
-- Silvander was as much surpised as I, -- Lindamira too was out of Tune; --
If Theodocia can go less, this change will be more my admiration, then her
virtue was.


Enter Lindamira, passing in as by him. Lon Now Madam, whither so fast?


Lin. To see which way the wind blows; -- pray my Lord, where is your heart now?


Lon. In the Princess lodgings, with yours; -- or can you tell me better, where
your own is?


Lin. I change my mind so often, that I know not where I left my heart last.


Lon. Are you no more concerned? Suppose Silvander change his opinion? Princess
have mighty power to overcome men's hearts.


L^n. Why then his opinion will be changed? -- I cannot value him, that leaves
to value me; -- methinks my Lord, the Princess favor to Silvander, should
abate your passion for her.


Lon. My desi^es go no higher, then to look, and wonder at her perfections! my
Esteem cannot be called love, beyond what Duty, and Obedience does allow; --
but how does Silvander receive this great Honor?


Lin. They are now in private; you may judge by his exalted looks when you see
him next; -- I am glad your Lordship is no more concerned.


Lon. This is a forced discourse Lindamira, pray do not mock me, who have a
true value of your worth.


Lin. The truth is, the Princess often angered at my confidence in Silvanders
love; only now tryes if she can shake his faith, by higher propositions; --
and my hope is, that his virtue may beget in her, some better thoughts for men,
which will do your business, and confirm mine, for Silvander is above
temptation; and I think Lonzartes does deserve what he desires.


Lon. You oblige me to say, your confidence does merit the greatest faith from
man; but is Silvander of your Plot?


Lin. No, 'twould then be none, nor I no trial have of his sincerity.


Lon. These are dangerous sports, and we too late may find them so; -- the
Princess and you are both too bold, and do too much rely on your own beauties.


Lin. If Silvander can be won, I can smile at such a loss.


Lon. It Is ca^^e to say so, when you fear it not; but I have seen stout hearts
fall to pieces by such a blow; -- you have settled my heart again, and I advise
you from these dangerous sports, lea^ they blow up your joys, when you are
mo^^ secure; we know our present minds, but cannon foresee what we shall like
to morrow: --

Our Nature with such frailty is endowed,
It Is well if present moments be allowed

Exeunt Severall^. Enter Theo^ocia, and Silvander, two Ladies at a distance;
Lindamira is seen near o^serving them. The. Is your heart my Lord so fixed on
Lindamira, that no Person, nor any Argument, can (...) preva^^ with you to
change?


Sil. Our Souls Mad^m, are so united, that hope death can only ma^e that
separation.


The Can no Fortune, nor any Q^ality (...) you to Honors, and Happiness,
beyond what you can ever hope from ^indamira? Nor a great beauty dis-ingage
your heart from her?


Sil. None can ever move me to a thought (...) change Madam.


The. What if she have chosen higher, and give^ way for your preferment also


Sil. I can smile at all this, when your Highnes^ (...) merry; -- ^indamira and
I Madam, do understand a happiness, can never be dissolved; we are above
temptation.


The. Suppose my Father be her choice, will you pretend to love, and hinder her
advancement, by your claim? -- Suppose my Dear Cousin Pandora, have like
affection unto you; and puts on this severity to others, in design only to
gain you? will you let such a beauty, of so high virtue and extraction dye for
you?


Sil. Your Highness sure does fancy what is impossible? -- but if all this were
so, I could dye in gratitude to serve Pandora, but do prefer Lindamira's love,
and virtue, above the brightest beauty, or greatest Empire this World has.


The. Can there be such worth in men? how have I been misinformed? -- Princes
who do not converse, know not the World they Aside. live in, but take all on
trust from others; -- You believe that I am now in jest Silvander, and do not
deal so freely, as I expect.


Sil. By all that's -- I am fixed, past a^ering; -- if your Highness knew the
joys, which do accompany united hearts, you would sooner undertake to pull
down Sta^s from Heaven, then hope a separation, where true love Triumphs.


The. I am fully satisfied, that ^indamira has what she deserves, a worthy
Lover; -- appear now ^indamira, and call in Lonzartes with the rest: -- I am
converted.


Enter Lindamira with Lonzartes and Ladies The. Here Madam, you are co^pled by
the gods, Silvander does deserve your confidence; -- Now wear that Jewel, I
before gave you in jest Sir, as a mark of my Favor, for your approved virtue.


Lin. Has your Highness any better thoughts for Marriage, then you had?


The. I have found an honest worthy man, beyond my Expectation; -- Lonzartes
you look sad.


Lon. My heart is not so full of feathers as it was, but is of late become a
lump of lead.


The. We have indeed been all too serious of late; come Lindamira, let us find
some Entertainment to refresh us on the (...) this Evening; Lonzartes, you, and
Clearcus may go with us* if you please?


[Exeunt all but Lonzartes. Lon. Your Highness does honor us; -- what these
various fancies tend to, is above my understanding; -- As Nature has framed
Women of a more refined matter, then us men, so she has given to some, Souls so
much above ours Excellent, that their Intrincique purity, dazles our Judgments
more then their brightest beauty does our eyes; -- Theodocia is cetainly
without blemish; -- yet may have some notion of my love, which she thinks not
fit to cherish, because she likes not me: -- And yet may have a virtuous
concern for my birth, and sufferings, such as her good Nature is unwilling to
destroy; -- It Is Theodocia's Excellencies makes me thus humbly seek my Right,
as her Gift; Else my Sword should make my way to ascend this Throne, which is
my own; -- but no more of that yet: --

-- For if I can be rightly understood,
My love may save the expense of so much blood.
[Exit,
FOURTH ACT.
Pandora with Lindamira are seen sitting on a Couch; Enter Clearcus to them,
they rise. Cle. MAdam It Is a felicity to love you, though neglected; by what
Name then shall I call my Joy? Now you allow my Love, to what height raise my
thoughts? -- Shall I dare to enter upon such a state of bliss? -- To be thus
snatched into so much ^ight, from the long Chaos I have lived in, may prove
more ruinous to me, then that Hell I came from.


Pan. My Lord, you speak a new Language I understand not.


Cle. Alas Madam, I have this night seen Visions, and do ^ind my passion,
growing much above my own command; -- For when I look on your eyes, I forget
that there are god^, and shall do such Idolatry to you, as will provoke them,
to make me more miserable, then you can wish me happy; -- But when I consider
how vast a Chasme. your resolves have made between us; I sink into such an
abyss of misery, that I can never get out of.


Pan. I understand you less, and less; -- The more you say, the more you do
confound my Judgment.


Lin. All this Madam, is only to let us see how he could talk; if any Women
were worthy of his real love; -- pray my Lord proceed, -- I shall take Notes
and Edify.


Pulls out (...) Table Book. Cle. Your mirth Madam, is now out of season, when
every word I utter flows from my wounded heart.


Lin. Why do you not speak to me then? who can change my mind as often as your
self? I was made for you; this Lady is impregnable.


Cle. I yield Lindamira, let not your wit destroy a man that does submit to
mercy; I beg quarter.


Lin. Oh! do you so?


Pan. It Is enough Lindamira, that he does confess himself (...) come, let it
be Registered amongst our Vict^^ies; -- And now my Lord, what is your next
desire?


^le. My next Madam, I have scarce begun with this, you d^ (...) all I say for
mirth; Does not my looks and Language show an Alteration? -- All (...), that
did possess my idle head are vanished, and I become a serious man: -- Your
(...) is already wrought, and I now see the only way to my (...), is to gain
what I so much (...).


Lin. Ex^ellently well Acted, this might cozen twenty that did not know him.


Pan. You shall do well my Lord to pursue this new path, until you do obtain a
general opinion of your virtue; But I hope you would not have us (...) it at
(...) ^ight.


Cle. Though my love cannot yet gain credit in your Esteem, do not deny me the
joy to think that you see how much I love, and honor you.


Pan. This is too serious for our Comedy my Lord.


Cle. Nothing can be too serious Madam, to express my love, by which the gods
are pleased to bring me to them; thus by forbidding what might entice me to
slight Paradise, by having had you here: -- It Is fit then that I submit, and
raise a joy from what I am now too apt to repine at, for it is a blessi^g to be
so fixed, as Antidates my Elysium here on Earth; this Souls joy will endure like
its own nature, unto Eternity.


Pan. You are cured then Clearcus, and will unto the Prince confess your
conversion, if we call you to it?


Cle. Propose away for my acknowledgement, and try.


Lin. Let us take time Madam to consider of it, least we loose half the
Entertainment by our have, and so spoil the jest.


Cle. Madam, let not this Ladies mirth prevail with your good nature, to
afflict a man, who can live only by your smiles.


Pan. I must confess I have some pain to hold in my smiles thus long, for this
serious way of fooling I expected not from you my Lord.


Cle. Why Madam, do you take all this for jest still?


Pan. Yes indeed do I.


Cle. By all the powers above, I do Adore you, next to them I Worship.


Lin. That Is no Oath Madam, for he Worship^ none.


Pan. I have the same thoughts Lindamira, and am safe.


Cle. What a Monster am I grown, give me credit Madam, or give me death? -- If
I do not love you, let Jove strike me with sudden Thunder; or I will gladly
seal what I have said with my be^ blood, if nothing less will satisfy.


Pan. Hold Clearcus.


[He Dra^^ Lin. Oh! let him alone, he will not hurt himself, he only hopes to
fright us.


Pan. My Lord you fright me now, and since you think fit to turn our Commick
Scene into a Tragedy; I shall quit my part in it; and from thi^ time, admit no
farther visits from you: -- Let us retire Lindamira, his converse grows
dangerous.


Exeunt Ladies. Cle. This had been my fate, had I engaged a little farther, and
this the fruit of chaste, virtuous love; what a folly it is, to give our freedoms
up, unto the will of Women, so humbly to obey, those we are Created to command:
-- But I am safe yet, and will now play with 'um, at their own game; and
through a seeming sorrow for my rejection, laugh at them, who think to laugh at
me.


Enter Lonzartes. Lon. A good day unto my Friend.


Cle. You speak too late Lonzartes, this is a fatal day, and I am studying how
I may make it more Eminent by death, then by my sufferings.


Lon. Why what is the matter man? have you visited the Ladies before they are
dressed, and made 'um froward.


Cle. Thy love Lonzartes has ruined me; -- yet I thank thee for my conversion,
I shall now dye a sober man.


Lon. Thy looks speak some disaster, tell me the worst, that I may join to find
a Remedy.


Cle. In a word then, I do love Pandora, as she deserves, and did so to the
life express my love; that in spite of Lindamiras mirth, she did believe it,
and has forbid my farther visits.


Lon. It Is not possible that she can be so fooled, she forbad thee in jest,
come let us go to her now.


Cle. I Will swear she did forbid me, and in great anger turned from me, I dare
not go.


Lon. This is pretty, would thou have me believe thou love?


Cle. Lonzartes, I am not in humor to be played with.


Lon. Nor I in humor to be fooled; what would thou have me say, when thou
talk thus to me? thou in love! H^, ha.


Cle. What shall I say? what do, to beget faith in thee? -- Pandora's
resolution against Marriage, which I so much rejoye'd at, is fatally become my
scourge, and I must dye, or have her.


Lon. That Is the only way to obtain belief; do but hang thy self, and then a
Printed Ballad ( The Dary Maids greatest Faith;) will make them swear thou
dyedst for love.


Cle. Do my looks agree with so much jest? does not my face declare, my heart
does love?


Lon. No, nor ever can do to me, would thou have me belie my self, that thou
may laugh at me? these shallow Plots are lost on me.

[Exit Lonzartes
Cle. This is right, had I been fooled into the Platonic pound; I might have
knocked my head against the walls, and never been believed; -- Thus I blow away
those bubles, those (...) Lectures of chaste love, which lead silly morca^^ into
slavery; -- Ha Sanga.


Enter Sanga. Sanga. Your pleasure Sir.


Cle. Go presently, and summon all that merry Crew, (who danced the other day,)
to Sup with me this Night; and bid the Music come.


[Exit Sanga. Sanga. I go Sir.


Cle. I will retreat while I am safe, and be Armed against my Wife, Virtuous,
Chaste Friends, with their Cob-web Netts, so subtly laid to catch me; -- Thus
I throw all their Enchantments off; -- And now like the Grand Seignor, after
some great Victory atcheiv'd; -- I will retire to my Seraglio.

[Exit.
Enter the Duke, with Theodocia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and Irain: -- and
Silvander. Duke. You tell me a story beyond belief Theodocia, Clearcus plays
with you all this while; he love?


The. If Pandora be mistaken, he will triumph over Women kind for ever.


Pan. I wish it were no worse Sir, it is I who now am to be pitied, who for the
common sport, and for his good, have brought an evil on my self, I cannot bear.


Duke. Why Pandora, he is descended of our own blood, and his Estate
proportionable to his Birth? so that if you can raise his virtues above his
vices, you will have no cause to murmur at his love.


Pan. True Sir, if I were not engaged to a single life, much might be said, to
set Clearcu's merrits above mine.


Lin. Is there no dispensation for such resolves Madam? when it may be
disputed, whether the gods approve them? -- They give us Laws enough, we need
none of our own making.


Pan. My heart will never consent to alter my resolves.


Lin. We shall have enough to do then.


The. ^et us all agree to laugh him out of it.


Lin. You will find little cause for mirth, when you see Clearcus next Madam.


The. Can so few hours alter a man of his temper, so much?


Lin. He is ashamed of his first Principles, and is angry at that shame; He
hates himself for loving, and loves so much, he dares not wish it less; This
mixture of passions, does beget such a confusion of thoughts, that makes him
look as if he had se^ on naught but sighs, and tears this twelve Month; and I
fear we shall have cause to turn our laughter into sorrow for him.


Duke. I Will give him Commands that shall divert him; -- come with me Theodocia.


Exeunt Duke and Theodocia. Lin. It Is great pity so brave a man should be so
lost.


Pan. It Is so Lindamira, but how can it be helped? must I become mad, because he
is so; -- 'Twas not a rash word, by chance let fall, but on debate and mature
judgment, because I saw none so happy after Marriage as before; -- Why may not
I then live and dye as free as I was born?


Lin. You see why, because the gods do not allow so great felicity on Earth, as
might keep us from ever wishing to be with them; pray whoever heard of a pair
of true Lovers, that desired to be in Heaven, if they might stay here till
Doomsday? It Is therefore for our good, that such united hearts are so rarely to
be found on Earth; take heed Pandora, that you bring not more evils on your
head, then you fore see.


Pan. I must now bear my Fortune as I may.


Lin. Though you have not met with many happy Marriages, I have heard of some,
who all their lives have had a constant spring of love; their passions so high,
and joys so great, each (...) to raise the others happiness above their own;
this I believe and hope for; -- Methinks till I am married, I am a thing laid
by, as if forgotten by the gods.


Pan It Is not high passions, nor great joys, I doubt to find, but their
continuance; -- suppose the Gallant Lovers to the Wars be sent, what (...) will
possess their frighted Ladies, till their return? and if miscarry, what will
their whole lives have to joy at after?


Lin. Those who stay at home, may have equal dangers, these are anticipated
dreams of evils, that may never happen; then you conceive not the joy those
dangers bring when they are over; this world affords us nothing to relish our
delights by, but such accidents as love, with some fears and dangers bring; It Is
sharps make sweet the sweeter.


Pan. But if I am satisfied with less joys, without those pains you find so
useful, why must I try to gain more happiness, then I do with for, when I have
joys enough already?


Lin. Joys enough Madam; there is no such thing in Nature, as enough of what
we love.


Pan. I am weary of this idle talk.


Lin. And I know no better Entertainment.


Enter to them Lonzartes, and Silvander. Pan. How think you Silvander, is
Clearcus what he seems?


Sil. Lonzartes knows him best Madam.


Lon. I do believe he loves, though I seem not to credit him, and am now
resolved to play with his passion, as he has done with mine; (...) entertain
the Princess rarely, to see how I shall anger him.


Sil. Is he enough fixed? to be so abused, for (...) neither Men, nor Women
have any faith in hi^ budding love, he may fly off for ever.


Lon. I am now going to see what humor he (...) in.


Sil. I Will wait on you.


Pan. Pray do, and let me know how I must be have my self, that would not hurt
him.


Lin. I can direct you best, if you will trust you^ self to me.


Pan. I shall trust you as far as any in this affairs* let us consult within.


Exeunt. Enter Clearcus and Sanga, with Men, and Women dancers. Cle. Welcome my
dear friends, I will be no more seduced by grave Lonzartes fooleries; this
night shall reunite us while we live: -- Is the Music come.


San. Not yet Sir.


Cle. I have broke through their Nets, and now the day and night are ours to
Revel in; we will be so merry, that our hearts shall seem much lighter then our
heels.


Enter Sanga. Sanga. Lonzartes, and Silvander are without.


Cle. They are come as I could with, I Will entertain 'um as they deserve; they
are my kind, chaste, virtuous, well-wishing spies; -- pray retire all Exeunt
Dancers. into that Gallery, while I dispatch my Court-Friends: -- Sanga shut
the windows close, then call 'um in, and say, that I am grown sad of late, Exit
Sanga. monstrous sad; -- Now for a grave face to suite with my disguise; I have
some fear my sides will burst, with holding in my laughter.


He sits in a sad posture. Enter Sanga with Lonzartes, and Silvander. Sanga.
Softly pray; -- for a strange Melancholy has seized him on the sudden; -- He
is now talking to Pandora.


Sil. She is not here.


San. He entertains her Idea in her absence with the same passion, he would
her; -- the only sure way for a lovers happiness; -- hark.


Cle. Blessed Angel, turn not away; -- these tears must be my daily ^ncence,
offered at your feet; if you refuse this Tribute from my captived heart; you will
turn the Elysium I enjoy, to Hell: Oh stay! and take my Soul with thee; -- that
gentle look! that: --


Lon. Why so sad fond lover? let not one repulse dismay so great a Conqueror;
thy next charge may prove more prosperous; -- we come to council thee Clearcus,
and to raise thy drooping Spirits by new hopes.


Cle Or to laugh at my affliction, whose Soul i^ sunk so low by my despair,
that all my Spirits are vanished; I must submit to my Captivity Lonzartes.


[He sighs. Lon. That sigh had almost blown me over, yet I am glad to see
this, and am now fully satisfied thou art in love, in love Clearcus: -- let me
Embrace my fellow-Prisoner, we will now shake our shackles, to the same sad
tune.


Cle. I know you came to mock me; -- but I must bear it.


Lon. Oh no! who can have so hard a heart? we pity you, and have some fears
Pandoras heart will break, when we relate your mighty sufferings; -- but if I
should sit thus in the dark, wo^ld it create the like Angelical Idea in my
brain Clearcus?


Cle This is barbarous, to catch a Lion in your Toils, and bait him like an
Ass; -- thus to render my passion Rediculous, will beget Pandor^^ scorn, and
may prove my destruction.


Lon. If she discern not your passion, how can she proportion her favors to
your merit?


Cle. Do I deserve this mirth from you, thus to highten my affliction?


Lon. Do you not? -- all that I can do this Twelve month, will not bring me on
equal terms for thy abuses: -- remember how you held me to the Ladies, and made
me your mirth, by which scandal you destroyed my credit with the Princess, this
is my revenge.


Cle. 'Twas a great scandal indeed to procure you the Princess leave to love
her; by my means you have obtained a happiness beyond your hopes, which all
your whining Poetry, or your Eternal sighs could ever reach; -- for which
special service; -- prithee good sweet Lonzartes spare (...) Hangs on him* me;
-- by our old Friendship I do beg; -- by thy own virtue, and unparalleled chaste
heart, I do conjure thee not to raise a public mirth out of my souls sorrow,
which you have brought me to.


Lon. Well then, if I find you do continue thus humbly penitent, and truly thus
afflicted, I will show more mercy then I found from you; -- come cheer up; --
we will ^igh, and condole together, Embraces Clearcus. and if possible, so
order our sad hearts, that both may the same moment break, and infect the world
with such a sorrow, as may fright the female Sex from like rigor unto men; so
shall we become a Noble Sacrifice to love, for the good of a whole Nation; --
or if you please, we will send for some of our old Gang to dance, and drink these
Melancholy vapors from our heart^, to let the Ladies see, their beauties are
not so destructive, as we make them believe.


Clearcus Embraces Lonzartes with great joy. Cle I marry Lonzartes, now thou
talkest like a Philosopher, now thou prescribest the only remedy for our
disease; -- Sanga, -- bid the Music strike a cheerful Air, and then call in
those Friends in the next room; -- Nay, if you allow this way of cure, I shall
soon expel loves venom from my heart into my heels.


Embraces Lonzartes. Lon. What is all this Clearcus, art thou mad still?


Lonzartes starts back Cle. I am wise, and do not mean to quit my cool,
pleasant, flowery paths, for your consumin^ flames of restless love, who walk
on tops of Steeples, and at that height, plead that your chaste desi^es are
pleasing to the gods; -- But I, who know the end of such fair flathes, as at
first appear with such folded Arms, and down cast looks, are but steps to
approach the Ladies fingers ends; --

-- Then by degrees grown bolder, you aspire,
Till naught but ruin, quench the subtle fire.

Enter Dancers Lon. What do thou mean by this misterious language?


Cle. I mean to follow thy advise, -- to sigh only when I make love to Ladies,
(their backs turned) I mean to dance, and sing as often as I can, that their
neglects may pieice no deeper then their eyes discern; -- here Lonzartes, this
Girl will cure the bite of a Tarantula, and drive the poison from thy heart.


Lon. Out Hypocrite; -- is this thy love unto Pandora? was all thy passion
counterfeit the other day?


Cle. No, 'twas fairly growing up to equal thine in all sincerity of Noble
thoughts; But the nice Lady would not permit it to take so deep root as yours,
before she blasted all my hopes, and in a moment let me see, that love is like
a bitter potion, which many taste, and flying away, rather choosing their
disease, then so ill a relished remedy; This made me return to my old Antidotes
Lonzartes; -- what think you of a heat or two before you go? -- call in the
Music.


Sil. Pandora was to blame, to throw him off so rashly.


Lon. Let us retire Silvander, this Air is infected.


Exeunt Lonzartes and Silvander. Cle. Go whine fond lover, go whine, I say, go
whine, While we cheer our hearts with We^ches and Wine, I say go whine.


[Exeunt Omnes. Here they Dance. Enter Lonzartes, Lindamira, and Ladies. Lin. I
do not wonder that he is fallen off, it was what I feared, when his passion went
so high, I saw Pandora was concerned, but we will bring it on again.


Lon. You are mistaken Madam, all he said then was jest, for he is now as mad
as ever; -- I left him Incirculed with six wild men, and as many wanton Girls,
prepared to dance and Revel all the night.


Lin. There is no harm in dancing my Lord, unless they do catch cold; you judge
Clearcus by what is past; but when I see him with Pandora next, I Will give my
opinion of his concern.


Lon. By what means may their meeting be procured?


Lin. We Will think on it.


Enter Theodocia, and Ladies to them. The. I am sorry Lonzartes that Pandora
has cast off Clearcus, which has occasioned his relapse, when a little patience
would have settled him in the way of virtue.


Lon. It Is every way what I expected not; his love was as strange as his
rejection, and his relapse in the old humor, beyond all the rest; -- I know
not what to think of him.


Lin. Let us bring them once more together, and I Will undertake to guess at both
their hearts; -- it may be govern 'um.


Lon. I Madam, but how shall they be brought together? when both would rather
see a Basaliske, then one another.


Lin. You may be mistaken my Lord, who judge by what you see, when it is our
business, and our virtue, not to show our hearts till a full trial, that men
are worthy of them; -- then you forget that Clearcus conversion, must be by one
he cannot conquer.


The. But if he will neither conquer, nor be subdued, how can his conversion
follow?


Lin. If your Highness can contrive an interview, I have a fancy in my head,
that may reconcile them, and effect what we all with.


The. I will send presently for Pandora, and entreat my Father to pretend some
business to call Clearcus hit her.


Lon. He will suspect.


Lin. Let him come, no matter what he suspects.


The. Do you Lonzartes, once more see what humor he is in. --

-- We must endeavor, and not fear to try,
But trust the Event, unto their destiny.

[Exeunt several^y. Enter Duke with Silvander and Lords. Duke. I ever thought
Clearcus did but mock, and laugh at their designs; his brains is not yet ripe
for serious love: -- But how does Theodoci^ look on Lonzartes?


Sil. With much neglect Sir.


Duke. That is not well, have you Silvander instr^cted Lindamira, that she may
inform Theodoci^ of Lonzartes Title to this Dukedom? and how much better then a
Foreign Prince, her Marrying him, will be applauded by our people, who are not
ignorant of his pretense.


Sil. I have Sir, and the Princess gives a serious ear to it, though she yet
makes no reply; a little of your Council and Authority, I believe may incline
her to a better value of him.


Duke. That shall not be wanting; Lonzartes (...) all that I can wish in a
successor; -- and his love looks so without design, that I will cherish it, and
try to win my Daughter to comply.


Sil. Your Highness will gain a double interest in all your Subjects hearts by
this honor to Lonzartes, who has merrits proportionable to your favor, and
his birth, all which his love gives Luster to.


Duke. I see it Silvander, and will recompense his Faith, and his Humility,
with my advice to Theodocia, who yet knows not his story.


Sil. The Princess must needs hear what every body talks, and all do with.


Duke. I shall now inform her fully of Lonzartes Right, too long held from him:
bid him meet me at my Daughters Chamber; I will no longer hide my purpose for
him: --

-- His Birth and Virtue, with his constant love,
Declares he never can unworthy prove.

[Exeunt. THE FIFTH ACT.
Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus. Cle. NO, I Will never see her more.


Lon. Do you not love at all?


Cle. Nor ever will; methinks love is like a smooth water, that Invites men to
Bath, and tumble in it with delight, until they be destroyed by Serpents,
which in the bottom undiscovered lie.


Lon. What means this ^imilie?


Cle. This Serpents bite, has Metamorphized you into a whining lover, into the
shadow of a man, of late become a shape without a Soul; why must I busy my
head with such Chymers, when I can please my self to my hearts wish, my own
way? -- Prithee sweet suppressed Prince, do not forsake me thus, for specious
shows of happiness, or vainer hopes of better days, these you will ever find
in Court; -- You are now safe, but when you grow wise, and serious, it will in
the Dukes head great jealousies create; and to let him see your virtue, may be
dangerous, and your pretense appear worthy of his fear.


Lon. That hazard is better, then what I now suffer, in the opinion of my best
Friends, who believe this wildness is my Nature, or such as may beget a habit
in me, which I can never put off; and thus my security in this disguise, may
become my ruin; -- I wish I could persuade you Clearcus to show forth that
virtue, all the World would wonder at.


Cle. To what end I pray? if the good Duke would give me employment fit for his
Kin^-man, and worthy of my Sword, I could soon be my self: But now I have
nothing else to do, and therefore play away my time in folly; and it is a hard
question which is best, for we know that too much wisdom does undo more men,
then it advances, or else begets eternal slavery to State Affairs, where the
wisest ever walk on needles points; -- I have weighed these things, and do
believe it is better to maintain the peace, and the security I now live in,
unregarded.


Lon. But you will loose the Dukes favor, and become contemptable to the whole
Court, if you continue thus Extravagant, what design can I have, by my desire
to see you great and glorious?


Cle. Have I not tried, and been misled? yielded to your wise Maxims, against
my own better judgment, and been rejected in the height of my Endeavors, to
be (as you call it) great, and glorious, is not this true?


Lon. Yes, in part.


Cle. I will no more of your advice, till you can cure your self.


Lon. I have an Honorable Argument for my love.


Cle. Who has not, until he be dispis'd?


Lon. Was it not your own desire to be negle^^ed? did you not declare against
all women, (...) you could conquer? you left Pandora no way (...) victory, but
by rejecting you; so that I can conclude a good success from what you raise
di^paire.


Cle. Ha! think you Pandora did reject me, (...) compliance with my humor only?


Lon. What else? can she be angry with you, (...) loving her too much?


Cle. You do surprise me with a discourse I look^ not for; -- but I will be no
more abused; -- will not see her.


Lon. How can you be reconciled then? shall (...) make love to you?


Cle. No, I abhor that thought beyond (...) anger, a woman Woo, that were
preposterous.


Lon. Will you treat by Ambassadors, and (...) by Proxy?


Cle. Nor so, that is only fit for Princes, who cannot meet to treat.


Lon. Will you have her; if she declares (...) would have you?


Cle. I shall never like her change of mind.


Lon. Can you tell whether you would have (...) or not?


Cle. That Is a harder question* then the other.


Lon. Will you have her by compulsion?


Cle. That were a Tyranny, would make her hate me ever.


Lon. shall the Duke by his Prerogative Power, in spite of both your teeth,
compel you both to compliance?


Cle. Let me think on this a little, at first fight, ^his looks likely to agree
us: -- if two im^ossibilities can make one possible, this might do our business.


Lon. Well, what do you resolve?


Cle. Nothing, why do you tempt me to farther evils? -- I know not what to
resolve, nor what to say; -- but will no more of love, my heart ^hakes at the
thought of my last trial; -- I blush to think how much less then man I was, and
how much more then woman I created her in those few hours I loved; --


Enter a Messenger. Messen. The Duke calls for Lonzartes.


Lon. I Will attend his Highness presently.


Cle. I take you for my Friend Lonzartes; -- do not discourse me into a Ruin,
you will share in.


Lon. I have no Rule for friendship above my desire to see you happy.


Cle. I believe it Sir, and beg your pardon for my distracted language; -- I
must attend the Duke to.


Lon. And I.


[Exeunt. Enter Pandora, and Lindamira. Pan. You tire me Lindamira, and chide
me for a fault I cannot own; I had no other way to free myself.


Lin. You might have checked his approach^^* with somewhat less severity, your
rigor may be get despair in him.


Pan. Despair of what? my undertaking (...) only on the Dukes command, to
afford him (...) visits, which I have done in hope of his conversion.


Lin. You did give over, before the work (...) perfected.


Pan. You speak as if the design to set him (...) were to inslave me to the
humor of a (...) man.


Lin. The wildest young men, do often pro^^ the soberest at the last; and the
truth is Mada^ we do all desire to see you and ^learcus conve^^ one another; so
to beget that unity of hearts which the World seeks most.


Pan. Do you believe that I who have a prejudice against the best of men, can
e're esteem the worst?


Lin. If Clearcus were under that notion, should have other thoug^ts; but when
I con^ide^ such men reclaimed, do often make good Husbands; I have hopes of him.


Pan. If his wildness were his only fault, time* and experience might reclaim
him.


Lin. If these be your only Exceptions M^dam, I wish you would trust me to
manage this affair.


Pan. You m^st not talk me into an Intr^^^ which ^ avoid; -- I do not love him.


Lin. You will do, when you have him, I know many have done so after Marriage,
who did not before.


Pan. That is too bold a venture for me, who have no faith in men; and those
Examples you mention so rarely to be found, my courage dares not undertake it;
pray no more of this.


Lin. The Princess desires your company at Court this Evening.

I did intend to wait on her.


Enter Duke, Theodocia, and Lonzartes. Duke. I have given you Arguments enough
on his behalf, which his dejected looks you see declare; -- Your favors
Theodocia should not be restrained, because his adoration is so great, he dares
not beg'um; come near Lonzartes.


The. Lonzarte's Worth is understood beyond the weak Rhetoric of flattering
words; he cannot wish to be more valued, then he is by me.


Lon. Nor will I ever Sue for favors beyond these you now afford me Madam; --
may I confirm my hopes, by understanding what you say my own way?


The. You may, for since my Father does so much advise for Marriage, I may
alter my opinion when I find just cause to value men, above my resolves against
them.


Lon. For Heavens sake Madam say no more, my breast cannot contain these
spreading joys you give me, my hopes increase too fast for my dispairing
heart, to comprehend these honors you allow, without an Extacy.


Duke. Theodocia, I shall never revoke the freedom I have given, to make your
own choice, though I direct you to Lonzartes, to whom (...) Ancestors have done
wrong.


The. This your indulgence Sir makes me mo^^ cautious how I proceed; --
Marriage is a conce^^ so great, I dare not at once resolve it, and the same day
choose the man: -- I can yet only say that I have altered my opinion in favor
of Lonzartes.


Lon. My Amazement, and my concern are too great to answer Madam, my felicity
is above the reach of a reply.


Duke. Theodocia, I have given you my be^^ council, and my full consent to
please your self.


The. I thank you Sir, and will endeavor to Regulate my heart to your advise;
and to Lo^zartes wish; -- give me but time to examine and approve what I am
willing to submit to.


Enter Pandora, and Lindamira to them, with Silvander. Duke. How is it Madam,
that you quit the field? before your undertaking be performed.


Pan. I have done my part Sir, which was on your command to allow him civil
visits, and to entertain the Princess, I complied with Lindam^^^ to try how our
Raleary would work on him, which did produce so unlooked for an effect, that I
was forced to quit my part, to save my self.


Duke. Were you in danger to be lost then? -- I did not think Clearcus had
prevailed so far; but if he be reclaimed, he will be worthy your esteem.


Pan. Your Highness did mistake me, I was in no danger to be lost through love,
nor at all concerned; for a man who does declare against all worth in women,
where he can get an interest: pray Sir, make me understand what you would have
me do?


Duke. We would have you marry Clearcus.


Pan. Whether he will or no; -- If I consent, can you prevail with him?


Duke. Do you comply, we will try what we can do?


Pan. I would not be Treypand into a Marriage I am so much averse to, in
confidence of his old humor, think my self secure, and be so lost.


Lin. You may ventute safely Madam, you see he is so great a Coward, that he
only dares pursue them that fly him, do but charge and he will run away.


Pan. If I were sure of that, I would seem any thing to be freed from farther
trouble.


Lon. Trust me Madam, he is now worse then ever.


Duke. Lonzartes, pray use your interest to bring him to us now.


[Exit Lonzartes. The. Do you think Cousin, we have a design to harm you?


Pan. No, but your Highness disputes me into a condition your self does not
approve; pray show me the way to this felicity, that I may credit what you say,
by what you do.


The. Will you then engage to marry Clearcus, the same day I marry?


Pan. Shall I choose your man, as you would mine?


The. Suppose I have already chosen.


Pan. I thought your Highness had been of my opinion; But if provided, I give
you joy.


The. Now you run too fast the other way, I am only toward marriage.


^an That journey seldom proves long Madam, when we look toward it.


Lin. That was said like a sage Sibell, the quintessence of truth in few words,
it is but a willing mind, and then.


Pan Prithee Lindamira help me to be rid of this uncertain man.


^in. I know no better council, then to be is love with him, or to seem so; for
if he should ta^^ you at your word, and marry, that may do you^ work; for I
once knew a ^ady, who chose to marry an importunate `utor, that she might be
rid^ him, and was so; for soon after marriage they pa^^ed. and never met more.


Pan. You are alwares in jest, I would have serious council now.


Lin. You have had my store twice over to (...) purpose.


Duke. By all my observations, I cannot judge whether Clearcus, or you Pand^ra,
be most extravagant.


Lin. Your Highness may do well to put (...) into the College of half mad
Folks, where (...) will either (...) one another, or become qu^^^ mad to^ether;
when their discase is known, fo^^ remedy may be found; ^^is now past judgment
what either of them ayle.


The. Lindamira says well, it is very strange you^ will not declare so far, as
to let us see how we may serve you.


Pan. Do but leave me to my self, and I am well Madam.


The. Many sick people are of that opinion, when in most danger, and must
therefore by their friends be governed.


Pan. As many healthy people, think themselves sick when they are not, and by
seeking remedies for nothing, do create evils, they never can find (...) for;
-- such high passions as Lindamira's, do never let us rest in peace, but do
create perpetual storms.


Lin. You argue well Madam, if a dull calm, were the only happiness appointed
us on Earth, then one degree from being asleep, would prove our greatest bliss;
-- sure no age did e're produce two such Icy-hearted Ladies, as the Princess
and you.


Enter to them Lonzartes and Clearcus. Lin. Here comes a Homely, and a Jigg
hand in hand; -- now for the second part to the same tune, Of love me, and love
me not.


Duke. Clearcus, it troubles me to see you delight in a retired darkness, or
else to walk in such clouds as we cannot see through; I would persuade you to
regain Pandora's good opinion.


Cle. Is the mystery of love to be discussed in public Sir?


Duke. With us, who are so near ali'd unto you both; I think it may, because we
all know what you both profess in private, and now des^^e to hear, what you
will face to face avow; and we entreat you Pandora, first to show, why you
threw off Clearcus.


Pan. You do amaze me Sir, to examine me as ^ Criminal!


Duke. You have no cause for this displeasure Pandora, but mis-judge our love
and our respects; we know your worth, and would to the World Illustrate that
virtue you design to smother by ^ ^ingle life; I allow your purpose did become
your younger days, and did express an Angelical innocense; but I question
whether now, on mature judgment, you may not do better for your self, and us,
to reclaim Clearcus.


Pan. You demand impossibilites from me, for (...) I should change my mind, he
will change his (...) Pray show me a rule to reclaim him by, before you do
condemn me.


Duke. We only desire you will afford him the same civility, as did first
induce him to adore that virtue he despised before.


Pan. I have done this.


The. You did begin, but you gave over too soon.


Lin And all her kindness but in jest too Madam, which he discerned.


Duke. How do you answer this? Lindamira (...) of your council.


Pan. I (...) him but in jest, and was by him enjoined to such seve^^^ as I
performed, and 'twas then thought the only way to vindicate our Sex, and to
work his conversion, which he at first did counterseit so well, as to deceive,
and fright me from his farther visits.


Lin. Was his love so terrible?


Pan. To me it was, who thought him incapable of ever having Noble thoughts for
any of our sex.


Duke. But when you found him growing worthy, why did you not cherish that
virtue, as your own Creation.


Lin. Because she feared her Virgin-vow might be defiled, by owning such a
Man-child of her own begetting; for he began to ask her blessing, till she
laughed him into so great anger, that one day he proffered to kill himself,
which gave end unto our Comedy.


Pan. If his cure had lain within the reach of Raleary I had gloried in my
part, but never shall consent to inslave my self unto the humors of a man, who
cannot be a minute in one mind; his imaginations are beyond the Moon, and would
have he knows not what.


Duke. Clearcus you have heard your charge; -- Guilty or not Guilty?


Lin. Guilty Sir.


Cle I shall never want your good word Madam; -- Lindamira tells you true Sir,
I am guilty.


Duke. Of what?


Cle. Of all the crimes, that offended Lady does object; pray Sir pronounce my
doom, and put me out of pain.


Duke. Will you submit then, and obey it?


Cle. If it can put me out of pain, I will?


Duke. I doubt it not; -- my Sentence is, that you revive that love you showed
unto Pandora lately.


Cle. Oh Sir, the very name of love, puts me into a shaking fit; for Heaven
sake, give me Halter^, Poisons, Daggers, any means to let out life, rather then
renew those torments which I felt that hour I loved.


Lin. Pray Sir, give me leave, to put him some Interogatories.


Duke. Do so.


Lin. Your Lordship has confessed, that you have loved one hour, and must have
some reason why you loved no longer; show us that reason, or for ever hold your
peace, and submit to judgment.


The. How Clearcus, nonplust by a Judge in Petticoates?


Clearcus stands mute. Lin. Why Madam? many of our Sex have pussled the wisest
men; -- give him leave to think a little; -- but if what I have said, has
struck your Lordship dumb, hold up your finger, -- it is He holds it up enough;
-- He has nothing to say for himself, but submits unto the mercy of the Court;
-- I understand him Sir; -- and have now found a remedy for both their evils;
-- If you will trust me with your hand my Lord, I will not harm it: -- and
Clearcus gives his hand. if I have credit enough Madam to be trusted with your
hand too, pray lay it without fear on mine, that I may try a charm I have, to
conjure out the evil Spirits that possess you both; -- you may at your own
pleasure, take back your hands; -- only let me hold 'um, while I pronounce my
charm within.


Pandora turns away. Duke. Pandora I entreat you to try Lindamira's charm, give
her your hand, she deals not with the Devil.


Pandora gives her hand Lin. The Devil I work by Sir, is truth, dressed in her
rich robe of Innocence; -- if truth do not convince both these Delinquents, my
charm will have no power on them; -- My Lord you have in this great Assembly,
often said, that you could never value any woman you could win; -- if now you
have found this Lady as impregnable as you can wish, she is your fate; -- hold
Sir, remember He proffers to speak you are dumb, till I have done; -- Now
Madam, I must speak serious sense to you, who stand here the expectation, and
the wish of all the Court; -- yet I know you must not consent to give your hand
to him, nor in a look, or word comply, with what I say; for if you yield,
Clearcus will for sake the Field; -- I shall therefore only put your hands
together, no marriage, nor no contract make, only desire that you will thus
hand in hand retire a while with me in private, to apply my charm, who now do
pr^y, that all the evils which ever did befall the most unh^ppy lovers, may
light on him, or you, that shall their hand remove, before my charm does wor^^,
now come with me.


(...) Duke. What the issue of thi^ will be I cannot guess; -- Now Theo^^^ia, I
must remind you (...) Lonzartes, who da^es not approach you on (...) own
behalf, who is, what you can wish, to make you happy; and I do again invite you
to Crown his unparalleled humility with a bliss, he presumes not once to
mention, least it offend you; I have also a State Argument you understand not
Theodocia, your two interests in this Dukedom, thus united, will make it
flourish; -- Lonzartes has been wronged.


The. I know his wrong Sir, and have observ^d his sufferings, or I had never
dallied with his love; I onzarte's clear soul is adorned with more glories then
this Crown will bring him.


Duke. If then your hearts agree, give me your hands; -- here Lonzartes is the
best reward I have to encourage modesty and worth, when they do in one heart
combine, as now in thine.


Lon. Great Sir, I am so much surprised, so overloaden with my joys, that I
have naught but blushes to express my gratitude; -- nor know how to welcome
this unlooked for honor from the Princess, who dains to raise her humblest
Servant from her ^eet, to set me on a Throne, incirculed with more joye^, then
that you now resto^^ me to.


[He kisses her hand The. Keep still your Character Lonzartes, as I will mine,
high transports in love are not long li^^d fear.


Lon. I shall be Madam, whatever you direct though this unlooked for happiness,
do raise my heart above my own command, for such an excess of joy, is hard to
manage.


[Kisses her han^ Enter Lindamina. Lin. I may now with your Highness Joy! hope,
now your Fannatick love, conforms to the Law of Nations; -- Now you may talk
your pleasure against high passions Madam; -- and me thinks you Sir, do look as
if you liked this better then that wise Sect of ayrie lovers, whose Philosophy
does teach not to desire, what they can never reach.


Lon. You are Madam the best Philosopher I ever met and do deserve to have a
Golden Statue in Love^-Temple set.


Duke. ^ut how have you disposed of your Fantastic couple? it is that great
work must Crown all your undertakings Lindamira.


Lin. That goes on excellently well Sir, I have left them sitting on a Couch,
with their hands still fixed, eagerly gazing on each other eyes, as if through
them they could discern the inside of each others hearts; by their no motion,
and their stedy looks, I can foresee they will be of one mind suddenly.


The. Why could not we see this Experiment?


Lin. Oh Madam, my charm will not work in company; lovers will seemingly
despise, what they like most, only to deceive observing eyes; I believe they
held off thus long, for shame to own what they had so publicly declared
against, and to themselves will hardly dare to let their hearts appear these
two days; -- they must look themselves into an Argument, for no words can ever
reconcile their first Principles.

If their hands, do not their hearts discover,
I Will no more pretend to charm a lover.

The. May we not peep at the hanging, and stand unseen.


Duke. Let us not turn this serious work into a jest, unless Lindamira do
approve it; none shall stir that way.


Lin. I can place you so, as you may see and hear too.


The. Pray Sir be pleased to look on them, our Testimony may be of use.


Duke. Come then.


^in. Your Highness must stand silent, or you will hinder my Projection.


The. We will, we will.


[(...) They all Re-enter behind the Couch, and stand on each side of the
Stage; then is discovered Pandora, and Clearcus holding hands, and sitting on a
Couch, a while silent, looking on each other; then Clearcus pr^ssers to kiss
that hand be holds, she puts him back with her other hand, and turns her ^ace
from him, -- He sighs: -- Cle. Turn not away those beauteous lights have
guided me to Heaven, nor look as if you were in pain to see my heart thus
charged from a rude Destraction, to an Ecstasy of bliss; from a desormed Satyr,
with a confused Chaos of dark thoughts, and blacker actions, by your glorious
beauties, and brighter virtues, new formed into the Figure of a man, Emulating,
those Excellencies I admire in you: -- Oh turn this way, and own what is your
own Creation, by your perfections raised from what was worse then nothing, to
something now, too worthy to be cast away; I should this happy hour believe my
self were in in Elysium; didn^t this fair, soft hand, and those bright eyes
assure me I yet live; from whence some divine instinct teaches my rude nature
to adore, what I never understood before.


Pan. I do not like to be thus long left alone, to be exposed unto your
passion, and the worlds censure; Lindamira has deceived my trust; -- I now see
your plot, and her design descover, but will no longer suffer the abuse.


[Offers to rise. Cle. Be not so cruel unto your self and me, think on the
curse hangs over us, if we remove our hands till she return.


Pan. It Is too much foolery, to give faith too.


Cle. Remember we complied to what she said; by which her words are Registi'd
in heaven, and have engaged the gods by our consent.


Pan. 'I was rashly done, and I repent; -- when will this subtle Sorcerress
return? my innocense will justify my blind consent, to which I was misled by
my fidelity and trust, and will no longer fear to take away my hand.


[Offers to rise. Cle. Oh take nor your hand away until the holy Charm have
rectitied your heart, and therein created so much charity, as in a moment may
remove your scorns, and reach you love; for I, who so long slighted your
neglects, and fied all civil favors from your Sex, do now tremble at the
thought of parting hands, until our hearts like them, become united.


Pan. Do you believe I indamira (...) of such Magic? that her words have power
to reconcile dislenting hearts, live ours.


Cle. Yes, I find them work on me, and hope same effect on you, else why sit we
here obeying those commands she left? why fear we to offend those powers she
did invoke? -- when you consider this, I hope you dare not stir a finger
toward such impiety.


Pan. Though Lindamira's virtue be approved, I was surprised by her enticing
words, and by the Duke compelled to do, I know not what; -- and therefore will
no longer now obey.


[Offers to rise; He holds her. Cle. Stay, oh stay, and let the fatal curse
strike me alone; my guilts have merrited what e're can fall on me; -- Do but
command me to remove my hand, and I Will obey; that you may see how much your
power prevails, above my fear of Lindamira's threats; If so, I may divert your
harms; I will against my Nature and my Faith destroy all hopes of future bliss,
to pull this ruin on myself, which else may light on you; -- Say, must it be?


[ Pandora sits silent a while. Pan. If I command your hands remove, and her
curse should after follow you, my unblemished Innocense may suffer more then
all your crimes can mer^t; -- I have no faith in charms, nor cause to
apprehend her curses can reach me; and yet; --

-- My doubts an^ fears, my reason does dismay,
I know not what to do, nor what to say;
The Wonder is so great, I am afra^d,
[Aside. Some (...) this Serpent, has an Angel made,
And now endowed him with (...) Art,
In force of evidence from my stubborn heart.

Cle. It Is worthy your consult, before you do destroy a body and soul; here a
ready Sacrifice to set you free, for now I find that Lindamira's charm does
higher work.

And now again, that dazzling light display,
Which did my heart inflame the other day:
^o gods, I do implore your power to move,
[Aside. The bright Pandora, to allow my love;
'T will be the same, if now Clearcus dies,
By Thunder Struck, or by Pandora's eyes.

Pan. Lindamira's virtue, and her wit, are much more powerful, then her charms;
-- (which I contemn,) but you my Lord, have now by chance thrown out such
words, I shake to think on; -- Your body and your Soul are now at stake you
say; -- and by your looks I read, you think our Fortunes and our Fates, depend
on my reply; -- and so do I; -- this is then too great a work, for so few
minutes to dispatch; we must look up Clearcus, and from above seek aid: --

It Is piety, when we our hearts submit,
To undergo, what e're the gods think fit.

Cle. It Is so, let us hasten to the Temple then, there Celebrate: --

[They rise up. This happy issue of so strange contest,
(...) rought by the gods, must by the gods be blessed.

He Kisses her hand, three or four times in Joy. Cle. Where is this powerful
Sibell gone? whose Sacred Charms do dis-inchant fantastic hearts.


Lin. I am here Sir, with witness enough, to hold Pandora to her word.


Cle Let me adore thy Divine virtue Lindamira? who has showed such skill, to
raise dead folks to life; for we were dead in follies, and are now become true
converts Sir.


Duke. This is great News, you are both well come to your wits again, which
does declare Lindamira a great Artist.


The. What says Pandora for her self?


Pan. I have both ways done too much, eitherto excuse or justify my self;
silence becomes me Madam.


Lin. Let the clock strike twice, before we credit what they say, or else ma^e
all sure, by I Clear^^^ take thee Pandora, etc.


Duke. Lindamira is my Orac^e; -- give me your hand Pandora, and yours Clearcus

May they most wretched live, and cursed dye,
Who shall this knot endeavor to untye.

The My prayers concur with yours Sir, and now dear Cousin, what I wished is
come to pass, that you and I might on the same day be Married.

Thus for our good, we see the Gods fulfill
What they design, though much against our will.

Pan. Your great Example Madam, is sufficient to lead me from all my own
resolves to follow you, and if now Clearcus be reclaimed, we must own all our
happiness to Lindamira's wit, who has conquered both, when neither of us could
subdue the other; And now Clearcus I hope will seek occasions to show the World
by his own actions the Noble Stock he is Descended from.


Cle. By your permission Madam, I shall set my heart toward my Prince his, and
my Countries Service; -- I beg employment Sir, on the next Galleys you send
out, least idleness corrupt my busy brain.


Lin. Mark that Sir, he is already wavering; Madam take heed how you take the
spirit of uncertainty, (in the habit of a man.)


Pan. You speak too late, the uncertain man, is now my certain fare.


Cle. Some diversions are necessary Madam, to look on the same objects ever,
dulls and tyres the best eyes; but Lindamira can say nothing, I dare contradict.


Duke. You shall command in Chief Clearcus, to show the world the vigor you
have too long hid.


Lon. Joys on joys, light on Clearcus head.


[They Embrace. Cle. May those joys be Multiplied on yours Sir; my Redeemer,
and now become my Prince.


Duke. We must conclude this happy day Lindamira, by joining Silvanders hand
with yours, if your mirth will give us leave to be so serious?


Lin. That is a serious jest Sir, I have long looked for.


Duke. Come near Silvander; -- which of you two is most pleased now?


Both. I Sir.


Duke. Who spoke (...)?


Both. I Sir,


Duke. This is a good Omen to a joyful like may you be both as happy as ever
love made any


Sil. We are happy to our wish Sir.


Lin. He speaks for himself Sir, on hopes of more then he may find.


Duke. We Will Celebrate these weddings sudd^^ly, and see that Lindamira's praise
be in loud Hymenealls sung through all the City, to encourage the like
Virtuous, and Noble undertakings.


Lin. I thank your Highness for your good opinion, but shall love you for this
gift of my Silvander, above all your other favors; Now Silvander

Let us dwell Arm in Arm, and daily show
Our loves increase, that all the World may know
Our hearts: Now the fair Princess does confes^,
That Wedlock may afford True Happiness.

EPELOGUE.
LADIES, our Author has so great Respect
To Your Fair Sex, he fears some gross Defect
In his best Characters, may prove so short,
Of Your perfec^ions, he needs pardon for it.
If such sad fate, do now attend his Play,
In's Cloak, thus muss^'d, he will sneak away;
But you like't, he will on tip-toe go,
That all the World, may the proud Author know.
FINIS.

