Mrs Anne Killigrew.
Painted by her self

I Beckett (...)



POEMS BY Mrs Anne Killigrew.

Immodicis brevis est aetas, and rara Senectus.

Mart. l. 6. Ep. 29.

These POEMS are Licensed to be Published, Sept. 30. 1685.

To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lowndes, over against Exeter Exchange in the
Strand. 1686.



THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
REader, do ask, What Work we here display?
What fair and Novel Piece salutes the Day?
Know, that a Virgin bright this POEM writ,
A Grace for Beauty, and a Muse for Wit!
Who, when none higher in Loves Courts might sway,
Despised the Mertile, for the nobler Bay!
Nor could Apollo or Minerva tell,
Whither her Pen or Pencil did excel!
But while these Powers laid both to her their Claim,
Behold, a Matron of a Heavenly Frame,
Antique, but Great and Comely in her Mien,
Upon whose gorgeous Robe inscribed was seen
Divine Virtue, took her from both away,
And thus with Anger and Disdain did say,
Of Me she Learned, with You she did but Play.
To the Pious Memory Of the Accomplished Young LADY Mrs Anne Killigrew,
Excellent in the two Sister-Arts of Poesy, and Painting.
An ODE.
I.
THou Youngest Virgin-Daughter of the Skies,
Made in the last Promotion of the Blessed;
Whose Palms, new plucked from Paradise,
In spreading Branches more sublimely rise,
Rich with Immortal Green above the rest:
Whether, adopted to some Neighboring Star,
Thou rol'st above us, in thy wandering Race,
Or, in Procession fixed and regular,
Moved with the Heavens Majestic Pace;
Or, called to more Superior Bliss,
Thou tread'st, with Seraphims, the vas^ ^byss.
What ever happy Region be thy place,
Cease thy Celestial Song a little space;
(Thou will have Time enough for Hymns Divine,
Since Heavens Eternal Year is thine.)
Hear then a Mortal Muse thy Praise rehearse,
In no ignoble Verse;
But such as thy own voice did practice here,
When thy first Fruits of Poesy were given;
To make thy self a welcome Inmate there:
While yet a young Probationer,
And Candidate of Heaven.
II.
If by Traduction came thy Mind,
Our Wonder is the less to find
A Soul so charming from a Stock so good;
Thy Father was transfused into thy Blood:
So were thou born into the tuneful strain,
(An early, rich, and inexhausted Vain.)
But if thy Praeexisting Soul
Was formed, at first, with Myriads more,
It did through all the Mighty Poets roll,
Who Greek or Latin Laurels wore.
And was that Suppho last, which once it was before.
If so, then cease thy flight, O Heaven-born Mind!
Thou have no Dross to purge from thy Rich Ore
Nor can thy Soul a fairer Mansion find,
Than was the Beauteous Frame she left be hind:
Return, to fill or mend the Quire, of thy Celestial kind.
III.
May we presume to say, that at thy Birth,
New joy was sprung in Heaven, as well as here on Earth.
For sure the Milder Planets did combine
On thy Auspicious Horoscope to shine,
And even the most Malicious were in Trine.
Thy Brother-Angels at thy Birth
Strung each his Lyre, and tuned it high,
That all the People of the Sky
Might know a Poetess was born on Earth.
And then if ever, Mortal Ears
Had heard the Music of the Spheres!
And if no clust'ring Swarm of Bees
On thy sweet Mouth distilled their golden Dew,
'Twas that, such vulgar Miracles,
Heaven had not Leisure to renew:
For all the Blessed Fraternity of Love
Solemnized there thy Birth, and kept thy Holyday above.
IV.
O Gracious God! How far have we
Profaned thy Heavenly Gift of Poesy?
Made prostitute and profligate the Muse,
Debased to each obscene and impious use,
Whose Harmony was first ordained Above
For Tongues of Angels, and for Hymns of Love?
O wretched We! why were we hurried down
This lubrique and adult'rate age,
(Nay added fat Pollutions of our own)
To Increase the steaming Ordures of the Stage?
What can we say t'excuse our Second Fall?
Let this thy Vestal, Heaven, atone for all!
Her Arethusian Stream remains unsoil'd,
Unmixt with Foreign Filth, and undefiled,
Her Wit was more than Man, her Innocence a Child!
V.
Art she had none, yet wanted: enon
For Nature did that Want supply,
So rich in Treasures of her Own,
She might our boasted Stores defy:
Such Noble Vigor did her Verse adorn,
That it seemed borrowed, where 'twas only born.
Her Morals too were in her Bosom bred
By great Examples daily fed,
What in the best of Books, her Fathers Life, she read.
And to be read her self she need not fear,
Each Test, and every Light, her Muse will bear,
Though Epictetus with his Lamp were there.
Even Love (for Love sometimes her Muse expressed)
Was but a Lambent-flame which played about her Breast:
Light as the Vapors of a Morning Dream,
So cold herself, whilst she such Warmth expressed,
'Twas Cupid bathing in Diana's Stream.
VI.
Born to the Spacious Empire of the Nine,
One would have thought, she should have been content
To manage well that Mighty Government:
But what can young ambitious Souls confine?
To the next Realm she stretched her Sway,
For Painture near adjoining lay,
A plenteous Province, and alluring Prey.
A Chamber of Dependences was framed,
(As Conquerors will never want Pretense,
When armed, to justify the Offense)
And the whole Fief, in right of Poetry she claimed.
The Country open lay without Defense:
For Poets frequent In-rodes there had made,
And perfectly could represent
The Shape, the Face, with every Lineament;
And all the large Demains which the Dumb-sister swayed,
All bowed beneath her Government,
Received in Triumph wherefoe're she went.
Her Pencil drew, what e're her Soul designed,
And often the happy Draught surpassed the Image in her Mind.
The Sylvan Scenes of Herds and Flocks,
And fruitful Plains and barren Rocks,
Of shallow Brooks that flowed so clear,
The Bottom did the Top appear;
Of deeper too and ampler Floods,
Which as in Mirrors, showed the Woods;
Of lofty Trees with Sacred Shades,
And Perspectives of pleasant Glades,
Where Nymphs of brightest Form appear,
And shaggy Satyrs standing near,
Which them at once admire and fear.
The Ruins too of some Majestic Piece,
Boasting the Power of ancient Rome or Greece,
Whose Statues, Freezes, Columns broken lie,
And though deface't, the Wonder of the Eye,
What Nature, Art, bold Fiction e're durst frame,
Her forming Hand gave Shape unto the Name.
So strange a Concourse never was seen before,
But when the peopled Ark the whole Creation bore.
VII.
The Scene then changed, with bold Erected Look
Our Martial King the Eye with Reverence struck:
For not content t'express his Outward Part,
Her hand called out the Image of his Heart,
His Warlike Mind, his Soul devoid of Fear,
His High-designing Thoughts, were figured there,
As when, by Magic, Ghosts are made appear.
Our Phoenix Queen was portrai'd too so bright,
Beauty alone could Beauty take so right:
Her Dress, her Shape, her matchless Grace,
Were all observed, as well as heavenly Face.
With such a Peerless Majesty she stands,
As in that Day she took from Sacred hands
The Crown; among numerous Heroins was seen,
More yet in Beauty, than in Rank, the Queen!
Thus nothing to her Genius was denied,
But like a Ball of Fire the further thrown,
Still with a greater Blaze she shone,
And her bright Soul broke out on every side.
What next she had designed, Heaven only knows,
To such Immod'rate Growth her Conquest rose,
That Fate alone their Progress could oppose.
VIII.
Now all those Charms, that blooming Grace,
The well-proportion'd Shape, and beauteous Face,
Shall never more be seen by Mortal Eyes;
In Earth the much lamented Virgin lies!
Not Wit, nor Piety could Fate prevent;
Nor was the cruel Destiny content
To finish all the Murder at a Blow,
To sweep at once her Life, and Beauty too;
But, like a hardn'd Fellon, took a pride
To work more Mischievously slow,
And plundered first, and then destroyed.
O double Sacrilege on things Divine,
To rob the Relic, and deface the Shrine!
But thus Orinda died:
Heaven, by the same Disease, did both translate,
As equal were their Souls, so equal was their Fate.
IX.
Mean time her Warlike Brother on the Seas
His waving Streamers to the Winds displays,
And vows for his Return, with vain Devotion, pays.
Ah, Generous Youth, that Wish forbear,
The Winds too soon will waft thee here!
Slack all thy Sails, and fear to come,
Alas, thou know not, Thou art wrecked at home!
No more shall thou behold thy Sisters Face,
Thou have already had her last Embrace.
But look aloft, and if thou ken'st from far,
Among the Pleiad's a New-kindl'd Star,
If any sparkles, than the rest, more bright,
It Is she that shines in that propitious Light.
X.
When in mid-Aire, the Golden Trump shall sound,
To raise the Nations under ground;
When in the Valley of Jehosaphat,
The Judging God shall close the Book of Fate;
And there the last Assizes keep,
For those who Wake, and those who Sleep;
When rattling Bones together fly,
From the four Corners of the Sky,
When Sinews over the Skeletons are spread,
Those clothed with Flesh, and Life inspires the Dead;
The Sacred Poets first shall hear the Sound,
And foremost from the Tomb shall bound:
For they are covered with the lightest Ground
And straight, with in-born Vigor, on the Wing,
Like mounting Larkes, to the New Morning sing.
There Thou, Sweet Saint, before the Quire shall go,
As Harbinger of Heaven, the Way to show,
The Way which thou so well have learned below.
J. Dryden.

The Epitaph Engraved on her TOMB.
P. M. S. Annae Killigrew, Doctoris KILLIGREW Filiae, Quae in ipso AEtatis
flore Obiit.

JUNII 16. 1685.

HEu jacet, fato victa,
Quae stabat ubique victrix
Forma, ingenio, religione;
Plura collegerat in se Vna,
Quam vel sparsa mireris in omnibus!
Talem quis pingat, nisi penicillo quod tractavit?
Aut quis canat, nisi Poeta sui similis?
Cum tanta sciret, hoc Vnum ignoravit,
Quanta, nempe, esset;
Aut si nor it,
Mirare Modestiam,
Tantis incorruptam dotibus.
Lauds meruisse satis illi fuit,
Has ne vel audiret, laudatores omnes fugerat,
Contenta paterno Lare,
Dum and sibi Aula patebat adulatrix.
Mundum sapere an potuit,
Quae ab infantia Christum sapuerat?
Non modo semper Virgo,
Sed and virginum Exemplar.
Gentis suae Decus,
AEvi Splendour,
Sexus Miraculum.
Nulla Vertute inferior cuiquam,
Cuilibet superior multa.
Optimi Deliciae patris,
Etiam numerosa optimaque prole fortunatissimi:
Priorem tamen invidit nemo,
(Seu frater, seu soror)
Quin potius coluere omnes, omnibus suavem and officiosam,
Amorisque commune Vinculum and Centrum.
Vix ista credes, Hanc si nescieris;
Credet majora, qui scierit.
Abi Viator, and Plange:
Si eam plangi oporteat,
Cui, tam pie morienti,
Vel Coelites plauserint.
The same Turned into English.
BY Death, alas, here Conquered lies,
She who from All late bore the Prize
In Beauty, Wit, Virtue Divine:
In whom those Graces did combine,
Which we admired in others see,
When they but singly scattered be!
Who her, so Great, can paint beside,
The Pencil her own Hand did guide?
What Verse can celebrate her Fame,
But such as She herself did frame?
Though much Excellence she did show,
And many Qualities did know,
Yet this, alone, she could not tell,
To wit, How much she did excel.
Or if her Worth she rightly knew,
More to her Modesty was due,
That Parts in her no Pride could raise
Desirous still to merit Praise,
But fled, as she deserved, the Bays.
Contented always to retire,
Court Glory she did not admire;
Although it lay so near and fair,
It Is Grace to none more open were:
But with the World how should she close,
Who Christ in her first Childhood chose?
So with her Parents she did live,
That they to Her did Honor give,
As she to them. In a Numerous Race
And Virtuous, the highest Place
None envied her: Sisters, Brothers
Her Admirers were and Lovers:
She was to all s'obliging sweet,
All in One Love to her did meet.
A Virgin-Life not only led,
But it is Example might be said.
The Ages Ornament, the Name
That gave her Sex and Country Fame.
Those who her Person never knew,
Will hardly think these things are true:
But those that did, will More believe,
And higher things of her conceive.
Thy Eyes in tears now, Reader, steep:
For Her if it lawful be to weep,
Whose blessed and Seraphique End
Angels in Triumph did attend.
Alexandreis.
I Sing the Man that never Equal knew,
Whose Mighty Arms all Asia did subdue,
Whose Conquests through the spacious World do ring,
That City-Raser, King-destroying King,
Who over the Warlike Macedons did Reign,
And worthily the Name of Great did gain.
This is the Prince (if Fame you will believe,
To ancient Story any credit give.)
Who when the Globe of Earth he had subdued,
With Tears the easy Victory pursued;
Because that no more Worlds there were to win,
No further Scene to act his Glorys in.
Ah that some pitying Muse would now inspire
My frozen style with a Poetique fire,
And Raptures worthy of his Matchless Fame,
Whose Deeds I sing, whose never fading Name
Long as the world shall fresh and deathless last,
No less to future Ages, then the past.
Great my presumption is, I must confess,
But if I thrive, my Glory's never the less;
Nor will it from his Conquests derogate
A Female Pen his Acts did celebrate.
If thou O Muse wilt thy assistance give,
Such as made Naso and great Maro live,
With him whom Melas fertile Banks did bear,
Live, though their Bodies dust and ashes are;
Whose Laurels were not fresher, than their Fame
Is now, and will for ever be the same.
If the like favor thou will grant to me,
O Queen of Verse, I Will not ungrateful be,
My choicest hours to thee I Will Dedicate,
It Is thou shall rule, it is thou shall be my Fate.
But if Coy Goddess thou shall this deny,
And from my humble suit disdaining fly,
I Will stoop and beg no more, since I know this,
Writing of him, I cannot write amiss:
His lofty Deeds will raise each feeble line,
And God-like Acts will make my Verse Divine.
'Twas at the time the golden Sun does rise,
And with his Beams enlights the azure skies,
When lo a Troop in Silver Arms drew near,
The glorious Sun did nere so bright appear;
Dire Scarlet Plumes adorned their haughty Crests,
And crescent Shields did shade their shining Breasts;
Down from their shoulders hung a Panthers Hide,
A Bow and Quiver ratled by their side;
Their hands a knotty well tried Spear did bear,
Jocund they seemed, and quite devoyd of fear.
These warlike Virgins were, that do reside
Near Thermodons smooth Banks and verdant side,
The Plains of Themiscyre their Birth do boast,
Thalestris now did head the beauteous Host;
She emulating that Illustrious Dame,
Who to the aid of Troy and Priam came,
And her who the Retulian Prince did aid,
Though dearly both for their Assistance paid.
But fear she scorned, nor the like fate did dread,
Her Host she often to the field had lead,
As often in Triumph had returned again,
Glory she only sought for all her pain.
This Martial Queen had heard how lowdly fame,
Echoed our Conquerors redoubted Name,
Her Soul his Conduct and his Courage fired,
To see the Hero she so much admired;
And to Hyrcania for this cause she went,
Where Alexander (wholly then intent
On Triumphs and such Military sport)
At Truce with War held both his Camp and Court.
And while before the Town she did attend
Her Messengers return, she saw ascend
A cloud of Dust, that covered all the sky,
And still at every pause there stroke her eye.
The interrupted Beams of Burnisht Gold,
As dust the Splendor hid, or did unfold;
Loud Neighings of the Steeds, and Trumpets sound
Filled all the Air, and echoed from the ground:
The gallant Greeks with a brisk March drew near,
And their great Chief did at their Head appear.
And now come up to the Amazonian Band,
They made a Hault and a respectful Stand:
And both the Troops (with like amazement struck)
Did each on other with deep silence look.
Th'Heroick Queen (whose high pretense to War
Cancelled the bashful Laws and nicer Bar
Of Modesty, which did her Sex restrain)
First boldly did advance before her Train,
And thus she spoke. All but a God in Name,
And that a debt Time owes unto thy Fame.
This was the first Essay of this young Lady in Poetry, but finding the Task
she had undertaken hard, she laid it by till Practice and more time should make
her equal to so great a Work.

To the Queen.
AS those who pass the Alps do say,
The Rocks which first oppose their way,
And so amazing-High do show,
By fresh Ascents appear but low,
And when they come unto the last,
They scorn the dwarfish Hills they have past.
So though my Muse at her first flight,
Thought she had chose the greatest height,
And (imp'd with Alexander's Name)
Believed there was no further Fame:
Behold an Eye wholly Divine
Vouchsafed upon my Verse to Shine!
And from that time I'gan to treat
With Pity him the World called Great;
To smile at his exalted Fate,
Unequal (though Gigantick) State.
I saw that Pitch was not sublime,
Compared with this which now I climb;
His Glories sunk, and were unseen,
When once appeared the Heaven-born Queen:
Victories, Laurels, Conquered Kings,
Took place among inferior things.
Now surely I shall reach the Clouds,
For none besides such Virtue shrouds:
Having scaled this with holy Strains,
Naught higher but the Heaven remains!
No more I Will Praise on them bestow,
Who to ill Deeds their Glories owe;
Who build their Babels of Renown,
Upon the poor oppressed Crown,
Whole Kingdoms do depopulate,
To raise a Proud and Short-lived State:
I prize no more such Frantic Might,
Than his that did with Wind-Mills Fight:
No, give me Prowess, that with Charms
Of Grace and Goodness, not with Harms,
Erects a Throne in the inward Parts,
And Rules men's Wills, but with their Hearts;
Who with Piety and Virtue thus
Propitiates God, and Conquers us.
O that now like Araunah here,
Altars of Praises I could rear,
Suiting her worth, which might be seen
Like a Queens Present, to a Queen!
`Alone she stands for Virtues Cause,
`When all decry, upholds her Laws:
`When to Banish her is the Strife,
`Keeps her unexil'd in her Life;
`Guarding her matchless Innocence
`From Storms of boldest Impudence;
`In spite of all the Scoffs and Rage,
`And Persecutions of the Age,
`Owns Virtues Altar, feeds the Flame,
`Adores her much-derided Name;
`While impiously her hands they tie,
`Loves her in her Captivity;
`Like Perseus saves her, when she stands
`Expos'd to the Leviathans.
`So did bright Lamps once live in Urns,
`So Camphire in the water burns,
`So AEtna's Flames do never go out,
`Though Snows do freeze her head without.
How dares bold Vice unmasked walk,
And like a Giant proudly stalk?
When Virtue's so exalted seen,
Armed and Triumphant in the Queen?
How dares its Ulcerous Face appear,
When Heavenly Beauty is so near?
But so when God was close at hand,
And the bright Cloud did threatening stand
(In fight of Israel) on the Tent,
They on in their Rebellion went.
O that I once so happy were,
To find a nearer Shelter there!
Till then poor Dove, I wandering fly
Between the Deluge and the Sky:
Till then I Mourn, but do not sing,
And often shall plunge my wearied wing:
If her blessed hand vouchsafe the Grace,
In The Ark with her to give a place,
I safe from danger shall be found,
When Vice and Folly others drowned.
A Pastoral Dialogue.
Dorinda. SAbaean Persumes fragrant Roses bring,
With all the Flowers that Paint the gaudy Spring:
Scatter them all in young Alexis's way,
With all that is sweet and (like himself) that is Gay.

Alexis. Immortal Laurels and as lasting Praise,
Crown the Divine Dorinda's matchless Lays:
May all Hearts stoop, where mine would gladly yield,
Had not Lycoris prepossest the Field.

Dor. Would my Alexis meet my noble Flame,
In all Ausonia neither Youth nor Dame,
Should so renowned in Deathless Numbers shine,
As thy exalted Name should do in mine.

Alex. He Will need no Trophie nor ambitious Hearse,
Who shall be honored by Dorinda's Verse;
But where it is inscribed, That here does lie
Lycoris's Love. That Fame can never die.

Dor. On Tyber's Bank I Thyrsis did epsy,
And by his side did bright Lycoris lie;
She Crowned his Head, and Kissed his amorous Brow,
Ah Poor Alexis! Ah then where were thou?

Alex. When thou saw that, I never had seen my Fair,
And what passed then ought not to be my Care;
I lived not then, but first began to be,
When I Lycoris Loved, and she Loved me.

Dor. Ah choose a Faith, a Faith that is like thine own,
A Virgin Love, a Love that is newly blown:
It Is not enough a Maidens Heart is chaste,
It must be Single, and not once mis-plac't.

Alex. Thus do our Priests of Heavenly Pastures tell,
Eternal Groves, all Earthly, that excel:
And think to wean us from our Loves below,
By dazzling Objects which we cannot know.

On Death.
TEll me thou safest End of all our Woe,
Why wreched Mortals do avoid thee so:
Thou gentle drier of the afflicteds Tears,
Thou noble ender of the Cowards Fears;
Thou sweet Repose to Lovers sad despair,
Thou Calm t'Ambitions rough Tempestuous Care.
If in regard of Bliss thou were a Curse,
And then the Joys of Paradise art worse;
Yet after Man from his first Station fell,
And God from Eden Adam did expel,
Thou were no more an Evil, but Relief;
The Balm and Cure to every Humane Grief:
Through thee (what Man had forfeited before)
He now enjoys, and never can loose it more.
No subtle Serpents in the Grave betray,
Worms on the Body there, not Soul do prey;
No Vice there Tempts, no Terrors there afright,
No Coz'ning Sin affords a false delight:
No vain Contentions do that Peace annoy,
No feirce Alarms break the lasting Joy.
Ah since from thee so many Blessings flow,
Such real Good as Life can never know;
Come when thou will, in thy afrighting'st Dress,
Thy Shape shall never make thy Welcome less.
Thou may to Joy, but never to Fear give Birth,
Thou Best, as well as Certain'st thing on Earth.
Fly thee? May Travelers then fly their Rest,
And hungry Infants fly the profer'd Breast.
No, those that faint and tremble at thy Name,
Fly from their Good on a mistaken Fame.
Thus Childish fear did Israel of old
From Plenty and the Promised Land withold;
They fancied Giants, and refused to go,
When Canaan did with Milk and Honey flow.
First EPIGRAM. Upon being Contented with a Little.
WE deem them moderate, but Enough implore,
What barely will suffice, and ask no more:
Who say, (O Jove) a competency give,
Neither in Luxury, or Want we'd live.
But what is that, which these Enough do call?
If both the Indies unto some should fall,
Such Wealth would yet Enough but only be,
And what they would term not Want, or Luxury.
Among the Suits O Jove, my humbler take;
A little give, I that Enough will make.
The Second EPIGRAM. On BILLINDA.
WAnton Bellinda loudly does complain,
I Have changed my Love of late into disdain:
Calls me unconstant, cause I now adore
The chaste Marcella, that loved her before.
Sin or Dishonor, me as well may blame,
That I repent, or do avoid a shame.
The Third EPIGRAM. On an ATHEIST.
POsthumus boasts he does not Thunder fear,
And for this cause would Innocent appear;
That in his Soul no Terror he does feel,
At threatened Vultures, or Ixion's Wheel,
Which fright the Guilty: But when Fabius told
What Acts against Murder lately were enrol'd,
Against Incest, Rapine, -- straight upon the Tale
His Color changed, and Posthumus grew pale.
His Impious Courage had no other Root,
But that the Villain, Atheist was to boot.
The Fourth EPIGRAM. On GALLA.
NOw liquid Streams by the fierce Cold do grow
As solid as the Rocks from whence they flow;
Now Tibers Banks with Ice united meet,
And it is firm Stream may well be termed its Street;
Now Vot'ries before the Shrines like Statues show,
And scarce the Men from Images we know;
Now Winters Palsy seizes every Age,
And none's so warm, but feels the Seasons Rage;
Even the bright Lillies and triumphant Red
Which over Corinna's youthful cheeks are spread,
Look pale and bleak, and show a purple hew,
And Violets stain, where Roses lately grew.
Galla alone, with wonder we behold,
Maintain her Spring, and still out-brave the Cold;
Her constant white does not to Frost give place,
Nor fresh Vermillion fade upon her face:
Sure Divine beauty in this Dame does shine?
Not Humane, one replied, yet not Divine.
A Farewell To Worldly Joys.
Farewell ye Unsubstantial Joys,
Ye Gilded Nothings, Gaudy Toys,
Too long ye have my Soul misled,
Too long with Aerie Diet fed:
But now my Heart ye shall no more
Deceive, as you have heretofore:
For when I hear such Sirens sing,
Like Ithacas's forewarned King,
With prudent Resolution I
Will so my Will and Fancy tie,
That stronger to the Mast not he,
Than I to Reason bound will be:
And though your Witchcrafts strike my Ear,
Unhurt, like him, your Charms I Will hear.
THE Complaint of a Lover.
See thou younder craggy Rock,
Whose Head o'er-looks the swelling Main,
Where never Shepherd fed his Flock,
Or careful Peasant sowed his Grain.
No wholesome Herb grows on the same,
Or Bird of Day will on it rest;
It Is Barren as the Hopeless Flame,
That scortches my tormented Breast.
Deep underneath a Cave does lie,
The entrance hid with dismal Yew,
Where Phoebus never showed his Eye,
Or cheerful Day yet pierced through.
In that dark Melancholy Cell,
(Retreat and Sollace to my Woe)
Love, sad Despair, and I, do dwell,
The Springs from whence my Griefs do flow.
Treacherous Love that did appear,
(When he at first approach't my Heart)
Dressed in a Garb far from severe,
Or threatening ought of future smart.
So Innocent those Charms then seemed,
When Rosalinda first I spied,
Ah! Who would them have deadly deemed?
But Flowrs do often Serpents hide.
Beneath those sweets concealed lay,
To Love the cruel Foe, Disdain,
With which (alas) she does repay
My Constant and Deserving Pain.
When I in Tears have spent the Night,
With Sighs I usher in the Sun,
Who never saw a sadder sight,
In all the Courses he has run.
Sleep, which to others Ease does prove,
Comes unto me, alas, in vain:
For in my Dreams I am in Love,
And in them too she does Disdain.
Some times t'Amuse my Sorrow, I
Unto the hollow Rocks repair,
And loudly to the Echo cry,
Ah! gentle Nymph come ease my Care.
Thou who, times past, a Lover were,
Ah! pity me, who now am so,
And by a sense of thine own smart,
Alleviate my Mighty Woe.
Come Flatter then, or Chide my Grief;
Catch my last Words, and call me Fool;
Or say, she Loves, for my Relief;
My Passion either sooth, or School.
Love, the Soul of Poetry.
WHen first Alexis did in Verse delight,
His Muse in Low, but Graceful Numbers walked,
And now and then a little Proudly stalk't;
But never aimed at any noble Flight:
The Herds, the Groves, the gentle purling Streams,
Adorned his Song, and were his highest Theams.
But Love these Thoughts, like Mists, did soon disperse,
Enlarged his Fancy, and set free his Muse,
Biding him more Illustrious Subjects choose;
The Acts of Gods, and God-like Men rehearse.
From thence new Raptures did his Breast inspire,
His fearce Warm-Heart converted was to Fire.
The exalted Poet raised by this new Flame,
With Vigor flys, where late he crept along,
And Acts Divine, in a Diviner Song,
Commits to the eternal Trompe of Fame.
And thus Alexis does prove Love to be,
As the Worlds Soul, the Soul of Poetry.
To my Lady Berkeley, Afflicted upon her Son, My Lord BERKELEY's Early Engaging
in the Sea - Service.
SO the renowned Ithac^^^ian Queen
In Tears for her Telemachus was seen,
When leaving Home, he did attempt the Ire
Of rageing Seas, to seek his absent Sire:
Such bitter Sighs her tender Breast did rend;
But had she known a God did him attend,
And would with Glory bring him safe again,
Bright Thoughts would then have dispossess't her Pain.
Ah Noblest Lady! You that her excel
In every Virtue, may in Prudence well
Suspend your Care; knowing what power befriends
Your Hopes, and what on Virtue still attends.
In bloody Conflicts he will Armor find,
In strongest Tempests he will rule the Wind,
He will through Thousand Dangers force a way,
And still Triumphant will his Charge convey.
And the All-ruling power that can act thus,
Will safe return your Dear Telemachus.
Alas, he was not born to live in Peace,
Souls of his Temper were not made for Ease,
The Ignoble only live secure from Harms,
The Generous tempt, and seek out fierce Alarms.
Huge Labors were for Hercules designed,
Jason, to fetch the Golden Fleece, enjoined,
The Minotaure by Noble Theseus died,
In vain were Valor, if it were not tried,
Should the admired and far-sought Diamond lie,
As in its Bed, unpolisht to the Eye,
It would be slighted like a common stone,
It Is Value would be small, its Glory none.
But when it has passed the Wheel and Cutters hand,
Then it is meet in Monarchs Crowns to stand.
Upon the Noble Object of your Care
Heaven has bestowed, of Worth, so large a share,
That unastonisht none can him behold,
Or credit all the Wonders of him told!
When others, at his Years were turning over,
The Acts of Heroes that had lived before,
Their Valor to excite, when time should fit,
He then did Things, were Worthy to be writ!
Stayed not for Time, his Courage that out-ran
In Actions, far before in Years, a Man.
Two French Campagnes he boldly courted Fame,
While his Face more the Maid, than Youth became
Add then to these a Soul so truly Mild,
Though more than Man, Obedient as a Child.
And (ah) should one Small Isle all these confine,
Virtues created through the World to shine?
Heaven that forbids, and Madam so should you;
Remember he but bravely does pursue
His Noble Fathers steps; with your own Hand
Then Gird his Armor on, like him he will stand,
His Countries Champion, and Worthy be
Of your High Virtue, and his Memory.
St. John Baptist Painted by her self in the Wilderness, with Angels appearing
to him, and with a Lamb by him.
THe Sun's my Fire, when it does shine,
The hollow Spring's my Cave of Wine,
The Rocks and Woods afford me Meat;
This Lamb and I on one Dish eat:
The neighboring Herds my Garments send,
My Pallet the kind Earth does lend:
Excess and Grandeur I decline,
M'Associates only are Divine.
HERODIAS Daughter presenting to her Mother St. JOHN'S Head in a Charger, also
Painted by her self.
BEhold, dear Mother, who was late our Fear,
Disarmed and Harmless, I present you here;
The Tongue tied up, that made all Jury quake,
And which so often did our Greatness shake;
No Terror sits upon his Awful Brow,
Where Fierceness reigned, there Calmness triumphs now;
As Lovers use, he gazes on my Face,
With Eyes that languish, as they sued for Grace;
Wholly subdued by my Victorious Charms,
See how his Head reposes in my Arms.
Come, join then with me in my just Transport,
Who thus have brought the Hermit to the Court.
On a Picture Painted by her self, representing two Nimphs of DIANA'S, one in a
posture to Hunt, the other Batheing.
WE are Diana's Virgin-Train,
Descended of no Mortal Strain;
Our Bows and Arrows are our Goods,
Our Palaces, the lofty Woods,
The Hills and Dales, at early Morn,
Resound and Echo with our Horn;
We chase the Hind and Fallow-Deer,
The Wolf and Boar both dread our Spear;
In Swiftness we outstrip the Wind,
An Eye and Thought we leave behind;
We Fawns and Shaggy Satyrs awe;
To Sylvan Powers we give the Law:
Whatever does provoke our Hate,
Our Javelins strike, as sure as Fate;
We Bathe in Springs, to cleanse the Soil,
Contracted by our eager Toil;
In which we shine like glittering Beams,
Or Crystal in the Crystal Streams;
Though Venus we transcend in Form,
No wanton Flames our Bosoms warm!
If you ask where such Wights do dwell,
In what Bless't Clime, that so excel?
The Poets only that can tell.
An Invective against Gold.
OF all the Poisons that the fruitful Earth
Ever yet brought forth, or Monsters she gave Birth,
Naught to Mankind has ever so fatal been,
As thou, accursed Gold, their Gare and Sin.
Methinks I the Adventurous Merchant see,
Ploughing the faithless Seas, in search of thee,
His dearest Wife and Children left behind,
(His real Wealth) while he, a Slave to th'Wind,
Sometimes becalmed, the Shore with longing Eyes
Wishes to see, and what he wishes, Spies:
For a rude Tempest wakes him from his Dream,
And Strands his Bark by a more sad Extreme.
Thus, hopless Wretch, is his whole Lifetime spent,
And though thrice Wreck't, 's no Wiser than he went.
Again, I see, the Heavenly Fair despised,
A Hagg like Hell, with Gold, more highly prized;
Men's Faith betrayed, their Prince and Country Sold,
Their God denied, all for the Idol Gold.
Unhappy Wretch, who first found out the Oar,
What kind of Vengeance rests for thee in store?
If Nebats Son, that Israel led astray,
Meet a severe Reward at the last Day?
Some strange unheard of Judgment thou will find,
Who thus have caused to Sin all Humane Kind.
The Miseries of Man.
IN that so temperate Soil Arcadia named,
For fertile Pasturage by Poets famed;
Stands a steep Hill, whose lofty jetting Crown,
Casts over the neighboring Plains, a seeming Frown;
Close at its mossie Foot an aged Wood,
Composed of various Trees, there long has stood,
Whose thick united Tops scorn the Sun's Ray,
And hardly will admit the Eye of Day.
By oblique windings through this gloomy Shade,
Has a clear purling Stream its Passage made,
The Nymph, as discontented seemed t'ave chose
This sad Recess to murmur forth her Woes.
To this Retreat, urged by tormenting Care,
The melancholy Cloris did repair,
As a fit Place to take the sad Relief
Of Sighs and Tears, to ease oppressing Grief.
Near to the Mourning Nymph she chose a Seat,
And these Complaints did to the Shades repeat.
Ah wretched, truly wretched Humane Race!
Your Woes from what Beginning shall I trace,
Where End, from your first feeble Newborn Cries,
To the last Tears that wet your dying Eyes?
Man, Common Foe, assailed on every hand,
Finds that no Ill does Neuter by him stand,
Inexorable Death, Lean Poverty,
Pale Sickness, ever sad Captivity.
Can I, alas, the several Parties name,
Which, mustered up, the Dreadful Army frame?
And sometimes in One Body all Unite,
Sometimes again do separately fight:
While sure Success on either Way does wait,
Either a Swift, or else a Lingering Fate.
But why against thee, O Death! should I inveigh,
That to our Quiet art the only way?
And yet I would (could I thy Dart command)
Cry, Here O strike! and there O hold thy Hand!
The Loved, the Happy, and the Youthful spare,
And end the Sad, the Sick, the Poor Man's Care.
But whether thou or Blind, or Cruel art,
Whether it is Chance, or Malice, guides thy Dart,
Thou from the Parents Arms do pull away
The hopeful Child, their Ages only ftay:
The Two, whom Friendship in dear Bands has tied,
Thou do with a remorseless hand devide;
Friendship, the Cement, that does faster twine
Two Souls, than that which Soul and Body join:
Thousands have been, who their own Blood did spill,
But never any yet his Friend did kill.
Then against thy Dart what Armor can be found,
Who, where thou do not strike, do deepest wound?
Thy Pity, than thy Wrath's more bitter far,
Most cruel, where 'twould seem the most to spare:
Yet thou of many Evils art but One,
Though thou by much too many art alone.
What shall I say of Poverty, whence flows?
To miserable Man so many Woes?
Rediculous Evil which too often we prove,
Does Laughter cause, where it should Pity move;
Solitary Ill, into which no Eye,
Though never so Curious, ever cares to pry,
And were there, among such plenty, only One
Poor Man, he certainly would live alone.
Yet Poverty does leave the Man entire,
But Sickness nearer Mischiefs does conspire;
Invades the Body with a loathed Embrace,
Prides both its Strength, and Beauty to deface;
Nor does its Malice in these bounds restrain,
But shakes the Throne of Sacred Wit, the Brain,
And with a never enough detested Force
Reason disturbs, and turns out of its Course.
Again, when Nature some Rare Piece has made,
On which her Utmost Skill she seems t'ave laid,
Polish't, adorned the Work with moving Grace,
And in the Beauteous Frame a Soul does place,
So perfectly composed, it makes Divine
Each Motion, Word, and Look from thence does shine;
This Goodly Composition, the Delight
Of every Heart, and Joy of every sight,
Its peevish Malice has the Power to spoil,
And with a Sullied Hand its Lusture soil.
The Grief were Endless, that should all bewail,
Against whose sweet Repose thou do prevail:
Some freeze with Agues, some with Fevers burn,
Whose Lives thou half out of their Holds do turn;
And of whose Sufferings it may be said,
They living feel the very State of the Dead.
Thou in a thousand several Forms are dressed,
And in them all do Wretched Man infest.
And yet as if these Evils were too few,
Men their own Kind with hostile Arms pursue;
Not Heavens fierce Wrath, nor yet the Hate of Hell,
Not any Plague that e're the World befell,
Not Inundations, Famines, Fires blind rage,
Did ever Mortals equally engage,
As Man does Man, more skilful to annoy,
Both Mischievous and Witty to destroy.
The bloody Wolf, the Wolf does not pursue;
The Boar, though fierce, his Tusk will not embrue
In his own Kind, Bares, not on Bares do prey:
Then art thou, Man, more savage far than they.
And now, methinks, I present do behold
The Bloody Fields that are in Fame enrolled,
I see, I see thousands in Battle flain,
The Dead and Dying cover all the Plain,
Confused Noifes hear, each way sent out,
The Vanquishts Cries joined with the Victors shout;
Their Sighs and Groans who draw a painful Breath,
And feel the Pangs of slow approaching Death:
Yet happier these, far happier are the Dead,
Than who into Captivity are led:
What by their Chains, and by the Victors Pride,
We pity these, and envy those that died.
And who can say, when Thousands are betrayed,
To Widdowhood, Orphants or Childless made.
Whither the Day does draw more Tears or Blood
A greater Crystal, or a Crimson Flood.
The faithful Wife, who late her Lord did Arm,
And hoped to shield, by holy Vows, from Harm,
Followed his parting-steps with Love and Care,
Sent after weeping Eyes, while he afar
Rod heated on, born by a brave Disdain,
May now go seek him, lying among the Slain:
Low on the Earth she will find his lofty Crest,
And those refulgent Arms which late his Breast
Did guard, by rough Encounters broke and tore,
His Face and Hair, with Brains all clotted ore,
And Warlike Weeds besmeer'd with Dust and Gore.
And will the Suffering World never bestow
Upon th'Accursed Causers of such Woe,
A vengeance that may parallel their Loss,
Fix Public Thieves and Robbers on the Cross?
Such as call Ruin, Conquest, in their Pride,
And having plagued Mankind, in Triumph ride.
Like that renounced Murderer who stains
In these our days Alsatias fertile Plains,
Only to fill the future Tromp of Fame,
Though greater Crimes, than Glory it proclaim.
Alcides, Scourge of Thieves, return to Earth,
Which uncontrolled gives such Monsters birth;
On Scepter'd-Cacus let thy Power be shown,
Pull him not from his Den, but from his Throne.
Clouds of black Thoughts her further Speech here broke,
Her swelling Grief too great was to be spoke,
Which strugl'd long in her tormented Mind,
Till it some Vent by Sighs and Tears did find.
And when her Sorrow something was subdued,
She thus again her sad Complaint renewed.
Most Wretched Man, were th'Ills I named before
All which I could in thy sad State deplore,
Did Things without alone against thee prevail,
My Tongue I Would chide, that them I did bewail:
But, Shame to Reason, thou art seen to be
Unto thy self the fatall'st Enemy,
Within thy Breast the Greatest Plagues to bear,
First them to breed; and then to cherish there;
Unmanag'd Passions which the Reins have broke
Of Reason, and refuse to bear its Yoke.
But hurry thee, uncurb'd, from place to place,
A wild, unruly, and an Uncouth Chase.
Now cursed Gold does lead the Man astray,
False flattering Honors do anon betray,
Then Beauty does as dang'rously delude,
Beauty, that vanishes, while it is pursued,
That, while we do behold it, fades away,
And even a Long Encomium will not stay.
Each one of these can the Whole Man employ,
Nor knows he anger, sorrow, fear, or joy,
But what to these relate; no Thought does start
Aside, but tends to its appointed Part,
No Respite to himself from Cares he gives,
But on the Rack of Expectation lives.
If crossed, the Torment cannot be expressed,
Which boyles within his agitated Breast.
Music is harsh, all Mirth is an offense,
The Choicest Meats cannot delight his Sense,
Hard as the Earth he feels his Downy Bed,
His Pillow stufft with Thorns, that bears his Head,
He rolls from side to side, in vain seeks Rest;
For if sleep comes at last to the Distressed,
His Troubles then cease not to vex him too,
But Dreams present, what he does waking do.
On the other side, if he obtains the Prey,
And Fate to his impetuous Suit gives way,
Be he or Rich, or Amorous, or Great,
He Will find this Riddle still of a Defeat,
That only Care, for Bliss, he home has brought,
Or else Contempt of what he so much sought.
So that on each Event if we reflect,
The Joys and Sufferings of both sides collect,
We cannot say where lies the greatest Pain,
In the fond Pursuit, Loss, or Empty Gain.
And can it be, Lord of the Sea and Earth,
Offspring of Heaven, that to thy State and Birth
Things so incompatible should be joined,
Passions should thee confound, to Heaven assigned?
Passions that do the Soul unguarded lay,
And to the strokes of Fortune ope' a way.
Were It not that these thy Force did from thee take,
How bold, how brave Resistance would thou make?
Defy the Strength and Malice of thy Foes,
Unmoved stand the Worlds United Blows?
For what is it, Man, unto thy Better Part,
That thou or Sick, or Poor, or Captive art?
Since no Material Stroke the Soul can feel,
The smart of Fire, or yet the Edge of Steel.
As little can it Worldly Joys partake,
Though it the Body does its Agent make,
And jointly with it Servile Labor bear,
For Things, alas, in which it cannot share.
Surveigh the Land and Sea by Heavens embraced,
Thou Wilt find no sweet The Immortal Soul can taste:
Why do thou then, O Man! thy self torment
Good here to gain, or Evils to prevent?
Who only Miserable or Happy art,
As thou neglects, or wisely act'st thy Part.
For shame then rouse thy self as from a Sleep,
The long neglected Reins let Reason keep,
The Charret mount, and use both Lash and Bit,
Nobly resolve, and thou will firmly sit:
Fierce Anger, boggling Fear, Pride prauncing still,
Bounds-hating Hope, Desire which naught can fill,
Are stubborn all, but thou may give them Law;
They Are Hard-mouthed Horses, but they well can draw.
Lash on, and the well governed Charret drive,
Till thou a Victor at the Goal arrive,
Where the free Soul does all her burden leave,
And Joys commensurate to her self receive.
Upon the saying that my VERSES were made by another.
NExt Heaven my Vows to thee (O Sacred Muse!)
I offered up, nor did thou them refuse.
O Queen of Verse, said I, if thou wilt inspire,
And warm my Soul with thy Poetique Fire,
No Love of Gold shall share with thee my Heart,
Or yet Ambition in my Breast have Part,
More Rich, more Noble I will ever hold
The Muses Laurel, than a Crown of Gold.
An Undivided Sacrifice I Will lay
Upon thine Altar, Soul and Body pay;
Thou shall my Pleasure, my Employment be,
My All I Will make a Holocaust to thee.
The Deity that ever does attend
Prayers so sincere, to mine did condescend.
I writ, and the Judicious praised my Pen:
Could any doubt Ensuing Glory then?
What pleasing Raptures filled my Ravished Sense?
How strong, how Sweet, Fame, was thy Influence?
And thine, False Hope, that to my flattered sight
Did Glories represent so Near, and Bright?
By thee deceived, methought, each Verdant Tree,
Apollos transformed Daphne seemed to be;
And every fresher Branch, and every Bow
Appeared as Garlands to empale my Brow.
The Learned in Love say, Thus the Winged Boy
Does first approach, dressed up in welcome Joy;
At first he to the Cheated Lovers sight
Naught represents, but Rapture and Delight,
Alluring Hopes, Soft Fears, which stronger bind
Their Hearts, than when they more assurance find.
Emboldened thus, to Fame I did commit,
(By some few hands) my most Unlucky Wit.
But, ah, the sad effects that from it came!
What ought to have brought me Honor, brought me shame!
Like Esops Painted Jay I seemed to all,
Adorned in Plumes, I not my own could call:
Rifl'd like her, each one my Feathers tore,
And, as they thought, unto the Owner bore.
My Laurels thus an Others Brow adorned,
My Numbers they Admired, but Me they scorned:
An others Brow, that had so rich a store
Of Sacred Wreaths, that circled it before;
Where mine quite lost, (like a small stream that ran
Into a Vast and Boundless Ocean)
Was swallowed up, with what it joined and drowned,
And that Abiss yet no Accession found.
Orinda, ( Albions and her Sexes Grace)
Owed not her Glory to a Beauteous Face,
It was her Radiant Soul that shon With-in,
Which struk a Luster through her Outward Skin;
That did her Lips and Cheeks with Roses die,
Advanced her Height, and Sparkled in her Eye.
Nor did her Sex at all obstruct her Fame,
But higher among the Stars it fixed her Name;
What she did write, not only all allowed,
But every Laurel, to her Laurel, bowed!
Th'Envious Age, only to Me alone,
Will not allow, what I do write, my Own,
But let 'em Rage, and against a Maid Conspire,
So Deathless Numbers from my Tuneful Lyre
Do ever flow; so Phoebus I by thee
Divinely Inspired and possessed may be;
I willingly accept Cassandras Fate,
To speak the Truth, although believed too late.
On the Birthday of Queen Katherine.
WHile yet it was the Empire of the Night,
And Stars still check'r'd Darkness with their Light,
From Temples round the cheerful Bells did ring,
But with the Peales a churlish Storm did sing.
I slumbr'd; and the Heavens like things did show,
Like things which I had seen and heard below.
Playing on Harps Angels did singing fly,
But through a cloudy and a troubled Sky,
Some fixed a Throne, and Royal Robes displayed,
And then a Massy Cross upon it laid.
I wept: and earnestly implored to know,
Why Royal Ensigns were disposed so.
An Angel said, The Emblem thou have seen,
Denotes the Birthday of a Saint and Queen.
Ah, Glorious Minister, I then replied,
Goodness and Bliss together do reside
In Heaven and thee, why then on Earth below
These two combined so rarely do we know?
He said, Heaven so decrees: and such a Sable Morn
Was that, in which the Son of God was borne.
Then Mortal wipe thine Eyes, and cease to rave,
God darkn'd Heaven, when He the World did save.
TO My Lord Colrane, In Answer to his Complemental Verses sent me under the
Name of CLEANOR.
LOng my dull Muse in heavy slumbers lay,
Indulging Sloth, and to soft Ease gave way,
Her Fill of Rest resolving to enjoy,
Or fancying little worthy her employ.
When Noble Cleanors obliging Strains
Her, the neglected Lyre to tune, constrains.
Confused at first, she raised her drowsy Head,
Pondered a while, then pleased, forsook her Bed.
Surveyed each Line with Fancy richly fraught,
Re-read, and then revolved them in her Thought.
And can it be? she said, and can it be?
That among the Great Ones I a Poet see?
The Great Ones? who their Ill-spent time devide,
'Twixt dangerous Politics, and formal Pride,
Destructive Vice, expensive Vanity,
In worse Ways yet, if Worse there any be:
Leave to Inferiors the despised Arts,
Let their Retainers be the Men of Parts.
But here with Wonder and with Joy I find,
I'th'Noble Born, a no less Noble Mind;
One, who on Ancestors, does not rely
For Fame, in Merit, as in Title, high!
The Severe Godess thus approved the Lays:
Yet too much pleased, alas, with her own Praise.
But to vain Pride, My Muse, cease to give place,
Virgils immortal Numbers once did grace
A Smothered Gnat: by high Applause is shown,
If undeserved, the Praisers worth alone:
Nor that you should believed, is it always meant,
It Is often for Instruction only sent,
To praise men to Amendment, and display,
By its Perfection, where their Weakness lay.
This Use of these Applauding Numbers make
Them for Example, not Encomium, take.
The Discontent.
I.
HEre take no Care, take here no Gare, my Muse,
Nor ought of Art or Labor use:
But let thy Lines rude and unpolisht go,
Nor Equal be their Feet, nor Numerous let them flow.
The ruggeder my Measures run when read,
They Will livelier paint the unequal Paths fond Mortals tread.
Who when they are tempted by the smooth Ascents,
Which flattering Hope presents,
Briskly they clime, and Great Things undertake;
But Fatal Voyages, alas, they make:
For it is not long before their Feet,
Inextricable Mazes meet,
Perplexing Doubts obstruct their Way,
Mountains with-stand them of Dismay;
Or to the Brink of black Despair them lead,
Where Is naught their Ruin to impede,
In vain for Aid they then to Reason call,
Their Senses dazzle, and their Heads turn round,
The sight does all their Powers confound,
And headlong down the horrid Precipice they fall:
Where storms of Sighs for ever blow,
Where raped streams of Tears do flow,
Which drown them in a Briny Flood.
My Muse pronounce aloud, there is nothing Good,
Naught that the World can show,
Naught that it can bestow.
II.
Not boundless Heaps of its admired Clay,
Ah, too successful to betray,
When spread in our frail Virtues way:
For few do run with so Resolved a Pace,
That for the Golden Apple will not loose the Race.
And yet not all the Gold the Vain would spend,
Or greedy Avarice would wish to save;
Which on the Earth refulgent Beams does send,
Or in the Sea has found a Grave,
Joined in one Mass, can Bribe sufficient be,
The Body from a stern Disease to free,
Or purchase for the Minds relief
One Moments sweet Repose, when restless made by grief,
But what may Laughter, more than Pity, move:
When some the Price of what they Dear'st Love
Are Masters of, and hold it in their Hand,
To part with it their Hearts they cannot command:
But chose to miss, what miss't does them torment,
And that to hug, affords them no Content.
Wife Fools, to do them Right, we these must hold,
Who Love depose, and Homage pay to Gold.
III.
Nor yet, if rightly understood,
Does Grandeur carry more of Good;
To be of the Number of the Great enrolled,
A Scepter over a Mighty Realm to hold.
For what is this?
If I not judge amiss.
But all The Afflicted of a Land to take,
And of one single Family to make?
The Wronged, the Poor, The Oppressed, the Sad,
The Ruined, Malecontent, and Mad?
Which a great Part of every Empire frame,
And Interest in the common Father claim.
Again what is it, but always to abide
A Gazing Crowd? upon a Stage to spend
A Life that is vain, or Evil without End?
And which is yet nor safely held, nor laid aside?
And then, if lesser Titles carry less of Care,
Yet none but Fools ambitious are to share
Such a Mock-Good, of which it is said, it is Best,
When of the least of it Men are possessed.
IV.
But, O, the Laureled Fool! that doats on Fame,
Whose Hope's Applause, whose Fear's to want a Name;
Who can accept for Pay
Of what he does, what others say;
Exposes now to hostile Arms his Breast,
To toylsome Study then betrays his Rest;
Now to his Soul denies a just Content,
Then forces on it what it does resent;
And all for Praise of Fools: for such are those,
Which most of the Admiring Crowd compose.
O famisht Soul, which such Thin Food can feed!
O Wretched Labor crowned with such a Meed!
Too loud, O Fame! thy Trumpet is, too shrill,
To lull a Mind to Rest,
Or calm a stormy Breast,
Which asks a Mufick soft and still.
'Twas not Amaleck's vanquished Cry,
Nor Isreal's shout of Victory,
That could in Saul the rising Passion lay,
'Twas the soft strains of David's Lyre the Evil Spirit chace't away.
V.
But Friendship fain would yet it self defend,
And Mighty Things it does pretend,
To be of this Sad Journey, Life, the Bait,
The sweet Refection of our toylsome State.
But though True Friendship a Rich Cordial be,
Alas, by most it is so alay'd,
Its Good so mixed with Ill we see,
That Dross for Gold is often paid.
And for one Grain of Friendship that is found,
Falsehood and Interest do the Mass compound,
Or coldness, worse than Steel, the Loyal heart does wound.
Love in no Two was ever yet the same,
No Happy Two ere felt an Equal Flame.
VI.
Is there that Earth by Humane Foot never pressed?
That Air which never yet by Humane Breast
Respir'd, did Life supply?
Oh, thither let me fly!
Where from the World at such a distance set,
All that is past, present, and to come I may forget:
The Lovers Sighs, and the Afflicteds Tears,
What e're may wound my Eyes or Ears.
The grating Noise of Private Jars,
The horrid sound of Public Wars,
Of babbling Fame the Idle Stories,
The short-lived Triumphs Noysy-Glories,
The Curious Nets the subtle weave,
The Word, the Look that may deceive.
No Mundan Care shall more affect my Breast,
My profound Peace shake or molest:
But Stupor, like to Death, my Senses bind,
That so I may anticipate that Rest,
Which only in my Grave I hope to find.
A Pastoral Dialogue.
Amintor. STay gentle Nymph, nor so solic'tous be?
To fly his sight that still would gaze on thee.
With other Swains I see thee often converse,
Content to speak, and hear what they rehearse:
But I unhappy, when I e're draw nigh,
Thou straight do leave both Place, and Company.
If this thy Flight, from fear of Harm does flow,
Ah, sure thou little of my Heart do know.

Alinda. What wonder, Swain, if the Pursued by Flight,
Seeks to avoid the close Pursuers Sight?
And if no Cause I have to fly from thee,
Then thou have none, why thou do follow me.

Amin. If to the Cause thou will propitious prove,
Take it at once, fair Nymph, and know it is Love.

Alin. To my just Prayer, ye favoring Gods attend,
These Vows to Heaven with equal Zeal I send,
My flocks from Wolves, my Heart from Love, defend.

Amin. The Gods which did on thee such Charms bestow,
Never meant thou should to Love have proved a Foe,
That so Divine a Power thou should defy.
Could there a Reason be, I Would ask thee, why?

Alin. Why does Licoris, once so bright and gay,
Pale as a Lilly pine her self away?
Why does Elvira, ever sad, frequent
The lonely shades? Why does yon Monument
Which we upon our Left Hand do behold,
Hapless Amyntas youthful Limbs enfold?
Say Shepherd, say: But if thou will not tell,
Damon, Philisides, and Strephon well
Can speak the Cause, whose Falsehood each upbraids,
And justly me from Cruel Love disswades.

Amin. Hear me ye Gods. Me and my Flocks forsake,
If e're like them my promised Faith I brake.

Alin. By others sad Experience wise I Will be,

Amin. But such thy Wisdom highly injures me:
And naught but Death can give a Remedy.
Ye Learned in Physic, what does it avail,
That you by Art (wherein ye never fail)
Present Relief have for the Mad-dogs Bite?
The Serpents sting? the poisonous Achonite?
While helpless Love upbraids your baffled skill,
And far more certain, than the rest, does kill.

Alin. Fond Swain, go dote upon the new blown Rose,
Whose Beauty with the Morning did disclose,
And e're Days King forsakes th'enlighted Earth,
Withered, returns from whence it took its Birth.
As much Excuse will there thy Love attend,
As what thou do on Women's Beauty spend.

Amin. Ah Nymph, those Charms which I in thee admire,
Can, nor before, nor with thy Life expire.
From Heaven they are, and such as never can dye,
But with thy Soul they will ascend the Sky!
For though my ravished Eye beholds in Thee,
Such beauty as I can in none else see;
That Nature there alone is without blame,
Yet did not this my faithful Heart inflame:
Nor when in Dance thou mov'st upon the Plain,
Or other Sports pursu'st among the Train
Of choicest Nymphs, where thy attractive Grace
Shows thee alone, though thousands be in place!
Yet not for these do I Alinda love,
Hear then what it is, that does my Passion move.
That Thou still Earliest at the Temple art,
And still the last that does from thence depart;
Paus Altar is by thee the oftnest pressed,
Thine's still the fairest Offering and the Best;
And all thy other Actions seem to be,
The true Result of Unseign'd Piety;
Strict in thy self, to others Just and Mild;
Careful, nor to Deceive, nor be Beguiled;
Wary, without the least Offense, to live,
Yet none than thee more ready to forgive!
Even on thy Beauty thou do Fetters lay,
Least, unawares, it any should betray.
Far unlike, sure, to many of thy Sex,
Whose Pride it is, the doting World to vex;
Spreading their Universal Nets to take
Who e're their artifice can captive make.
But thou command'st thy Sweet, but Modest Eye,
That no Inviting Glance from thence should fly.
Beholding with a Generous Disdain,
The lighter Courtships of each amorous Swain;
Knowing, true Fame, Virtue alone can give:
Nor do thou greedily even that receive.
And what 'bove this thy Character can raise?
Thirsty of Merit, yet neglecting Praise!
While daily these Perfections I discry,
Matchless Alinda makes me daily die.
Thou absent, Flowers to me no Odours yield,
Nor find I freshness in the dewy Field;
Not Thyrsis Voice, nor Melibeus Lire,
Can my Sad Heart with one Gay Thought inspire;
My thriving Flock ('mong Shepherds Vows the Chief)
I unconcerned behold, as they my Grief.
This I profess, if this thou not believe,
A further proof I ready am to give,
Command: there is nothing I Will not undertake,
And, thy Injunctions, Love will easy make.
Ah, if thou could incline a gentle Ear,
Of plighted Faith, and hated Hymen hear;
Thou hourly then my spotless Love should see,
That all my Study, how to please, should be;
How to protect thee from disturbing Care,
And in thy Griefs to bear the greatest share;
Nor should a Joy, my Wary Heart surprise,
That first I read not in thy charming Eyes.

Alin. If ever I to any do impart,
My, till this present hour, well-guarded Heart,
That Passion I have feared, I Will surely prove,
For one that does, like to Amintor love.

Amintor. Ye Gods --

Alin. Shepherd, no more: enough it is that I,
Thus long to Love, have listn'd patiently.
Farewell: Pan keep thee, Swain.

Amintor. And Blessings Thee,
Rare as thy Virtues, still accompany.

A Pastoral Dialogue
Melibaeus, Alcippe, Asteria, Licida, Alcimedon, and Amira.

Melibaeus. WElcome fair Nymphs, most welcome to this shade,
Distemp'ring Heats do now the Plains invade:
But you may sit, from Sun securely here,
If you an old man's company not fear.

Alcippe. Most Reverend Swain, far from us ever be
The imputation of such Vanity.
From Hill to Holt w'ave thee unwearied sought,
And bless the Chance that us has hither brought.

Asteria. Famed Melibaeus for thy Virtuous Lays,
If thou do not disdain our Female Praise,
We come to sue thou would to us recite
One of thy Songs, which gives such high delight
To every Ear, wherein thou do dispense
Sage Precepts clothed in flowing Eloquence.

Licida. Fresh Garlands we will make for thee each morn,
Thy reverend Head to shade, and to adorn;
To cooling Springs thy fainting Flock we'll guide,
All thou command'st, to do shall be our Pride.

Meli. Cease, gentle Nymphs, the Willing to entreat,
To have your Wish, each needs but take a Seat.
With joy I shall my ancient Art revive,
With which, when Young, I did for Glory strive.
Nor for my Verse will I accept a Hire,
Your bare Attentions all I shall require.

Alci. Lo, from the Plain I see draw near a Pair
That I could wish in our Converse might share.
Amira it is and young Alcimedon.

Lici. Serious Discourse industriously they shun.

Alci. It being yet their luck to come this way,
The Fond Ones to our Lecture we'll betray:
And though they only sought a private shade,
Perhaps they may depart more Virtuous made.
I will accost them. Gentle Nymph and Swain,
Good Melibaeus us does entertain
With Lays Divine: if you will his Hearers be,
Take straight your Seats without Apology.

Alci. Paying short thanks, at fair Amiras feet,
I Will lay me down: let her choose where it is meet.

Al. Shepherd, behold, we all attentive sit.

Meli. What shall I sing? what shall my Muse rehearse?
Love is a Theme well suits a Past'ral Verse,
That general Error, Universal Ill,
That Darling of our Weakness and our Will;
By which though many fall, few hold it shame;
Smile at the Fault, which they would seem to blame.
What wonder then, if those with Mischief play,
It to destruction them does often betray?
But by experience it is daily found,
That Love the softer Sex does sorest wound;
In Mind, as well as Body, far more weak
Than Men: therefore to them my Song shall speak,
Advising well, however it succeed:
But unto All I say, Of Love take heed.
So hazardous, because so hard to know
On whom they are we do our Hearts bestow;
How they will use them, or with what regard
Our Faith and high Esteem they will reward:
For few are found, that truly acted be
By Principles of Generosity.
That when they know a Virgins Heart they have gained,
(And though by many Vows and Arts obtained)
Will think themselves obliged their Faith to hold
Tempted by Friends, by Interest, or by Gold.
Expect it not: most, Love their Pastime make,
Lightly they Like, and lightly they forsake;
Their Roving Humor wants but a pretense
With Oaths and what is most Sacred to dispense.
When unto such a Maid has given her Heart,
And said, Alone my Happiness thou art,
In thee and in thy Truth I place my Rest.
Her sad Surprise how can it be expressed,
When all on which she built her Joy she finds,
Vanish, like Clouds, dispersed before the Winds;
Her self, who th'adored Idol wont to be,
A poor despised Idolater to see?
Regardless Tears she may profusely spend,
Unpitty'd sighs her tender Breast may rend:
But the false Image she will never erace,
Though far unworthy still to hold its place:
So hard it is, even Wiser grown, to take
The Impression out, which Fancy once did make.
Believe me Nymphs, believe my hoary hairs,
Truth and Experience waits on many years.
Before the Eldest of you Light beheld,
A Nymph we had, in Beauty all excelled,
Rodanthe called, in whom each Grace did shine,
Could make a Mortal Maid appear Divine.
And none could say, where most her Charms did lie,
In her enchanting Tongue, or conquering Eye.
Her Virtue yet her Beauties so out-shon,
As Beauty did the Garments she put on!
Among the Swains, which here their Flocks then fed,
Alcander with the highest held his head;
The most Accomplished was esteemed to be,
Of comely Form, well-grac't Activity;
The Muses too, like him, did none inspire,
None so did stop the Pipe, or touch the Lyre;
Sweet was his Voice, and Eloquent his Tongue;
Alike admired when he Spoke, or Sung!
But these so much Excelling parts the Swain,
With Imperfections no less Great, did stain:
For proud he was, of an Ungoverned Will,
With Love Familiar, but a Stranger still
To Faith and Constancy; and did his Heart,
Retaining none, expose to every Dart.
Hapless Rodanthe, the Fond Rover, caught,
To whom, for Love, with usual Arts he sought;
Which she, ah too unwary, did bestow:
'Cause True her self, believed that he was so.
But he, alas, more wavering than the Wind,
Straight broke the Chain, she thought so fast did bind;
For he no sooner saw her Heart was gained,
But he as soon the Victory disdained;
Mad Love elsewhere, as if 'twere like Renown,
Hearts to subdue, as to take in a Town:
But in the One as Manhood does prevail,
Both Truth and Manhood in the other fail.
And now the Nymph (of late so gay and bright,
The Glory of the Plains and the Delight,
Who still in Wit and Mirth all Pastimes led)
Hung like a withered Flower her drooping Head.
I need not tell the Grief Rodanthe found,
How all that should assuage, enraged her Wound;
Her Form, her Fame, her Virtue, Riches, Wit,
Like Deaths sad Weights upon her Soul did sit:
Or else like Furies stood before her Face,
Still urging and Upbraiding her Disgrace,
In that the World could yield her no Content,
But what alone the False Alcander sent.
'Twas said, through just Disdain, at last she broke
The Disingenious and Unworthy Yoke:
But this I know, her Passion held long time,
Constancy, though Unhappy, is no Crime.
Remember when you Love, from that same hour
Your Peace you put into your Lovers Power:
From that same hour from him you Laws receive,
And as he shall ordain, you Joy, or Grieve,
Hope, Fear, Laugh, Weep; Reason aloof does stand,
Disabl'd both to Act, and to Command.
Oh Cruel Fetters! rather wish to feel,
On your soft Limbs, the Gauling Weight of Steel;
Rather to bloody Wounds oppose your Breast
No Ill, by which the Body can be pressed;
You will so sensible a Torment find,
As Shackles on your captivated Mind.
The Mind from Heaven its high Descent did draw,
And brooks uneasily any other Law,
Than what from Reason dictated shall be,
Reason, a kind of In-mate Deity.
Which only can adapt to every Soul
A Yoke so fit and light, that the Control
All Liberty excels; so sweet a Sway,
The same it is to be Happy, and Obey;
Commands so Wise and with Rewards so dressed
That the according Soul replys, I Am Blessed.
This teaches rightly how to Love and Hate,
To fear and hope by Measure and just Weight;
What Tears in Grief ought from our Eyes to flow,
What Transport in Felicity to show;
In every Passion how to steer the Will,
Tho rude the Shock, to keep it steady still.
Oh happy Mind! what words, can speak thy Bliss,
When in a Harmony thou mov'ft like this?
Your Hearts fair Virgins keep smooth as your Brow,
Not the least Amorous Passion there allow;
Hold not a Parley with what may betray
Your inward Freedom to a Foreign Sway;
And while thus ore your selves you Queens remain,
Unenvied, ore the World, let others reign:
The highest Joy which from Dominion flows,
Is short of what a Mind well-governed knows.
Whither my Muse, would uncontrouled run?
Contend in Motion with the restless Sun?
Immortal thou, but I a mortal Sire
Exhaust my strength, and Hearers also tire.

Al. O Heaven-taught Bard! to Ages could prolong
Thy Soul-instructing, Health-infusing Song,
I with unwearied Appetite could hear,
And wish my Senses were turned all to Ear.

Alcim. Old Man, thy frosty Precepts well betray
Thy Blood is cold, and that thy Head is gray:
Who past the Pleasure Love and Youth can give,
To spoyl't in others, now do only live.
Would thou, indeed, if so thou could persuade,
The Fair, whose Charms have many Lovers made,
Should feel Compassion for no one they wound,
But be to all Inexorable found?

Me. Young man, if my advice thou well had weighed,
Thou would have found, for either Sex 'twas made;
And would from Women's Beauty thee no less
Preserve, than them secure from thy Address.
But let thy Youth thy rash Reproach excuse.

Alci. Fairest Amira let him not abuse
Thy gentle Heart, by his imprinting there
His doting Maxims -- But I will not fear:
For when against Love he fiercest did inveigh,
Methoughts I saw thee turn with Scorn away.

Ami. Alcimedon according to his Will
Does all my Words and Looks interpret still:
But I shall learn at length how to Disdain,
Or at the least more cunningly to feign.

Alci. No wonder thou Alcimedon art rude,
When with no Generous Quality endu'd:
But hop'st by railing Words Vice to defend,
Which Foulers made, by having such a Friend.
Amira, thou art warned, wisely beware,
Leap not with Open-Eyes into the Snare:
The Faith that is given to thee, was given before
To Nais, Amoret, and many more:
The Perjured did the Gods to Witness call,
That unto each he was the only Thrall.

Aste. You Have made his Cheeks with Conscious blushes glow.

Alci. It Is the best Color a False Heart can show;
And well it is with Guilt some shame remains.

Meli. Have, Shepherd, have to cleanse away thy stains,
Let not thy Youth, of Time the goodly spring,
Neglected pass, that nothing forth it bring
But noxious Weeds: which cultivated might
Produce such Crops, as now would thee delight,
And give thee after Fame: For Virtues Fruit
Believe it, not alone with Age does suit,
Naught adorns Youth like to a Noble Mind,
In thee this Union let Amira find.

Lici. O fear her not! she will serve him in his kind.

Meli. See how Discourse upon the Time does prey,
Those hours pass swiftest, that we talk away.
Declining Sol forsaken has the Fields,
And Mountains highest Summits only gildes:
Which warns us homewards with our Flocks to make.

Alci. Along with thee our Thanks and Praises take.

Aste. In which our Hearts do all in One unite,

Lici. Our Wishes too, That on thy Head may light,
What e're the Gods as their Best Gifts bestow.

Meli. Kind Nymphs on you may Equal Blessings flow.

On my Aunt Mrs A. K. Drowned under London Bridge, in the QUEENS Bardge, Anno
1641.
THe Darling of a Father Good and Wise,
The Virtue, which a Virtuous Age did prize;
The Beauty Excellent even to those were Fair,
Subscribed unto, by such as might compare;
The Star that 'bove her Orb did always move,
And yet the Noblest did not Hate, but Love;
And those who most upon their Title stood,
Veiled also to, because she did more Good.
To whom the Wronged, and Worthy did resort,
And held their Suits obtained, if only brought;
The highest Saint in all the Heaven of Court.
So Noble was her Air, so Great her Mien,
She seemed a Friend, not Servant to the Queen.
To Sin, if known, she never did give way,
Vice could not Storm her, could it not betray.
When angry Heaven extinguished her fair Light,
It seemed to say, Nought's Precious in my sight;
As I in Waves this Paragon have drowned,
The Nation next, and King I will confound.
On a young Lady Whose LORD was Traveling.
NO sooner I pronounced Celindas name,
But Troops of winged Powers did chant the same:
Not those the Poets Bows and Arrows lend,
But such as on the Altar do attend.
Celinda named, Flowers spring up from the Ground,
Excited merely with the Charming Sound.
Celinda, the Courts Glory, and its fear,
The gazed at Wonder, where she does appear.
Celinda great in Birth, greater in Mien,
Yet none so humble as this Fair-One's seen.
Her Youth and Beauty justly might disdain,
But the least Pride her Glories never did stain.
Celinda of each State the ambitious Strife,
At once a Noble Virgin, and a Wife
Who, while her Gallant Lord in Foreign parts
Adorns his Youth with all accomplished Arts,
Grows ripe at home in Virtue, more than Years,
And in each Grace a Miracle appears!
When other of her Age a madding go,
To the Park and Plays, and every public Show,
Proud from their Parents Bondage they have broke,
Though justly freed, she still does wear the Yoke;
Preferring more her Mothers Friend to be,
Than Idol of the Towns Loose-Gallantry.
On her she to the Temple does attend,
Where they their Blessed Hours both save and spend.
They Smile, they Joy, together they do Pray,
You Would think two Bodies did One Soul obey:
Like Angels thus they do reflect their Bliss,
And their bright Virtues each the other kiss.
Return young Lord, while thou abroad do rome
The World to see, thou loosest Heaven at Home.
ON THE Duchess of Grafton Under the Name of ALINDA.
A Song.
I.
The Ambitious Eye that seeks alone,
Where Beauties Wonders most are shown;
Of all that bounteous Heaven displays,
Let him on bright Alinda gaze;
And in her high Example see,
All can admired, or wisht-for, be!
II.
An unmatch't Form, Mind like endowed,
Estate, and Title great and proud;
A Charge Heaven dares to few commit,
So few, like her, can manage it;
Without all Blame or Envy bear,
The being Witty, Great and Fair!
III.
So well these Murdering Weapons weild,
As first Herself with them to shield,
Then slaughter none in proud Disport,
Destroy those she invites to Gourt:
Great are her Charms, but Virtue more,
She wounds no Hearts, though All adore!
IV.
It Is Amorous Beauty Love invites,
A Passion, like it self, excites:
The Paragon, though all admire,
Kindles in none a fond desire:
No more than those the Kings Renown
And State applaud, affect his Crown.
These following Fragments among many more were found among her Papers.

Penelope to Ulysses.
REturn my dearest Lord, at length return,
Let me no longer your sad absence mourn,
Ilium in Dust, does no more Work afford,
No more Employment for your Wit or Sword.
Why did not the foreseeing Gods destroy,
Helin the Firebrand both of Greece and Troy,
E're yet the Fatal Youth her Face had seen,
E're loved and born away the wanton Queen?
Then had been stopped the mighty Flood of Woe,
Which now both Greece and Phrygia overflow:
Then I, these many Tears, should not have shed,
Nor thou, the source of them, to War been led:
I should not then have trembled at the Fame
Of Hectors warlike and victorious Name.
Why did I wish the Noble Hector Slain?
Why Ilium ruined? Rise, O rise again!
Again great City flourish from thine Urne:
For though you are burned, my Lord does not return.
Sometimes I think, (but O most Cruel Thought,)
That, for thy Absence, thou art thy self in fault:
That thou art captived by some captive Dame,
Who, when thou fired'st Troy, did thee inflame
And now with her thou lead'st thy amorous Life,
Forgetful, and despising of thy Wife.
An Epitaph on her Self.
WHen I am Dead, few Friends attend my Hearse,
And for a Monument, I leave my VERSE.
An ODE.
A Rise my Dove, from midst of Pots arise,
Thy sullied Habitation leave,
To Dust no longer cleave,
Unworthy they of Heaven, that will not view the Skies.
Thy native Beauty reassume,
Prune each neglected Plume,
Till more than Silver white,
Then burnisht Gold more bright,
Thus ever ready stand to take thy Eternal Flight.
II.
The Bird to whom the spacious Air was given,
As in a smooth and trackless Path to go,
A Walk which does no Limits know
Pervious alone to Her and Heaven:
Should she her Airy Race forget,
On Earth affect to walk and sit;
Should she so high a Privilege neglect,
As still on Earth, to walk and sit, affect,
What could she of Wrong complain,
Who thus her Birdly Kind does stain,
If all her Feathers moulted were,
And naked she were left and bare,
The Jest and Scorn of Earth and Air?
III.
The Bird of Paradise the Soul,
Extemporary Counsel given to a Young Gallant in a Frolic.
AS you are Young, if you will be also Wise,
Danger with Honor court, Quarrels despise;
Believe you then are truly Brave and Bold,
To Beauty when no Slave, and less to Gold;
When Virtue you dare own, not think it odd,
Or ungenteel to say, I fear a God.
These Three following ODES being found among Mrs Killigrews Papers, I was
willing to Print though none of hers.

Cloris Charms Dissolved by EUDORA.
I.
NOt that thy Fair Hand
Should lead me from my deep Despair,
Or thy Love, Cloris, End my Care,
And back my Steps command:
But if hereafter thou Retire,
To quench with Tears, thy Wandering Fire,
This Clue I Will leave behind,
By which thou may untwine
The Saddest Way,
To shun the Day,
That ever Grief did find.
II.
First take thy Hapless Way
Along the Rocky Northern Shore,
Infamous for the Matchless Store
Of Wracks within that Bay.
None over the Cursed Beach e're crossed,
Unless the Robbed, the Wracked, or Lost
Where on the Strand lie spread,
The Sculls of many Dead.
Their mingled Bones,
Among the Stones,
Thy Wretched Feet must tread.
III.
The Tiees along the Coast,
Stretch forth to Heaven their blasted Arms,
As if they plaind the North-winds harms,
And-Youthful Verdure lost.
There stands a Grove of Fatal Ewe,
Where Sun nere pierced, nor Wind ere blew.
In it a Brook does fleet,
The Noise must guide thy Feet,
For there is no Light,
But all is Night,
And Darkness that you meet.
IV.
Follow The Infernal Wave,
Until it spread into a Flood,
Poisoning the Creatures of the Wood,
There twice a day a Slave,
I know not for what Impious Thing,
Bears thence the Liquor of that Spring.
It adds to the sad Place,
To hear how at each Pace,
He curses God,
Himself, his Load,
For such his Forlorn Case.
V.
Next make no Noise, nor talk,
Until thou art past a Narrow Glade,
Where Light does only break the Shade;
It Is a Murderers Walk.
Observing this thou need'st not fear,
He sleeps the Day or Wakes elsewhere.
Though there is no Clock or Chime,
The Hour he did his Crime,
His Soul awakes,
His Conscience quakes
And warns him that is the Time.
VI.
Thy Steps must next advance,
Where Horror, Sin, and Spectars dwell,
Where the Woods Shade seems turned Hell,
Witches here Nightly Dance,
And Sprights join with them when they call,
The Murderer dares not view the Ball.
For Snakes and Toads conspire,
To make them up a Quire.
And for their Light,
And Torches bright,
The Fiends dance all on fire.
VII.
Press on till thou descrie
Among the Trees sad, ghastly, wan,
Thin as the Shadow of a Man,
One that does ever cry,
She is not; and she never will be,
Despair and Death come swallow me,
Leave him; and keep thy way,
No more thou now can stray
Thy Feet do stand,
In Sorrows Land,
It Is Kingdoms every way.
VIII.
Here Gloomy Light will show
Reard like a Castle to the Sky,
A Horrid Cliffe there standing nigh
Shading a Creek below.
In which Recess there lies a Cave,
Dreadful as Hell, still as the Grave.
Sea Monsters there abide,
The coming of the Tide,
No Noise is near,
To make them fear,
God-sleep might there reside.
IX.
But when the Boisterous Seas,
With Roaring Waves resumes this Cell,
You Would swear the Thunders there did dwell.
So loud he makes his Plea;
So Tempests bellow under ground,
And Ecchos multiply the Sound!
This is the place I chose,
Changeable like my Woes,
Now calmly Sad,
Then Raging Mad,
As move my Bitter Throws.
X.
Such Dread besets this Part,
That all the Horror thou have past,
Are but Degrees to This at last.
The sight must break thy Heart:
Here Bats and Owls that hate the Light
Fly and enjoy Eternal Night.
Scales of Serpents, Fish-bones,
Th'Adders Eye, and Toad-stones,
Are all the Light,
Has blessed my Sight,
Since first began my Groans.
XI.
When thus I lost the Sense,
Of all the heathful World calls Bliss,
And held it Joy, those Joys to miss,
When Beauty was Offense:
Celestial Strains did read the Air,
Shaking these Mansions of Despair;
A Form Divine and bright,
Stroke Day through all that Night
As when Heavens Queen
In Hell was seen,
With wonder and affright!
XII.
The Monsters fled for fear,
The Terrors of the Cursed Wood
Dismantl'd were, and where they stood,
No longer did appear.
The Gentle Power, which wrought this thing,
Eudora was, who thus did sing.
Dissolved is Cloris spell,
From whence thy Evils fell,
Send her this Clue,
It Is there most due
^^d thy Fantastic Hell.
Upon a Little Lady Under the Discipline of an Excellent Person.
I.
HOw comes the Day orecast? the Flaming Sun
Darkn'd at Noon, as if his Course were run?
He never rose more proud, more glad, more gay,
Never courted Daphne with a brighter Ray!
And now in Clouds he wraps his Head,
As if not Daphne, but himself were dead!
And all the little Winged Troop
Forbear to sing, and sit and droop;
The Flowers do languish on their Beds,
And fading hang their Mourning Heads;
The little Cupids discontented, show,
In Grief and Rage one breaks his Bow,
An other tares his Cheeks and Hair,
A third fits blubring in Despair,
Confessing though, in Love, he be,
A Powerful, Dreadful Deity,
A Child, in Wrath, can do as much as he!
Whence is this Evil hurled,
On all the sweetness of the World?
Among those Things with Beauty shine,
(Both Humane natures, and Divine)
There was not so much sorrow spied,
No, not that Day the sweet Adonis died!
II.
Ambitious both to know the Ill, and to partake,
The little Weeping Gods I thus bespake.
Ye Noblest Powers and Gentlest that Above,
Govern us Men, but govern still with Love,
Vouchsafe to tell, what can that Sorrow be,
Disorders Heaven, and wounds a Deity.
My Prayer not spoken out,
One of the Winged Rout,
With Indignation great,
Sprung from his Airie-Seat,
And mounting to a Higher Cloud,
With Thunder, or a Voice as loud
Cried, Mortal there, there seek the Grief o'th'Gods,
Where thou findst Plagues, and their revengeful Rods!
And in the Instant that the Thing was meant,
He bent his Bow, his Arrow placed, and to the mark it sent!
I followed with my watchful Eye,
To the Place where the Shaft did fly,
But O unheard of Prodigy.
It was retorted back again,
And he that sent it, felt the pain,
Alas! I think the little God was therewith slain!
But wanton Darts never pierce where Honors found,
And those that shoot them, do their own Breasts wound.
III.
The Place from which the Arrow did return,
Swifter then sent, and with the speed did burn,
Was a Proud Pile which Marble Columns bare,
Tarrast beneath, and open to the Air,
On either side, Cords of wove Gold did tie
A purfl'd Curtain, hanging from on high,
To clear the Prospect of the stately Bower,
And boast the Owners Dignity and Power!
This showed the Scene from whence Loves grief arose,
And Heaven and Nature both did discompose,
A little Nymph whose Limbs divinely bright,
Lay like a Body of Collected Light,
But not to Love and Courtship so disclosed,
But to the Rigor of a Dame opposed,
Who instant on the Fair with Words and Blows,
Now chastens Error, and now Virtue shows.
IV.
But O thou no less Blind,
Than Wild and Savage Mind,
Who Discipline dare name,
Thy Outrage and thy shame,
And hop'st a Radiant Crown to get
All Stars and Glory to thy Head made fit,
Know that this Curse alone shall Serpent-like incircle it!
May thou henceforth, be ever seen to stand,
Grasping a Scourge of Vipers in thy Hand,
Thy Hand, that Fury like -- But see!
By Apollos Sacred Tree,
By his ever Tuneful Lyre,
And his bright Image the Eternal Fire,
Eudoras she has done this Deed
And made the World thus in its Darling bleed!
I know the Cruel Dame,
Too well instructed by my Flame!
But see her shape! But see her Face!
In her Temple such is Diana's Grace!
Behold her Lute upon the Pavement lies,
When Beautie's wronged, no wonder Music dies!
V.
What blood of Centaurs did thy Bosom warm,
And boil the Balsome there up to a Storm?
Nay Balsome flowed not with so soft a Flood,
As thy Thoughts Evenly Virtuous, Mildly Good!
How could thy Skilful and Harmonious Hand,
That Rage of Seas, and People could command,
And calm Diseases with the Charming strings,
Such Discords make in the whole Name of Things?
But now I see the Root of thy Rash Pride,
Because thou did Excel the World beside,
And it in Beauty and in Fame outshine,
Thou would compare thy self to things Divine!
And 'bove thy Standard what thou there did see,
Thou did Condemn, because 'twas unlike thee,
And punished in the Lady as unfit,
What Bloomings were of a Diviner Wit.
Divine she is, or else Divine must be,
A Borne or else a Growing Deity!
VI.
While thus I did exclaim,
And wildly rage and blame,
Behold the Sylvan-Quire
Did all at one conspire,
With shrill and cheerful Throats,
T'assume their chirping Notes;
The Heavens refulgent Eye
Dance't in the clear'd-up Sky,
And so triumphant shon,
As seven-days Beams he had on!
The little Loves burned with Nobler Fire,
Each changed his wanton Bow, and took a Lyre,
Singing chaste Aires unto the tuneful strings,
And time'd soft Music with their downy Wings.
I turned the little Nym ph to view,
She singing and did smiling show;
Eudora led a heavenly strain,
Her Angels Voice did echo it again!
I then decreed no Sacrilege was wrought,
But nearer Heaven this Piece of Heaven was brought.
She also brighter seemed, than she had been,
Virtue darts forth a Lightning 'bove the Skin.
Eudora also showed as heretofore,
When her soft Graces I did first adore.
I saw, what one did Nobly Will,
The other sweetly did fulfill;
Their Actions all harmoniously did suit,
And she had only tuned the Lady like her Lute.
On the Soft and Gentle Motions of Eudora.
DIvine Thalia strike th'Harmonious Lute,
But with a Stroke so Gentle as may suite
The silent gliding of the Hours,
Or vet the calmer growth of Flowers;
Th'ascending or the falling Dew,
Which none can see, though all find true.
For thus alone,
Can be shown,
How downie, how smooth,
Eudora does Move,
How Silken her Actions appear,
The Air of her Face,
Of a gentler Grace
Then those that do stroke the Ear.
Her Address so sweet,
So Modestly Meet,
That it is not the Loud though Tuneable String,
Can shewforth so soft, so Noyseless a Thing!
O This to express from thy Hand must fall,
Then Musicks self, something more Musical.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN Mr. Drydens Ode, Stanzo 5. at the end of the first line read [None.] p. 9.
v. 6. for her r. its. p. 24. v. I. for renowned r. renowned. p. 38. v. last but
one, for renounced r. renowned. p. 57. v. I. instead of the
Interrogation-point, make a Comma, p. 97. v. 13. r. burned with a nobler fire.

THE TABLE.
ALexandreis. Page 1 To the Queen. 6 A Pastoral Dialogue. 11 On Death. 13 First
Epigram, Upon being contended with a Little. 15 The Second Epigram, On
Billinda. ibid. The Third Epigram, On an Atheist. 16 The Fourth Epigram, On
Galla. 17 A Farewell to Worldly Joys. 18 The Complaint of a Lover. 19 Love, the
Soul of Poetry. 22 To my Lady Berkley, Afflicted upon her Son my Lord Berkley's
early Engaging in the Sea-Service. 24 St. John Baptist Painted by her Self in
the Wilderness, with Angels appearing to him, and with a Lamb by him. 27
Herodias's Daughter presenting to her Mother St. John's Head in a Silver
Charger, also Painted by her self. ibid. On a Picture Painted by her self,
representing two Nymphs of Diana's, one in a posture to Hunt, the other
Batheing. 28 An Invective against Gold. 30 The Miseries of Man. 32 Upon the
saying that my Verses were made by another. 44 On the Birthday of Queen
Katherine. 47 To my Lord Colrane, in Answer to his Complemental Verses sent me
under the Name of Cleanor. 49 The Discontent. 51 A Pastoral Dialogue. 57 A
Pastoral Dialogue. 63 On my Aunt Mrs. A. K. drowned under London Bridge in the
Queens Barge, 1641. 76 On a young Lady, whose Lord was Traveling. 77 On the
Duchess of Graston, under the Name of Allinda, a Song. 79 Penelope to Ulysses.
81 An Epitaph on her Self. 82 An Ode. ibid. Extemporary Counsel, given to a
young Gallant in a Frolic. 84 Cloris Charms Dissolved by Eudora. 85 Upon a
Little Lady under the Discipline of an Excellent Persont. 92 On the soft and
gentle motions of Eudora. 99

