PALLANTUS AND EUDORA A Tragoedie. Written by Mr. HENRY KILLIGREW.

MART. Victurus Genium debet habere liber. LONDON. Printed for John Hardesty at
the Black-Spread-Eagle in Duck-lane, 1653.

The Publisher to the Reader.
WHen this Play came first abroad into the World, it found the approbation of
the most Excellent Persons, and best Masters of this Kind of Writing which were
in that time, if there were ever better in any time; Ben. Johnson being then
alive, who gave a Testimony of this Piece even to be Envied. Nor do I know
more than One Objection, that was ever made against it, Which was, The
indecorum that appeared to Some in the Part of Cleander, who being represented
a Person of seventeen years of age, is made to speak words, that would better
suit with the age of thirty. But the Answer that was given to One, that cried
out upon the Monsterousnesse and Impossibility of this thing, the first day of
the Presentation of this Play at the Blackfriars, by the Lord Viscount
Faulkland, may satisfy All Others; and if the Considerablenesse of the Answer,
and Answerer, be duly weighed, may serve no less for an Ornament and Patronage
to the Author. The passage was thus. This Noble Person, having for some time
suffered the unquiet, and impertinent Dislikes of this Auditor, when he made
this last Exception, forbore him no longer, but (though he were one he knew
not) told him, Sir, it is not altogether so Monsterous and Impossible, for One
of Seventeen years to speak at such a Rate, when He that made him speak in
that manner, and writ the whole Play, was Himself no Older. I shall say no more
of the Worth, or former Opinion had of this Piece, it being in hand, to show
what it Merits, or Merits not.

A few things I have to add, concerning my present Publication, which are
these. That this Play never saw the light in its true Shape till this day: a
former Impression there has been of it, but One, not only deformed with all
the Errors of an Uncorrected Press, but what might else proceed from a false
and imperfect Transcript; the Original Copy being then (together with the
Writer of it) in Italy. Who was so far from consenting to the printing of his
Book at that time, that he had not then Corrected those parts of it, which he
was forced to pass over with less care, by reason of the hasty calling of it
out of his hands, by the Entertainment for which it was desig'nd. So that (I
may say) the former Impression is no better than a Corrupted Fragment, or Foul
Draught, of what this Play was intended, and differing so much from what it now
is, that if the Corrections, Expungings, and Additions, be considered, it is
almost the one half otherwise. This has made me likewise impose a New Name
upon it: for it is a Creature now wholly at my Disposition, and belonging to
me, not as to a Plagiarie, but a Susceptor, or Foster-father, that has taken up
this Child long since Ejected by the True Parent. And my desire, is to have it
show as little Affinity and Resemblance as is possible to its Antitype; whose
Prejudices it can no way better remove from it self, than by showing them
False, and Despising them.

MART. Multum creed mihi, refert, a font bibatur Quae fluit, an pigro quae
stupet unda latu.
The Persons of the Play
The King a Usurper. Timeus his Son. Polyander Minetius
two Lords. Comastes a buffonish Lord. Coracinus Argestes
Servants to Timeus. Harpastes Melampus
two Villains. Cleander the true King of Crete, a Youth. Clearchus a stranger
prince. Pallantus first Prince of Crete, disguised. Aratus Phronimus Eurylochus
three great Lords. Haimantus Admiral of Clearchus Fleet. Acates Tutor to
Cleander. Flamen. Poet. Waiters. Guard. Soldiers. Eudora Sister to Timeus.
Rodia her Woman. 2. Ladies Hianthe Sister to Cleander. Melissa her Woman. 2.
Ladies


Chorus of Priests and People.

The Scene CRETE

PALLANTUS and EUDORA A TRAGEDY.
[ACTUS, 1. SCENA, 1.]
A Banquet set out. Loud Music. Enter the King, Comastes, Aratus, Polyander,
Phronimus, Eurylochus, and Menetius. King. NO happiness like the Fools,
Comastes?


Com. No, none Sir. He Is mirth it self, and the cause
Of it in others. They say, all pleasure
Is a shadow; then that which we enjoy,
Is only the shadow of a shadow,
Hardly the Picture of what he embraces.
Our delights are faint, thwarted with fears,
Disgusted by the conscience, and after
An hour of pleasure, succeeds a week of
Repentance: in which time we live by Rule,
And not by Nature; laugh not, though the jest
Be good; nor rage, though at a just cause;
But sickly whisper out our sayings,
As if they were our last. When the Fool lusts
With his whole soul too, and sins till he is weary;
Knows no conscience, but his Want-that-way, nor
Remorse, but Disability.

King: Ha, ha, ha.

Com. Nature never showed her liberality
More, than to those she was sparing of her
Best gifts to. She houses Wisdom in a
Body full of decays, such as requires
Her whole strength to bear up the ruin;
Measures his legs with the Spiders, gives him
Pale, and wan looks, scarce altered from the earth
He was made of. Where to the Idiot, she
Bestows a body, equal with the Bulks
Of Trees, and arms as thunder-proof, makes him
A strong, a large, and healthy Fool.

King Ha, ha, ha.

Ara. Fit Lectures for such a Scholar.

King Well Comastes,
Thou shall not want for a Coat, if that will do it.

Com. Send me a Mind too with it, and you have not
A greater present for your Neighbour-Princes.

King Come my Lords let us sit. And fill up our Cups,
Make them like our joys, still full and flowing.
Thus it should be my Lords in a state that
Knows no troubles: let unhappy Princes,
Whom losles do afflict, and fears a ffright,
Make Annual-Feasts; but we whose even affairs
Do follow one another, and do keep
Their just Periods, though the Reins are loose,
And their Guide sleep, seeming rather so to
Have faln-out, than so caused: each day shall
Be a Triumph, each hour a Feast.

Ara, We may chance to find one out for Funerals.
aside

King A health to all, and a long peace.

Com. You are melancholy Aratus.

Ara. You are rude Comastes, and let me tell you --

Comastes strikes Arates on the shoulder. Poly. O let his Lord-ship alone. He Is
one of those
Which say their prayers backward for the State.

Ara. You are the Foxes that thrive by it.

Phro. Aratus your anger is unseasonable, And the King marks it.

King How now Aratus,
What Is the matter? Our Table should know no frowns,
And then least, when we our self forbears 'em.

Ara. Royal Sir, I ask your pardon. He waked me
Something rudely, and got a froward answer.

King What, all dead? Fill another round, our Wine
Moves not. Here Polyander, to thee --
What think thou of Comaste's happiness?

Poly. I think Sir, it is as dull, as foolish.
There cannot be a sense of pleasure, where
There is so little sense. Greatness is the Center
Of all happiness, and felicity,
Like our Lands at first, is tied to the Crown.
Kings comes near unto the Gods, and are like them
Both in power and pleasure; do command all,
Enjoy all, are miserable only in having
Of too much, and wanting what to wish for.
Theirs is the dazzling happyness. It Is idle
Therefore to prefer Private joys before
The Crown-pleasures. The King may throw by his
Greatness when he please, and be poorly happy;
But the Beggar will nere sigh unto a Scepter.

King Why I Polyander, there is some life in this,
A little heaven even in the apprehension.
Aratus art not thou of this opinion?

Ara. Not I Sir, nor of my Lord the Fools there.
Kings are more miserable, than they seem
Happy; flattered by themselves and others,
Into a joy that is not, and what they feel,
They rather do imagine than find so.
Yet I grant too, a King may be happy,
But not then as a King. Felicity
Is a Purchase, and no Inheritance,
Nor has the Prerogative more than one life
In It ever, it dies still with the Buyer.
Troubles are the good Kings profession,
In the Wars the first Dart is thrown at him,
Where often times his happyness is in a
Glorious death; or perhaps his God-like Rays
Are plucked from him by some accursed hand,
And so falls less happy, being after
Vainly wished so by a poor revenge he
Knows not.

Com. Very Grave, and unseasonable!
Thus your Lord-ship gets the reputation
Of Singularity, which the Vulgar
Suspect to be Wisdom.

Ara. Sir you see
How this place and my freenes are injured.

King Mirth, only mirth Aratus. He means
Thy speech would better have become a Council,
Than a Banquet. Timeus welcome. Nay
Keep your seats. Would thou had been partaker
Enter Timeus. Of our Mirth.

Time. Sir, when my actions, or my age,
Shall make me worthy of your ease and pleasures,
I shall be a thankful sharer: but till then,
Your Troubles will become me better than
Your Sports, and Cares will sit more lovely on
My Brow than Roses. Sir, those that are about you
Seek to drown your Virtues.

Ara. Your Highness means
None here?

Time. I name none here my Lord.

King. Nay Timeus,
Thou nere look friendly on our pleasures.

Time. I must confess Sir, I had rather see you
Bloody than thus Wet; nor are my Wishes
Impious, Polyander.

Poly. My Lord.

Time. How basely that Smile became thee. I had
Rather thou had answered me with a Blow
Than such a Look. I thought to have ask't thee
Something, but I see thou art unworthy
Of a brave Demand. Thy Skill lies only
In the Curiosity of a Meal,
To say at the first touch of the tongue. this is
A Chian, this a Falernian Wine.
Straight by the color of the flesh to know,
Whether the foul were crammed, or whether fed,
Prithee Polyander, how sat the Wind
When this Bore was slain? Were not these Apples
Pulled the Moon Increasing? Degenerate!
I have seen thee put thy face into a Frown,
And were it so constant in that look, as if
Thou had no other.

Poly, Sir, when you shall find,
Or make a cause, I Will put them on again,
Here they will but sour the Entertainment.

Com. You see, my Lord, they are not drowned, they live
Still under water.

Time. Like thine, Beast.

King Prithee Timeus let us enjoy our Mirth
While the Gods give it: the time will come,
That we shall wish for it, and not have it.
On my Conscience thou could be content
To have Enemies, only that thou might cut'em off.

Time. I am sorry, Sir, if I have offended
Against your Mirth, it was not my intent.
I came to bring you News.

King News? What is it? Good?

Time. It Is as you shall esteem often Sir: There Is
A Stranger Prince ariv'd.

King Hither?

Time. Yes Sir.
His Visit's forced by a Storm, as he pretends.

King. What ere the Occasion is, he shall be
Welcome. The time's far spent. Aratus, it
Shall be thy Employment. From us fairly
Salute the Prince, and tell him, though the Seas
Have been Unfriendly, the Land shall Court him.

Ara. Great Sir, you highly Honor me.

Phro. So, now we have time to speak: What think thou,
Exeunt all but Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus. Aratus of these passages?

Arat. Well, bravely well.

Eury. Your speech struck desperately at the King:
He will not swallow it without some touch of jealousy.

Ara. It Is no matter. He cannot cross us now.
We have not tan'e so many years to build
A Work up, and then to have it ruined
With a push. No, he that will shake't, must first
Overthrow a Kingdom, a Prince, a Law, so large
The Extents are: Nere did Plot thrive like it,
It has infected with the Holy Sore
The greatest part of the Realm, and catches daily;
Like some Unheard of New Opinions
Straightened at first, and imprisoned in the breasts
Of two or three, gain strength by Time, and Ears,
And daily fed by curiosity,
Thrust out at last the Old, and most Received,
And grow the whole Religion of the Place.
When we have called our Party forth, the Work
Will seem done, the thin Numbers that are left,
Not deserving the Name of Enemies.
The Tyrant then will see himself no more
A King, but only the Wretched Cause of War,
His Power being ravished from him.

Phr. While the fruit's thus ripe, why do we let it grow?

Eury. And spoil perhaps?

Arat. We will no longer, only
A little Ceremony detaines us
To Crown our King, that past, our actions
With our thoughts shall then contend in swiftness.

Phro. How sped your visit to the young Prince?

Arat. Most happily: O had you seen with me
The Dear Cause of this our Danger, how Cheap
Would you have thought the Greatest for his Sake,
And stood contemning Life, thinking your blood
Ill-stored within your veins, when that his service
Called it? sure 'twas some such Shape and Sweetness
Which first slav'd men, and gained a Rule, before there was
A Kingdom.

Eury. You forget your Message to the Prince.

Arat. It Is true; pray bear me Company, we may get thanks
For our Complement another day.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Harpastes. Harp. Devil, whether will thou hurl me? The
Ship
Sunk under so much Ill, nor can the Earth
Bear us both together: the greatest Hills
Press not her face with half that Load; one thought
Of Goodness made me lighter than the Waves,
And in an instant taught me how to swim.
Enter Melampus to him. Melampus!

Melam. Harpastes!

Harp. Are we only escaped?

Melam. I hope so.

Harp. Then the Storm has played the Hangman,
And saved us Innocent.

Melam. Innocent! What Is that?
It has saved us so much labor, and a broken head perhaps.

Harp. The Wrack was great, and full of horror.

Melam. How the rogues prayed, and roared above the Waves.
Vowed whole herds of Off rings for their safety.
But Neptune saved 'em Charges, and took the
Verier Beasts.

Harp. We escaped miraculously.

Melam. I hope you will burn no Bullocks to the Sea.

Harp. No, my Vows were of another Nature.
I vowed to live well, and change my bloody purpose.

Melam. Thou did not mean in Earnest?

Harp. I did then, but I no sooner touched the shore,
And safety, but my Old thoughts returned.

Melam. Come, we will go claim our Hire, and swear we killed him
Before the storm. Our Fellows dead-pay will
Fall to us. We Will demand for losses, I,
Enter Pallantus. And our dangers too.

Harp. If my Eyes deceive
Me not, here comes one will deny the payment.

Melam. It Is he, how the Devil escaped he? Be resolute, and second me.

Pallan. How now friends, amazed at what is past? Dangers
Ore-blown are Dreams, no more to be esteemed of,
Within this hour you would have given a world,
To stand thus had it been yours; let not smaller
Losses then afflict you. The greatest Riches
Are trifles after such Deliverance.
Our Birthday was not half to us so happy,
As is this Minute, then we had no sense
Of Life, now we perceive and joy in it --
They assault him, and he kills 'em. What moved these Villains hatred? Sure
they know
Me not: Nor did I ere see them before
This Voyage! They could not hope for Money:
There Is more in it. Let me see -- What Is here, a beard?
Black patches? Sure it is their trade they are so
He searches 'em. Furnished. Both are of the same profession.
He finds a Letter about the last. I am glad to hear you have found Pallantus,
receive this man the bearer into your Company and Counsel, and if your secret
practices fail you, assault him openly, and by violence perform the Murder; let
the one or the other be done speedily, my employments here for you are many,
and instant.

Your Lord and Friend, Timeus.

Art thou the Lord, my wonder then is over!
Thy l' reachery was ever greater than thy Hate,
And that too was something more than Malice,
Above the search of Innocence, a Knot
Unto the subtil'st Traitors, a Rid de
To thy self. Were not thy Home-Cruelties
Enough, but thou must maintain thy Factors
Out for lives in Foreign Kingdoms? I have
Lain hid so long, am now so New Formed by Art,
No friend can know me, Hate, thy Eyes are more
Percieving far than Friendships. I have not
Dared to Name my self, because with it I do
Name my Father, and yet thou have me perfect.
Him, with many more, that were to Good to look on
So much Ill, as thine, and thy fathers Lives,
Were made away -- Some God give me temper,
Or too much Rage, instead of a Revenger,
Will turn me a Stock, a Fool. Hear me ye
Banished Gods (for I may justly fear
If that your powers are absent any where,
It Is from this place where Tyranny does reign)
On this Altar I do vow, to be your
Martyr, If not your surviving Instrument,
Nere to let fall your Vengeance, till it light
On those which slew the King, your King, the
Image of your Goodness. Which killed the Prince,
And dared to say that he was lost, lost indeed.
Which on the Princess do intend a Rape,
Their Marriage is no better. Which slew
My Father, and last resolved on me.
Had I a thousand lives I'd' gage them here,
And think your judgment yet not bought too dear

Enter Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus Arat. In the name of wonder what are
thou?

Pall. Why?
What am I Sir?

Arat. Nay, I know not,
Nor does any but an Antiquary,
Or a Conjurer, certainly, The art no Man,
Or if thou be'st, I am sure none of the
Last Edition

Pall. Were your Troop absent,
I Would make you find I were without those helps.
It Is so long since you saw a Man, a true One,
That you know not when you meet one. Your Lordships
Glass showed you none this morning.

Eury. Whence came thou?

Ara. I, that I Would fain know, here is no hole open
In the Earth.

Pall. From Sea.

Ara. From the bottom sure,
Above Water nothing floats like thee.

Phro. Of what profession art thou? a Soldier?

Pall. Yes.

Ara. Thou should be hanged for thy very looks
If thou were not, they are excusable
aside In no Calling else.

Pall. I know ye all, but
At this time will not be known unto you.
These are some insolent Scoffers, that breath
Their Wits on all they see weaker than themselves
Against they meet the Fool next, I wrong my self
To talk to'em.

Eury. Do hear?

Pall. None of your wit yet.

Eury. Thou bleed'st!

Pall. Was It that made me such a wonder?
I do so.

Eury. And much blood is spilt upon
The Ground. Know thou the cause?

Pall. Yes, I was
Assaulted by two Rank Rascals, which I
Let blood, and cured.

Phro. Have thou not killed, and rob'd'em?

Pall. Sir your thoughts are base. And you do ill thus
To insult upon my Innocence. Rob'd'em;
Money's more below my thoughts, than Earth:
My Education has been Noble, and
Though the Midwife wrapped me not in Purple,
Nor Princes Gossipt at my Birth, I have
Dared to be as Honest as the Greatest.
My Word has commanded more, than all your
Lands and Money. Those Deeds which I have done,
Dishonesty dared not to have looked on.
They would have frighted your Lordship, if but
Told you toward bedtime.

Phro. I never saw
Such fierceness!

Ara. I begin to admire this fellow!

Eury. Where have thou bestow'd'em?

Pall. behind there.
If you search' em you may find more. What Money
They had, the Sea washed 'em clean of before their deaths.

Phro. Why, were they cast away?

Pall. Yes, but it seems
they search the villains. They had a Land-fate.

Ara. Who Is here, rogues limbs?
Their two heads a piece?

Phro. Here Is a Paper speaks 'em
Most notorious Villains.

Eury. They were proper men.

Ara. They were so. Did kill'em both, alone?

Pall. I told you once so, and am not proud often
To boast it over again, and tell you how I did it.

Ara. Trust me thou art a brave fellow.
And I admire thy stoutness. Thou look
As if thou had been Nure'd in perils.
Dare thou with us confront a Bold One?
But as Honest, as'tis Great. What say thou?
Can thou like of us?

Phro. Thou shall not find us
As we appeared at first.

Pall. While ye talk thus
I can. And in your Business, if Honesty
Go yoked with Danger, it cannot fright me then.
No, though all the Monsters of Sea and Land,
And Hell to boot, were framed into one Horror,
I Would face it, Charge it, and wager a life
I Would Conquer it.

Ara. Thy words go high as thunder.

Pall. Pardon my words, if my actions bear up
Equal.

Arat. I believe they will,
And dare promise thou will do wonders.
Let meimbrace the -- Thou Art welcome to our
Friendship. Mine eyes did look on thee unworthily
Before, me thinks thou art Comely now, thy scarrs
Are so many Graces, not set by an
Effeminate, but by a manly, and
A Warlike skill. Business calls us hence, thou shall not
Part one Minute from me. Thy wounds needs help,
Come, thou shall Heal before me.
Exeunt omnes.
Enter Clearchus, and Haimantus. Cler. Have you commanded all the Mariners
Aboard, each Captain to his charge, bid the
Soldiers fill the Decks with their full numbers,
And display their Colors, left nothing wanting
That may add to the Glory of the Navy?

Haim. Sir, all things are in their Pride and height.
The Captains Bravery seems to lend brightness
To the day, and like the Sun, throws rays, and light
About 'em: Nor lookstheir Gold less awful,
Than the Soldiers Steel. On the Ships appear
The Joy and Riches of a Conquest, and yet they
Keep the Order of a joyning-battel.
There wants nothing to make a Warlike, Princely,
And well-commanded Navy, but your Presence Sir.

Clear. I would not have them think us such Poor Men,
That we are drove to seek for their Relief,
To sue for Bread and Water; but rather
That we come like Noble Woers, full of
Rewards and Presents, able to return
All favors we receive, and equally
To honor Them, that honor Us, as Great
As they. It shall appear, that he that is
Master of such a Fleet, may style himself
Prince, though Lord of nothing else.

Haim. The people
Flock upon the shore, and with one Voice say,
You come to fetch their Princess. Sir, you have
More than their Consents already, you have
Their wishes too.

Clear. I marry Haimantus,
Such a Jewel would make the rest look dim!
There are two Ladies in this Isle (if fame
Say true) the wonders of the World! When Nature
Made them, she summoned her whole Godhead,
And unwearied wrought till she had done,
Formed each limb as if she had begun there:
She seemed to practice on the World till then,
And what like beautiful she framed before,
Were but Degrees to this Height, these the Ascent,
From which she now must fall! They made her Older
Than the labor of a thousand years --

Enter a Servant. Serve. There Is a great train, it seems from Court, coming
To your Highness.

Clear. Come, lets meet'em.

As Clearchus is going out, Arats, Phronimus, Eurylochus and Pallantus meet
him. Ara. Sir, the King congratulates your safety,
And is glad of your Arrival, though the Cause
Were dangerous, You would have Obliged him
Much Sir, if you had been bound for Creet.

Clear. The King is Royal, and chides me kindly.
He binds a Stranger ever to his Service.

Ara. His Majesty expects you will honor him
With your Presence this night at Court.

Clear. My Lord;
I shall wait upon him. But I must fist
Entreat, you will favor me with your Company
A shipboard. I shall not need to excuse
A Soldiers Entertainment, I doubt not,
But your Lordships knows it well; Coursnesse and
Plainness are the Praise of it.

Arat. Sir you are
The Envy of your Neighbor Princes, you
So far exceed them in a Brave Command;
I nere was happy in the like sight before.
And my Lord, they that can boast the strangest,
Have not seen one so Common, and so Rare.
Your Navy looks, as if she wore the Spoils
Of a whole Land, or came to purchase 'em.

Clea. My Lord you will make me proud. Your presence yet
Will add unto its Glory.
Enter Timeus, and Coracinus
Exeunt Omner. Time. Found dead upon the shore!

Cor. I my Lord,
Thrown into a Cliffe.

Time. Were they drowned?

Cora. It Is believed not, my Lord: for many fresh Wounds
Were found upon their bodies; and yet their Clothes
Were wet.

Time. It Is strange! Were there but two?

Cor. No my Lord.

Time. That Is stranger yet. Reward the Men that found them,
And bid'm make no farther enquiry
After their Deaths, nor speak of it. Let it
Exit Coraos. Die with you too, do you hear? The Villains
Have robbed at their return, and got their deaths
That way. I nere could spare 'em worse; the State
Stands in greater need of theirs, than of the
Sword of Justice. Rodia.

Rod. My Lord.

He calls Rodia, and she Entern. Time. Is your Lady to be spoke with?

Rod. Always,
My Lord, by you. But now she is coming forth.

Enter Endora. Time. Save you sweet Sister.

End. O you are welcome Sir.

Time. Sure Eudora, Venus and the Graces
Had their hands to day about you! You look
Fairer than your self, and move in the Sphere
Of Love and Beauty; Cupid has taken
His Stand up in your Eyes, and shootes at all
That come before him! Pray Venus he miss me.

Eud. When do you grow serious?

Time. These are the Fair Look^
Must captivate the Stranger Prince in a Free Country?
And th is the Dress that must inchant him? ha.

Eud. There is no Charm in it certainly; it pleased
Me the least of Many. No, it is your Fair
Mistress, that bears those Love-Nets about her:
If the Stranger'scape her, he is safe.

Time. 'Had better
Kill his Father, and then gaze upon the
Spectacle, than look upon her with the
Eyes of Love.

Eud. Nay then you are unjust.
Would you have him stronger than your self was?
If he for that be guilty, the same Doom
Must belong to both alike.

Time. But I have
Prevailed so far, that he shall be free, both
From the danger of Love, and seeing.
Nor must You make up his entertainment.

Eud. I was Commanded to be ready, and
Attend there.

Time. But now the Commissions altered,
And runs in the Other Sense.

Eud. I shall be
Content to obey either. May I not
Know the cause?

Time. You may. We would not feed
The Prince here with hopes to get a Wife. This
Was the Storm that drove him in. Nor must you
Only for this time forbear his presence,
But while he stays. He Is unworthy of you.

Eud. If you know him so, I shall then without
Excuse deny his Visits. But I think
This businuesse may be borne a Nobler Way;
Nor will the End Fail, though the Means be Fair.
Leave it to me: If he Sue with Honor,
He will take an Honorable Answer;
Though he gain none from me, I Will get his Love,
And send him home no less a Friend, than if
He were a Husband. By my Restraint, you will
Only procure unto your self, the marks
Of Jealousy and Rudeness, and fouler Stains,
If that the Crime were named to the desert.
Besides, it does proclaim in Me too such
A Weakness, as I am much ashamed of.
Had he a Face adorned with the Graces
Of both Sexes, Beauty, and Manliness,
And these (after the Custom of the Roman
Princes in their Statues) Engrafted on
On the body of some God, I could look on,
Converse, I, and neglect him too, when I
Have reason for it. Fear not me then.

Time I do not, I know thee strong, the Honor
Of a Kingdom may lean with safety on Thee.
But he will linger here too long, besot
The State with Feastings, and in this Jollity
Give Opportunity to Treacherous
Practices. He must be used Ill, there are
Reasons for it.

Eud. Is there then a Policy
In Rudeness? Why do you not rather send
A Defiance to him? Proclaim him Enemy?
This were Nobler far, than to receive him
In your arms, and then Affront him; say Health,
And wish Poison in the Cup. Are you so much
Below him?

Time There are greater thoughts in hand,
Than Curious Points of Gallantry. If he send
Any Present to you, you must return it
Back with Scorn.

Eud. Pride is ill becoming,
And hateful, even to the next Proud man does
Practice it.

Time. Then take'em, and laugh at him.

Eud. No, where my thanks are too much, I Will rather
Return Gifts for Gifts. I should shame to be
A gainer on such a Score, which the Meanest,
Honest Purchaser would blush at.

Time. He Will take
Those Gifts for Favors.

Eud. They will not prove so;
Yet He will deserve some, as he is a Stranger.

Time. Not from You. Presents the State will send him.
You hear my Fathers Will. You must not see him
While he stays!

Eud. I do, and shall easily keep
That I do not care to break.

Time. Farewell.

Eud. Must you be gone?

Time. There Is a little business
Calls me.

Eud. If it be but a little, stay.

Time. Only the Welcome of the Stranger.

Eud. It Is too much to hinder.
I see a Causeless, and a Needless Rage
Hid in your breast. The Prince may be Noble,
Valiant; if you receive him then with Scorn,
He Will prove a stronger Enemy, than those
Unworthy Ones you fear at home, whose own
Actions daily ruin, and whose ill-made
Knots, will loosen faster than they tie 'em.
You have prevailed with me, I Will not be wonn
To see him now: but let it not Appear
By your Default, and that my Retirement,
Is only in scorn to him: which will be
Made plain, if that you change not this Face you
Have put on. It becomes you at no time.
A Prince should always Smile, or look indifferent.
He has no need of Frowns, as other men.
Life and Death are in his breath, and if any do
Offend, his Revenge is known, and need not
Be declared by Face-expressions. Where there is
Power to Punish, it is Tyranny to Rage.
Anger is no Attribute of Justice,
It Is true, she is painted with a Sword, but looks
As if she held it not. Though Warbe in
Her Hand, yet Peace dwells in her Face. Learn once
Of me, and when you have no Cause of
A Distemper, express none. Now you have made
All sure, doubt not; but receive the stranger
With fearless and confident Embraces.

Time. I will, or at lest I Will tell thee so, when
Thou perswad'st me thus. Farewell Eudora.

Exit Timues. Eud. Thy subtle Plots will ruin thee at last.
Valor and Policy do seldom meet;
Yet here they are in their Extremes in One;
But do most strangely Divide the Owner.
Make him Dread none, and yet confirm him not
Within a Guard.
Exit Eudora. CHORUS. What can our Wishes deprecate,
When Vice is seen, both Law, and Fate?
When for the good of the Commonweal,
The Councel's called, to Plot a Meal.
And Beasts brought in with solemn Cry,
As Spoils got from the Enemy?
Whose life's the Table, and the Stage,
He does not Spend, but Lose his Age.
The Kings eyes, like his Jewels, be
Set to Adorn, not to Foresee:
And as his Crown, he thinks each thing,
Runs round in a continued Ring.
But Sacrifices Crowned be,
And Garlands fit for destiny.
Fates thus we fear have writ this Latt,
That Wint shall lose, what Blood has Got.

[ACTUS 2. SCENA 1.]
Enter Clearchus. IS this your Royal Entertainment?
A common Host would have given one as Civil,
Have shown his Guests their Quarter, and then left'em
To stumble out again. My Receivers are
Are all vanished -- An undeserved Affront
Will trouble me -- Neither of the Princesses
Were in the Train; they might have trusted 'em,
I could have gagged a Kingdom for their security --
One passes by him reeling, and by and by after another. Last of all Melissa,
they all make reverence to Clearchus, as they pass. Enter Comastes. Was not
that fellow drunk? Now they begin
To Muster up again. Here I stand like one
That learns to make his first Honor in a
Dancing School -- Sir by your favor. If your
Business calls you not, pray let me entreat
Your Company a while.

Com. Troth and't like your Highness, I am in have, in very great have, The
King has sent for me, and I know he is thirsty till I come. I would your
Highness were as resolute, and as well Armed this way as I, He shows a great
Goblet.
you would be the welcom'st man -- He loves a Royal-Drunkard to admiration; he
never saw one yet, but in a Glass. Sir, have you any business with him? You
need no other Orator than such as this; such a Mouth without a Tongue, will
persuade any thing. Yet this is o'th least, fit only for Physick-dayes, when
he would not surfeit; a mere Toy that troubles the Wayters with often filling.
But I have One, as high -- Here Is nothing to measure't by; but 'twas that made
me so Inward with him; I always use to Petition him with it; it is bigger than
any of his own, and pleased him above Measure. The first time he saw it, he
commended the Gallantry of my Mind, and said it was a Noble Emulation in me! He
has a Daughter Sir, a beautiful Lady, my Hopes, unless some Neighbour-Prince do
Reel betwixt us. Your Highness comes the right way, he hates a dry, Inland
Traveller; but that you Kiss the Cup, when you should Drink; and have too much
Bounce, and Down-with-him in you; which are things he surfeited of, some
sixteen years since, and still the very Names turn his stomach. Besides, your
Navy and Attendants are too great, he would have esteemed more of you, had they
been fewer, enough only to lean on, when you were Overtaken; or if you had
wanted those, and borrowed his unto your Chamber, it had been better: Where he
finds Worth, the Pomp delights him not. Your pardon Sir.


Exit Comastes. Clear. Why here is a fellow now! With what License
He belies his Master, or speaks Truths
Altogether as Unpardonable! Sure
He has his Patent for it! I find at my
Return from Travel, I shall want Names
For all the Monsters I have seen.

Enter Aratus to him. Ara. Though your Highness be here a stranger,
I may demand of you where the King is.

Clear. If none know more than I, my Lord, you have lost
Your King.

Arat. Sure he is not well,
I hope he is not: with a safe Loyalty,
I may wish, he has a Dangerous Cause,
Rather than none, to take him from a Prince,
The first Night of his Arival in his Court.

Clea. My Lord, I have found much Honor in you,
One that knows to show more Civility
To a Stranger, than he can deserve,
And you are unhappy only at this time
In an Unworthy Choice: but if still you
Can continue this Nobleness (though the
King frown) I shall gladly make some stay; at least
Till I have satisfied a Strangers Curiosity,
And may seem rather to have left the Place,
Than to have been thrust from it.

Ara. Believe me Sir,
Both your Reception, and this Necessity,
That you are drove to seek so mean a Service
As mine, does shame me much. It Is not the use
Of this Kingdom to be thus Uncivil,
Nor is it our Custom, as it has been this day,
To Coop our Ladies up, as if the sight
Were Dangerous; their Beauties will endure
The Test, and we dare trust'm to it. 'Twas
Unkindly done, I know one Look of theirs
Would have given a Welcome to a Young Man,
Above the highest Cost.

Clea. My Lord, you know
To speak a pleasing Language.

Ara. We have two
Princesses Sir, Few Nations can show such Jewels;
Yet only one is Oriental,
The other's Artificial, but an
Excellent Gem too; One of them, the True One,
I doubt not, but I have credit to show
Your Highness; but it is not to be purcha'st,
That happy Opportunitie's already past,
And the New Owner Esteems it above
His Wealth, his Life, I and his Honor too.

aside. Clea. Yet, my Lord, bless me with the sight. I can
Rejoice at so much Excellence, though
Another do possess it. And no doubt
As much of the Owners felicity, lies in Strangers
Admiration, as in his own Possession.

Ara. All but Jealous Men think so: and they count
Themselves Robbed of all happiness in their Wives,
Others receive; engrosse as Covetously
Their Beauties, as their Persons, and think themselves
Cuckolded by a Woman's Commendations.
But my Lord, I Will leave you. I was going
To the Princess before I met your Highness.
I know few words will gain so easy a request.
Tomorrow, and daily, I Will wait upon
Your Highness.

Clear. My Lord, you have engaged me
Your Servant, beyond my hope of freedom.
Exeunt severally.
Enter Hianthe, two Ladies, and Waiters. Hian. Nay, you must bear it patiently.
My Dominion extends no further than
These Rooms, and beyond them I grant nothing.
How will you endure the Strangers Delays,
That thus hardly brook his Coming? The King
In Complement, will not permit the Winds
To serve sooner than a Month, were that all
His stay: but here must be Masks and Triumphs
Before he goes, and the Subject yet not known
For the One, nor Ornaments made for the Other.
Perhaps a League must be Concluded,
And then I would not live to be so Old,
As to see the End often. The Meanest persons
Require a Month to fit themselves, a Prince
Cannot turn in less than a Season.

1. Lady May we not see the Garden, Madam?
Hian. No, nor the Day, but through a Window.

2. Lady We Will petition to him, under the title
Of distressed Damsels, that must pass the
Hour of their Age in Imprisonment,
Unless he will travel to his own, or some
Other Country, to gain 'em Freedom.

Hian. He Will think we are held by some Enchantment,
That his Absence, and not his Sword, must gain
Our Liberty. O Melissa welcome.
Enter Melissa. Now we shall see the Show, though but as sick
Persons, by Relation. Say, what have thou seen?

Mel. The scurviest Entertainment -- I did not
Think it possible, so short a Time could have
Prepared one so ill: 'Twas thought on before,
And pains taken to Order it so much
For the Worse. This was the first day that ere
Me thoughts the King, and my Lord Timem,
Looked like the Father, and the Son. The King
Had on his Old Council Face, which all hope't
He had forgot, and this was the only time
These many Years, he should not have worn it.
They both embraced the Stranger as coldly,
And carelessly, as I have seen our Common
Fencers do, that are immediately
To Fight with one another after. This
Behavior in the Great Ones, was presently
Observed like a New Fashion, and in
An instant the whole Court was in it, from the
Bravest, to those that follow a Fashion
Only, when it is to leave off something, I mean
Our poorer Gallants that go in Quirpo,
And look not as if they were Hot, but wanted
A Cloak. Marry their wits were not so Changeable
As their Faces, and having but One Suit
Of Complement, and that now Unfashionable,
They were fain to supply it with Legs, and Silence.

Hian. How looked the Prince at this behavior?

Mel. Much above it, in my Opinion, two foot
Higher than my Lord Timem, though not
Altogether so tall. These sour Looks, were
All the Without-door Show, which ended,
In a solemn March, they returned all into
The Palace. The Strangers seemed, rather to
Follow with a silent Consent, than on
Invitation. There the press shook me off,
To find this out for your Highness Mirth.
She shows a Rol^ of paper. And at my return, as I least expected,
I found the Prince all alone, where any body
Might have seen him for nothing. The Grecian,
And the Trojan Captains in the Hangings,
Were all his Company: with whom he seemed
Well suited, had they been alive, his Looks
Were as Daring as theirs, and standing so,
Bred much Comparison.

Hian. Know you the reason
Of this behavior?

Mel. No Madam, yet
If I would, I might have learnt of many:
The whole Company were Politicians.
There was one Yeoman-Statesman informed most
About him; and his Conjectures, go for
Current Truths next Post into the Country.

Hian. Well, now tell us what you have got there for
Our Mirth.

Mel. A precious piece of Poetry,
Which I have been the Patroness of from
The first Nonsense in it, that is, from the first line.
There Is much mirth intended in it, and I
Doubt not by your Highness will find it.
The Author himself is an Emblem of
The first Comedies, in which One acted All,
And will make you laugh, though you saw him
Every day. I have brought him along with me,
He stays but till his admittance be granted.

Hian. No prithee Melissa, 'twill be too much.

Mel. I beseech your Highness. And do but smile
Upon his Learning. Domine, Domine.
The Poet enters rudely, and seeing the Princess, steps back as rudely. Look,
look. I told you what you would do. You are
So forward.

Poet. I can presume.

Hian. Ha, ha.

Mel. Hold your peace with your presuming. You should
Let the Princess speak. This is the Author,
Madam.

Hian. Lad. Ha, ha, ha.

Mel. What think you your Play
Will do, when one Scene of your self breeds all
This Mirth?

Poet. Hum.

Hian. Melissa.

Mel. Your Highness --

Hian. Prithee discharge him, I am notable
To look so much laughter in the face, and
Contain my self, to save my Modesty.

Mel. So, it is well Sir. The Princess has taken
Notice of your Worth, and commanded me
To reward you. Attend to morrow, and
You shall receive it. And pray see that her
Highness have all your Labors, as you call em.

Exit Poet. Hian. Oh it is well we dress us not. Here all take
Papers, and sit down, we'll choose our several parts.

Enter Clearchus and Haimantus. 1. Waiter. Who were they past by?

2. Waiter. I know not; but certainly
They understand what they do, they went on
With so much Confidence.

Clear. Where are we now?

Haim. Certainly in no danger Sir.

Mel. The Prince!

The Ladies and the Princess rise up amazedly. 1. Lady. The Prince?

2. Lad. The Prince?

Clear. Madam, our bold Mistake has thrust us on
Too far, to retire without Excuse, which
We shall hardly make, unless your Favor
Meet us. We are strangers that thus have erred,
Unfortunately I must not say, that
Were a Rudeness greater than the other;
Yet we ought to esteem this your Disturbance
A Fault, though to us a blessed one, and
Has conferred a happyness, our best Deeds,
Could not have deserved.

Mel. This Entrance was
Exeunt Clearchus and Haimanius. Something abrupt, and beyond the Intent
Of our

Poet. A strange accident Hian!
Was it the Prince that spoke?

Mel. Yes Madam; but
'Twas improper here.

Hian. Art thou sure 'twas he?

Mel. I am Madam. Her Highness is troubled,
I see a Prince is too high a Personage
For a Comedy, and spoils the Mirth often.

Hian. Melissa, I have something to impart to you.
Exeunt Hian and Ladies. When the Company leave me at Night,
Attend me in my Chamber.

Enter Aratus, and Palantus. Ara. Madam, a little of your Company,
I beseech you.

Mel. My Lord Aratus save you.

Ara. A proper Salutation for so fair
A Lady, whose beauties are Destructive.

Mel. Your Lord-ship's very Conceited. It Is the
First Jest, I dare say, was ever made on that
Poor saying.

Ara. What do you look at? Do you want
She looks as she speaks of Palant. and Arat. hinder her. A Servant?

Mel. Bless me, my Lord! what Thing
To fright us have you there?

Ara. Why I pray?
Because he is Black? The fitter for a Lady.

Mel. For a Lady! I never saw such a Devils Play-fellow!

Ara. He Is white within, all Snow, and Milk.

Mel. They are put into an Ink-bottle.

Ara. What, you would have one that spends more Milk bout a
His Face, than he sucked in's Childhood; that dresses
Himself in Gloves, as if one Part were too good
To do service to the other; and dares not
Show his hands for shaming of his Mistresses,
Nor commend Hers, because his own are Whiter.
This'is One neglects his Outside, beyond
A common Cleanness, and bestows that Care
Upon his Mind, there wastes his four Hours
Of Dressing. And what the other does exceed
In Spruiseness, he will make up in Service.
Pay Respects unto his Ladies Virtue,
Not unto her Muff. And if at any time
Danger do approach her, fearless he dares
Beat it back, or make it Welcome by his
Noble Fall. Himself in Presence guards her,
And his Memory in's Absence. Come, pray
Spoil not his Hopes among the Ladies.
He Is a young Courtier, and wants a Mistress.

Mel. I am turned when I hear reason.
I beseech you my Lord, let me be she.

Ara. I thought 'twould come to this. You make the furthest
Way about, the nighest to your Ends, Love,
By discommending. Pray let him salute
You then.

Mel. Not unless you will stand by me.

Ara. Well, I warrant you. My friend.

Pall. My Lord.

Ara. Pray draw near, here is a fair Lady, gladly
Would salute you, Now you're at Court, you must
Lay by your Warlike thoughts, and Plot how you shall
Overcome in Complement, and Conquer in Civility.

Pall. My Lord, I should be ashamed to pretend
So much unto the Soldier, as to make
My self Unsensible of so great an
Honor, as this Lady does me by her
Fair Salutation. Though I am Unworthy,
I can be Proud to be her Servant.

Ara. What think you?

Mel. I know not what to think of
So much wonder! What Rarities shall
I be Mistress of, and none Envy me?

Ara. Well, to leave you in that Rapture; may I
Speak with the Princess?

Mel. Yes, she went hence but now.

Ara. May I adventure to go in?

Mel. You may,
But call my Servant along with you.

Ara. You are longing again, but not a bit,
Exeunt Omne^ It Is Sweet-meat, not a bit.
Cleander discovered sleeping. A Song. While Morpheus thus does gently lay,
His powerful Charge upon each part,
Making thy Spirits even obey,
The stiller Charms of his Dull Art.
I thy Good Angel from thy side,
As Smoke does from the Altar rise,
Making no Noise as it does glide,
Will leave thee in this Soft Surprise.
And from the Heavens will fetch thee down,
A lively Vision to express,
Thy Right unto an Earthly Crown,
" No Power can make this Kingdom less.
But gently, gently, least I bring,
A start in Sleep by sudden Flight,
Playing aloof, and hovering,
Till I am lost unto the sight.
This is a Motion still, and soft,
So free from Noise and Cry,
That Jove himself who hears a Thought,
Knows not when we pass by.

Enter Acates. Aca. There he sits, and sleep has seized on him,
Which seldom does so when the Season calls it:
But still he takes it when it comes, not when
It Is due; when Weariness, and not the Warnings
Of the Night do prompt him to it. He says,
To Sleep, because the Day is gone, is to
Perform a Duty, not a Necessity:
And to Eat at a Certain Hour, to
Satisfy the Time, and not his Hunger.
Nature is the Mistress of his Faculties,
Which are averse, and refractory to
All Custom; will admit no Laws, but what
Themselves Enact, nor strictly observe them
Neither. It Is a strange Distraction for sixteen
Years, a Deeper Melancholy possesses him,
Than does those, that have run the Miseries
And Sins of a Long Life. This desolate
Happiness is all that he enjoyes,
And this I am Commanded to take from him.
Cleander, what ho Cleander.

Clea. Why are you thus Cruel in your Care? Did you
But know the Felicities you have waked me from,
You Would have rockt my sleep for ever: Thought it
A greater Mercy to have killed, than thus
To have Disturbed me. I was wrapped into
The Company of Men, of Gods, if compared
With those we here converse with. Enjoyed the
Most Excellent things, by a Heavenly Vision,
Showed more Excellent and Glorified.
Sa^^ Crowned a King ore all, and with a Traitorous
Call, you have Deposed me! Alas, how fading
Is my Happiness, which a Small Noise, or
Motion can dissolve, and turn to nothing.

Aca. Let that Reason make you scorn'em, and aim
At Lasting Ones.

Clean. Were their longest life but
Three Minutes, and that time Uncertain,
They were yet to be preferred before those the World
Holds in highest Estimation. They are pure
And Celestial Pleasures, to be fed on
Only by the Fancy. I Will in, and again
Invite them with a Slumber.

Aca. I must for bear
Exit Cleander. My Remedies, it is dangerous applying
Exit Acates. Physic in a Fit.

Enter Polyander and Menetius at one door, and Comastes to them at the Other.
Com. Polyander, Menetius. well met. Have ye
Seen the Thing yet?

Poly. What Thing?

Com. The Thing that haunts
The Court. It has something like a Man, and pretends
To be One. He comes to the Ladies, like
A rough Water-Dog among a Flock of Foul,
And they flutter as fast from him, scattering
Feathers as they pass, I mean their Fans, and
Such Movables. The Guard dare not mingle
With him, he is too boyst'rous for their Company.
One Glance of him, as he past by the other day,
Broke the Kings Draught, which a Cubit-Cup could
Nere do -- See, see, here he comes, with as many
Enter Pallantus. Patches, and such like properties, as would
Furnish a Casheerd Company to beg with.
Sure he was Scar-Bearer to some Army.
Let Us observe it what it does: look, look, its
Pleased with the Hangings.

Poly. He cannot be thus
By Nature, nor by Accident! 'has studied
To appear horrid!

Mean. Danger is not so
Dreadful in it self, as it shows in him.

Com. Well, I cannot forbear, I must enter
Parley with it. What Rare things shall I know,
If I can get it speak! I Will enquire the fortune
Of The Kingdom for the next thousand Years.
That Is not worth the asking. I Will enquire when
The Dissolution of the World shall be,
And where it is Treasure lies. He cannot choose
But know the very Heart of the Earth. If I
Cannot persuade, I Will Conjure something from him.
Bo, Bull-begger, What art thou? Who let thee loose?
Where is any Gold hid? My fears were just.
Nothing but a Charm will do it. Anaell,
Ma^fo, Rachimas, Thulnear, Vemoby,
Sav^an, Vernesa, Elty, Famelron
Ausculta and obtempora madatis meis.
This was not terrible enough, it must be
More powerful yet. I adjure thee by those Boots,
Thy Velvet Eye, the Tailors work about thee --

Pall. Peace Fool, the King will hear, and thou't be
Whipped for bawling.

Com. Prithee good Devil, something
Exit Pallantus. Of The other World --

Mean. Ha, ha, ha,

Poly. I hope 't has
Satisfied your Curiosity Comastes? ha, ha, ha.

Com. Nay, I Will not leave him thus; be baffled by
A Goblin. I Will follow it to the place
Where it shakes the Chain, that is certain,
Exit Comastes.
Men. Ha, ha, ha Come let us see the End of the Conjuration.
Exaunt Omnes.
Enter King, and Timeus. King. But these are things for the following Age
Timeus, we are hedged in beyond all fear,
If Loyalty can prove destructive, there is
Yet some danger.

Time. Because you see a Calm enwrap all round
About you, you conceive 'twill be as Lasting,
As it is Pleasing; Tempests, Sir, may contradict you,
Even while you think so. Evils are silent now,
Not done away, they Couch, and lie in-wait,
Sedition walks with Claws bowed in, and a Close Mouth,
Which only she keeps for Opportunity
Of Prey. You Are not to suppose, that all Shut Eyes
Do sleep; they are never more watchful, than when thus
They counterfeit neglect; securely they
Pry into the Depth of things, by seeming
Not to observe the Face, and Outside,
Your Ruin yet appears not, and you think
Because it Lurks, you are Safe. Enemies
Reconciled, are like Wilde-Beasts brought up to hand,
They Have more Advantage given them to do Mischief.

King. Can the Urnes quicken their Ashes into
Soldiers? Can the Graves and Tombs send forth a Race
Of Enemies? From those that Live we are safe,
They have no will to hurt us; and those that
Sleep in the forgotten Dust cannot. There Is
Nothing remaining to our Care, but to
Give thanks; the gods are favorable, and if
We could be grateful, our Felicity
And safety were both summed and perfect. I tell
Thee often, thou let'st thy best days pass,
Without receiving of that Fruit, that should
Be crop'd from 'em. I did expect thou should
Have urged me to thy Nuptials, such Cares
Befit thee best, how the Triumphs should be
Ordered, and Hymen's Torch well lighted.

Time. Pray Heaven no other Flames break out,
But such as Mirth show forth. But Sir, I must
Be bold to tell you, a few flattering Lords
Guild over the Defects and Ruins of your State;
They make you call a Lethargy, Security;
And that a Kingdom, which like to Childrens
Houses on the Sand, reared up in Sport, and
Toying, will become a Prey unto the Wave
That first approaches it. They can perhaps
Judge well of Meats and Wines, good Table-States men,
Soldiers at a Banquet, strong to overcome
A Charger, or a Goblet: but Kingdoms
Safeties, are not owed unto the Palate,
And the stomach: if these were State Affairs,
Your Council were most sound, and every Breast,
A Synod. If Music could now raise Walls,
And Cities as of Old, your Realm would be
Impregnable.

King. Have thou yet done? Not all
The Ghosts that I have made, have been thus Cruel
To me; nor at yet their Graves have threatened
Half these Evils. Thy Mothers Labor, was
A Conception, to the pains thou hourly
Bring'st upon me.

Time. Sir, I am sorry. Yet
'Twas my Love that so did dictate to me;
My desire that your sports might follow one
Another, and succeed so just, that they
Might seem to bring the season on, and not
The season them, that thus they might continue,
Ever; but 'twas then that they might continue,
And not fail by Treason -- But Sir, I will
No more. I shall hereafter think it more Piety,
Hand in hand to fall in Perils with you,
Than my self to bring them.

King. What would thou have?
The Power I have, is wholly thine. If that
I never did deny, was not thought given,
Now I do. Use all the Means thou will, by Laws,
Or our Prerogative, to remove thy fears.

Time. Sir, I thank you, humbly thus Low I thank you.
Nor will I in a Complement return
You back this Power, till I have made you safe.
I shall work like a Resolute, but skilful
Surgeon, that dares feel, and search a Wound,
And if he find Dead-flesh, dares cut it off,
Exeunt Omnes. Or more Corruption, will not spare a Limb.

Enter Clearchus habited like a Flamen. Aratus, Haimantus, and Pallantus. Ara.
My Lord, Cupid put his Hood-wink on you
Heuses to Aim with, and then you could not
Miss the Mark. I fear, the second View will not
Prove so Ravishing. The most Excellent Things
Scarce please twice.

Clear. My Lord, think not so;
For were the World dark about her, or I blind
To all things else; in Her I could find
Variety enough; and so long as
Her Beauties were not Eclipsed, I could not
Envy him that were so placed, as to behold
The World as in a Map.

Ara. These Habits then
My Lord, will secure your Visit. Me thinks
Your Highness becomes them Rarely well!
You Are a Person now most Sacro-sanct,
Twice Holy, made so by your Dignity,
And Order. We'll go before Sir, and inform
The Princess of your Coming. You Will draw less
Suspicion likewise if you walk alone.

Exeunt all but Clearchus. Clear. The King of Crete is a Usurper.
His Son's a Villain, by their Masters Blood
They have reached the Diadem, and by
The Violation of his Daughter,
Seek to support their Greatness: but this last
Evil is still in the Forge, not yet Completed;
And the fair Princess looks on her Destined
Nuptials, as her Rape: her Lover, as her
Murderer. Fates, I hope, have in their Blessed Decrees
Writme the Rescuer of this Royal Virgin,
The VVinner, and the VVearer of this Jewel.
And neither the Error that threw me
Unawares upon her close Retirement,
Nor yet the Flame conceived from Her fair Eyes,
Were merely Casual, but things of a Deeper
And Diviner working. Love, who art Ruler
Of the Destinies themselves, if Youth,
And Greatness powerfully do invoke thee:
If a Virtuous Mind, a Spirit bold, Affections pure,
And Constant Faith, are Oblations grateful
To thy Altar, favor my Present Hopes,
All these I offer to thee. And proudly
Do exchange my peace and Quiet, for the
Troubles, and perturbations of a passion.
Crown but the End, and let all the Doubts,
The Sufferings, and the Dangers, that ever rackt
A Lovers Soul, be made my Portion.
possess me then with the Fullness of thy
Deity: let not thy Shades and Flourie Banks
Withhold thee, make Paphos but thy Refuge,
The Heart's thy Native Soil, thy Mothers Lap's
A Banishment to it. But idely I invoke
The God, while favorably he beckons me
To Recieve my Vows, and the Happiness
I Sue for, does Attend me. The houre's already past
That Calls me to the Princess.
Exit
Enter Hianthe, Aratus, Mclissa, two Ladies, Haimantus, and Pallantus. Hian.
May I ever hope to see such Happiness?

Arat. To enjoy it long, Madam, and know no End
Ofit.

Hian. Can I be no way assistant
To the Business?

Ara. Only in your Prayers.
It Is our Task to Subdue the Men; but the Gods,
Who must with piety be conquered, we will leave
Unto your Goodness: And yet, Madam, me thinks
The present Opportunity prompts us
With a Means, to add both Strength and Reputation
To our Affairs. This Gallant Prince (whose Visit
You expect) is not, I find, a Stranger
To the Interests of Crete, nor lightly resents
The Tyranny it groans under. The power
You seem to have ore him, may improve
This Compassion into a Zeal, to re-instate us
In the Liberty we have Lost.

Hian. My Lord
I Will use my best Endeavors, if I find him fit
To be Engaged; Leave this particular to me.

Enter Clearchus, who puts off his Disguise with the help of Haimantus. Ara.
Madam he is now ariv'd. That Is he, in the disguise.

Hian. So fell the Cloud from off the Trojan Lord,
Not able to Contain the Rays it held,
But being pierced dissolved at Once to Air,
Exposing to the Worlds Astonished Eye,
A Lusture rivalling the Midday Suns.

Clear. Sure I was Rude, and Barbarous, before
This Nobler Fire did touch my Heart, and from
The Wild Inhabitants of the Wood
Differed in Passion only, and not Reason:
That without more Amaze I could behold
Such Brightness; and with a Ready Speech Excuse
The Fault my Error had committed.
I cannot now find out a Word to suit
With my Desires; nor does the whole Store
Afford me One, but what must prejudice
Her Excellence, and my Estimation of it.
Pardon Madam, that like the Ascendants
To the Altar, by Degrees I thus approach you,
Pausing at each Step, and bowing to that Nearness.
Rashness was my Crime before, and should I
Throw that Blot a second time upon my Actions,
Rudeness might be justly thought my Nature,
And Barbaritie my best Knowledge.

Hian. My Lord, that which you call your Crime, was the
Incivilitie of the Court, that left
A Stranger to commit an Error
So unhappy to himself. I dare not
Undertake to Patronize the Act,
Nor yet to Excuse it; I shall believe I have
Obtained much, If I may be thought wholly
To Disclaim it.

Clear. Madam allow me then
To beg your Pardon, for the Presumption
With which I made this Visit; that I thought it
A Hard, Nay Injurious Treatment, to be forced
To Quit this Isle, before I had the Honor
To look upon you: for since I have beheld
Those Wonders of Beauty you are Mistress of,
I find my Voyage was too Short, my Hazards
Too Slight, and Few, to be rewarded with so High
A Favor.

Hian. My Lord, had you directed
Your Words to my Misfortunes, I should have
Acknowledged then, you had seen a Raritie,
One in the perfection, and Excellence
Of Misery; but I have no pretense,
No Title unto ought besides my Troubles.
Please you, my Lord, to withdraw unto a place
That admits not so public an Access.
Your Visit to me is not without all Danger.

Exeunt Clearchus. Hianthe, Melissa, and the Ladies. Ara. If I would set a
Spectacle to the World,
It should be such a Close, Where Virtue
Adored Virtue, and Greatness bowed to Greatness.
Me thinks the Heavens do open, and the Clouds
Are spun into a Thread, to let down some God
Unto this Meeting! Let us withdraw,
The Power is now descended, and all within
Is Sacred and Mysterious, and if we pry
Into these Secrets, our Curiosity
Will be punished.
Exeunt Omnes. Chorms. While this Old Poppy thus does sleep,
And does in Vice, as Age, grow deep,
Benumming all the Plants are nigh,
Into a Drowsy Lethargy.
Behold a Nobler Branch appears,
As far from's Manners, as his Years.
O shed Thou then thy Influence,
And we will resume fresh Beauties thence.
The Fiercer Sweetness of his Face,
Presents a Rigor, mixed with Grace;
And though there were a Want of Blood,
His Worth would make his Title Good.
Virtues so Grown, in so Few Years,
Make Him even Such, become their Fears.
On then, and cause the Scepter be
Thought but Reserved, not Snatched from Thee.

[ACTUS 3. SCENA 1.]
Enter Aratus, Phronimus, Eurylochus, Pallantus. Aratus. ARe all things ready
for the Ceremony?
The Crown, and Robes?

Phro. They are, there is nothing wanting
If the Prince were come.

Eury He Is now come.

Enter Clearchus and Haimantus. Ara. Your Highness is welcome: but I fear it may
Appear, to a strange Place, and Persons! What
Do you think my Lord? Are you not fallen,
Into the Company of so many
Traitrous and lost Men?

Clear. Say not so Sir,
You have not Warrant, though you rank your self
Within the Number. The Place and Persons
Rather appear to me, as if some Holy Rite,
Or piece of Sacred Worship were intended.

Ara. My Lord, you understand it right, it is a Piece
Of H oly Worship and Devotion that is
Intended by us. And I may truly say,
That this our private Meeting, and close Counsel,
Is more Just and Glorious, than the loudest Deed
In Court, that all our public Acts, Edicts,
And Forms of Law, are dark and impious,
Compared to it. Nay, that this Time, and Place,
Made holy by our Purposes, has the Gods
More manifest and present, than the Altars,
And the Temples, long since made Void and Empty
Of a Deity, by those which sue for
Favors, and requests for Him (who justly
Heard) deserves their Horrid'st Vengeance.
We are not met here, to Plot a general Ruin,
For a private Injury; we know and teach,
That the Greatest done by the King unto
The Subject, cannot give him Cause to throw off
His Faith; Kings are petty Gods, and may tempt us.
Nor is it Want, or desire of Innovation
That thus stirs us; we are in the Best*
Ill-State already. Nor Ambition,
To strike at that Laurel, which the Thunder
Spares; no, we Reverence it, and know, that
As Men are the works of Nature, so Kings
Of Jove. But it is our Oath, the Sacrament
We took, which still holds us, though our Lord be dead,
Until his Successor release us from it,
By taking of a New One. We are not
Subjects, but Slaves to Him we now Obey,
And therefore as Slaves, we ought to hate our
Master: He was born less than We, and hides
The Private Man, under the Public Gown.
The Purple which he wears, was dipped deep in
The blood of Innocents to colour't so.
But I vainly waste my self in Words, here
Are no Minds to be persuaded, nor Ears
To be instructed. The sins we are to punish
We all know, and the gods remember.
Our strength then is all we are to speak of.
Which is more than three parts of the Isle, sixteen
Years Undisturbed Provision; so carelessly
Was that secured, which was got by Blood.
There Is but one Lord-ship, small in respect
Of others, the Tyrants Own Possession,
That will be Cordial for him; but they are
So besotted with their Fortunes, that their
Greatest Aid, will be but in their Wills to
Do him Service. They may offer up their Lives
Like so many Sacrifices for his sake,
But not like Soldiers, they are Unworthy
Of that Name. They may Dye, but never Conquer.
War was never talked of, but in their Banquets,
Nor dare they Fight beyond a Brawl

Phro. And if we would count part of our Strength
In their Weakness, we have no Opposition.
In the City where They and their Vices
Are daily seen, nothing is so Contemptible.
And in Remoter Parts, where Majesty
Is more reverenced, being known only
By the Power and Laws, and where the name of King,
Hears like the Name of God, even there, those sonns
Of The Earth, as I may call 'em, dare menace him,
And pile hills on hills, to set their Bodies,
Equal to their Hates.

Eury. Here we are thee my Lord;
Can each of raise such Forces, which though
They failed to effect it, yet could make
The Kingdom fear a Conquest.

Pall. Your Highness
Is a Soldier, and though but Young, perhaps
Have seen already, what others whole Lives
Have not shown them; yet we will play a Game
We dare invite You to, though you were
Accompanied with all the Ancient Heroes.
Who had they leave but in their Aerie shapes,
To set on a Tribunal, Spectators
Of the War, this their second Leaving of
The Earth, should be more grievous to them, than
Their former Deaths, and they would wish this Isle
Might be their Elysium.

Ara. You see my Lord,
How each can bring his Forces in, and prompt
The other; Those which have none on Earth,
Can bring them down from Heaven, in stead of Men,
Bring Manly Spirits, Words, and Looks confirming
More than Armies.

Clear. M Lords, I must confess, with no small pleasure,
I have heard the Justice, the Strength, the Courage
Of your Cause. And for the first of which, although
I never doubted; or from the other two
(Meant ever to withdraw my Aid) however
VVeak; yet I am glad to see the Enterprise
So hopeful: For though most greedily I
Should embrace all Hazards for two such Mistresses
As Justice, and the Excellent Princess,
Yet where their Interests are Disputed, I cannot wish to see a Danger, what
Ever weight of Glory I might purchase
By it. My Lords, the small Force I am Master of,
Either in my Person, or those Commanded by me,
Reckon on till you see us Conquer, or lie
Upon the ground.

Ara. Our Designs are then succesful
Above our wishes.
Phronimus introduct.
The Priest, we are now ready for him. Though
Exit Phronimus We need nothing to strengthen our Resolutions,
Yet we will take an Oath: it is good to have the Gods
Along with us. A Sacrament is the Tie,
No less of Loyalty, than of Treason.
Here let us all, before this Sacred Witness
Phronimus returns with a Plamen, bearing in his hand an Image. Of Faith and
Perjurie, make a Holy Vow
Of Loyalty to Our Selves and Cause.
And as we draw near to so Divine an
Essence, consider that it is not Gold or Marble
That we touch, but a Moddle of a Sensible
And Living Power, which has Vouchsaft to be
Embraced by One Hand, when the Vastness of
Our Thoughts could not comprehend it.
Here they all see^ to take an Oath, by Kissing of the Image. Exit Eurylochus.
Now we are ready for the Prince. Eurylochus
Conduct him in. Your Grace shall see a Stronger
Persuasion, than any you have yet heard,
The lively Image of Her you so much Serve.
He Knows not yet his Fortunes, but I dare
Warrant He Will bear them bravely. He has read
The Lives of Kings, though he never acted
Any; and you shall perceive he is Princely-Born,
Though not bred in Court.
Eurylochus returns with Cleander. Royal Sir, you are welcome!
Start not at the Name, it is your Due, You
Were born to the Title: and I doubt not,
Though you never heard it thus applied before,
It Is not altogether Strange unto you
There was a Spark, which in the first Womb,
After a Special Manner was infused
Into you, and is another Soul
Within you; as the One Informs your Body,
So this Informs your Soul; we may called
The Difference of a King. That will tell you,
We are all here your Subjects, and this
No Strange Philosophy I teach. And though
This Rich Perfume has hitherto been wrapped
In this Disguise of Learning, and defended
From the air o'th Court, it is not decai'd,
But grown stronger by such keeping; which when
It shall be opened, will cast a fragrant
Smell ore all the Kingdom, and cure the Infections
Of the Former Age. To open it we
Are met, it is a Medicine we too long
Have languisht for. And Sir, though it be a short
Warning to so Great a Matter, you must
Presently resolve to be a King. We
Have no time now to instruct you in
Your Right, and how you lost it. It was Years
In doing, and will require Years to relate it.
In the mean time, let what you see persuade you,
Our Serious Looks, Respects, and the Presence
Of these Holy Rites.

Clean. I need not excuse
My want of Answer, there is nothing fit for me
To say: Which way so e're I shall declare
My self to this Purpose, will appear Foolish.
Whether I Refuse, or Grant, both are alike
Ridiculous. It Is not with Me, as with
Elder Years, They may refuse Offers like these,
And be admired for such their Moderation;
Or accept them, and for that Magnanimity
Be honored. But should I assume an Action,
So many Years above my Age, I must
Expose my self a Pagent to the Beholders
Scorn and Laughter. My Lord, That which I have
To say is, only this. My Years are yet in Nonage,
My Actions not my Own, to Others Wills
I am wholly Subject. you may Command me
Even to Wear a Crown, and to submit to
Accept the Highest Honors. Set me, if
You please, on the Throne you speak of, and when
You see a time again, remove me. Yet,
My Lord, I Would have you know, I am not so Young,
But that I understand I am a Subject, and that
I have a King; that thus, though but in Sport,
To Use his Titles is a Fault, But for
Any to Acknowledge such a Spirit,
As you, my Lord, have spoken, is no less
A Traitor, than he which strikes the Crown from off
His Head.

Arat. You have been heavenly taught, and shall
Be ever instructed in such Lectures.
But the Treason which is committed, is
Committed' against your self, your Spirit is
Usurpt, and he that holds it is your Servant,
As I am, or at least should be so. Sir,
The time presses now, and we cannot use
The Circumstances necessary to
Persuade you; but what ever appears Strange
At this time to you, a few days use will
Render most familiar. Sir, please you ascend,
Yond place is provided for you -- Submit
Cleander expresses a modest unwillingnesse. Now, and Command ever. My Lord,
will you
Please to honor us with your Assistance.

Here they take off from Cleander his black habit, and put on him a Rich Robe,
Clearchus, and the Flamen, set the Crown upon his Head, and the rest stand
before him, and salute him King. Omnes The Gods preserve the King.

Ara. We have now performed one part of our Duty,
Which was to seat you thus, the next is,
With our Lives to keep you at this Height.

Clean. If I may yet take confidence to speak,
And it will become me to say something of
My self. I could tell you, how this Day has
Been familiar to me, and in a Dream
I have seen these things so often, that did
Not these Shouts confirm me, which were then still
The concluders of my Greatness, I could not
Yet believe, but that I have now suffered
Is Aerie all, and the Shape I see merely
Fantastic.

Flamen. It was a Good and Prosperous
Omen, which presaged your Quiet here.
The Gods would not suffer you to rest in
A Wrong place.

Omnes May it be so.

Here Aratus presents Clearchus to Cleander, seeming to inform him who he is,
he descends and embraces him, the rest pay their homage by kissing his hand, in
the mean time Pallantus speaks. Pall. And shall I alone in such a Glorious
Action walk unseen? And as a Fault,
Perform my Duties in Disguise? I Will rather
Add a Trumpet, and a Flag to all my
Actions. Here fall my Mist away, Now
Thou only barr'st me from my Joys, to which
I am not near enough, unless I can
Embrace. Give me leave my Lords, that as my life,
So I may throw my Body at his Feet,
I have a share in him, I though a Stranger
To you. It was my Fathers purchase,
With his Life he bought it, nor desire I
To hold it by another Patent. May
Such be the Noted End Successively
Of all our Name, No Disease, but our Masters
Cause to Dye of. Here let me Kneel, and pray
All Happyness, and the Best things may fall,
And then rise, and with my Sword, procure the
Blessing s I have praid for. Know me my Lords,
I am Pallantus.

Phre. Eury. Pallantus!

Ara. Pallantus!
My dearest Friend, proved my nearest Kinsman!
Could I be so dull as to imagine
Such Valor could be in a shape so low
As thy Outside promised? Or so common,
As to be met by Chance? That I could love
Thee so, and yet have no Interest in thee?
Where have thou been so long Dead? Sir look upon
This Man, that turns our joys thus from you, your
Party is made strong by his Discovery,
'Has brought such Unexpected Aid within
Himself! You Are to receive him Sir, not only
As a Servant, but a Kinsman.

Clean My Lord,
I am as yet in a New World, and know
No more, than if I now began to live,
The most Common things, are Wonders to me.
You must excuse me therefore, if I know not
How to entertain such Accidents as these,
But I shall make it my Labor every day
To understand my Duty, of the which
I think it no small part, to give the due
Value to every worth I meet.

Clear. Sir, as a new friend let me embrace you,
But this Alteration shall not give me leave
To forget the former Favors I am
Obliged to you for. What I received in
Your Disguise, I shall be ever ready
To pay unto your self.

Arat. How it grieves me
To see thy Beauties thus blasted in thy Youth,
War has been too rough a Mistress to thee,
And set thy Gloryes in too Eminent a place.
Had Venns been in the Camp, she would
Have covered thee with Mars his shield, although
The God himself had wanted it. I can
Remember when the Loveliest Face compared
With thine, could not have taken from thee. When
In the brightest Ring of Beauties, thou appeard'dst
But well-set; and had thou been attired like
One of them, thou might have won the Prize
Of fairness from a Coure of Ladies.

Pall. My Lord, they are well lost: but those which were
The Causers of it, shall receive Wounds as deep,
If not so disfiguring, and afford their blood
To wash the Scars they have made.

Ara. They shall,
And we will help to bath thee. It Is time that
We broke up our meeting, our longer stay
May prove dangerous. Phronimus and Eurylochus
You must post this Night to your Commands.
Your Majesty must bear'em Company.
And now without more delay show your selves:
We will be ready here at the first News.
My Lord, your Navy also will require
Strict watch and guard, on our first Motion
That will be attempted.

Clear. Haimantus, you
Shall presently away, and take the Charge
Upon your self.

Ara. Pray do so my Lord.
All we have to do, is to mingle our selves
In the Court again. When once these troubles
Sir, are over, a perpetual Calm will follow.

Clean. My Lord, I never enjoyed safety, so pleasing as these Dangers.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Timeus reading a Letter. -- By the next Post I shall send
your Highness the whole Design of the Conspiracy we have so long suspected; in
the mean time, know Aratus, Phronimus, and Eurylochus are the three great
Diseases of the Kingdom. --

But not incurable. I know which way
To handle 'em. There must be some sudden
Remedy applied, that will work strongly.
This Night I Will send it. Be absent all ye
Lazy Medicines which the Law administers,
Ye are more treacherous, than the Villain
Ye examine; and where there was none, give
Time to act Mischief: Your Summons are
The Traitors Watchword, and drive him to take
That Opportunity, which otherwise
His Fears would have let slip. My self will be
The Accuser, and the Judge. When Public
Means are dangerous, each Prince has the Courts
Enter Pallan. Of justice in his Breast -- What Fiend is this,
That causes such Antipathy within me?
The Midnight Ghosts take not shapes so horrid!
I have not slept, since first he crossed me!

Pall. We are alone. The Gods have given this time
For my Revenge.

Time. What does he mutter to himself?
Coracin s, Argestes -- Kill that Dog.

Cora. My Lord!

Timeus. Kill that Dog -- Cowardly Villains,
It were a justice to leave you to the Worrying.
Enter Coracinus and Argestes, they assauit Pak. but he worsts 'em till Time.
assists 'em, and makes him retire, they all pursue him off of the Stage.
Within Treason, treason, save the Prince, treason. Timeus, Coracinus, Argestes
return, bloody. Time. He was a Devil! The Power of Hell was in
His Arm; Night threw her shades about him
To defend him! He could not thus have escaped,
Unless he had vanish^d! Is he o'er-taken yet?

Enter a Servant. Serve. No my Lord. But it is impossible he should
Pass the Court. Sure he has taken Covert
In some Lodgings there-abouts.

Time. Let search be made,
And give Command, That when he appears again,
He that first meets him, without more Circumstance,
Do ki'l him. Promise a Reward to him
That brings his Head.
Exit Servant.
Enter Clearchus and Aratus to the rest with their Swords drawn. Clear. How do
you my Lord?

Time. Well.

Ara. Is your Higness hurt?

Time. And may be again, if I look not warily.
Would your Lordships Sword were sheathed.

Ara. Sir, 'twas drawn
In your Defense: and if you are Jealons of it,
You wrong a Ready-hand to do you Service.

Clear. Sir, is not the Traitor known that did it?

Time. No doubt he is.

Clear. My Lord, you speak
Very doubtfully. I hope you do not think,
But I am sorry for the Accident

Time. I know not what to think. Your Disposition's
As great a Stranger to me as your Person,

Clear. I see, my Lord, you know to throw Injuries,
Though to confer no Civilities on
A Stranger.

Time. Injuries are deserv'dly placed
On an Intruding Guest.

Clear. You Are Unworthy.
They both draw, and are held as under. And though I am incompast with all the
Dangers I may Justly fear from so Barbarous
A Place, which dares do any thing it Lusts unto,
Without regard of Laws or Hospitality,
I Would tell you so. And were you from this Dunghill
That you stalk on ('it is no better) I Would pull down
That Unmanner'd Pride within you.

Time. Let me go,
Nothing shall privilege him to talk thus.

Clear. They hold you in your safety. Nor is the Distance
'Twixt your Life and Death, longer than this Space
'That parts us. If you dare, follow me,
I Will stay you out a Days Sail at Sea,
I Challenge you to a Princely Combat.
Where come with all your power, that I may
Destroy so many Brute-Beasts from off the Earth.

Exit Clearchus. Time. Shall I be tied while I am bated? --
I Will send those tha shall overtake you, and cut
You off, before your Shipping yet. Argestes,
Haste unto the Port presently, and in
My Fathers Name, Command all speedy Power
Be raised to stop the Prince. Bid'em fire his
Ships i'th'Haven --

Ara. O my Lord, consider
A little more, before you lay a Blot
Upon the Nation, which Future Ages
Cannot wipe off. No Story can parallel
Such a Fact. Your Highness moved him much,
And gave him Cause of choler.

Time. Does he help
Your Lordship with Ships? that thus you plead his Cause.
Shall I be Tutored by a Traitor?

Ara. Sir, you are happy if you can find a Tutor,
When you thus much need one. And for your other
Language, when I understand it, I Will return you
An Answer, in the mean time, you must take it
Home to you as you gave it

Time. It Is well Sir,
I shall find other ways, than Words to Answer you.

Enter the King, Polyander, Menetius, Comastes, and a Guard. King. How now
Timeus! What, bloody?

Time. No more
Than you see, Sir. The Sword rather left it
On me, than drew it out.

King. Who is the Traitor,
That durst commit such Outrage?

Time. He Is 'scapt unknown.

King. Unknown? that cannot be, when he has past
Thus far in the Court, some must take notice of him.
Can you describe him?

Time. He was habited
Like a Soldier; but his Looks had more of
Devil than of Man.

King. Upon my Life
I saw him! but it is two days since. He must
Be known in all this time. Enquire who brought in
Any such Man, or was seen with him.

Com. This can be
No body but my Hob-goblin. And't please
Your Highness, was he not in a Buffe-Coat?
And had his Face all bedabl'd with Patches?

Time. Yes, he had so.

Com. Then do I know him,
He belongs to my Lord Aratus there.
No body durst speak to him but he,
He showed his teeth at every body else.
He had like to have bit me once.

King. Aratus,
Do you hear? They say, he, that committed
Aratus stands in a study after his heat with Timeus, and minds not what is said
This Villainy, belongs to you.

Ara. To me, Sir?
He wrongs me that thinks so. I maintain none
That dare attempt such Insolence Poly. My Lord,
I saw him with you.

Ara. Who? pray make me know
The Man.

Poly. A black stern Soldier that followed you.

Ara. I fear I understand you now!
aside. There is such a One that follows me; but
I never discovered any Disloyal
Spirit in him. His Outside, it is true, was
As you describe, not molded after the
Common Frame of Men, but threatened more than
Any I have seen: Yet 'twas but his Outside
That threatened so. Within he was Gentle,
All a Courtier, to be wound and turned by
The least Civilitie. I must confess,
When he was Injured, then he was High, and
Lordly, Storms rose in's looks, and Thunder
Was in his Voice.

King. And you knowing this,
How durst you turn such a Wild Beast loose into
The Court? Whom had I met, and chanced to have
Angered, my fortune had been the same.
Lay hands on him. You shall find that such a Spirit
The Guard lay hold of Aratus. Dwells in my Breast too, and when it is stirred,
Will raise tempests as great. We shall find
Other particulars beside to examine you of.

Ara. Then the Gods send their aid, or all is lost!
aside. Yet, Sir, hear me speak. The Jealousies you
Have of me, I shall not perhaps be able
At this present to Clear; and indeed I
Know not so much as what they are. But Sir,
To show you in this last Accident how much
I am Innocent. I will relate unto you,
How first I met the Actor of it. 'Twas on that Day
I was employed on an Honorable
Message from your Majesty to the Stranger
Prince, On the Shore I found him, having lately
'Scapt a Shipwreck, and as great a Danger
On the Land; for he had been assaulted
By two Villains that were in the same Voyage
With him, the cause of whose hate he could not tell,
Having no acquaintance with them, but in
The Ship; but as he had before the Waves,
So in this Tempest too, as I may call it,
He bore himself above. In the instant,
While he was yet hot in his Anger,
And their Blood, we came upon him --

Time. Pray Sir let me speak to you. There Is a Wonder
Discovered to me by this Relation!
And under this Monster, he has Spoke of,
A greater does lie hid; One that you would rather
Have in Chains, than all the list of Traitors
I have named. Sir, commit the Uucasing
Him to me, and suffer me to proceed
With Aratus, as I shall see cause.

Exeunt all but Timeus, Aratus, and the Guard. King. Take your way, I Will leave
him to you.

Time. My Lord, with the persuasion of your
Innocence, I have procured your Freedom
Of my Father; and do desire in Return
Of this kindness (if it be such) to let
Me see the face of this my Enemy
Once more, if your Acquaintance (as appears
By your words) be not too late to know his
Abode. My Lord, I shall receive him otherwise
Than you expect. The Relation you have
Made of him, and what my self was witness of,
Have turned my Hate into Admiration
Of him, and if I can move his Love, as
I have done his Anger, I shall be happy
In his Valor. It Is not the first time that
The Brav'ry of Enemies, have made them Friends,
And that Wounds, have been the first Seals of Love,
I do consider how much I injured him,
And that on such provocation, he could not
Have done less, At the first sight I called him Dog,
And without more Circumstance commanded
To have him killed.

Ara. Now Sir, I must kneel to you,
You have the goodness of a Prince. He shall
Submit for his Offense, or suffer for it.
And if you find not that Noble Spirit
In him, I have told you of, in the most
Dangerous Business you shall employ him,
Let him be punished for this his Ill-plac'd-Valour.

Time. My Lord, I Will take no other Surety,
But your Word; ever oblige me thus.

Exit Timeus and Guard. Ara. But my Lord, though I can Answer,
I cannot give Credit to your smooth Tongue.
This last Accident might have lost all. I Will
Hazard no more by my Delays. And seeing
They know not their time to strike, I Will teach em
Both the How, and When to do it. Before
To morrow this time, I Will ring their Dull
Security such an Alarm --

Enter Haimantus disguised like a Saylor. Haim. My Lord,
Prince Clearchus Salutes you.

Ara. Ha! Prince Clearchus
Said thou? Come nearer friend.

Haim. Do you not know me
My Lord?

Ara. My Lord Haimantus! I crave your
Pardon. How fares the Prince?

Haim. Well, and both He,
And my Lord Pallantus (who happily made
His Escape to our Ships from his Pursuers)
Have sent me in this Disguise, to let you know,
The Block-house is privately surrendered
To 'em: in which they now are, with three hundred
Of our Selectest Men: and undertake
With this strength to rescue the Princess Hianthe
This Even, if the state of your other Affairs
Will suffer it. Our Navy besides rides Clear,
And disengaged near to the Block-house,
Where they can land what greater Force they please.

Ara. Hum. The Gallant Prince, and bold Pallantus safe,
The Block-house surrendered, and the Ships at hand
Both for a Reserve, and a Retreat -- Why should
They not attempt it? My Lord, tell'em,
Their Design is Noble, and like Themselves,
Full of Youth, of Fire, of Bravery, of Justice:
That where such Spirits as theirs move in any
Action, all Designs ought to Follow, and
Not Lead; they make the Period, and the Points
Of Business. Say, I do not only approve,
Of this their Purpose, but will Assist 'em
In their Retreat, and at the same time give
A Divertisement, by some hundreds of
Great shot poured into the City. Come my Lord
I Will direct you a way to return less
Hazardous than that you came in hither.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Hianthe. The time of their great Plot is now complete,
The hours are finished. O let it not You,
Which look down, which favourablylook down
Upon this Isle, want your Power which first
Did strengthen it; let the same Hand that bid,
Disclose it too! Shame not at so Glorious
An Offspring, when it is Heavenly, and does
Confess the Father, when none but Gods dare
Call it theirs, nor without Blasphemy can
Own it. Ye were kind Parents at the first,
Show your selves still so, and Rear the Child ye
Have Gotten. Where Humane strength shall fail, there
Hold it up, and make that Want, the Strongest.

Enter Mellssa. Mel. Madam, I now met my Lord

Ara us,
Who entreats your Highness to keep within
Your Lodgings this Night, and to fear nothing
What ever Embroylments you hear abroad,
Or near you.

Enter Timeus. Time. Madam, I come to tell you,
The Infection, which caused this your Retirement,
Is now cleared up, and vanished, and abroad
You may safely bless us with your Presence:
The Court has for these days suffered an Eclipse,
But when it shall again show forth its Beams,
Your Beautyes, it will look more Glorious,
By its short Obscuring.

Enter the King, Comastes, Minetius. King. Weil said Timeus.
Now I like thee; here thy Cares and Services
Are bent the right way; would I could see thee
Once look pale in these. Can a young Man (when
He may have leave to breath in such a Paradise
As this) draw a common Air? an Air of the People?
I am loath to change thy present thoughts: but
The business I have to tell thee, will bring
Thee peace, and more leisure for them. The suspicion
Thou had of a Treason, was not Vain; since
It has broke out; but it is already suppressed.
The two Chief of them are taken in their passage,
As they went to Head their Forces. And I
Have commanded they be set so High,
As to enjoy a Large View of that Land they
Were Ambitious of, and then to strangle 'em
At that Height.

Time. Are there but two, Sir, of Note
That you have taken? Flatter not your self,
Had they been thousands, they had left more behind.
Your Majesty counts that a Victory,
Which they scorn to account a Loss; and think
You Are safe, when they are not endangered.
Is Aratus, Phronimus, or Eurylochus,
Among them? Is Pallantus one of the two
Are taken?

King. Pallantus! Thou dream'st of the Dead,
And the Ages past.

Time. Sir, he is Living,
And if my Aims deceive me not, he has
Lately Walked among us, and makes up the Knot
Of Traitors -- Ha!

King. What can this mean! Look out!
A vollie of Great Shot interrupts their discourse, and they stand amazed.
Enter Polyander. Poly. Sir, arm speedily, put your self within
Your Strength, or you are lost. The Block-house
Is revolted, Prince Clearchus poures Men
In Swarms upon the Shore, Aratus has
Seized both the Gate and Fort that lead unto
Great Shot still. The Haven, and thunders, as you hear,
Upon the City.

Time. These were the Evils
I was a Prophet of, I saw them when
They were Disguised. Sir, it is no time now to Stand,
But Do.

King. Madam, we entreat your Pardon,
That thus we have offended against your peace,
And made you the first partaker of our Troubles,
That ought to have Known them Last.

Hian. Sir, your Trouble
Is too sad to be excused.

Mel. How likes your
Highness the Serenade of this fair Evening?

Exeunt all but Hian. Meliss. Hian. I like it well Melissa, but I fear;
My Solicitude and Care are too great
To admit a perfect Joy --

A Tumult and noise of Weapons are heard at the Door. Within. Stand, stand.

Clea. Within. Gentlemen stir not, if you will save your Lives;
We come to serve the Princess.

Enter Clearchus, Pallantus, and Haimantus, with their Swords drawn. Clear.
Madam, you are safe, fear nothing. If you please
To put your self into our protection,
You may for ever bid a farewell to
This your Hated Prison. My Lord, Pallantus,
Guard the Princess, and make the Retreat with
All the Speed you can. The Honor of bringing up
The Rear in this Action, I can impart to none.

Within. Arm, arm, arm.
The Princess and Melissa go off with Clearchus and his Party, a tumultuous
Noise of fighting continues for some time after. Then enter at another door, as
in sight, Timeus and his Party, who are beaten back by Clearchus and his Party.
Timeus is struck to the ground by Clearchus, but rescued by his followers;
which done, Clearchus retires Orderly, and the rest remain.
Enter Polyander to them. Poly. On the ground, my Lord!

Time. Lower and baser yet,
Viler in my Condition Polyander,
Than this my Posture. Affronted, baffled, scorned,
Wounded by Traitors, and by Dishonor
Deeper. The Princess in my very sight
Born from me.

Poly. My Lord, these Wrongs dictate Revenge,
And not Complaints, show your Resentments with
Your Sword And let what you Have call your thoughts
To it, and not what you have lost.

Time. Lead on.
Exeunt Omnes. CHORUS. While He that should be Eye and Ear,
Through Sloth does neither See nor Hear,
Behold like Thunder comes a Sound,
Which does at once Amaze and Wound;
" That Dart sure hits, which Clouds did hide,
" And safely Kills,' cause Undescri'd.
" Where Dangers urge, he that is slow,
" Takes from Himself, and adds to's Foe.
The are come beyond a Whisper now.
And boldly dare proclaim their Vow.
" When the Prey's sure, to show the Snare,
" Begets not Counsel, but Despair.
Like Lightning it awakes the Sense,
Only to see, and grow Blind thence.
" It Is Love, not Faction, where the Good,
" Conspire to spill Usurping Blood.

[ACTUS 4. SCENA 1.]
Aratus and Pallantus are discovered sitting at a Table, with Pen, Ink, Paper,
and Mathematical Instruments before them. Aratus. BEsides this great Work, we
must have two less
On either hand of it; and which must first
Be made, no less to secure the Work in doing,
Than when it is done; two common Horn-Works
Will be sufficient for this purpose. Would they
Were finished.

Pall. My Lord, commit the Charge of them
To me, I Will both hasten the labor, and stand
Upon the Guard till they be done.

Enter Clearchus and Hianthe to them. Hian. Do you hear the Rumor my Lords?

Ara. No, Madam.
What is it? -- What Fatal Check can our Affairs
Hianthe answers not presently, as one troubled at what they are to utter.
Receive, that it should want a Tongue to speak it?
Which hitherto have been so prosperous, so sull
Of fresh successes, that our whole Councels
Have been employed, but how to Entertain,
And make best Uses of them.

Hian. It Is reported,
That the King's taken.

Ara. Horror and Amazement
Seize me on the bare Relation! But such
A Prodigy cannot be! So Divine
A Person, was never thrown away so
Cheaply. Though the Gods abound in all Goodness,
They never Lightly yet Esteemed of any;
That were not to show their Plenty, but their
Contempt of Virtues. Excellent Lady,
Say the Particulars of this Report.
Was there any of the Kings Age made mention of?

Hian. No, the Account we have is this, That two Lords
That were in their passage to raise Forces,
Are taken by a Troop of Horse of the
Adverse Party. My Brother being yet
In his Disguise, and not known, is conceived
To have past for one of their followers.

They stand all silent for a time as confounded with the belief of this
relation, Pall. first recovers, and speaks the following speech as to himself.
Pall. Where are all our Great words now? Those
Mighty sounds which made a trembling in the Air,
And caused no less a deafness with their fall,
Than if Thunder, the Voice of Heaven were turned
Articulate, and spoke the Threats of Jove
Unto the Word? Changed to as great a Silence?
Such when a Tempest ceases, is the Calm
That follows, no noise is heard; as if the Winds
With Blasts were Breathless grown, and the Seas
Sat down, and after so much Toil required Ease.
But a True and Noble Spirit, ought not
To sink under Misfortune, but bear up
The stronger; and if the state be Desperate,
To attempt Ways as Desperate to Change it.
No Action can be counted Folly,
Where no Counsel can be given for Any.
Rashness is Bravery, or VVisdome then, when
The Best Hope is but Destruction. I will do
Something, And where the gods have given a Will,
We ought not in their Service to sit still.

Exit Pallantus. Hian. I was born, and bred up in Miseries,
And the Misfortunes I have past, were not
To excuse my following Age from more,
But to prepare me only to suffer
Greater yet, and stranger.

Clear. My Lord,
Recollect your self. This News may be false, and all
The Danger the King is in, may be from your believing it.
Give not your self cause to mourn hereafter,
All perished on a Mistake. If that this,
The worst of Evils, be befalln, yet
It ought not to be the reason of your
Neglect, but greater Care and Vigilance.
Though much be Lost, yet that Remains, may well
Expect your best Thoughts to it. Look upon
That Lady, too much swallowed up in Grief,
Through our so low Dejection. If you have
Lost a King, consider in Her you have still
A Queen, and such a One, as for whose Service,
You would not think your dearest blood too precious,
Were it not frozen with your present sorrows.

Ara. My Lord, I thank you, and will follow your
Advise. Pardon my Amazement, and if
I seemed dead, when the life of all my Actions
Was taken from me. Yet 'twas not a Slumber
I was lost in, but a Confusion of
Various thoughts, not knowing which to follow,
Till your Highness pointed me one forth.
We'll act something now so speedily, that
They shall not have leave to put an ill Design
In practice. Madam, revive your gentle
Spirits, happyer things attend you, than now
You know, or hope for -- The News --

Hian. What News my Lord?

Ara. Such as is not to be named
Enter a Serve. who Delivers Ara. a letter, which he opens hastily. Without a
Sacrifice! O see Madam!
Though we have lost, we are not yet Undone;
There Is a Check, but not a Total Ruin
Of our Fortunes. The King, Paronimus, and
Eurylochu. are all safe, and never
Were in Danger; this Night they will be here
With their full Power.

Hian. My joys are then restored me,
I shall see my Brother

Clear. My Lord, who are they
Are taken, and have given occasion for
This Mistake?

Ara. Two that stood boldly for our Party.
More besides, their Name's there, and that they were
Honest, I cannot now instruct your Highness.
You may perceive, they, which have no such Cause
Of joy as we have, do lament them much.
We shall have a time too, I doubt not, both
To mourn and revenge their fall. In the mean time,
Let 'em rest in Peace and Honor. Such a
Farewell, were I in their Condition,
I should have expected. They have only
Out-stript us in the payment of a Debt
We all owe unto our Master, ours is Due,
Though yet not called for. Come Madam, we must
Prepare to meet the King, and after that what
Ever our souls can wish for. But where is
Pallantus, absent from this happy News?

Ser. He went forth my Lord a little before
The arrival of the Letters.

Ara. We shall meet him.
Joys of this nature will never come too late.
Exeunt Omnes.
Enter the King and Timeus. Time. Sir, though there are Troubles in your
Affairs,
Let none be in your Countenance. Your Eyes,
Should like those blessed Twin-fires upon the Ship,
Display a Prosperous Flame, a light of Joy,
And Comfort round about; that they which toil
In the Rage, and Fury of this Tempest,
May from thence foresee a Calm, and nourish
Hopes of safety. Thus you wrong your Power,
Destroying it your self, 'cause others would.
The Soldier groans, just as you groan, their pulses
Have the same Motion, and their Hearts do beat
Both Hope, and Fear, according as yours does.
All Omen comes from you, your Passion is not
A single Sadness, it is the Peoples too.
When you confess a Fear, none dares be Bold,
Courage is thought a Folly, not a Virtue.
Your Mirth were now Discretion, and a Face
Cheerful as at a Feast, were Policy,
'Twould be one kind of Succor.

King. Timeus
I thank thee: But these Joys come from Above,
And are not to be taken when we please:
No Man can pronounce, He will be happy.
Yet I will struggle with my Thoughts, and strive
To recover the Peace, that is fled from me.
But let not this thing Discomfort you,
Perhaps it is a course of Humors only,
And a little Physic may remove it.

Time. With the Comfort and hope of this, I Will leave
You Sir. And if the Genius that attends
Your Person, smile upon us, no other
Evil shall dismay us. Shall I bear any
Commands from you to the Camp?

King. Only my Salutations. The Charge of all
Do thou take upon thee. To morrow if
This Fit leave me, I Will visit you,
How every thing is irksome to me! Clouds
Exit Timeus. And Darkness are before my Eyes,
All things dissenting one from the other,
Yet Conspire in this, that they present Death
To my View. I have that Idle Comfort
Only left, That he that Despaires of All,
Ought to fear Nothing. When things cannot grow worse,
All fortune then is on His Side that Suffers.
But my Injustice seconded with Murder,
Do forbid Success. A Kingdom reared in Blood
Stands on a Slipperie Foundation.
And I have been nourished in Peace thus long,
That being grown Specious and Great, I may
At last fall a Sacrifice worth Slaughter.
Thoughts urge Thoughts; Suspicion gets Suspicion;
Horror Horror; I have not that small Settlednesse
Of Mind, as to think one thing twice. Were I
But Innocent, I would provoke Misfortune,
Call for Fate with as undaunted Courage,
As the Lord and Ruler of it does -- Hold.
An uproar at the door, Pallantus rushes in, and wounds the King, the Guard
follow on him. I command you hold. -- What a Nothing it is
That I have thus much Feared, and labored
To escape, when 'twas my Good! Childishly
Dreading every Thought of Cure, then most Offended,
When my Health was near. How Well I am
After this Little Wound! Quiet of Mind,
And Peace of Conscience, those Blessed Companions,
Begin to return unto me. I see
Nothing but blood can appease blood in Sacrifice;
That to the Guilty there is no Ease, but Death,
No Mercy, like the Cross, Oh! -- Hold in your Rage.
As the King shows signs of weakness through his wound, the Guard make offer
to kill Pallantus. Have ye not already acted Mischeifes
Enough by my Command, but ye must
Voluntarily thrust your selves on more?
You Are deceived, though I have been hitherto
A Tyrant, now I am Merciful, and would
Gladly behold things Just and Innocent.

Cap. He faints. The Villain must not live.

King. I Command you hold. My Power is yet Good.
You are the Villains, the True Causers of
This my Misery, and you should Lay Hands
Upon your selves. How Ridiculous is this
Your Fury? Suppose I should give way
To your Desires, what were you the Safer,
Or I the Better? You would have One Foe Less,
And I one Sin more, that am already
Laden. Does not my Judgment affright you
Rather? I was not only Guilty, your
Hands were dipped in the same Blood with mine, nay,
Often performed such Deeds, I only durst but Wish.
Had I given you my Commission, Obedience
Here would not have Excused you. Your Loyalty
To Me was but at Best a Broken Faith
Unto another, and when Ye observed
It most, Ye were most Perjured. What can
Ye expect? Ye see when I was Guarded
By an Host, was thought Secure from what the
Power of Earth or Men could do unto me,
One Man, as I may say, One Handful of
That Earth, broke through all my Safeties, and with
A Single Arm has forced what a Million
Could not keep: and when no Humane Means was found,
Yet there was a Miracle to Conquer me.
The Guard rele^^. To you I turn now no more my Terror,
In Return of this Favor you have found,
Show the like to These, and Others, that shall
Be guilty of that Name, Of Friends to Me.
Though You are Nothing yet, this Deed will make
You Powerful: and You that have given them All,
May demand back so Small a Part.
Now you have been so much my Enemy,
Change something to a Friend -- How Vainlie
I take Care for Lesser things, neglecting
My Chief Concernments. O my Timeus!
O my Poor Eudora! -- Leave me not yet my Soul.
Thou can not mount until the Load be taken
From thy Wing. Thou could inhabit here
When it was Hell, now it is Paradise,
O stay -- and dwell --

He dies, and the Guard run and bear up his body. Pall. Though the Fall be
Great, it cannot shake me,
When I know it is Just. The Malefactors
Penitence takes not the Justice of his
Doom away; though He be Changed, That remains
Unstained. He may die with Pity, but not
With Innocence. They mind me not, I Will take
This Advantage of their Sorrow for my
Escape; I will not trust their Obedience
To a Dead Command.

Cap. Leave your sad Embraces,
Exit Pallantus. They Will bring no Comfort to you, though you persist
In'em, till you are such as this you hold.
This ground of Sorrow will afford a perpetual
Supply of Moisture, which your Eyes, like Suns,
May draw up, and pour down for ever; but
Never exhale a Satisfaction to you.
Let us to the Prince, and there unburden
Our hearts of this our grief, and if he have
A Service that commands our Lives, all hazards
Now will be welcome to us.

1. Guard. The Villain
That committed this Sacrilegious Act's escaped!

2. Guard. We were too soft to obey Dying-Speech.

Cap. His Entrance and Escape were ordained
Both by Fate, 'twas not in Our Power to hinder Either.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Timeus. Give me a Power Mighty as my Rage,
That my Revenge may reach unto the Clouds,
And unthrone those Gods, that joined hands with Men
To commit so Black a Deed. It were but
Justice they should loose their Deity, that
So would throw it off. Oh my Father! did I
Unload thy Shoulders of the Kingdom,
That thou might fall under a less Weight?
And bereft thee of thy Jealousies, to
Ruin thee with more Assurance only?
Where are all those Flattering Tongues, that when
There was no Need, would, in a Complement,
Hourlie Suffer for Thee? Not One to die
In thy Defense? Or by his fall to make
Thine more Decent? What ho, Charisius,
Erastus, Acmanthes, not one Voice?
How Dismal is this Place! The Graves where Death
Inhabits are not so dreadful! l I Will fly thee,
Though I run among the thickest of my Foes,
They can present no Horrors like this Lowness;
The Cries, the Sword, the Trumpet in the Battle,
Strike not so deep Amazement! --
I walk like
He goes out, as in search of some of those that had wont to attend, and
returns again. Aeneas among the Shades, all is Hell
About me! I see nothing but what my
Fancy frames in Horrid Shapes! O ye vain fears
Of Guilty Men! All are Unreasonable,
But yours Ridiculous. When you have contemned
The greatest and most real Dangers,
You tremble at a Ghost, a Thing less than a Man,
And when the Substance could not, the Shadow
Frights you. There is no way but this to set me
Above my Fears; when I am Less I shall
Be Equal to 'em.

Cap. O hold, my Lord!
He prepares to fall on his Sword, and the Guard return, and save him. Offer
not up your Self a Sacrifice,
When there are so many, that gladly would
Redeem you with their Lives. Let that thought
Prevail with you, That you ought to Live for them,
That so willingly would Die for you.
You Are the Prop of thousands, and if you sink,
You pull a Kingdom with you. Take your Sword
By the Other End, and so holding it,
Seek to appease this Royal Ghost. If you
Cannot regain a Crown, yet win a Memory
By the loss of it: This Object makes your Grief
A burden to your Honor. Lean on us,
My Lord, and we will conduct you to the Camp.
Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Polyander, Comastes, Menetius, and a Captain, at their entrance a Shout
is heard. Poly. What Shout is this among the Enemies?

Cap. It Is their Acclamations still for the Arivall
Of their Fellows, with whom they have now joined
Camps.

Poly. I am glad often.
I hope we shall have Command, to try the Fortune
Of the Field to morrow. Would the Whole Knot
Of them were there, that we might make quick Work,
And like Alexander, untie it with a Blow.

Com. I and a Wall round about 'em to keep
Them to the Slaughter; that we may not be
Troubled to kill a Thousand in a Thousand
Places. I like not this pursuing, it is
The greatest Evil, next to the being
Pursued; the Wine nere tastes well when it is so
Jumbl'd. Give me a Standing-Camp, that
Flourishes like a Peaceful City, and wants
No Necessaries. Here stand your Engines,
There Victual: on this hand a Palesado
Defends you, on the other a Barecado
Of Pork-tubs as impregnable: before
A Fose is cut of some two hundred paces,
And the Soldiers tippling in it, behind a Coop
Runs out of the same length, and the Poultrie
Tippling in their Trenches; whose bodies are
Too delicate and tender to bear travel.
Here a Man may, even among the Tents, forget
To be a Soldier.

Poly. Ha, ha, ha, On my
Conscience Comastes, thou art weary
Of the Camp already.

Com. Yes faith,
As your Selves are, if you would confess the truth.

Poly. Why, me thinks there is no Pleasure like the Soldiers,
Who takes his Swing in all Delights, and sates
Himself with 'em, as if he were near to
Taste 'em more; and if Fortune be so kind
To grant him a second and a third Fruition,
Like Friends, which parted in the Morn two Dangerous
And Hopeless ways of ever seeing, they Meet
With a Multiplied, and Unexpected Joy.
His very Wounds, are Pleasures, and Elysium
Comesfaster on him, than his Death. --

Com. When Honor is the Prize, and wronged Justice
The Cause that thrust him on, he throws off One,
That he may gain a Better Life, a Life
Of Fame, which is Eternal even in Death.
That he enjoyed before was Fading,
Sustained only by the Infirmities
Of One Weak Body, now it is supported
By the Memories of All, the Charge of it
Is committed unto a World of Men,
Nor is it Extinguished before the Frame of the
Whole Universe. None are so surviving
As the Sons of Glorious War. Jove gave
Life to Hercules and Theseus, but Mars
Eternity; they breathed from one, but gained
Heaven by the other. These were the great Thoughts,
Which when I was yet Young, and not able
To effect 'em, did dwell in me; they did
Suggest unto my soul, that I ought to raise my hand
Against the Gods, if they slept at Perjury,
And favored Injustice.

Poly. Holloe Comastes!
What Rapture's this?

Com. To show you how easy
A thing it is, to talk like a Soldier,
And be as brave a fellow as either of you.

Omnes. Ha, ha, ha.

Mean. Thou would make an excellent
Run-away-Souldier. Such a speech on the Highway,
Were greater Violence, than Bidding-stand,
A long staff would not get an Alms so soon.

Poly. What say thou now Comastes, to a jovial Round
Or two, beyond the Court-Healths? Those at the Kings
Own Table?

Com. I believe I shall say more
Than you at this, as well as at the Other.

Poly. Captain, command 'em to bring some Wine in.
Exit Captain. Come, in the mean time lets sit.

Enter to 'em one of the Guard that was present at the Kings Death. Guard. My
Lords, stand upon your Guard. The King's slain!

Omnes. The King!

They all start up upon the News, and draw their Swords. Poly. Thou look
distractedly, speak it again!

Guard. He Is slain! My self was present at his Death.

Poly. By what accursed Hand?

Guard. That Devil, that
Awhile since wounded the Prince, has Murdered him.
But my Lords, I lose the time, and Betray you
In it. The Prince is come into the Camp,
And commands you strait to repair to him.
He finds the Army wavering in their Faith,
The City Bands are already Revolted,
And others begin to draw off. The Kings death,
And a Declaration from the Enemy,
Pretending that a Son of the former King's
Preserved by Aratus, heads their Forces;
Has almost gained them a Victory. without
A drop of Blood.

Poly. Away, we stay too long,
Lead us where you left the Prince.
Exeunt Omnes. Enter Aratus. Never did Justice show her self so Eminent:
This was a Deed, as if her own Hand
Had wrought it! Who can complain the want of
Providence? Or say, the Guilty and the
Innocent make one Heap in Judgment, when
This is told? A Tyrant in the Amidst of
All his Strengths, guarded with Friends and Arms,
What ever Power or Policy could make him
Safe with, by a Single Hand strengthened with
Justice, was snatched from the amidst of all!
The Ligt'ning melts not the enclosed Gold
With half that wonder, leaving that Contains it!
Nor does the Plague, in a Multitude of Men,
Make a Choice so Curious.

Enter to him Cleander and Clearchus. Clean. My Lord, we may Sheath our Swords.
This Gallant Act of the Heroic and
The brave Pallantus, has not only
Removed a Tyrant, but, I may say,
Dissolved an Army, and Reduced a Kingdom.
The Praetor, in the Cities Name, offers
Allegiance. And diverse Bodies, both of Horse
And Foot, have left the Enemies Camp, and are
Come over to us. What can we attribute
To this Noble Deed, that in any measure
May reach the Greatness of it? We ought to
Acknowledge it the Compendium of all
Our Future Fortunes; and what over High
And Happy shall succeed to us, to be
The Consequents alone of this. A Benesit
Of that Universal Nature, that like
The Suns Influence, our Enemies feel
The Good of it as well as we.

Ara. Sir, you weigh
This Action as you ought. And while you can look
Thus Nobly on the Services are done you,
You Will make this Isle a Land of Heroes,
The Princes Eyes breed Virtues when they shine
Upon 'em; and what ever has been found
To be his Temper, quickly grows to be
The Genious of the People.

Clear. What thinks your Lordship,
If we drew out, and faced the Body of
The Enemy, that yet holds together?
And with Fear, or Forces, sought to dissolve'em?

Ara. My Lord, what can we return you for this
Gallant Forwardness? But the Force that now
Stands against us, will not be worth your Highness
Hazard, nor yet pains to face 'eur. A little
Shame, and Obligation to their Late Master,
Is all the Bond that holds 'em. And a few
Days, if not Hours, will scatter 'em, without
Our Swords. But this Message from the City,
Will require your Majesty's attendance
To it. Please you to hear what their Demands
Are to you.

Exeunt Omnes. Drums, and other noyses of an Assault. Pall. Within. Spare no
Opposition.
Break the Gates, add fire unto your Force.

Enter Rodia, and another Lady frighted in, Endora after them. Rodia. O Madam,
they break in upon us!

Eud. O my Father, when thou art slain I cannot
Fear what after does befall me! The same
That was their Cruelty to Thee, will to Me
be Pity.

A noise as if the doors were forced, Pallantus and other Soldiers break in.
Pall. Stand. No man advance to touch a Life,
Or do a further Violence. My Rage
Has blindly lead me on to Violate
A place no less Sacred than the Temples,
And rudely ere I looked about, has thrust me
On the Deity! So those that are led
To see some Glorious Sight, eager and longing,
Ask still as they pass, which is the way? and
How near? till they are engaged within its
Splendor, which opening suddenly upon them,
Makes 'em retire as fast again with Reverence!

Eud. What stays thee Monster? And makes thee pant thus
Ore the Prey? Here I stand ready, and do
Invite thy Fury; Come, and save my hand
A labor: if thou art Surfeited, I Will
Whet thy Appetite. The art a Murderer,
A Villain; these Name thee not; They are but
Diseases of the State, Thou the Death. The Law
Comprehends them within her Verge, thy Giant
Faults do so much O're-top Her, that Justice
Cannot reach thee, and if there were no Gods.
Thou then were Innocent, and would stand Safe,
Because thou art so Wicked. Thou have Killed
Thy King. O no, thou had no share in him!
He was a King of Men, thou a Beast, the
Foulest, and the bloudiest that ever preyd
On Innocence.

Pall. My Revenge, how false
Thy Beauty was.

Eud. How Monstrous thou appear'st!
Thou represents unto me all Ill,
I ever heard of!

Pall. And thou all that
I ever heard of Good!

Eud. Thou mov'st like so many
Living-Mischiefes! had the Priests beheld thee,
They might have Divined, all these Future Evils
So exactlie in thy Form, that what they told,
Would rather have seemed a Story, than
A Prophecy, and have saved us from thee.
Nature was never Guilty of such a Work,
Some Hellish-Power has given thee Birth, and Spirit,
And sent thee on the Earth to destroy all
That Is Fair and Holy.

Cap. Sir, raise your Spirits.
Can you endure such words as these? Soldiers on,
And make Her feel those Evils She has uttered.

Pall. Hold, hold, Thou Worse than she has Named! dare thou
Command, or move to such a Sacrilege?
If thy Sins were told thee from the Heavens,
Thou Would blaspheme the Voice that spoke to thee
Withdraw, thy Rage is too Unhollow'd for
This Place. Provoke me not with another
Offer. I shall not swollow your Bitterness,
Though gilded in the Name of Friendship.

Exeunt Captain and Soldiers. Eudo. What next intend'st thou? What Masterpiece
Of wickedness will thou glory in alone?
Know, thou can not Force me; here within thy
Reach I am as safe, as if an Army,
All resolute to death, divided us.
She shows a Dagger: This Hand, something weaker than a Woman's,
Can resist all thy strength, were it as great
In Mischief, as in Will.

Pall. Though I seem all
That you have Named, and Fouler yet, this is
A sin I dare not do. O think me not
Worse than you have said already, and then
I may again wash off my Stains. The Beasts
Are Noble, meek to Chastity, and humbly
Lick the feet of Majesty. Judge me not
By show, our Eyes deceive us, and as often
Persuade us to the Wrong, as do the Blind-
Man's feet; falsely do prompt us, All that is
White, is Innocent, and all that is Black, is
Sinful without exception. Should those
That look on you, be led so by the sense,
They must kneel down before you, and adore you
As some Deity, not being able
To fancy so much God, as they do see
In you! Such Forms their Powers have given you,
That you may become a Rival in their Worships.

Eudo. Why talk thou thus? Thy Tongue has no more power
Than has thy Hands.

Pall. Neither intend Violence
Would you could entertain of me one thought
Of Goodness, as hopeless as you think me,
I Would undertake to make it good, and Better't
Daily.

Eud. Why delay'st thou? What would thou have

Pall. Forgiveness, Love, I dare not say.

Eudo. Love!
Thy Thoughts are more Misshapen, than thy self.
In thy very Hopes thou art Cruel. This Base
Imagination has wronged me more,
Than all thy Actions: In those thou only
Sought'st the Ruin of Greatness, in this
The Ruin of my Name. A Rape were a Glory
To thy Affection, and though it had Lost,
It would have Got me Fame, the Honor of
A Ravished Virgin. Did thou Woe me with the
Highest Services, as thou come in my
Fathers Blood, I could Reward thee, but could
Never yield thee Love. I was too long
A Princess, and lost the name too Late,
To entertain so low a thought.

Pall. The World
Of Causes that part me, and Happyness!

Eud. Love is soft, and full of Courtesy,
A greater Opposite to Lust, than Hate.
The Flames thou feel'st, are more preposterous,
Than those which burn the Breasts of Satyrs, or
Of Beasts; which kill the Young, and in that blood
Enjoy the Dam. Think thou that any is
So bold in Lust, to imbrance the Fears thy Love
Brings with it?

Pall. My Youth, and Comeliness how
Are you obscured!

Eudo. My Miseries have put
A new Nature in me, changed that Calmness
I had wont enjoy, into the Looks, and
Language of a Fury. How ill does Rage
Become a Virgins breast? I will suppress it.
And if it must break forth, dissolve it into
Tears. An Age worn out in thought, cannot present
One Comfort to me, I am so Wretched.
Oh! My soul's more Earthy than my body,
This War that is within me, I hope will
Gain a Victory over my Life at last.

Pall. Accursed that I was to be the Author
Of so much Misery. Is there no way to restore
That Peace which you have lost? If there be any,
Despair not of it, though it be held within
The jaws of Death, I Will snatch it for you:
Though it were lost in the Darkest Mass of things,
My Love would distinguished in a Chaos:
If it have no Being, but what your Thought
Gives Life to, I Will Wish it for you, so strong
My Fancy is to serve you Let it be
Any thing to be done, I Will do it. Can I,
The wretched Cause removed; bring ease unto
You Sufferings? Here on my Knee I yield my Life,
Unto your taking: or if you had rather,
I Will offer't up my self.

Eudo. No, and yet
There is a way, and thou may do it.

Pall. Is there a way? O my joys! The Gods are
Merciful! Name it, name it to me.

Eudo. If thou will vow to do it presently.

Pall. Need I an Oath to confirm I would be
Happy? It Is my own Happyness, I thus
Eagerly pursue in yours. Every sigh
You give, does make me breathless; and every
Tear which you let fall, does bow me nearer
To the Earth, than all the years and Wounds that
I have suffered. Yet I will swear, By all things
Holy, all that I fear and reverence,
To refuse no Labors, Death, to gain your Ease,
And restore joy unto your Life again.

Eudo. Now thou can not, thy last words have rendered
Thee Unable. The Ease was Death, which yet
I beg from thee.

Pall. From what a Heaven of happyness
Am I fallen?

Eud. Assist me all my strength.
Ye Gods this way ye have ordained I should
Come to you: pardon that Fate then, which your selves
Did give me.

She makes an offer to stab her self. Rod. O my Lady!

Pall. Stay, O stay that hand!
Let that Goodness in you, which would spare Things
Fair and Holy, preserve the Fairest, and
The Holiest! The Angels would be proud to take
Such Shape upon them when they Visit Earth,
It Is such as Your self ought to look with Reverence on.

Eudor. There Is a Weapon hid within my Heart, which
None can take away: it wounds deeply now.
Death thou art a Lover, and do Court me mildly.
Ladies O my Lady: help, help. O my Lady!

She faints. Rod. Give her more air.

Pall. She Is gone, my time's no longer.
Our Lives were woven on the same Web, the
Destinies condemn' me to see her Death,
And then to follow.

He prepares to fall upon his Sword. Rod. She breaths, stand off.

Eud. My Brother, O my Father!

Rod. How do you Madam?

Eud. Too well, my strength returns to fast unto me.

Pall. Were my Soul fled, that Voice would call it back
Again, it self would return, and choose this
Paradise on Earth. I Will not disturb her
With my Longer stay. Fair One, if your Lady
Shall need any thing, you may have it with
A thought; No less respect shall wait on her,
Than if her Father still Ruled all. The Guard
Shall be at your Command, and attend only
For your Quiet, and your Safety.

Rod. Soldier
Thou Art Noble. The Gods reward thy goodness.
Exit Pallantus at one door, and Eudora led off by the Ladies at the other.
CHORUS. HE who Unjustly swayed the State,
Lives no where now but in their Hate,
There Is Nothing left of him but Shame,
Which both Preserves and Clouds his Name.
When Civill-Beasts fall, let it be
Called Slaughter, and not Victory.
When that He dies, that lived a Shade,
His Sleep's Continued then, not Made.
Arise thou Star of Honor here,
And in his Stead shine round our Sphere.
Grace thou the Throne, and let us see,
Thy Father once more Reign in thee.
We Will now in naught but Love Conspire,
And no breast burn but with True Fire.
While that such manners rule the Throne,
Live all by his, he by his Own.

[ACTUS 5. SCENA 1.]
Enter Eudora and Rodia. Eud. THis Quiet we enjoy, does strike Amazement
In me! Sure they have Slain the Body with
The Head, which makes this General Calm.

Rod. Madam,
It Is much more Innocent. And though that part
Of it we find, by particular Command
Be Ordered so; yet it is but an Image
Of the Universal Peace that Blesses
All the Isle. No Noise of Arms, Rapine of
Soldiers, Tumults, Slaughters, are seen in any
Place, but Security and Joy do reign,
As in a long and Settled Peace. The Conspirators
Having brought about their Great Design,
Desire to have it seen to all the World.
They Sought a Change, but not a Desolation.

Eud. Their Moderation is too Late; nor will
It satisfy the Gods, when they have spilt
So much Blood, that they will Spill no more.

Rod. O Madam, how far you wander, and are lost
In Error! and to all your other Miseries
Is added this, your Mistaking of the Ground
On which you Suffer: and whether with my Duty
It will stand, to inform you of the Right,
I know not: Yet while there is a Charity
In the Rudeness, I shall be bold to tell you,
This Last Alteration the State has suffer d,
This wresting of the Scepter from your Name,
Together with your Fathers Life; has not
Befallen through the Impious and black
Contrivance of a few bloody and ambitious
Lords, greedy to assume the Royal Ensigns
To themselves: but in the Name of Justice,
And the Owner, they have made this Seizure.
And there stands up a King, to Countenance,
And Justify the Fact; a King not known
Unto the Latter Age, a Son of Him
From whom, with the like violence, but more
Injustice (pardon what I say) your Father
Formerlie did tear the Diadem.
O Madam! Your Innocence, or Piety,
Or both, though you stood for many Years,
So Great a Person in the State, Kept you
From looking in this Mystery. And if
You doubt the truth of what I have said,
Or can suspect your Enemies Cause is pleaded
By me: ask of the most Zealous to your House
And Name, and you will find, I have not only
Declared a Verity, but restrained by Manners
And by Duty, concealed a Story of the horrid'st
Cruelty, that any Age or time can Parallel.

Eud. If this be true, our Sins are mightier
Than our Sufferings; and had we a greater Debt
Than Life, we ought to pay it. My Miseries
Are due to me, I was a Party, and
Enjoyed my Fathers Violence and Treason.

Rod. You are as Innocent, as at that Time
Your Age was; and only do offend, in these
Your Tears, and too much Sorrow, which on this
Occasion showed excessively, is not
To Grieve, but to Repine. The King was Old,
And taking his Latest Leave, and it is hard
To say, whether he were First oppressed with Years,
Or Vengeance. My Lord Time us, it is true,
Was Young; but waigeing so seaslesse and perverse
A War, against Virtue, and against Justice,
What wonder if at last he sunk in such
A Quarrel?

Eud. How ill these Words become thee
To speak, and me to hear'em? Think thou, the Shame
And Vices of our House, can bring a Comfort
To me?

Rod. I think their Shame and Vices, Madam,
Ought not to oppress your Innocence.

Eud. As the Glories, so the Dishonours of
A Family reflect upon the Rest
Of Kin.

Rod. It Is the Error of the Blind
Mistaking World, that places either, where
They are not deserved.

Eud. Can any shift off,
With Honor, from themselves the Sad Calamity
That O're-whelmes their House?

Rod. If that Calamity
Be the punishment of Particular Crimes,
To dote on the Calamity is to Allow
The Crimes.

Eud. None can be suspected to allow
A Crime, that punish even their Innocence,
For their Alliance to the Vicious.

Rod, Nor none can be admired for Justice more;
That punish Innocence on any Score.

Enter Lady to 'em. Lady. There Is one of the Adverse party, that seems
Of Note, desires admittance to your Highness.

Eud. See Rodia who it is.
Rodia goes out as to see, and returns again. Who is it?

Rod. Madam, I Know not! nor did I ever see
Any like him! His Grace and Form admit
No Parallel! He speaks like the Soldier
That first broke in upon us, but him
It cannot be, He was the Terror, This the Delight,
And Wonder of those that look upon him!

Eud. Whether will thy Unseemly Admiration
Carry thee? In Men Beauty's the Least Part.

Rod. Madam, it appears so in him! Yet where
Such Excellence of Form is seen, the Beauties
Of the Mind are seldom Common. He craves
Admittance to your Highness, and will not
Take it, before that it be granted.

Eud. Admit him. It will not become our State,
To deny Commands, much less when they Entreat.

Rodia goes out, and returns again with Pallantus richly habited. Pal. The
Kingdom owes a Sacrifice for your Life;
All will joy to hear of it: which had it falid,
Would have pulled more Guilt upon us, then the Sins
Of a whole Age.

Eud. It is my shame you tell me of,
And a great Share of my Grief that thus I stay
To Grieve.

Pal. My Offensive Tongue can utter
Nothing pleasing to you; so great are your
Misfortuues, and your Honor so tender
To you: Yet if my Blood could Cure the Wounds
I have given you, I would not stick to make
A Balsome with it.

Eud. Thou art not He
Which gave'em me.

Pal. If my Repentance can make
Me Clear, I am not. Otherwise it was I
Who blinded with the beauty of a Rash
Revenge, tore from you all your Joys, and with it,
Lost my Own.

Eud. Thou Art strangly Alterd
If thou be he!

Pal. Nothing so strangely
As my Hopes are. Which first appeared to me
In a shape most Heavenly, and told me
All should be as Blessed as their Form!
That if I would strike one Noble Blow,
I should remove the Numerous Wrongs and Evils
Of a Nation. But treacherously hid it
From my sight, that with the same stroke, I should
Produce One Evil, out-weighing all the rest
That I had Remedied.

Eud. Why do thou Color thus
Thy Cruelty with Outward show of Justice
And Compassion? Thou had no Cause for that
Which thou have done, The Wrongs were General
Thou Urgest so; and of a Public Nature,
And came not in the Compass of thy Private
Vengance; but that thou had a Hand was ever pressed
And ready to act a Cruelty.

Pal. Yet I had
A Cause, pardon me that I say so, and being
That I saw not You before I did it,
A Just One. I lost a Sovereign, as near
To me in Blood, as Love. And if this Cause
Seem Remote, I had a Father Murdered,
Whose Death it became me to Right with Vengeance,
As it becomes you to mourn ore yours with Tears.
My self the First Prince of all this Isle,
Was drove a Fugitive to other Countries,
My Wrongs and Innocence were my only Guilt.
Nor did my Persecutors here give ore,
They thought too Much was Left me in my Life;
So Poor at that time, so Orewhelmd with Miseries,
It Was hardly from a Death to be distinguished.
Their Injuries put a New One in me,
And blew the Spark unto a Flame, Consumd'em.
Look on this -- It may bring you Comfort,
He gives her the Letter he found at the beginning in the Villains pocket that
should have killed him. With making you Out-of-love with the Subject
Of your Grief.

Eud. Pallantus! are you Pallantus.

Pal. This is the first Day, I have dared to be so

Eud. And to all the Treason and Injustice named,
Here Is signd, Timeus! Could thou be so Cruel,
So foully Impious? Degenerate Brother!
This has made a Mercy of all that has
Befallen thee: Nay thou do deserve
To have thy Punishments Outlive thee;
To have this Blasting Character engraved upon
Thy Tomb to all Posterity. Here lies
The Bloody, Treacherous, and (to make thee
Monstrous, to have thy Age joynd to it)
The Young Timeus; that was subtle in
His Youth. What remains for me? That Happiness
The most Wretched do enjoy, is taken
From me, A Worthy Cause of Sorrow. Now
I can neither Live or Dye without a Stain.

Pal. Can you find yet a Resemblance but of Justice
Inmy Actions?

Eud. I Know not how to Answer you.
The Tongue that can defend such Impious Deeds,
Must be as Wicked as the Will that did
Commit'em. Had Equity poynted all
Your Actions out, given you Rules to work by,
Told you how much, how far you must have gone,
You could not have done more Justly. There wants
Not any thing to Crown your Judgment, but
My Death, the only Surviving Issue
Of that Sinful Race: I have a long time
Loathd my Life, and now I loath My Self too,
I find, I know not how, a Guiltiness
Possess me; my Fathers Crimes, flow like his Blood
Within me.

Pal. O say not so! Forbear at length
To profane the Divine Goodness that dwells
In you! It is a Sin, though You Your self
Commit it. Shall Self-Slaughter be held a Sin,
A Self-Slander not be Noted as a
Greater Crime? If the first be Murder,
So much the Soul's more Excellent than the Body,
That the Last must be held a Sacrilege; a kind of
Blaspheming of the Deity dwells in us.
Take heed, while you would rather Dye, than bear
A Stain, you pull not the Greatest on you
By avoiding it.

Eud. They that will preserve
A pure and Spotless Soul; must punish even
The least Affinity in themselves to Sin.

Pal. Be yet advised. They that too Nicely Create
Sin where it is not, Condemn their Innocence
When their Judgment's Faulty.

Eud. Why do you thus
Reward me Good for Evil? Why would you
VVith-hold me from Perishing Justly,
That sought to sink you in all your Innocence?
Could my Imprecations have drove you
To Destruction, I had had but the End
I aimd at.

Pal. You Are still a Judge too Cruel
To your Self. All those Imprecations
I deserved, as I then showed to you.
But do you Ask, Why I would save you from
Destruction? O you have set too High a Prize
Happiness in That your Question, unless
Your Bounty too would show the Way, that we
Might Hope to Effect it! How should I despise
The proudest Honors that attend the Sword,
In which Robbers and Ruffians may be Sharers
With me, to win a Glory so perfectly
Illustrious? And could I bestow
So Matchless and Divine a Benefit,
As Your Preservation, on the World,
People would style me God! And though from the Earth
I took my Being, with the Noblest of
The Ancient Heroes they would fix my Name in Heaven,
Invest me with Diadem of Stars,
And Robe of Immortallitie! And what is it,
That Obstructs this Blessing to the World and Me?
If I look upon your Innocence,
I read a Book, in which, not only a Few
Finite Years are writ, but see an Age
Drawn out to all Eternity. If on your
Loss of State; no Injury of the World,
No Shock of Fortune can diminish
A True Greatness, That which was your Own,
Is still On you; and sets you forth the Example
And Adoration, both of the Present
And the Future World. Is it then last,
Your Loss of Friends, or all these joined together,
That withholds this Blessing we would so Dearly
Purchase? What is there in your Condition,
That is not to be paralleld in Others?
Look upon my Misfortunes, and you shall find
A perfect Sceme of all your Saddest Evils.
I lost, as you have done, a Father, a King,
The Second Hopes unto a Crown, the Joys
And Glory which do wait on these: Nay more,
By you I lost them. Remember what your
Righ Hand, your Father, and your Brother, did
Take from me, what your Left, their Ministers,
And Servants. Learn then a Strength of me (that
Is the Worst Name for it) to bear a Change
Of Fortune: And pardon a Fathers Death;
Let the Innocence of Mine excuse my
Violence to yours. We are the Wretched'st Two
Alive, made so by Our Selves, and can be
Only Happy in Our Selves -- No Beam of Joy yet?
No breaking of a Raie of Comfort,
From these Clouds of Sadness? No Dancing
After this Long Night of Sorrow? Madam,
Yet look up! Though hitherto my Comforts
Have been Air, and unable to remove
The weight of Grief oppresses you, yet here is
One remaining, I dare pronounce, will prove Successful.
Vouchsafe to cast an Eye upon this Paper,
That bears the Characters of your Living
Brother, and other Friends.

He gives Her a Paper. Eud. It is not so!
It cannot, it must not be! Your Safeties
Will not Suffer this; if the Sword of War
Have spared him, That of Policy has Cut him off.
Forbear to Mock me thus, such Delusions
Drive my Sorrows to Distraction.

Pall. Madam,
He lives, and with him all the Rest, whose Names
Are there Subscribed; nor is there more than One
(Could you but pardon that) of any Note
Has lost a Life by these Late Troubles. Think not
I have mocked you with a Deceitful Show.
I know, to have given you Happiness,
As you imagine, had been Twice only
To have Snatched it from you. I shall say no more
To you, But Live as you find the Hopes true
I have promised you. And believe when I
Spoken this: my Life, my Honor, all that
I possess, and all that can be added
To me, are a Gage Short to that I have given you.
And till I present your Brother in Safety
To you, I Will never press to enjoy again
The Heaven of Looking on you.

Rod. Madam, clear
Exit Pallantus. Your Spirits yet at last from these Clouds
Of Discontent. Many Noble Comforts
Court you on every Side; make a Truce
With Your Sorrows, but till you see the Issue
Of Them.

Eud. I shall at least so far, as till
I have proved this One that is promised me.
Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Cleander, Hianthe, Clearchus, Aratus, Haimantus, Phronimus, and
Eurilochus; Shouts of the People as they Enter. People. Jove, Neptune, Apollo,
all the Powers
That favor Crete, preserve and bless the King.

Clean. Through the Happiness of my People. May
I know no other Joy or Bliss, but what
First passes you, the Middle-Way of Blessings
Between the Gods and Me.

People. The Gods preserve
Your Majesty.

Enter Pallantus, and Kneeles and kisses the Kings Hand, Pall. Sir, I humbly
crave your Pardon,
That thus tardily, after the People,
And your Enemies, I present my Duty
To you, and wish you Happiness.

King. I cannot
Be deceived, thou must be, th'Inimitable,
Matchless, not to be Counterfeited, or
Resembl'd, Great Pallantus! Whom as none;
Can Reach to in a Noble Action, so none
Can Equal in a Gallant Presence! Nor
Do I wonder to see the Change wrought in thee,
Thy Deed has thus Transformed thee, It sits upon
Thy Brow, and casts a Glory round about
Thy Face!

Ara. Me thinks till this Day, the Times had
Likewise a Vizor on, a Looked not with
A True Face before. Sir, you shall hourly see
New Graces, and New Glories break forth from him!

Pall. My Lord, you promise too Highly for me.

Ara. Thou look sadly after all thy Honors.

King. So my-thoughts! What can be the Cause? Can He
That has given a Nation Happiness, want it
Himself? Speak thy Discontent. If it lie not
In my own Power to Remedy, I Will Sacrifice
In thy behalf.

Pall. Sir, low as the Earth I bow
To you. But that which is my Grief, will be
No longer mine alone, than while I do
Conceal it; it is a Disease, that all Good Men
Will catch with the first Fancy, and Conceit.
Justice could never yet, with all her Care,
So carve out her Punishment, but that the Innocent
Were Wounded with the Stroke, and felt the Judgment
Of another Sin. While with her Sword,
She Cuts off the Offending Parent, the Child
Is made an Orphan in the Cradle, and mourns
In after days, the Crime he nere Committed.

Clean. Whither does this Sad beginning tend?

Pal. To this Sir. As we have slain (with all Religion)
A bloody Tyrant and Usurper; one
That was Greater in his Sins, than in the
Kingdom he purchas't by them: So too we have
Unjustly slain the Father of a Lady,
That knew not so much Guilt, as to satisfy her,
Why she lost him. And for want of his Life,
She now Contemns her Own, a Jewel
Of Jnestimable Value to all the World,
But to her self. Sir you cannot call Her
An Enemy, though her Goodness stood against You
So Many Years, and preserved her Father,
In despite of all his Sins. It became her
To withstand the greatest Piety what ere,
If it were an Enemy to her Own.

Hian. Her Cause of Grief is Mighty, and if Care
Be not taken, as their Faults have done the Rest,
Her Goodness will destroy her. We that beheld
The past Deformities, can bear Witness
Of her Virtues. She was the only Mine
Of Honor, and when we had been wearied
In seeking one Grain else where, in Her
We could find a Treasure. Nor was this a Beauty
In her, set off only with the Blemishes
Of Others, And Foiled by General Vices;
But it was a Real, and a Native Excellence,
Which as it could not be obscured by Thickest
Darkness, so neither could it be out-shined
By the most Radiant Brightness.

King. Her Grief
Concerns us all, and ought to be provided for
Before our Feasts and Triumphs. Return.
In our Name to Her, and tell Her, be the Advantages
Nere so Eminent we have received by 'em,
We truly Mourn, for whatever Losses, may be Called Hers,
Say too, in Person we had come to Comfort her,
But that we thought a Visit, in the Freshness
Of her Sufferings, too much Violence.
What ever there remains, that can bring a Joy
To Her, shall carefully be sought out,
And offered to her. Her Brother with many
Of her Friends are fled into the Fort,
And are there shut up -- Would I could give'em Life --
What say you my Lord? May I do this?
Will not Mercy in this place, be Madness?

Ara. Sir it will be so in no place. You may do this,
Or any thing you have a mind too.
Even in your Suddain'st, Uncousidered Thoughts,
There is a Secret Counsel, and Depth of VVisdome;
And seeing all your Actions, Nay, all your Pleasures
Are in some Exercise of Virtue; we
Will not cross you in'em, but make it
Our greater Care, to see you no time Suffer
By your Goodness, or that your Mercy prove
A Cruelty to Your self.

Clean. You have given me
Resolution. Haste then in the first place
Unto the Fort ('It Was their desire this Morning,
To have Conference with one of Note)
And if you finde'em fit for Mercy,
Or to be made fit, offer't to'em
Exeunt Omnes.
Enter at one door Polyander, Menetius, Comastes, and the Captain of the
Guard; Timeus to them at the other. Time. No Answer yet returned?

Poly. Not yet Sir.

Time. One look out again.

Polyander, I remember,
Exit Captain. I heard thee once say, when I condemnd thee
For thy smiles, That if there were a Cause, thou
Could Frown, Why look thou Sadly at this Time then?
Our Fortunes ought rather to stir our Indignation
Than our Grief.

Poly. Sir were they my Own Misfortunes
I were under, and not yours, the Heaviest
Pressures should not move a Passion in me,
Unless it were some Glory, but when I look
On you a Fellow-Sufferer with me,
Remember the State from which you are fallen,
Though in my Own Miseries I had a Heart
Of Flint and Rock, In yours I could desolv't
Into a Stream of Tears.

Cap. Sir there is now one arrived.
Enter Captain. Has certainly brought an Answer.

Time. Letus
Seat our selves before he Enters, that he
They all sit down about a Table that has a Cup of poison on it. May see on
what strength our Demands are made.
Every Man put on a Face of Mirth and
Resolution; and fancy to himself
He Is at a Banquet, that will refresh him,
After all his Toil -- Who's this? Do any
Enter Paliantus Of you Know him?

Poly. Not I my Lord!

Men. Nor I!

Time. Sir, You Are VVelcome But we Invite you only
To look on. The Liquor this Goblet holds,
Though it be Brisk, and of a Lu^ty Operation,
We cannot Commend so much for Purity,
Or help to Good Digestion. The Gods
Give not Life more Certain, than this gives Death,
Do you think you can behold the Drinking
Of it? Would Aratus himself were here,
That once he might be Glutted with
A Spectacle of Death! You look Pale on it is
Already. Fly Sir, while you may; for certainly
Your Enemies have a Plot upon you,
And sent you hither to take your Death in
By your Eyes. Had they none to send us,
To behold our Resolutions, but such a Trifle?

Pal. What Shape can I put on, and thou not Injure
Me in it? I never yet appeard to thee
In any Form, but Either I found thy Scorn
Or Hatred in it! At first I was thy Fear,
As all that were Innocent did Fright thee.
And because Thou were Guilty, I was Banished.
Not to remove me neither, but my Death.
Which standing firm against any Stroke of Law,
By Treachery thou would have reached it.
Am when by Miracle I escaped thy Plotted
Mischiefs, by Chance thou would have slain me
A Stranger, and Unknown to thee: My Disguise
VVrongd thee not, nor could thou pretend a Quarrel
To it, more than to him that in the remotest
India draws his breath --

Timeus starts from the Table, and draws his Sword, the rest do the like.
Time. I know thee now!
Thou need'st not further declare thy self!
And thou art Come past all my Wishes
To Satisfy my Regenge.

Pallantus Knocks, and a Guard rushes in. Pall. Hold, I came
To bring Peace, and not Destruction. Do you
Perceive yet how vain is all your Malice?

Time. If thou art that man thou would seem to be,
And Equally with Me do honor a Dead
Father; yet setting by these Seconds,
Let us Singlie try our Hatred. The Grant
Of This will please me more, then a Consession
Of all the Articles proposed by me.
I had rather see thee Dead, or by this Means,
Not see thee Live, then again be Master
Of the Fortunes I have Lost. I am unfit
For Life, And shall but curse the Givers of it.

Pall. If I thought so, I Would grant to your Request,
And Kill you; I could do it, I have Strength
And Justice enough to make me Able.
But you are not so Bad as you suppose.
These are Despairing, not Malicious Thoughts.
Yet ere I gooe (rest assured) one way or other
I Will give you Satisfaction, I came
For that Intent. Show me your Articles --
Here one gives him the Articles, which he seems to run over with his Eye, and
reads the last aloud. And last, That thus attended we may depart
The Isle, How poor are these Conditions!
Without more Commission I dare grant you
Better. Why these are demands within the Compass
Of a Subjects Asking. Be not Deceived,
You were not so Safe in your Own Reign,
As in your Enemies. The State is not
Translated from one Tyranny to another;
But a Prince governes now, which is a Name
Of Mercy as well as Power; which He truly Knows,
And in his first Deeds desires to show on you.
He does not think he is then like Jove, when he can
Thunder, but when he can shoure down Blessings
On a Nation: Not when he is the Voice
Of Death, but when he sits Harmless with the Power
Of Death about him. Revenge, Torments,
Executions, are not the Attributes
Of a King, but a Destruction. He Rivals not
The Immortal Powers in Temples, Statues,
Adoration; but in Transcendent Virtues,
Divine Performances; the Saving, Helping
Qualities, not the Stern, and Awefull,
Are the Steps, by which he Climbes above the Heads
Of The people, and appears a God on Earth.

Time. Why should I be a Stranger to these Virtues
More then this man? I was not born for Less Things
Then He! Certainly, when Nature made this Frame
She intended it for the Noblest purposes!

Pall. What do you yet Resolve, or Demand further?

He minds not what Pallantus says, but continues his meditation. Time. How my
Soul's Acquainted with these Excellent
Precepts, though it have been ever Kept
A Stranger to 'em! how it approves, consents,
Takes part with 'em at first hearing; even winding
And twisting with 'em, as if its Highest Good
Were in their Fellowship!

Pall. If you have no more
To Ask, or Hope for, hear what is Freely
Offered to you. Your Lives in the first place
Are granted you; In the next your Fortunes,
Honors (in a word) whatever with Justice
You can call yours. Why look you Wildlie at this Gift
Of Grace? It is no Wonder to the Giver
Of it, nor them which live about him, though
The Consequence may seem Dangerous.
'I were not worthy the High Name of his Virtue,
If either the Peril or Offense were Less.
And it is but a Mean Expression of his
Goodness, to say, His Enemies were Courted
To Live by him. But presently you will think,
This Offered Mercy is not to Save you,
But to Defer your Death. A Vain Thought.
When can it be done more Justly? Or more
Safely? You Are as far from those to Pity you,
As to Help you: None but Himself has any Care
Of you. It Is true, there is a Lady that had
A share in you, but Injuriously
You threw her off; nor can you claim an Interest,
When you have Neglected Her in all her Miseries:
Not in your Flight, your Articles, no not
In your Thoughts provided for Her. And had
She not fallen into the Hands of Enemies,
That were Servants too to Honor, You had
Thrown away a Jewel that had a First Esteem
Even among the Gods.

Time. O Sir, you have undermined
My pride, and removed me from that Advantage-Ground
I stood on, to my Own Low Pitch. These your
Last Words come Near unto me, and make me,
With Reverence, believe all that you have spoken.
Your Virtues before did only stir my Hate
And Envy; but this Deed has taught me Admire you.
Nor can I doubt, there is a want of any Honor,
When you have shown such Noble Care, in preserving
A Distressed Virgin, whom I durst not think of,
Least I should think too of Dishonor.

Pall. Sir, keep your Transportation to your self.
We do not think Our Selves such High Deservers,
In doing that which Barbarous People
Would have done. They which would have burnt the Temples,
Would have Knelt to Her; and what Duties their
Want of Faith denied unto the Altars,
So Visible an Image of the Deity
Would have called from 'em! Think you, we could desire
To save such Enemies as you, and not
Adore an Enemy of Her Virtues?

Time. Give me not Scorn, and Honor in the same breath.
You cannot so Nicelie, so Abstractedlie,
Confer a Benefit on the Unfortunate
Eudora, but it will Reflect on me.
Your Words besides, with a kind of God-like
Power, have removed, not only my Despaires
And troubles; but like Heavens Lightning, shot into
My Soul, has torn me from my self; burnt and
Consumed all that was Vicious and Corrupt
Within me. Be not then Unlike the Powers
You have yet resembl'd, to scorn the Person
That your Grace Converted.

Pall. All Virtues, crowned
With Happiness, flourish in Timeus.
I meet you to the fullest of your Wishes.
And believe, as my Body is now One
They embrace. With yours, my Soul is no less joined.
I perfectly Forgive, whatever you
Have done to me: Forget, what I have done
To You. Next, believe with This, I throw away
All Danger that does threaten you. In the last place,
He casts away the poison. Exeunt all but Comastes. Follow me whether I shall
Lead you.

Com. I breath, am warm, alive all over; feel, smell, hear (but when I look on
He points to the Cup that had the poison.
Thee, I thank God) I taste not. I see too, and more particularly, that it is
not Death, but a Dream of Death only that hangs on me; Some ill Vapors of the
Spleen, bred from Noise of War, hearing of Murders, Variety of Danger, and
no Feasting. The King, my bountiful and loving Master, was killed suddenly;
his Son deserted by the Army and the whole Kingdom, on the News, escaped
hardiie with his Life, a few friends and followers to this Fort: where, with as
much ado, we shut our Selves in, and our Enemies out; But Honor, a subtiler
and more pernicious Adversary than all the rest, shuffled it self into the
Hold with us, and has never ceased one minute since, in its Own Name, and the
Name of Honesty, of the Condition we have Lost, and the Disgraces we were to
expect, to present us with Halters, Daggers, Poison, any thing that might give
us (as she termed it) a Noble End. I must confess, I am not for these
Melancholy Things, my Ends have still lain otherwise. It Is true, I bear on me
the Dignity of a Lord. But how? As a Peddler does his pack, upon my Shoulders,
not in my Heart. And what is Honor at the best? But a bare Name only; and not
always so much to me: the Title was never given me Seriously, but by Rascals;
with my Fellow Peers (if I pleased 'em in the Feast) I was my Lord Comastes,
If not, Comastes-with-my-face-full-of-Sauce, and my Locks of Liquour, my hair
and beard dropping like a Wine Press, as if my being there were not to Drink
the Wine, but Make it. But again, I have a Lordship in Land to loose, as well
as Title. What then? shall I sell my Life for Dirt? My Soul for a few Acres?
I Will batter the World too for a Grave, and maintain't I make as Wise a Bargain.
But say this Land be taken from me, pray how came I by it? Was it the
Inheritance of my Noble Father, or the Purchase of my own Wit? Good
Yeoman-of-the-Bottles Sleep in peace; your Sons Being was from you, but his
Well-Being, and his Dignities, from his proper Virtues. Which as the
Philosopher wisely observes, in no fortune leave the Owner. And while the
Sciences of Eating, Drinking, Fooling, and the like, are held in Estimation, I
cannot want a Lordship. Farewell therefore all Dreams and Meditations of the
Other World, my Making was for this; your Elysium with Sweet Shades, and
purling Streams, does not one whit entice me, for when they have said all they
can, it is still to be Dead, to be there. And having happily broken from the
Company of my Noble Associates, I Will yoke no more with 'em, till I see what
becomes of their Magnanimities: but thus as I am, alone, with wary steps I Will
march unto the New Court; and do not Despair, though the King and State be
Changed, to continue still the same Man.

Exit Comastes.
Enter Pallantus, Timeus, Polyander, and Menetius. Pall. My Lord, I beseech you
attend here
Till I give notice of your Coming.

Pallantus goes out, and returns presently again, and holds up the Hanging for
Eudora, who with transportation meets her Brother, after whose first Encounter
Pallantus withdrawes. Eud. Oh! Is it Real, that my Arms embrace?
Or do they Idly thus infould a Shadow?
Liv'st thou Timeus? Or are we Dead together?
And on the Elizeum Banks enjoy this
Meeting. Say, and confirm me. For so lost
In Misery, so weakened and perturbed
With Grief are my best Faculties, that what
I do, and what I see, I Know not.

Time. Dearest Eudora, I excuse thy Weakness;
Nor is it a Wonder, if thy Softer Nature
Feel these Impressions of a Potent Sorrow;
When the like Passion disorders even
The Strongest of my Powers, and leaves me broken
With as great Distemper. O my Eudora,
Well may we rave of Shades below, and
An Hereafter-Being, when we have lately
Suffered such a Change, as to a Death
May well be Equaled. Turn, and cast thy Eye
Upon these Miserable Relics of our
Former Fortunes.

Eud. Yet we do Live, my Lords,
She turns to these that came with Timeus. If they do Live, that have a
Doubtful Death
Still hanging over 'em. But my Timeus,
I am overwhelmed with Griefs, they are parted to me
By an Unequal Hand: my Share of Common Losses
Is the same with Yours; and then my Private Troubles
Are no less than they. No sooner were the
Transports over I owed your Safety, but Like
The Pangs of Death these seized on my Soul.

Time. What can thy Goodness suffer, that is set beyond
The reach of all I can Imagine?

End. Which way shall I begin? I dare not speak
My Troubles; the beholding of thy present Evils,
Forbids the Office of my Tongue. O my
Timeus, thy Misfortunes are so great,
That they render thee something Sacred
To my Thoughts. And as with Religion
We Impale that Oak, which by Joves Thunder
Has been struck, to keep't hereafter from a
Prophaner Wrong: So Thou, by thy Misfortunes
Struck from Heaven, seem Consecrated and Exempted
From all Violation of a Mortal Tongue.
Yet look on This, and read thy Self, those Thoughts
I dare not utter. And though it show but One
Small Line of that Vast Sceme of Cruelty,
Designed or Acted by thee, it may serve
To bring the Rest into thy Mind. This Paper
Was found in the Villains Bosom, that should
Have done the horrid Act, by Him that should
Have suffered it.

Time. Eudora, though on a
Mind of Blood and Guilt, this Paper, and thy Words
Attending it, might rush with no less Horror,
Than that Thunder thou now spok'st of: Yet on me,
These Bolts and Flashes are like those Brute
And Idle Ones, which dash against Rocks and Mountains
Without harm. Know, that before these Wakenings
Came from Thee, all Heavens Artillery has been
Empti'd on my Soul; and those Celestial Fires
Have wholly purged, nay calcined, and burnt up
The Old Timeus. And what is seen remaining
Of his Substance, is of a Holier
And Diviner Nature; such as admits
No Commerce with a Sin, unless it be,
Like the Religious Magistrate, to Hate,
And Punish it. Such as dares look on all
His Vices past, nay, bear 'em purtrai'd, and
Blazen'd in his Banner, as the Enemies,
And Monsters, against which he is to wage
A Trucelesse-Warre for ever.

Eud. And when Timeus
Shall begin his Race of Virtue, who is there
To be found, that can Outstrip him, or bear up
A Pace that is Equal! O let me embrace
You again, my Brother! Twice Saved, twice Restored
Unto me; and much Dearer in the Last
Than First Gift of you. Before my Arms
Infolded but my Comfort, but now they
Contain, and hold their Wonder! And know Timeus,
These Virtues Heaven has sent thee, are in no Idle
Useless Season given thee, but bestowed
With as much Providence as Bounty; when
An Occasion Great and High Calls on 'em.
Say then, my Brave and Virtuous Brother,
Say, From thy New and Changed Soul within thee,
That Radiant, and yet Sparkling Virtue,
From Heaven so Late descended, What Course
Does Honor point forth unto our present
Fortunes. What does its Sacred Laws exact
And Command from us. Take thus from me the State
Ofour Condition. On the One Side, Our Lives
Are granted by our Enemies, and not
Only so, but we are Highly Courted
To accept 'em, have all the Flatteries
And Temptations, can make us Love them,
Even Obtruded on us. On the Other,
We have lost a Father, nay more, a Crown,
They say, Usurpt. This Mystery you better know
Than I. Yet still Consider (for 'twill no less
Concern our Honor to weigh this thing)
Whether a False and Usurpt Power (being still
The Sovereign and Highest) do not Create
Something of a True and Real Greatness
In the Persons that have borne it, which forbids'em
To Act a Second, and a Lower Part, on this
Worlds Stage. And if in this Scrutinie, the Verdict
Be cast against our Lives, Know it is not
In Our Enemies powers to give us that,
Which Duty, our Higher Master, Commands us
To throw from us; but either thou art Obliged
To show me the Way to Death; or it is expected,
That thou Learn it from me.

Time. O Eudora,
Thou Wonder of Virtue, thou Miracle
Of Honor! How sordid Low, how despicablie
Poor is all the World beside thee! What Noble
Heights thy Soul does mount to, no less above
The Following, than President of others!
And shall I presume to Judge those Daz'ling-Flights,
Which no Eye less Heavenly than thine Own
Can reach to? Shall Timeus? A Trewant?
A Novice in the School of Virtue?
A Proficient but of Yesterday? No.
Eudora, pronounce boldly what thy Soul
Shall dictate, as to an Oracle I will submit,
But never teach thy Virtue. If the Question
Thou have put be Hard, I dare not speak in it,
It Is Eudoras Life: if it be Easy,
'Twas yet her finding, and poorlie I will not
Rob her of the Glory.

Eud. Alas, alas,
How far I am mistaken! Thou giv'st me Glory,
And I need thy Pity. Thus Children have a Sword
Put in their Hand, when both their Hand and Sword
Need holding by another. If I had
Vanity to take unto my Self the Powers
Thou speak of; yet at this time,
Like a Physician that is himself Distempered,
My Learning and Experience serve me Nothing.
No Timeus, my Reason's darkened,
The Clouds of Discontent obscure my soul,
And in the Mazes of a troubled Mind
I wander without a Cleu to guide me.
Death with his Horrors, and Dismay laid-by,
Dressed in a Form bewitching, and Uncommon,
And waited on by Crowds of Sweets, and Pleasures,
(As if with Love again he had changed his Arrows)
Most powerfully Charms and calls me to Him!
One while presents before me, the Famed Examples
Of the Roman Fortitude, the exalted
Glories of those Ancient Worthies, that preferred
A Noble Death, before a Life of Pleasure,
And of Shame. And then pursues this Theme
Of Shame, though all those steps of low Contempt;
And Scorn, I opened to you at the first,
Or the Worlds Censure can be thought to blast
The Gallant by. Life on the Other side,
With a Deportment Sad, and Face Austere,
Without all dress, or show of Blandishment,
But with a kind of Aweful, and Divine
Authority, forbids me hear the Allurements
Sung by Death; tells me, though the Notes be Sweet,
They Are most Pernicious, and that a Syrene
Sings 'em; that the Worlds Opinions, as her
Pleasures, are False and Impious, and by
The Virtuous both should be contemned, Opinions
In Truth, and not in Number, take their Weight.
Now well I understand, when Both have Pleaded thus,
It Is neither Life, nor Death, the Noble should
Desire, but Duty. The One, and Other,
Ought to be held Indifferent: and this Third
Alone with Passion be pursued. But now
In which of these two Our Present Duty lies,
There stands the Scruple I am troubled with,
There stands the Doubt I would have Solved. For when
I dare meet Death in any Form, I would not
Have it said Eudora forfeited the Belief,
Of having a Diviner soul, while through Fear,
Like a Plant or Vegetable, she clove
To a Being on this Earth. Nor yet, when
I have Greatness enough to look on Life,
In the most Frowning and Unpleasing Aspect,
That unequal to my Miseries, Out-fac'd
With Troubles, I poorly fled my Station
In this World, and Crept into the Calm of Death
To seek my Peace. Like Boasters thus playing
The Coward under a Masque of Valor.

Time. Eudora, this part of your Philosophy,
That Life and Death ought neither to be Considered,
But as they may Conduce unto our Virtue,
None more firmly does embrace than I.
Nor in the Days my Soul was tainted with
The Blackest Crimes, was an Unmanly Fear,
Ere part of that my Guilt. And yet Eudora,
I must say, I see no reason, more than
The Scruple, the Ruputation of thy Question
Put into me, why the Prolonging of
Our Lives should be Dishonorable to
Either of Us. And if it be Duty that calls us
To our Death, it will not be hard to show
Where that Duty is set down. If the Worlds
Opinion only, what that Opinion is,
Thou have already spoken. Thy words import
Beside, that the Discontented, Passionate,
Vainglorious, obtain not, by their Contempt
Of Life, the Honors of a Noble Death:
But Those alone, who have no Other Way,
To save their Virtue. So that, 'twas not Rome'^
Cato, or her Portia which deserved this Crown;
But her Curtius,, her Regulus, her Decius.
And if any do Object, that the first
Of these, were also Highly Virtuous,
I readily confess it: but all that
The Virtuous do, is not always Virtuous.
This is an Immunity of the Gods,
And not of Good-Men. And though One Comm on
Glory belonged unto the Lives of Both
Of these, the Glory of their Deaths was far
Unequal. The One sought Themselves, the Other
Sought their Duty To bring all this home to Thee
Eudora, Remember that thy Virtue's
Courted, thy Honor's safe, no way Assaulted.
But adored. And then for Thee to think of Death,
Is Idle, Vain, or Scrupulous; Error,
And not Virtue; Superstition, and not
Enter Pallantus. Duty, nay worse, it is Dire and Impious;
Something that might Suit perhaps, with the Foul Deeds
Of Timeus former Life, but not with
The Fairer Actions of Eudora.

Pall. How like a Sky troubled with Clouds and Meteors,
That Heavenly face appears! The most Propicious
Aspects from on High, shine on their present
Councels. I fear some Deadly Maxim governs,
And guides their Consultation.

Eud. Timeus,
This is the Time allowed us to work out
To Our selves, an Everlasting Honor.
If we let-slip the Opportunity,
We Are lost unto a Noble Name for ever.

Time. Eudora, there is little danger of an Error,
Or Omission there, where neither Will,
Nor want of Care betrayed the Business held
In Consultation.

Eud. For should we think
To Reassume again hereafter, our
Councell's now laid-by; Our Neglect at present,
Would not be looked on as an Error, but
A most Wretched Poorness; and our best Pretenses
Be judged a pitiful afflicted Folly.

Time. There is but one Particular I know
Can hinder, in Eudora, the Choice of Life,
From being just, and truly Honorable.

Eud. There spoke my Noble Brother! That, that particular
Timeus! That Particular is Undoubtedly
The thing we have so long been searching for,
And never found till now.

Time. It Is this Eudorn,
That thou be well persuaded and assured,
Of what thou put'st in Act: for the most Just
And Lawful Action performed with Doubting,
Becomes Unlawful.

Eud. Timeus, I thank you,
For your Reproof; I shall believe it seasonably
Given me. It has awaked me, and no longer
Will I hover in a Doubtful Mind; It Is true,
This sense you have delivered, coming to me
From another Hand, I held suspected;
Thought it not safe, too hastily to Credit it,
From you: But seeing you do not only Affirm,
But Abide and stand in this your Sentence:
I likewise as an Undoubted Truth, will
Accept, and rest upon it. -- Say now Timeus,
Do you know yond Person, that did Conduct you
To this place?

Time. Know him, Eudora! Yes,
When he wandered in Remotest Nations,
My Fears held Intelligence on his Motions;
When first he set his Foot within this Land,
My Spirit, by a kind of Antipathy,
Did feel it. In his Disguise I knew him.
There is no Place, or Shape he can be Hid in,
But my Soul would find him. He was the Meteor first,
That hung with Direful Threats ore my Impiety.
But since the Auspicious Star, that lead me,
Both to Honor, and to Life. It Is the Valiant,
Virtuous, and Heroic Prince Pallantus!

Eud. My Obligations are no less to him,
Than yours. Too long we do neglect him,
And having once resolved to accept of Life,
We ought to acknowledge it to Him that
Gave it us. Let us join our Thanks together.

Here they both go to Pallantus, who sees them not, till Eudora begins to
speak, but then as one surprised he turns to them. Eud. My Lord -- we come to
acknowledge our Lives,
To have been your Gift, and in no Common way
Bestowed upon us. Mercy must be allowed
A share in the Act; but had not your Honor,
And Prudence, wrought more Effectually,
The Other Virtue had been Useless to us.
As you are the Greatest, Bravest, most Glorious
Person of this your Age; may you be likewise seen,
The most Fortunate, and most Happy.

Pall. Eudora, like the Gods, when she Says happiness,
She Gives it. But what thanks shall I, and all
The World with me, return for the Unvaluable
Benefit, she acknowledges Received,
Enter Rodia. But is indeed Conferred on us, The Conservation
Of her Life?

Rod. Madam, the King's hard by,
Coming, as it is said, with an intent
To visit you.

Eud. The King!

Pall. It Is true Madam.
I had it in command from him, to say,
He was a Suter to you, to admit
A Visit from him;

Eud. What will you do, Timeus,
With your self!

Time. Not willingly meet him
At this time.

Pall. My Lord, you need not, you may
Withdraw. I believe too, a fitter time
Exeunt Timeus, Poly. Menetius. May be found to present you to him.

Enter Cleander, Clearchus, leading Hianthe, Melissa, Aratus, Haimantus,
Phronimus, and Eurylochus. Clean. Madam, fall not so low; too much already
Euroda offers to kneel. We have Dejected you, and gladly would
Descend our selves, to raise you Higher.
Yet look on that Majesty the Gods have
Enthroned in you, your Matchless Virtues,
And Divine Perfections, and you will see
Not only there is none Above you, but none
Can be found your Peers. Our Visit, is in wish
To Comfort you; and we hope, while our Highest
Vows are such, you will not scorn the Offer,
Though from your Enemies; your Enemies,
By Fate, and Fortune Madam; by Design,
And Will, your vowed and perfect Servants.

Eud. O Sir,.
Permit me to throw my self before your Feet!
It is not fit I stand an equal Height,
With Majesty and Virtue, so much Above me.
What hateful Name, and by the World abhorred,
Is due to me, when you have called to Your self
An Enemy? If you are One, it is to
Your own security, in preferring thus
Your Mercy, before your Peace. You Have given me,
And my Brother Life, to bring your own in danger,
And Removed our Grief, which may hereafter
Cause it to your self. Sir, think me Unworthy,
But not a Scorner, of these Favors. I know
To weigh both my Losses, and Obligations
To you.

Clean. If you will make us happy,
To partake hereafter our Joys with us,
With you we will observe your Days of Mourning.
Count all your losses Ours; with most Obsequious Rites
Adorn the Dead; remember, and lament him,
As a common Parent.

Hian. None, Madam,
With so high a Confidence, can wish you
Comfort, as my self; who in so long, and sad
A Night of sorrow, knew none, but what you gave me.
Be Favorable still to me, and grant me
A time to pay 'em back; be favorable
To the Age in the same Grant; your Name will bless
Its Annals, while it has leave to boast,
Not only its own Virtues, but all the former Years
Could justly Glory in.

Clear. Fame, thou spok'st loudly
Of these Ladies, and yet thy Voice was narrow
In their praise.

Enter Comastes creeping behind the backs of the Company, who severally make
their Addresses to Eudora. Com. I have Past hitherto,
And perceive no great Alteration.
I thought the subversion of a State,
Would have changed the form of the Houses, and the Streets.
It has not shifted a suit of Hangings here.
Yonder Is our princess too; I am among Friends.
Now Fortune direct me, which is the King --
The Least-Change that e,er I saw. Nay, then
I perceive, I may even do what I list.

Ara. My Lord Comastes! Faith this was kindly done,
To make the King a Visit.

Com. Your servant
My Lord. I hope you have forgot the little
Unkindness, which past betwixt Your Lordship,
And my self, and will speak a Noble Word
In my behalf unto the King.

Ara. Ha, ha, ha,
Would thou be Fool again?

Com. No my Lord,
You know I was never called so in the Last Reign.

Ara. Ha, ha, ha, Why I tell thee, the King's too serious.
He never Laughs, nor Smiles, but very seldom,
And then it is still in Approbation,
Of something Excellent. He hates a Jest. Look,
Twice h'as cast his Eye upon thee, and yet
Keeps his Countenance: Despair of ever Pleasing him,
There Is no Buffoonrie can come from thee,
So Ridiculous, as thy present Misery.

Clean. My Lord -- Who Is that?

Ara. One Sir that was Master
Of the Dead King's Mirth, he never laughed without
His Allowance. It Was in's Power to have jested
The best Head off in the Kingdom: Yet I think
He was guilty of no worse Crime, than Lunary.

Clean. What does he expect?

Ara. To hold the same place
Under you.

Clear. Sir, we understand you,
And your Desires. Go, leave the Court; be not
Seen in it after this day, upon your Life.
And look warily to your Actions,
If you shall deserve the Lightest Punishment,
The Heaviest shall fall on you.

Ara. Stay my Lord --
Sir, you have Doomed him, as if you had been Witness
Of his Follies, and were there not hopes he might
Redeem the Life he has so ill spent,
A weightier judgment were deserved by him.
Sir, I beseech you let me entreat for him,
He Is yet Young, and if he have Leave, may be
Virtuous Continue Sir, as you have begun,
To Change the Men, and not Destroy 'em.
He thrust himself with confidence on your Mercy,'
Let it not be said, that that was a Snare to any.
Besides, Sir, you have made this Place a Sanctuary,
To All that can claim an Interest
In that Excellent Lady.

Clean. My Lord, I would
Be ever taught thus by you. Sir, I recall
What I have said, and wish to see those Virtues,
We hope in you,

Com. I Will not despair Sir,
To be Master of 'em, 'Twas the desire
Of Favor with my King, that made me what
I was before, and shame now to Remember.
But seeing I am to please another way,
And make Virtue my Endeavor, Unwearied
In those Rougher Ways I Will toil to gain your Smiles.

He kisses the Kings hand: Clean. My Lord, having weighed the Necessity
Of your Voyage, I shall not with unseasonable
Complements importune your stay, but rather
Give my best Assistance both to make it
Prosperous, and your Return more speedy.
We have ordered a Fleet, my Lord, to attend
On your Designs, not so much inferior
In Number of Men and Vessels to your own.

Clear Sir, too profusely you bestow these large
Benefits upon me, without naming all
Conditions, or share of Venture with me.

Clean. Conditions, my Lord? Hereafter Ages,
That have forgot our Obligations,
May make Articles between our Nations,
But ours must never know any; we cannot
Be Losers by you, from whom we have received
All that we possess.

Pall. My Lord, I am
An humble Suitor (if I may obtain
His Majesty's leave) to be allowed a place
In this your Voyage. The Kingdom sends forth none
More useless to it, than my self; none that
With more reason seeks the Tumults of a War,
To cure the Troubles of an unquiet Mind.

Clean. My Lord, you hold the palm out to me,
In this offer of your Company. Victory,
I know, will follow, which way so ever you
Turn you. I shall be proud to serve my self
Under so Brave a Conduct.

Clean. This Accession
Likewise, my Lord, I shall be willing to grant
Unto your Voyage; but still that your Return
May be more Speedy. Yet I hope we have
A Gage in this Lady more powerful than
All Others, One that will put an Edge unto
Your Sword, and Sails unto you Vessels.

Clear. Sir, in Her Name alone I do pursue
This Voyage, and in Her Name alone,
Shall hope a prosperous and speedy Issue.

Pall. Madam, though a Hard Fate, or Fortune no less
Cruel, has set me for ever at a Hated
Distance to you. Yet another power,
No whit Inferior to the Former, Commands me,
To direct all my Actions to your Service.
And however Unaccepted, nay Unknown,
To you, I pay these Devotions, yet
Constantly to pay them still. In Obedience
To this Power I have engaged my self unto
This present Voyage; an Undertaking
To me, without Design, without all Fruit:
But either, as I hope, by some Famed Action
To add a Glory more unto your Name,
Or by my Seasonable Destruction,
For ever to remove a Hated Object
From your Sight.

Eud. My Lord, while you strive to confer
More Glory on me than I dare Assume,
You take some from me, which I may justly Claim;
And Blast my Honor, while you seek to Raise it.
Wrongfullie you Charge both my Innocence
And Clearness, when you say, I Hate you,
Or can be pleased with your Destruction.
I have already Acknowledged the Highest
Benefits received from you, offered my Vows to Heaven
In your behalf: and though, when these are once paid,
They do not there take End: Yet to repeat them
Often unto Your Self, would ill become
Eudoras tongue, and less the greatness of
Pallantus Ears. But if what is alredie past
Be too little to assure you, your Ruine's
No Part of my desires, by this Double Suit
I shall seek to confirm you further. First,
That you will be pleased to take my Brother
This Voyage with you. And let this persuade you,
I seek not your Destruction. Next, that you will
Obtain me leave to retire from Court, to pay
That Debt ofteares in quiet, I have so long
Owed unto the Dead. And this no less ought
To assure you, I cannot Hate that person,
By whom I seek so far to be Disposed of.

Pall. Madam, you have given me a Happiness,
Which neither Envy, Malice, nor the worst
Of Fortune can take from me.
You have set me the Only man above
The Stroke of Fate. Whatever you desire,
After your Own manner, and in your own Time,
Will be permitted to you; and you may command
Not only for your self, but in the behalf
Of Others. And may, I hope, after these Days
Of Mourning are expired, to see again
That Joy return into your Face, which I
Was never yet so blessed as to behold?
And shall in that Day a Servants Humblest Suit
Take place; which now his High Respects forbid him,
Even to Name to you?

Eud. Now first, My Lord,
I have seen a Weakness in you; but yet
I shall thus far Remember you. That the
Gallant Ask not their Fortunes, but they Make 'em.
A more Direct Answer I must not give you.
And if it appear hard to you, that I refuse
To Prophecy in that, I may seem so well
To Know my Resolutions; ask the same Question
Of those that have been held the most Allowable,
And wise Diviners in your present Case,
Your Virtue, Honor, Obligations to me;
And hear what they will say. Perhaps they will Doubt,
Or Hide their Skill; if they do, Excuse a Virgins
Silence, when such bolder Oracles make no Reply.

Pall. Madam, let me kiss your hand -- I beg your pardon.
No further shall I provoke you with my
Disordered Passion, though I know, nothing
But my Wonder can be increased by your
Replies. Your Wisdom, Honor, Beauty,
All Incomparable, shall be the Incitements
Of my Actions unto Glory, in hope
They may hereafter prove their Crown and Ornament.
In the mean time I shall seek to know no other thing
But this, How most Worthily I may approve
My Self your Servant.

Clean. And Madam
Cleander when he speaks, takes Eudora in one hand, and Pallantus in the other.
If favourablie you shall admit him
In that quality, we All will glory
To wear the same Title. And think not, that
A Single Person Courts you, but in a
Single Person, the Interest of the Kingdom.
Even thus Divided I acknowledge Ye Both
To be the Chiefest Glory of your Country,
But when Ye shall be joined Yee'l add yet more
Unto her Happiness, and be no less
Her Peace, and her Security. But I
Anticipate the Blessings of another Day,
When my Duty commands me to give thanks
For those I have received on this. And hitherto
Our Kingdom, has been like the Kingdom of
The Gods, Felicity has succeeded
To Felicity, and Joys have Crowned Joys.
And should this Day Conclude what it has Begun,
I have yet reigned a Perfect Reign; having
Beheld in Few Hours, the Strange and Various
Changes of an Age.
Exeunt Omnes. This Play being Designed for an etertainment of the King and
Queen at York-House, at the Nuptials of the Lady Mary Villers, and the Lord
Charles Herbert, had Scenes fitted to evety Passage of it throughout, and the
last in this place was a Funeral Pile, bearing on the top the body of the Dead
Tyrant, and set out with all the Pomp the Ancients used in those Ceremonies.
This Seen consisted only of Music and show; on the one side of the Pile
stands a Consort of Musicians, representing the Priests of the Land, and on the
other side of it another, representing the People.
People. Sacred Peans to Mars sing,
Notes of Triumph, not of Woe,
Hence your Ewe and Cipresse fling,
Who adornes a Trophy so?
These are the Spoils of our Great Enemy,
Hang Garlands on them of the Laurel Tree.

1. Priest. Hence impure and bloody Voice,
Far be from our Mysteries,
Bidentals are Joves proper Choice,
Holier than the Sacrifice,
Each Unskilful Hand and Rude,
At his Alter dares obtrude.
Here all the Principal Persons of the Play enter in Mourning.
2. Priest. Touch not then with Lips profane,
What Heavens Fire has purified,
Tears have washed away his Stain,
His Black Deeds his Blood has died.
He for his Sins has paid, with Death and Sorrow,
His Credit's more that Pays, than does not Borrow.
Chor. He for his Sins has paid, with Death and Sorrow.
His Credit's more, etc.

People. Yet still you must allow a Fault.
And that by Death his Body ought
To Expiate Offenses Higher,
Then purge if Sulphur, Salt, and Fire.
Least your too partial Favor this way bent,
Excuse the Ill, and Blame the Innocent.
Chor. Least your too partial Favor this way bent,
Excuse the Ill, etc.
About the middle of the last Stanzo, Timeus puts a lighted Torch to the
bottom of the Pile which gives fire to some Perfumes laid there on purpose;
the which wraps the Pile in smoke, and smells ore all the Room. At the End of
the Song the Curtain falls, and shuts both the Scene and Actors from the
Beholders Sight.


FINIS.
(...) Midnight and Daily THOUGHTS
To a careless Sinner.
THou do not, sure, believe that thou shall die,
Or never think upon it seriously;
Because thou liv'st as if thou did disdain,
After this life, ever to rise again:
Else thou would set a higher price upon
The Glories of thy Resurrection:
For it is not possible a Man of sense
Can always hold so ill intelligence
With Heaven, as not to wish, or not to fear,
He never may, or never would come there.
Some Caveats.
WHen petty Pleasures are procured with Gold,
When youth is gone, and we decrpeid old,
There Is no more Gusto than a Tale twice told.
The greatest Monarchs, while they flourished,
Were honored and adored; but being dead,
Were soon forgot, and only pitied.
So that whatever Marble Tombs pretend,
All their gay glories never can defend
Their pampered bodies from the Beggar's end.
Caesar and Alexander both became
The highest splendour of a glorious Name;
And yet in some things both deserved blame.
So that when Men have all the World subdued,
They may themselves, and all their Fame delude,
Unless they do in Piety conclude.
Those mighty Hero's cared not to be good,
(But brave) because they never understood
The sacred Sanction of our Savior's Blood.
But those who saw the Miracles he did,
And heard how boldly he their Crimes forbid,
Are justly scourged, instead of being chid.
What Is our due then, who do believe, yet run
The course which that accursed Crew begun,
To slight God, and re-crucifie his Son?
Which shows Men want some Caveats to restrain
The idle Fancies of a busy Brain,
That frequent losses bring, instead of gain.
These serious Thoughts are Caveats to despise
Such Crimes, as from our idle hours may rise,
And captivate our Senses in disguise.
Till by a power divine we can obtain
Such bright, serener joys, as will sustain
Our Souls, and to eternity remain.
For we are born to learn, and to express,
By daily actions, what we do profess
To purchase everlasting happiness.
On Poverty.
PUre honest Poverty in former times,
Was no disgrace; but now our latter Crimes
Have introduced new kinds of punishments,
To expiate our sins, for old Contempts
In luxury, and such profuse expense,
That we are now chastised for that offense,
With Penury, to make us own our shame,
And free all present accidents from blame:
Which from God's mercy now to us is sent,
To make our most obdurate hearts repent.
And yet there may such poverty proceed
From wicked Men, whose malice have decreed
Our ruin, to get wealth for their support,
In spite of right, or their damnation for it.
And such absurd, base scandals do invent,
That no man's innocence can ever prevent.
From such Devils, good Lord, deliver me,
As hate all those, who truly worship thee;
And with profound repentance do submit
To all the judgments that our God thinks fit;
And make the poverty I now endure,
For all excesses past a perfect cure.
On Pride.
OF all the Vanities I know, it is Pride,
Which all the World most justly may deride,
That like an Ass, with golden Trappings dressed,
Thinks himself 'bove all other Beasts the best;
And when he brays, does all that hear him fright,
Mistaking their amazement for delight;
Like gilded Fools, that only learn of late
To strut, and make loud noise when they do prate;
For Pride did never the greatest man adorn,
Nor free him from God's hate, and wise Men's scorn.
Satan for Pride, and for Ambition fell,
With his accursed Crew, from Heaven to Hell.
On Pride's Kindred.
PRide's next of kin, are such as do despise
Their Neighbors, for the Motes in their dark Eyes;
Who first their own Beams should remove, then learn:
That Rule, by which they may such Motes discern,
And by this caution constantly prevent
Such rash Censures, that do raise discontent
Between good Friends, who seldom will endure
A blind Man's Precepts, till himself he cure.
September. 3. 1693. On this Day's Sacrament received.
LORD,
I Did believe, but not such joy conceive
As since I did thy Sacrament receive,
To ratify thy mercy, and my zeal,
By adding of thy Holy Spirit's Seal
Upon my heart, to manifest thy love,
And all my doubts and fears by faith remove,
Which made me shrink from death; but now my voice
Shall Hallelujah's sing, and Soul rejoice,
To celebrate this Victory obtained
Over all my sins, by thy blessed Conduct gained.
How great then is my Obligation grown,
If thou will this day my Election own,
By adding joys on joys, and grace on grace,
Till I in glory come to see thy face!
And now adore and worship thy great Name,
With warm addresses from this sacred flame.
On Adoption.
I Have read, that he who lives in a constant, uniform Obedience to the Gospel,
and performs the Conditions required in it, departs sincerely from iniquity,
and shuts up the ways that lead him into temptation, may give himself as strong
and comfortable an assurance, that he is an adopted Child of God, as if a voice
from the Clouds should tell him so; and is a good argument for frequent
Meditations.

How to know when our Sins are forgiven.
IT has been asked, How a Soul may know when her Sins are forgiven? and
answered thus: When she finds the same affection to God, with his that said, I
hate iniquity, and all false ways I utterly abhor. Yet David, who said so, did
die, and so must we. Though our Souls may, by the same grace, become of the same
temper with his, and our sins be forgiven too; yet we may consider how few Men
do slip out of this World into eternity, with a joyful hearty delight to be
with God (through divine Love) which is the highest perfection of an holy life;
and is our greatest assurance to manifest our sins forgiven, when our Souls are
by faith so fixed on God, as to know no joy so great as such spiritual Comforts
do raise, when we desire to be in Heaven; which taught David to hate iniquity,
and to abhor all false ways; and so reduced him from all his sins, to become a
man after God's own Heart.

On Reconciliation before we die.
IF we fully consider our manifold sins, and the horrid Punishment due unto us
for them, if not forgiven before we die, 'twill make us tremble at the approach
of Death. But if we do believe in Christ's plenteous Redemption, with GOD's
immense Mercy to deliver us from Hell's eternal Torments, and exalt us unto
Heaven's eternal Joy and Glory; it may be justly said, Happy is that Man who
can obtain such a Reconciliation with GOD before he die (as daily to delight in
the Meditation of a sudden Death, with inward assurance of his eternal Bliss
the moment he expires) which is the highest Exaltation of Joy on Earth, and
will be the greatest Comfort at the hour of Death; and ought to be the chief
Business of all Men to live and die so, who do march every moment, from our
Cradles, dying, toward our Graves.

On Heavenly Joy.
Whatever we do on Earth, we all pretend
Heaven is our Home, Heaven is our Journey's end.
That Is true Seraphick Joy, when we do find
Such elevated Bliss, as fills the Mind
With high transports of God's celestial Throne,
And all our meaner Objects we disown:
Yet sometimes spoil our blessed angelick rest,
To roll on Roses, when on Thorns is best,
Vainly thinking some diviner Grace
May smooth afflictions with a smiling face;
When sighs and tears (if they come not too late)
More surely can our heavenly Joys create.
When God observes our Zeal to do our best
To please, we shall assuredly be blessed;
And may expect to find more Penitents
Encircling of God's Throne, than Innocents:
Which shows sincere Repentance surely can,
With a fixed Faith, restore relapsed Man.
Thus may our high-rais'd, warm addresses prove
Bright Ecstasies of the divinest Love.
Then will our Souls from dross be clean refined,
And by our sacred Chemist be calcined,
Fit for a Choir of Angels to attend
Such Saints, and sing them to their Journey's end.
On taking heed of all our Ways.
WHen God reduces Sinners, to take heed
Of all their ways, in thought, in word and deed,
Repentance then will be of little use,
When all our actions will need no excuse:
We shall the World subdue, and stoutly stand
In full obedience unto God's Command.
And then will Death in glorious Robes descend
To guide, not fright us, at our Journey's end.
So that if we take heed in all our ways,
We shall the Devil defeat, and wear the Bays.
To a Friend.
My dear Friend,
I Have read in a divine Author, That if God be with us, he will make us see
that he is with us; and will not depart from our sight, until he has brought us
never to depart out of his. Which is a Lesson of high concern to Men in this
World; for Thus to enjoy God here, is to be in Heaven before we die. When our
Souls are thus transported with a continual divine Conversation with Almighty
God, we may taste and relish his celestial Joys to some degree, so as to envite
us to value his spiritual Comforts above all carnal Fruitions. So that our
great Business is to improve this Blessing to the highest reach of humane
Fancy, by a daily practice of holy Meditations, to contemplate and observe how
God does infuse this joyful enjoying of Him into our Souls, by the secret
working of the Holy Ghost; when we set our selves with zealous integrity to
find him there, to converse with us on this great lesson of his immense Mercy,
with our humble prayers to be enlightened from above, to participate of such
angelical Delights, as far as our frail Nature will admit of; which by frequent
use, will bring us to such an habit of holy living, that God will manifest his
presence ever with us, by an inward Felicity of divine Comforts, to such an
assurance of our Election unto eternal Bliss, as is ineffable to be described:
So that when we raise our Thoughts with a divine Desire, to know as much of God
as we can know, and of his being with us, he will add of his Grace to enlarge
our Capacities to such heavenly Trances in Devotion, that we shall be with him,
and he with us, as we do wish, with such a joy as will dread all diverting
Occasions that shall obstruct those Emanations of his holy Spirit working in us.

And thus if we do entertain our selves by such frequent addresses to find God,
he will daily meet, and ever dwell with us, if we unfelgnedly desire to dwell
with him; and will give us such a glimpse of his eternal Bliss, as may fix our
hearts on Heaven, and make us live every moment in a joyful Expectation of
Death's quickest Summons thither; and by this frequent entertainment of thy
Soul with God, Thou, my Friend, wilt find such a communication with God on
Earth, to be the highest Perfection of Piety, and a felicity much more
delightful than all other Diversions, which can never reach such Seraphick
Joys, as I wish to thee my Friend.

On the Fear of Death.
IF we fully consider our manifold Sins, and the horrid Judgment due unto us
for them, it may well be said, Happy is that Man who can obtain such a
Reconciliation with God before he die, as daily to delight in the meditation of
a sudden death, with inward assurance of his eternal Bliss the moment that he
expires. Because all our Ideas of the divine Felicities above, do seldom invite
Men to welcome Death with cheerful Hearts: Our fears are so much stronger than
our Faith, that too many Men do rather think, than find they do believe that
Christ's plenteous Redemption will cancel all their Crimes, and bring them into
Heaven; and therefore dare not really rejoice to look on death; but start back
from such angelick Happiness, as he brings good Men to participate of, in God's
eternal Glory; which natural infirmity of doubting, can only, by an illustrious
Faith, be removed; and that Faith, by frequent Prayers, be obtained. Then, thus
to live, and so to die, will make us live and die in great tranquillity, though
not to reach St. Stephen's Faith, who saw Heaven open to him; yet to so great a
degree of divine Raptures in Devotion, as to be filled with elevations of an
inward assurance of our Election, which must come from God, when the Soul is in
such a blessed Trance of celestial Delight, that is ineffable to be described.
How near such joy is to the joy we read of in Paradise; when fervent Zeal is by
a lively Faith so raised, and sixed in God by frequent Meditations, it is a
wonder that such Men can fear to die, or doubt togo to God with cheerful
Hearts, when thus invited, and thus led by his holy Spirit, with such bright
illuminations of surprising joys, while those divine Flames last, as cannot be
related. When Men's hearts are warmed with such Seraphick high Transports of
Love and Mercy from Almighty God, to give true Penitents some taste of their
eternal Glory; that being thus enlightened, they may not fear to die; but rather
welcome death, who comes to carry them to Heaven, which is the highest
Exaltation of the Soul's joy, so to delight in God, that the expectation of
Heaven may be more pleasant, than all the momentary Fruitions of this World
are, compared unto a blessed incomprehensible Eternity,

Which neither Wit nor Fancy can express,
When multiplying numbers make it less;
When neither first nor last can ever be known
Points so far distant, yet so joined in one,
That the eternal Circle shows us none,
But is a secret known to God alone.
It Is such a sacred Riddle, so^ profound,
That humane Wisdom never can expound;
But leaves us still to wonder and adore,
What will be after, and what was before.
On the Power of Faith.
THough Men by Nature born to fear, and to avoid what may seem hurtful, yet
that fear by Grace and Faith may be converted into divine Valor of the highest
kind, as is evident by the Three Children in the fiery Furnace, and by Daniel
in the Lion's Den; which with other the like Examples, should invite such Men
as trust in God, not to fear what he only can prevent, if he thinks fit; and
though a fearful Man cannot remove a Molehill for want of Faith, much less
Mountains; how little Faith then have we, when the noise only of Ill News does
affright our unsettled Souls with dismal apprehensions of what may never happen
more than the ill event brings with it, if it do, unto such pious men as live
prepared to bear afflictions for few moments here, with faithful, joyful
Thoughts of their eternal Happiness in Heaven. So that we see the Power of
Faith will remove the greatest terror, and work Miracles, when Men dare trust
in God.

Lord, give me grace to live, as I do write,
And as thy holy Spirit shall indite,
To manifest thy mighty Mercy shown
To such a Reprobate as must own.
Christ's Doctrine to suffer.
CHrist's Doctrine is with patience to inure
Our selves to suffer, what he did endure
On Earth; from that malicious, cursed Crew,
Who scorned his Miracles, and boldly slew
Their blessed Messiah, who did then submit
To die, because his Father did think fit,
That we, redeemed by his precious Blood,
Might trust in him, who died to do us good;
And now may sighing sing, and weeping pray
Our death may prove our highest Holy Day,
When we with Christ in Paradise appear,
And shine amongst those blessed Angels there.
On the Power of Love to God.
TO love and fear God, is what every good Christian does own, and what most Men
think they do; but very few, I fear, do understand what it is to love and fear
Him as we ought, with all our Heart, Soul, and Mind, above all other Objects
whatever; which is a Lesson of great use to bring Men to Heaven; who know that
we are dying every moment that we live, and cannot wish more pleasure here,
than we shall find by serving God thus: For those who can love him with all
their Heart, and Mind, will worship, and adore him with the same Zeal, and will
obey, praise, thank, pray, and trust in him with the like fervent affection, in
all their divine addresses, with their utmost endeavors to be with him in
Heaven; which God never will reject; nor can eternal Bliss be purchased at a
lower rate of Love.

Thus God exposes Heaven, to entice
Good Men, to purchase at the Market-price;
When Love, with all its Perquisites, comply,
To six a blessed Immortality
On such exalted Souls, as take delight
To mediate on his beatick sight.
When their enlightened Faith does bring them there,
(Enriched with love) they will bid adieu to fear,
And leave no arguments to justify
Such timorous Men, as dare not think to die;
Though their eternal joy will then be such,
That none will have too little, or too much.
And those who truly love, will surely find
Their happiness by God is predesign'd,
Who sees the heart and thoughts of every Man,
That loves and serves him to the best they can.
On Faith.
WHen Faith grows strong, our Fancies will soar high,
To search the secrets of Eternity;
Which to our Souls are of so near concern,
That no man can a greater Lesson Learn,
Nor have a more serene, celestial Bliss,
Than he will enjoy, by practicing of this
Great step, which by degrees will lead him on
To the sacred Seat of his Adoption,
Where Faith 'bove all the Gifts of Grace will shine,
With Love in Bliss, and Glory most divine.
On God's Mercy.
OUr God from us his Glory keeps concealed,
Because it would destroy us, if revealed:
His Essence we can never understand;
It Is well if we obey his just Command;
For God to mortal Man will never teach
Such great Secrets; because what we can reach,
By Nature cloys, as soon as had or known:
He therefore lets us live by Faith alone;
Still subject to so many hopes and fears,
That our prime Joys are damped by frequent tears,
Which daily do our sorrows multiply,
Until death comes, to tell us we must die;
The only remedy ordained to cure
All sorts of evils that we here endure.
Yet God in mercy makes amends at last,
To free us from all miseries are past,
By raising them to bliss, who do their best
To gain a share in his eternal rest;
Which belt in God's esteem is to do all
Was done by blessed St. Stephen and St. Paul.
On true Valor.
HAppy are they, who in these latter days,
Are filled with love, with gratitude and praise
To God, whose joyful Souls do ever fly
With highest thoughts of their Eternity;
And by the actions of their lives declare,
That Faith in Christ, has conquered their despair,
For all past Crimes; and now with Death has made
Strict Friendship, never more to be afraid
Of his most sick alarms, in disguise,
Nor of his quickest Summons by surprise.
And thus the greatest Cowards in the Land,
For Valor may in competition stand,
With any Hero's of the former age,
Or those who now in a just cause engage,
When Courage is a Virtue to be brave,
And sets a Crown on such a Soldier's grave.
On Relapsed Man in Paradise.
WHen Youth with strength, wealth, and beauty flourish,
Some short joys our wanton hearts may nourish;
But when old age is much decrepid grown,
We ought with sighs and tears great Sorrows own,
For idle hours that we have vainly spent,
Without the sense of shame or punishment;
And if we die in that unhappy state,
All hopes of mercy then will come too late;
So that if age revive, and propagate
Past sins, till they do greater Crimes create,
'Twill turn old Age's Blessings into hate.
Then let no mortal man presume to think
He cannot see, when he is pleased to wink;
For no Man yet was ever such a Sot,
That Age his former Crimes had so forgot,
That on his Crutches thinks it is boldly brave,
Laden with Crimes to creep into the Grave.
Much worse than Youth, when crossed in his desire,
In a mad fit, dares leap into the fire:
Which shows, that all our Ages here, never can
Retrieve the Curses of relapsed Man;
Till faith in Christ create a brighter flame,
Impow'ring men to have a surer claim
To Heaven, at our blessed Savior's cost,
Than that, which Adam's disobedience lost.
By which, we the intrinsic Treasure find
Of future joys, in a Seraphick mind.
On the Power of Faith.
IF all Men did our Christian Graces understand, That like good Heralds we
might rank them according to their antiquity and merit, Faith may claim the
highest dignity and place, as of just right, to be the most fixed foundation on
the blessed Rock of our Salvation, which will, unmoved, withstand the greatest
Storms, when lofty Structures built on Sand, are, with Wind and Rain, soon
tumbled down. And if we mind those mighty Miracles of the first Ages, they all
relate unto Faith. Our blessed Savior also used to say, Whosoever believes in
me, shall never die: (Do you believe that I can do this? and then, Be it done
according to your Faith) Thy Faith has made thee whole. The Woman with the
bloody Issue, had no other application for her Cure but Faith.

Without Faith, what signifies our Creed?
And to what purpose did our Savior bleed!
If we all Doubting could from Faith divide,
Pure Faith would then in greatest triumph ride.
God grant all those the Power of Faith, that die
In joyful Hopes of blessed eternity;
When their departing Souls will gladly own,
By faith they rise from Dunghills to a Throne.
How to delight in GOD.
THe Text says, Delight in the Lord, and he will give thee thy hearts desire:
And no doubt but if we delight in him, with the highest faculty of our Souls
(above all carnal appetites) with contemplation of his glorious Essence and
Attributes, in frequent fervent Prayers, with continual Gratitude for his daily
Mercies. To adore him as we might, we should find such a rejoicing in God, to
be the most voluptuous felicity that the heart of Man is capable of. But we
mock our selves too often with a belief of this Felicity, by a careless
searching short in our own Hearts, for a clear proof of the divine Perfection
of this delighting in God; which every Man must find in himself; for no Man can
correct the unseen Errors of his Neighbor's heart. So that it must be every
Man's concern to examine his own Conscience, how much he rejoices in God, more
than in all worldly Fruitions; and according to his proportion in excelling
therein, his peace of Conscience will prove the more exalted joyful Feast, and
will create in him the greatest hope of his heart's promised desire, and is the
surest way to remove our natural Fear of Death, who only can lead us to glory;
which all Men ought to think on, more than all other affairs in this World: For
if we delight in God as we ought,

We should the clear intrinsic value find,
When Grace enriches a delighted Mind,
That trusts in God; and by such blessed converse,
Excells all pleasures of the Universe,
Which no Man's Faith nor Fancy can conceive,
Till that delightful practice gives him leave:
Then Souls enlightened by that holy fire,
Will pass to Paradise when they expire;
An higher Bliss can no Man's heart desire
Though worldly joys may all our Senses please,
The Soul's joy makes them all but a disease.
But when God's glory in our Souls does shine,
It shows those holy Raptures are divine.
Yet we ought not to think, that every petty pleasing Object that assaults our
Senses, does deserve the Name of a Delight, more than little Children have for
every new Baby they do see. But when the Soul's supreme delight is so fixed on
God, that every address brings men as near to him as Souls can come while they
are involved in Clay; yet by a flaming Zeal, and such high mounting Faith, as
does believe that God is everywhere, and Heaven with him, and them, are
altogether at that time there. Where such joys may grow up to such a divine
Delight in God, as will come nearest unto his beatick sight (though few Men seek
it by such practice as we might) and therefore cannot fancy such transcending
Bliss on Earth, as those her metick Livers have, who daily do converse in
Heaven, with great delight, in expectation of a quick Summons thither; and such
Piety may be truly called, Delighting in God.

It Is said my Book does need apology,
To beg a Pardon for tautology;
Which is a Crime I never understood,
If the repeated matter be all good;
David's Example, as my Pattern, may
Excuse that Error, and for pardon pray.
On the Power of Divine Meditation.
DAvid says God requires no Sacrifice,
But Penitence and Faith; he does despise
The Blood of Beasts; We are to thank and praise
His holy Name, and honor him always.
And if we trust him as we ought, Mankind
Will be, by frequent Comforts, so refined,
That we on Earth shall have a daily taste
Of his eternal Peace, and joys at last.
If David's Rules authentic be, That God
Had rather use his Mercy than his Rod,
And proffers Heaven at so cheap a rate,
T'invite us to become regenerate.
What labor less can mortal Men invent,
To gain God's favor, and 'scape his punishment!
If thus our Duty may his Favor claim,
All Men will trust and honor his great Name.
Such Ecstasies in Meditation will
Men's heads with glorious heavenly Visions fill;
And by degrees our Souls with joys advance,
To think that we are there in such a trance;
And find that such enlightening Zeal as this,
Is emanation for our future Bliss.
A Dream of Heaven.
THough Sleep Death's Image be, I have been now,
I know not where, conveyed I know not how!
Where something did appear so dazzling bright,
I could not see its Glory, for the Light.
My Soul supriz'd with Wonder; and amaze,
Methought I prayed, and did forbear to gaze:
Frighted and pleased at what I liked, and feared,
I found it was a Dream of Heaven appeared;
Which waking fled; but did my Fancy fill
With blessed Ideas, which abide there still
With such transporting joy, that I can weep
To think of what I had, and could not keep.
On a Dream of Hell.
STart not, my Soul, it is but a Dream, to show
The dismal Terrors of eternal Woe,
Which unrepenting Sinners feel below:
Where Satan with his cursed Crew do dwell,
For their Ambition tumbled down to Hell;
While we rejoice on the Divine Presence
Of our exalted Bliss, by Penitence.
Those fiery Streams, we seem to see,
May give us joy to find that we are free
From that sad Doom, where Torments never cease,
But rather to Eternity increase:
While our Conversion does aloud proclaim,
What mighty Honor due to God's great Name;
Who will, in Mercy, save a Reprobate,
If his Repentance do not come too late?
On Death.
It Is very strange the World should still comply,
To think that Death is sent to make us dye,
By leading us to Immortality:
And the same moment does our sonls convoy
From worldly slavery to eternal joy.
So that we ought to find some other Name
For God's great Messenger, that bears our blame
Alone, though Life and Death are both the same
Moment our eternal Lot, to end this strife,
We may treat Death as our first step to Life:
No terror find by our remove from hence,
When all our Happiness proceeds from thence.
The POSTSCRIPT.
IF Heaven be what we read, or hear and see, or do believe to be the glorious
Habitation of the more glorious Trinity, that we pretend to love, to obey, to
trust, worship and adore, as one united God, who has created Heaven and Earth,
the Sea, and all therein; and from whom we do expect eternal happiness, when
our Souls expire. How can we justify this Creed, if in our actions we daily do
transgress what we so daily do profess, as if our present moments did afford us
more concern, to pamper fading Flesh for being Worms meat in the Grave, above
the nourishing of our Souls with heavenly Manna, to endure unto eternity.

If this be Gospel Truth (as I think it is) I cannot choose but wish and pray,
that my Retirement may produce the like Effects in others, by reading what I
write, to obtain the high Felicity I privately enjoy, transcending all the
glistring Vanities that I have seen, and too largely sharedin; but now know no
Felicity in this World, to be compared unto the Joy of living ever ready to go
out of it, which is not so easily done, as said, though we endeavor all we can.

Now, Reader, I have nothing else to say;
But wish thee Grace to meditate and pray,
Which will high joys create, and teach thee why
True Piety will never fear to dye,
When armed with such Divine Philosophy.
FINIS.
ADDENDA.
On our cold desire to go to Heaven.
WE seem to prize the other World 'bove this;
But fear to go to that undoubted Bliss.
We find few Men, who would with Enoch fly,
From hence to Heaven, (that dare soar so high!)
Or with Elijah, would take like delight,
To mount his Fiery Chariot, in his flight.
Our Faith, for such Celestial Joy, comes short
Of our Fruitions here; where our Support
Is what we see, and what we understand;
Which we prefer, before God's best command.
Though Reason, and Religion, both agree
To bring us to a Blessed Eternity;
In the same moment, we are raised from hence,
Through Faith, by God's Divinest Influence:
Which only can Immortal Life Create
By Death, destroying this our Mortal Fate.
So that, till we with God's Decree comply,
We do not truly Live, until we Dye.
To a Friend in a fit of the Gout.
WElcome thy pain, my Friend; this Gout is sent
In Mercy to fore-warn, and to prevent
Thy Gluttonies, and Epicurean Crimes,
Which were unpracticed in our Fathers times.
This is the effect of strong Falernian Wine,
And pride, to wash thy Feet in Muscadine;
By eating Mushrooms stewed with Ambergreece,
And the fat Livers of the Jews fed Geese,
With Peacocks Eggs in gravy, to support
Thy Luxuries, and now you are punished for it.
On the Fear of Death.
IT IS strange, that all Mankind should be afraid
To Die! nor any arguments persuade
Wise Men, from the terror of a Name;
Death is God's Messenger, and we to blame,
To antedate his Arrant, with such fear,
As doubts to go with Him, we know not where
Though Death's power, only can our Souls convey
To Heaven; if we God's Holy Laws Obey.
But we still struggle with undaunted strife
To keep our dying Bodies, from true Life.
For want of Faith, lest Death should by mistake
Lead our sad Souls to the Infernal Lake;
When such gross misdoubting Grace, only can
Force Death to fright a misbelieving Man:
Which shows the Glory of our future State,
Is left to our own Option; not to Fate.
On true Devotion.
WHen true Devotion is our chief delight,
We may presume, it is pleasing in God's sight,
And to our Souls; will sacred Bliss reveal,
To fix and to eternalize our Zeal;
And while we live, our blessed thoughts direct,
To the Seraphick Joys of God's Elect.
And will by our Adoption when we dye,
Declare the glory of that dignity.
On God's wondrous Works.
WHen we consider God's Word and Deed,
And see the products of the smallest Seed,
It does our wonder greatly antedate
With joy, and in our hearts fixed Faith create,
It does all doubtful thoughts, with truth confute,
When fancy guides our Fingers on the Lute.
But yet these petty arguments of sense,
Must all submit to God's Omnipotence,
In wonders of a higher nature shown!
Which all the Christian World admires, and own.
But know not how the boystrous Sea or Land
Do steady stand; (by God's Supreme Command.)
Who has the Sun and Moon so firmly set,
With Stars, in their fixed Spheres, that no Man yet,
Can by his Industry or Art declare,
How high or what circumference they are,
And yet the Seat of God's Celestial Bliss,
Is still to be admired! above all this
Where God himself, Enthroned is pleased to dwell,
Which must in Glory, all the rest excel.
Though these be wonders of a large extent,
There be some of much more wonderment!
That God should all Offenses here forgive,
And grant us daily comforts while we live.
By our Souls washing in the Crimson Flood,
Of our Blessed Saviors Sacramental Blood,
By which he does our Claim to Heaven advance,
When we approach in a Seraphick Trance;
And own his Mercies with entire delight,
To glory in his bright Beatick sight.
The more we think, the more we wonder! and
The less of Miracles we understand;
Why the same Earth, should every year produce
Such various Fruits and Herbs, for humane use;
If Faith and Gratitude did not combine,
To think such Meditations are Divine.
When God with secret Bliss, such joys imparts
As does create true Zeal in pious hearts;
And does their Souls, with flaming Love invite
To Paradise; ineffable to write;
Unless his Holy Spirit should indite.
To my Old Sick Friend.
MY good Old Friend, why so sad? does thy Age decline so fast? that the Idea of
thy Grave frights thee with fear to die. Are we not all dying? and none knows
who shall go next, nor how soon be gone; if this occasion thy dismay, I will
teach thee an Antidote that will dispell the Poison of that Serpent's bite, and
turn that universal curse of Death, into a State of Bliss; if thou can raise
thy dejected Spirit to a quick sense of snaring the Eternal Joys of Heaven,
with those departed Saints, who by Faith, Prayer, and Penitence, are now
exalted thither.

Let thy melancholy Meditations and Preparations for the Grave, be changed from
a Gaol delivery; into a constant, cheerful, zealous Conversation, in thy Divine
Retirements, with God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; by a total
Resignation of thy Soul, and all thy concerns unto them; and think with
pleasure how near thou art arrived to thy Journeys end, to be with them in
Paradise. Then such Celestial Thoughts will be thy most pleasant entertainment,
and surely meet with surprising joy from Faith in Christ's plenteous
Redemption; which will beget a hearty, speedy welcome unto Death's arrival, who
comes to conduct thee to Eternal Bliss; and thou will also find, that every
devout step toward this felicity of thy approaching Salvation; will make thy
heart dance with a Saint-like delight, to baffle the terrors of the Grave; with
a serene prospect of thy Eternal Happiness at hand; and so make thy last hours
full of Angelical transporting joy to be with God, the moment thy Soul expires;
fix thy heart thus, and all sad Thoughts will vanish, when a sincere Faith
becomes predominant.

Thy Heart by practice, will delight in this Divine Elixir of Eternal Bliss.

On vain Projectors.
NO mortal Man can limit or restrain,
The boundless fancies of another's brain;
But may such Fetters on his own Thoughts lay,
As will keep them from wandering much astray;
But naturally, Men add wings to try,
How high their vain ambitious Hearts can fly,
Until like Icarus, their waxen wings
Do melt, and all their hopes to ruin brings.
But when our Souls do with Angellick Love
Soar high; they will Celest'al joys improve
To flaming Zeal, and raise our hearts so high;
As will discern our Immortality.
To my Rich Friend become Poor.
TEll me, Old Friend, and speak the truth,
If twenty Dishes in thy Youth,
Did then more please, and gratify
Thy Stomach with that Gluttony,
Which did Diseases daily breed;
Till now thou do on one Dish feed.
Tell me if now thy constant health
Gives not more joys than thy lost Wealth
Afforded; by thy vast excess,
In frequent Treats and Wantonness;
Which made a noise, more than content,
For all thy charge and time misspent.
When to the Poor, half that expense,
Would have procured God's Providence;
And saved the loss of thy Estate,
Which thou have thought upon too late;
Though now thou do aloud profess,
Thy Poverty proves Blessedness.
On Injustice.
IF Charity to Men, be God's Command?
Justice, must in much higher favor stand;
If neither can in wicked Men find place;
They slight God's Anger, and despise his Grace.
But these are petty Crimes, when Avarice
Does harden hearts for gold; and Souls entice,
To sell Salvation at so cheap a Rate;
Such villainous intentions aggravate.
When a designed premeditated cheat,
With a bold-fac'd fraud, shall just Right defeat,
And a false Cause by power shall justify;
Hell only can reward such Infamy;
For God with indignation does declare,
He will Poor Men's Oppressors never spare.
Against Momentary Joys.
NOW let my Friend, from sighs and sorrow cease,
For Crimes repented; let thy joy increase,
For thy serene assurance, lately gained,
Of pardon, by thy Savior's Blood obtained;
Let thoughts of thy Eternal Glory rise,
And scorn all Earthly Bawbles that surprise
Unsteady Souls, with present fading Toys
That cloud the brighter Beams of Heavenly joys.
And boldly do those glist'ring bubbles try,
In hope they will last unto Eternity.
Who raise their idle fancies, by their wit,
To practice Atheism, rather than submit
To part with present Moments of delight,
To purchase Heaven, with God's Beatick sight;
Who with his known Decrees, will not comply,
But think to live, till they are pleased to dye.
Tho of such Men, it may be truly said,
They are that moment, both alive and dead.
The Terror of Death, by Death is cured.
IF Death were not for Sin from Heaven sent;
It could not be esteemed a punishment;
To be delivered from our daily woe,
While'twixt our Roses, Thorns, and Thistles grow,
So that our care should be, to weed our hearts
From foul excrescents, by such holy Arts,
As will that fatal sting of Sin destroy,
And so convert our sorrows into joy;
When we the Pangs of such a Death endure,
As does produce both Punishment, and Cure.
To my Old Friend on his Birthday.
MY Friend, thou do well to celebrate thy Birthday, as a vowed Sacrifice to
God; because he did reserve the first born to himself of Living Creatures, and
thou art one; But let not thy Altar be adorned with a superfluous Treat, with
too many flagons of rich Wine, and Tables thronged with Wealthy Guests, as if
it were a Bacchanalian Feast: But such a moderate Meal for thy own Servants,
with some Poor Neighbors, that may soberly rejoice to see a New Year begin,
with a propitious prospect of thy ensuing happiness; and pray thy Piety and
charity may Shine round about thy Habitation here on Earth, until thou art
advanced to Heaven.

Death is the Beggars highest Holiday.
IT IS but a faint Felicity, that any Man can have in all the Honors, Treasures,
and Pleasures of this World, without a joyful inward assurance of his
Salvation; when the next moment, an angry Neighbor, or a Tyrant Prince, can
end his days: Or Sickness by tormenting pains turn all his joy into sorrow
while he lives; with despairing terrors worse than all, at the approach of
Death; when a poor pious Beggar, will die transported full of Celestial Joys
for his highest Holiday, and be as welcome into Heaven, as the greatest Monarch.

And therefore may be well and truly said,
Both Souls are of the same fine Substance made.
To my merry Friend.
WHY now so joyful my good Friend? has thy Princes smiles this Morning added
new feathers to thy Heart? that makes it fly so high. His frowns to morrow may
turn those gay feathers into Lead; though thou deserve not such a change:
Consider now such frequent sad Fates, as do befall the craftiest Men, that only
trust in mortal accidents for their support in Princes favors; and raise thy
Souls delight in Service of the King of Kings, whose favors will endure unto
Eternity, above the reach of Earthly Storms; and then thy Prince's favors will
have a sure foundation to subsist on, with higher joys than any Sycophants
black Arts, by Malice or by Envy can disturb thy Peace, or Pleasures; when a
good Conscience is so centered, and so fixed on God. For no Man can imagine,
the constant felicity, of a strict pious Life, in all conditions; but he that
is so reconciled with a lively Faith to God, as cheerfully to part with all the
glist'ring Bubbles of this World, to enjoy everlasting Bliss in Heaven, which
ought to be the supreme hope of our best endeavors.

On the fear of Death.
THO Men by nature Born to fear, to Die
May still account it a great misery,
When Piety and Prayer cannot prevail,
To change the power of that severe Intail;
Though all our Hearts, and Souls do still agree,
To frame our Minds to God's most blessed Decree;
Because no other means, (like that the best)
To bring Mankind to his Eternal Rest.
Yet our weak Faith cannot the credit gain,
By Heavenly joys, and glory to obtain,
Such Courage and a Valor so Divine,
Rather to Die with joy, than to repine
To part with fading pleasures; that no Age
Can for one moments certain time engage,
They shall abide; nor can find any cure,
That Men on Earth, for ever shall endure.
How great a shame and folly then, that we
Should fear to go, where we desire to be
And so prefer our miseries on Earth,
Before a blessed and glorious cheerful Death;
That will in gratitude the surest way,
Our Souls to God in Paradise convey;
When Faith, with such a Zeal shall so comply,
'Twill show a Godly Gallantry to Die.
On the Art of Meditation.
WHO will the Art of meditation learn,
Must make each Paragraph his chief concern*
For some few moments to consider on,
Lest reading more create confusion;
And unavoidably disturb the Brain,
With more at once, than what it can retain;
When Piety by Art is thus refined,
It will rejoice the heart, enrich the mind
With sacred Thoughts; beyond all Earthly care;
Till flesh be turned into Angelick Air.
All Men should live as ever in God's sight,
And make Devotion their supreme delight.
And then observe, how God does Grace return,
To make Seraphick Joy the brighter burn.
FINIS.

