CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS UPON HOSEA THE SECOND The 7. and 8. Verses. As they were
delivered at a friends House who had broken his leg, for which meeting the
Author was committed to the White-Lyon by Sir Thomas Mallet late Judge of
Assize for the County where he remains Prisoner of JESUS CHRIST.

By WILLIAM KIFFIN.

Exodus ^^.22, 23, Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not: for he
will (...) pardon your iniquities; for my name is in him, But if thou shall
obey his voice (indeed) the^ shall he be an enemy to thine enemies, etc. Psalm.
81.13, 14. O that my people had harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
ways; I should soon have subdued their enemies, etc. LONDON, Printed for
William Larner, at the Bible in Little-East-cheap. 1642.

To the right worshipful the Justices of peace for his Majesty's County of
Surrie, the Author wishes increase of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, together
with all other good things.
RIght worsh. it may seem strange unto you that such an one as I who have bin
judged an offender should be so bold as to go about to shelter any thing under
the shadow of your protection, as it may seem both to your selves and others,
I now do it dedicating the ensuing matter unto you, but give me leave I beseech
you a little to excuse my bouldnes herein, being induced hereunto by these
considerations.

Because the providence of God so ordered it to call me before you, to give an
account of my last practice in this thing: (namely,) why I should take upon me
to preach having never bin at the Universities, nor received orders from the
Bishops.

To the which question, J answered: that I conceived I had a warrant for what J
did from the Scripture as (namely) 1 Pet. 4.10. where it is said, as every man
has received the gift, so let th^^ minister the same as good Stewards of the
manifold graces of God, where it appears to be manifest, that as no man in
the things of God is to speak above what he knows, but according to the
proportion of Faith, so likewise ought no man to hide any of the things of God
which he has received from God, but seasonably to declare them to the glory of
God and edification of others, least he be found in the number of those who
hide their talent in a napkin, and therefore being thus by the providence of
God called before you to give a reason of my action, and the hope that is in
me, J made bold to p^esent the perusal of what had then bin delivered unto
your Worships.

The second Reason inducing me hereunto, is because it was the request of some
of you before whom I was examined, upon the hearing of the Subject that I was
upon, that you might see the notes of what was delivered upon it, which I
promised to do, and have herein faithfully done it, not adding or detracting
any thing from it so far as possibly I can remember, either in matter or
manner, therefore have I made bold in this sort to present it to you.

The third and last reason is, because I apprehended by what I heard from you,
that God has given you in a good measure, knowledge by which you are able to
judge of things that differ, and therefore have I presented these few things
unto you which God was pleased to help me to deliver, not from any opinion of
any great or rare matter herein above others, but conceiving they are the truth
of God, and such as ought to be embraced, I therefore tender them to your
Worsh. and to all whom the providence of God shall direct them to, desiring
your perusal hereof and tender consideration hereupon, whether a man for doing
this which J have done, have hereby so griavously transgressed against God or
man, that he might by either law of God or man ^o suffer imprisonment for it,
and if David for doing his duty in the eyes of some appeared to be vile, said
that then he would be more vile, the like may I say, if for doing my duty to
God J am compted vile, I am like to appear yet more vile, if God enable me to
it, even till he shall change thi^ vile body of mine and make it like to his
glorious body, who works all things according to the good pleasure of his
own will; acknowledging with that suffering Apostle, and that with joy and
comfort, though in a prison, that after that way which men call heresy,
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
law and in the Prophets. Pardon J beseech, my boldness, and if any terms
have passed from me which either derogates from your persons or placosi, inpute
it to my weakness rather then to the least willfulness or disrespect, for the
Lord is my witness, I desire to honor both, as likewise all men in place of
authority, as I am bound by the word of God to do, and though I am accused and
condemned for being at a conventicle, truly if praying for the King and
Parliament and edifying one another in our most holy faith, be keeping
conventicles, then J am guilty: but if a Conventicle be such a meeting as in
the least measure is against any of these, then I detest it and abhor it:
thus desiring the Lord of mercies to fill you with the knowledge of himself,
that you may be faithful in your places of trust; your unworthy servant shall
remains

White Lion, 25. March 1642, Your Worships to command to his power in the Lord
though a prisoner, W. KIFFIN.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS UPON HOSEA THE SECOND.
2 HOSEA, 7, 8. Though she follow after her Lovers, she shall not come at them;
though she seek them, yet shall she nor find them: then she shall say, I will
go and return to my first Husband, for then was it better with me then now:
for she did not know that I gave her Corn and Wine and Oil, and multiplied
her Silver and Gold, which they prepared for Baal.


THE Lord intending to set forth His own Majesty and greatness together with
his love and goodness to the world, makes choice of a People whom in special
he displayes his Glory before, and makes known his love and goodness unto:
amongst the rest of Gods ends and designs which he had in so doing, this is
one, that he makes known to us, (namely,) that they might declare, and hold
forth these excelencies of God to the world, which people were the children of
Israel, as appears 3. Amos 2. and that these might excel above others he makes
Covenant with their fathers and them, Genesis 17.7. and therefore claims a
special interest in them, expecting more then ordinary things from them, as
appears by Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. where Moses tells them, You are the Children of the
Lord your God, for thou art an holy people to the Lord thy God, and the Lord
has chosen you to be a precious people unto Himself; above all the people
that are upon the earth, etc. As if he should say, you are the peculiars of my
love, and therefore I would have you be peculiar in your carriages: and that
there might be nothing wanting on Gods part to make them complete herein, he
therefore gives his Laws unto Jacob, and his Statues unto Israel: not dealing
so with any other Nation, Psalm. 147.19, 20. but now he having planted this
noble vine and expecting fruit proportionable to the means; but behold and see
how soon they degenerated and fell from God, and followed the inventions of
their own brain, and the suggestion of their own Spirits. For no sooner was
the ten Tribes rent from Rehoboam, to Iereboam, but they were rent from the
profession of Gods truth, to the following of Baall! Which was occasioned by
the subtle counsel of Iereboam, who having gotten a Kingdom thought to keep
it by his own policy, rather then going in a way of truth, for if we look into
the Books of the Kings, you shall there find, that that which was the great
Master Piece of policy, proved to be the great Master Piece of his misery, and
the truth of God herein apearing to be made good, is well specified by the
Apostle, Romans 8.7. the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God.

But to come as briefly as I can unto the things intended in the words: you
shall therefore find after their apostasy from God; the Lord is pleased to
walk in a course of means toward them: which means was the sending of his
Prophets amongst them, to discover their evils to them, that so they might be
reduced unto their former state and condition: amongst the rest this Prophet
Hosea was one, who does in this first, and second Chapters, declare unto them
their sin; as likewise the threatenings of God against them for that sin, and
that he might not bestow labor in vain, there is therefore (in the 6, and 7.
verse. of the 2 Chapter,) declared the special means that God took which
should take effect to reclaim some of them to himself, the means is laid
down in the sixth verse. and further amplified in the seventh: In the sixth he
says he will stop her way, he will hedge up her path^: and whereas it might be
objected though they may be stopped and hedged up, yet love will make men leap
through hedge and ditch (as we say,) to which Quest. is Answ. made in the
seventh verse. Though she do follow her Lovers, she shall not come at them, as
if he should say, there shall not be left so much as a probability or
possibility of means to come at them, so that in this seventh verse. we may
observe these four things.

1. The strength of these Peoples spirits in cleaving to affect her Lovers,
expressed in these words, following after them and seeking them. 2. The means
which the Lord here uses to reclaim her from them, expressed in these words,
though she do seek after them, yet she shall not find them: she shall be
disappoynted of her ends herein. 3. The effect that this means wronght (by the
blessing of God upon it) expressed in these words, then she shall say, I will
return to my first Husband etc. 4. Here is laid a maine motive or
consideration that wrought upon her spirit expressed in the latter clause of
the verse. for then (says she) it was better with me then now.
From the former part of the words we may observe thus much, namely, that there
is an aptness of spirit even in men professing religion, which are in the
visible Church of God, to forsake God, to follow other lovers, other Gods: this
we shall see plainly proved to us, if we do but a little examine the
Scriptures. 2 Jere. 13. The Lord there complains, my People have committed two
evils, they have forsaken Me the Fountain of living Waters, to dig them pits,
even broken pits that will hold no water; We see here those that God owned for
his People, even these forsake him; But before we farther prove it, some may
object and say, but what is it to forsake God, or how and when may men be said
to forsake God? Ans. That usually in Scripture men are said to forsake God when
they forsake the law of God, the Commandments of God, or the worship of God,
and therefore says the Lord to Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.6. This People will rise up,
and go a whoring after the Gods of a strange Land, and will forsake me and
break my Covenant which I have made with them, as if he should say, by breaking
my Covenant they forsake me: and so in the 24 Joshua, 20.10 Judge. 10. to 13. 1 Samuel 8.8. 2 Chronicles. 13.11. all which Scriptures prove that a People in outward
Covenant with God have forsaken God, and that then they are said to forsake
God, when they forsake the worship of God.

Now I come to the reasons how it comes to pass that such an aptnes of Spirit
does appear.

1, Rea. Because the terms which other Gods propound are more suitable unto
men's carnal reasonings then, the te^mes propounded by the Lord, therefore in
the 23. Ezekiel. 5. And Aholah played the Harlot when she was mine, and she was set
on fire with her lovers, the reason is given in verse. 6. which were clothed
with blew silk, and so indeed that honor and preferment which is held unto
men, by the hand of the whore, as a Cup of Gold, draws all men, high, and low,
rich and poor, to commit spiritual fornication with her, whereas the terms
which the God of Heaven tenders to men (if they will follow him) is that they
must suffer for his name sake, and that Foxes have holes, and Birds of the Air
have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his head, the
consideration of which terms, makes men many times turn off the profession of
Jesus Christ: when tribulation or afflictions comes, men are offended, Math
13.1.

2. Rea. Because men have more conversments with other Gods, the hearts of men
naturally have more commerse with the world and sin, and so with the worship
set up by the men of the world, rather then with God and the things of God: and
certainly where a man's thoughts is most pitched, there is his love and
delight, for where the treasure is there will the heart be, and therefore says
the Apostle, Demas has forsaken us and embraced this present world, as if the
Apostle should say, he has considered things beforehand concerning the world
and has found by his conversments with it, that the world is good, and
therefore now he has embraced this present world, he has given up the strength
of his heart and affections to it; as on the contrary, when the soul begins to
have his thoughts pitched upon God, and has his spirit raised up, to behold
the lovelynesse and glory, fullness, and excellency that is in Jesus Christ,
the soul upon these considerations closes with Christ, imbraceth Christ and
says concerning him, as the Church says in the like case concerning Christ, 1
Cant. 12. a bundle of mirth ^s my well Beloved to me he shall lie all night
between my breasts: Oh says the soul, Christ shall have the chiefest seat of
residence in my heart, and his laws shall bear sway in my life: what though I
am imprisoned, reproached, disgraced, counted a fectious person, one that
troubles the State, yet this is no trouble at all unto such a heart, for he
looks up to Christ, desiring with him to endure the Cross, and despise the
shame: but on the contrary men's hearts being set upon the creature, and their
desires being set upon excelencies here, reject the excelency of Jesus Christ,
and the profession of his truth.

3. Rea. And last, why men in an external Covenant with God, those that God
ownes as his, may fall back and degenerate, is because that men nay, and (they
which have more in them then men, even the Saints of God themselves) do
neglect their spiritual watch, they suffer their spirits to wander, and then
its no marvel that he who wanders up and down the whole earth seeking whom he
may devour does meet with this wandering spirit, and turn it out of the way,
and so we see David's eye was wandering upon Bathsheba and Satan soon caught
him in a snare, as you may see in 2 Samuel 11.2.4. these with many other reasons
might be laid down, for the confirmation of this truth, but I judge these may
suffice.

The second thing observable from the words, is the means it self used by God
to reduce them to their former state laid down in these words, though she
seek after her Lovers she shall not come as them, as if he should say, I will
take a sure course with them to reclaim them to my self; though she do go a
whoring after her Lovers and follows other Gods and loves so to do, she
shall not find them, that is, she shall find no content, nor satisfaction in
them as formerly she has done: from whence we may observe, That when God
intends to do any souls good, either to reclaim them from a falen condition,
or to bring persons to the knowledge of himself, the usual way that he takes
herein is to discover to them the emptiness and insufficiency of all things
that is here below; as not being able to give any content, or satisfaction to
the soul; there is something of this truth (me thinks) appearing in the 14.
verse. of this Chapter, where the Lord says, I will bring her into the
Wilderness, now we know a Wilderness condition is a condition distitute of all
help, nothing is to be found therein but wild Beasts ready to devour, no help
is to be expected in the Wilderness from it; so indeed when men are brought into
a Wilderness condition having neither penny nor pennies worth as the Prophet
says, Esai. 55.1. Then is God pleased to speak comfort to his People and then
does he cause them to look upwards: but for fuller proof, 3 Ierc. 23. see there
the ground of their return to God, truly (say they) the hope of h^ls is but
vain, nor the multitude of mountains, what then? but in the Lord our God is
the health of JSRAEL; when they were brought to see the strength of all things
to help them was but weakness, then they cry, in the Lord our God is the health
of Israel. So in 1 Ecles. 1.2. Solomon after his setting his heart to find out
content in the creature and after his following other Gods and forsaking the
Lord who had appeared twice unto him, you shall find upon his return this is
the account that he leaves behind him, all is vanity and vexation of spirit,
and the reason why God takes such a course with men is, because while the soul
sees any fulness in any thing in heaven or earth whereby to lean to besides
Christ, it will fasten at the horns of that Altar, be it what it will, and
never make any further search or inquiry after Christ, the carriage of the soul
in this case is like the carriage of Jacob in an other, for while there was corn
in Canaan, Jacob never thinks nor mentions going into Egypt, but when there was
none there, then says old Jacob, Gene. 42.2. why gaze ye one upon another,
seeing there is Corn in Egypt? so in deed while there is any food to be got
for the soul here below it looks no higher, and therefore it is, that the Lord
is pleased to out off all springs of comfort and peace to be had from any thing
here below, that so the soul may see Jesus Christ to be he who has all the
Well-springs of comfort, and peace, and joy, and refreshment to the soul.

1. Use, Let us a little from the consideration of this Doctrine examine our
spirits, and see how our hearts stand affected, or what our Spirits is fraught
with, whether with high conceits of the world, of the excellency and fulness and
glory of it? Or whether with the excellent fullnes and goodness that is in
Jesus Christ? certainly this is an undoubted truth, that if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in them, let them profess what they will,
therefore it behooves every man to look about him, and see whether God has
ever yet made this discovery to the soul, namely, that all the things of the
world is empry and poor, and weak, not able to give out the least dram of
trve comfort to the soul; I beseech you let us again ask our hearts this
question, as Christ did in the like case: are we able to drink of the Cup that
Christ has drunk of? And to be baptized with the Baptism that Christ is
baptized with?

We do not know what employment Christ may put us upon: certain it is, that
that heart which is in the last engaged to the world, will never do any great
matters for Jesus Christ, he will play fast and loose with Christ, this we all
profess to know, that we cannot serve two Masters, God and Mammon, their
commands are so opposite one to each other as that if we obey the one, we must
reject the other, wherefore let us commune with our own hearts, and see a
little how our spirits stand affected to Christ do we find upon serious
examination, that Christ and his laws does bear sway in our hearts, and that
excellency that is in them does in the eyes of our souls weigh down all that
riches and honors and pleasures and preferments of the world? nay more then
this, do you see so much excellency in Gods ways as that it will bear your
charges with great allowance through those miserics and sorrows, reproaches
and losses that you shall sustain in this life, yea even life it self, we
shall see, Paul when he cast up his account of matters of this nature, he
triumphs in that glorious allowance that he saw provided for him by God, 2 Cor.
4.1. says he, our light afflictions which are but for a moment they work for
us a far more excellent eternal weight of glory: wherefore let us not rest
satisfied with a face of profession, but let us labor to make inquiry into our
own heart and see what discoveries God has made to us of the creatures
emptiness, and his own fullness.

2. Use. We may from the Doct. delivered see the reason why the Lord many times
is pleased to strip his own people naked of creature comforts, it is that so
the Lord may discover to his people, the emptines, the flittingnes of the, that
so they may see more fulness, yea even all fullness in himself: and therefore
though the world misconster Gods meanings to his Saints in his carriages
toward them in the passages of his providence, in saying they are poor and
mean and the offscouring of the world, and God regards them not; let not the
servants of God misconster his meaning too, this will but aggravate their
sorrow, but let us see what the Scripture says, and consult with it 2 James 5.
Harken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of of this world,
rich in Faith and heirs of the Kingdom? This is a thing worthy of serious
attention, that God should choose poor nothings of this world to be rich in
faith and heirs of the Kingdom: and this is most usually found, that the
meaner the Saines conditions are in the world, the fuller and richer are they
in faith, and in Communion with Jesus Christ; and therefore if God be pleased
to take away Wife or Children, or friends, or liberty, or estate, if God be
pleased to take away any of these from us and to empty us of these, we should
labor to make that use of it which the Lord expects we should (namely) to see
more fulness in him from whom we have all our mercies.

The third thing laid down in the words, is the fruit or effect that the
means wrought upon her, expressed in these words, then shall she say, I will
go and return to my first Husband: where we may take notice under what
consideration she returns home to God, and that is here declared under the
consideration of a husband; she does not say, I will return to my Savior, and
so expect salvation from him, but to my husband, to him, to whom I desire to
yield subjection and obedience as a loving spouse ought to do, from whence we
may observe thus much:

That Jesus Christ is the only head and husband, Lord and Lawgiver of his
Church and People: for proof of which let us examine the Scriptures. 1 Ephe.
22, 23. and gave him to be the head of all things, to his Church which is his
body, the fulness of him that fills all in all, that fulness the body
has it has from the head, 4 Ephs. 15, 16. where the Apostle exhorts them,
that they would not be tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine by the
flights of men that lie in wait to deceive, and that they might prevent this
evil he lays down a means in these 15. and 16. verses. but speaking the
truth in love may grow up into him in all things which is the head even Christ,
from whom all the body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every
joint supplieth according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, makes increase of the body to the edifying it self in love, 5. Ephesians.
23. Christ is the head of the Church, and the Savior of his Body: and so in
the 1 Col. 18. and 33. Esa. 22.

Now for the reasons how it comes to pass that Jesus Christ is the only head
and husband, Lord and Lawgiver of his Church.

1. Rea. Because the Church of Christ is sprung up from the loins of Christ.
they have been taken out of the very sides of Christ: for alas this we are all
to know, that though we were glorious in the loins of our first Parents in the
day of our creation, though God made man righteous, yet he sought out many
inventions: Eccles. 7.29. The creature man soon lost his glory and became vile
and miserable, and so had continued, had not Jesus Christ stepped between the
misery of the Creature and the wrath of his Father, and by his own blood made
up that great breach which sin had made between the creature man, and the
great Creator the Lord of Heaven and Earth: had it not bin for Christ, there
had not so much as the name of a Church of God bin heard of upon the face of
the Earth: therefore as Adam claims propricty in Hevah because she proceeded
from his side, saying, this now is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, She
shall therefore be called Woman; So may Jesus Christ claim a propriety and
interest in the Church to be Lord and husband of it, because it proceeds from
his very, loins his very sid^s.

2. Rea. Because Jesus Christ has bought his Church they, are the travel of
his soul, the glory of his Mediator-ship, are there not all the reasons that
possibly can be, seeing Jesus Christ has traveled for his Church, and by his
travels brought forth a glorious deliverance to his Church that now his Church
should be subject to him, and yield obedience to his laws: seeing Christ has
satisfied God his Father by his own blood, is it not reason that we should
live to his praise and honor: is it reason that when a mother has undergone
sore travel and pain with a Child, and at last when the Child is through many
difficulties and hazards of the Woman's life, brought forth, that another Woman
that stands by, when the Child is delivered, should snatch it up and say, this
Child shall be subject unto me and own me for its mother, and what I command
it so it shall do, and what I command it to wear it shall wear: would not
this be compted injurious dealing with this poor Woman that has suffered so
much in bringing it forth, that now she should be deprived of the comfort of
bringing it up? and is it not as injurious dealing with Jesus Christ, that
seeing he has traveled for his Church, and brought forth his Church, that now
other men should arrest it of his hands and prescribe laws to them, which they
would force their consciences to be subject to; and therefore by way of use, in
the first place this serves to reprove all these persons that so do:
certainly Jesus Christ will one day be even with all those persons: sure it
is, that the Church being the glory of his Mediator-ship, he will not give his
glory to any other, nor his praise to graven Images, but though m^n do now
labor to dis-throne Christ, yet there is a time coming wherein Jesus Christ
will dis-throne all his, enemies and will reign gloriously in the despite of
them all, he will make his enemies his footstool; the mountain of the House
of the Lord shall be established in the tops of the mountains: therefore let
all men for the time to come take heed how they prescribe any laws for the
government of the Church; that they step not up in Christ's stead: but this let
all men know, that Christ has prescribed laws already which are perfect and
pure, by which he both has, and does, and will govern his Church, and
therefore let this be the duty of us all, to labor to know what these laws
and rules are, that so we may be more and more subject unto them, that we
dishonor not Jesus Christ, by giving any thing to any other, which is only of
right due unto him.

2. Use. If it be so that Christ is the head and husband of his Church and
people, then in the next place we may take notice of the wonderful and
singular love of Jesus Christ toward a poor company of creatures; that Christ
should stand under such a near relation to them as a husband, there is no
reason can be given, in respect of us why Christ should do it, we may find
reason enough in our selves why Christ should loath us, condemn us, reject us;
but that he should love us, stand as a husband to us, we must seek a reason
of this elsewhere then from our selves: and truly the Scripture does declare
the reason fully to us in the 2 Hos. 19. I will marry thee to my self in mercy
and compassion, it has bin the mere mercies and compassions of Jesus Christ
working in his own breast has brought this great and mighty work to pass:
and truly the serious consideration of this thing were it well weighed by us,
it would cause us to be willing to be any thing, to do any thing, yea to
suffer any thing for him, who has bin and done and suffered so much for us.

3. Use, exhorts all of us, that seeing Jesus Christ is the head of his Church,
etc. we should from hence be exhorted to yield subjection to Jesus Christ and
his laws in all things.

And first of all, our subjection to Christ must be free subjection.

Secondly, it must be Universal subjection.

Thirdly, it must be perpetual subjection.

1. Our subjection to Christ and his laws must be free, that is, it must be
raised within us from the consideration of that excellency that is in Christ
and his laws, and from no by-end whatsoever, this was David's frame 119. Psalm.
94. says he there, I am thine, save me; for I seek thy Precepts: as if he
should say, I seek them merely for that excellency that I see in them: many
may outwardly be subject to Christ, but yet not under this consideration, but
as Christ says, 6. John ye seek me for the Loaves: so may Christ say to
many, you seek me, you yield outward subjection to me, not freely from that
excellency that is in me, but for your own by-ends and respects, but we must
know that that subjection which Christ calls for must be free.

Secondly, it must be Universal, Christ calls for all: 12. Mark 33. thou shall
worship the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul, and might, and
strength, and says the Apostle, you are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your bodies and in your Spirits, which are Gods.

Thirdly, it must be perpetual, Christ cannot endure that any should deal
deceitfully with him, but we must prove constant unto him what ever it cost us,
2 Rev. 10. be faithful to death, and in 1 Luke, 74, 75. Christ expects that
his people should serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our lives. Not a little season for a spirt, but constantly, and if we do but a
little cast our eye upon Christ, we shall see that which may engage us
hereunto: as 1 Christ's love was a free love; secondly, it was a full love, and
thirdly, it is a durable love, whom he loves once he loves to the end; And
therefore we should be engaged freely and universally and constantly to submit
to Jesus Christ.

4. Use, Is for consolation to the servants of God that have given up
themselves to be swayed by the Scepter of Christ, I say consolation in diverse
particulars: as first if Christ be thy husband, then be comforted in this, that
he will provide for thee, 34. Psalm. 10. the Lions shall lack and suffer hunger,
but those that fear the Lord shall lack no good thing, 54. Esa. 4, 5. fear
not, for thou shall not be ashamed, neither shall thou be confounded; for he
that made thee is thy husband, whose name is the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, We may expect as provision from Christ, so protection from Christ,
he will certainly protect his people, 33. Deuteronomy. 3. all thy Saints are in thy
hand, he will either keep his people from trouble, or support them in trouble,
43. Esa, 2. when thou passest through the water I will be with thee, and
through the fire it shall not hurt thee: the servants of God, in all their
trobles and sorrows which they undergo for his name sake, go no farther then
Jesus Christ himself goes along with them, 63. Esa. 10. In all their
afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them.

Thirdly, as we may expect provision and protection from Christ, so
preservation also, 13. Heb. 5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, it is
not any thing that men or Devils can do that can any way by any of their
subtlties or persecutions separate Jesus Christ from the soul, but as Christ
says, because I live you shall live also, and therefore when there was but
such a conception raised in the heart of the Church, 49. Esa. 14. SYON says,
the Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me: see what answer the
Lord there makes, verse. 15, 16. Can a Woman forget her child? though she may,
yet will not I forget thee, behold I have engraven thee upon the palms of my
hands, thy walls are ever in my sight. As if he should say, it is as possible
for men to pull away my strength from my self, as to pull away my people from
me which seems to be held out in these words, I have engraven thee upon the
Palms of my hands: now that which is engraven in a man's hands, is as it were
made one with the hand: you may as well pull away the part of the hand as the
engraven in the hand, so indeed so deeply are the People of God interested into
that great attribute of Gods strength, that men and Devils may as soon pull
God out of Heaven as the Saints out of Gods hands.

The fourth thing observable in the words, and that is the motive by which she
is provoked to return to her first husband, laid down in these words, for it
was better with me then now; the consideration of that goodness that formerly
she had found in Gods ways, did mightily provoke her to return again: from
whence we may observe thus much.

That it is ever best with the servants of God and Churches of Christ when they
keep closest to God.

What it is to keep close to God we have already showed, that to keep close
to God is to keep close to the Law of God, the Commandments of God: now that
it is best both with persons and Churches, when they so do, will appear by the
Scripture, 2. Jer. 2. says the Lord there, go and cry in the ears of
Jerusalem saying, thus says the Lord, I remember thee with the kindness of
thy Youth, and the Love of thy espousalls when thou wentest after me in the
Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown, what then did they lose any thing by
it? no certainly, in verse. 3. Israel was a thing hallowed to the Lord and his
first fruits; all they that eat it shall offend: evil shall come upon them;
says the Lord; we see God takes spetiall notice of it, and tells them, Israel
was a thing hallowed to the Lord, God himself sets them apart as People
excellent in his eye, and so did he esteem of them, that men had better have
taken a Bear by the teeth (as we say) then to have meddled with them, evil
shall come upon them, says the Lord, 19. Exodus 5. see what the Lord there
says, now therefore if you obey my ways indeed, and keep my Covenant, then
you shall be my chief treasure above all people, though all the ^arth be mine,
and ye shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, etc. those
that God ownes as his chief treasure, are such as obey his voice, and keep
his Covenant, 7. Ier. 23. this thing commanded I them saying, obey my voice,
and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk in all the ways
which I have commanded you, that it may be well with you, it is and has bin
well with the Saints, when they have closely walked in the ways of God, so 11.
Jeremy, 4, etc.

1. Rea. Why it is best with the servants of God when they cleave closest to
him, is because those who so do, are kept by God from that disaster of sorrow,
and shame, and confusion that seaseth upon others who forsake him, therefore
says David, 119. Psalm. 4. then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect
to all thy Commandments, whereas in 99. Psalm. 7. confounded be all those that
worship graven Images: and in 3. Ier. 2. We lie in our confusion, and our shame
covers us; (the reason is given,) for we have sinned against the Lord our
God, even to this day; and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God. It Is
sin that brings shame and confusion of face, but when the soul walks closely
with its God, it shall be sure to be kept from shame, for what is it that makes
men ashamed, and confounded? it is when they are frustrated of their hopes, of
their expectations, of what they thought to enjoy in the way wherein they
walked; but now the servants of God shall be sure never to be frustrated of
their hopes, for what they expect from any promise of God made by God unto
them, they shall be sure it will be performed in its season: its true, there be
many things which are imposed upon them by men, as reproaches and scoffs and
imprisonments etc. Which they think is matter of shame, but even these things
are looked upon by the Sts. as matter of honor and joy, 5. Act. 41. they went
away rejoicing, that they were accounted worthy to suffer any thing for his
name sake.

2. Rea. Is because those that keep closest to the commands of God, are most
honored by God, and it must needs be well with those whom the Lord will
honor, these are they whom God will employ in his special service, being made
vessels of honor fit for every good work, for those which walk closest to
God in the doing of his will, are those whom God most usually imployes in that
most honorable service of suffering for his name sake, and you shall always
find (since the coming of Christ in the flesh) that those Churches and persons
that have most shined in a way of Innocence and holiness toward God, have bin
most liable to persecutions, and afflictions from men; you shall see that
Church of Smyrna, which Christ had nothing against, (2. Rev. 9, 10.) was that
Church which of all the rest had suffered, and was like to suffer most for his
name sake: and therefore as faith is the gift of God, (wherein those who have it
bestowed upon them excel other men,) so suffering for Christ is as well an
excellent gift of God, given as a special favor to some of the Saints, 1.
Phil. 29. by which they walk as it were upon a higher ground above their
brethren, having the spirit of glory and of God resting upon them, 1. Pet.
4.14. and so in 3 Rev. 4. thou have a few names in Sardi, which have not
defiled their garments: and did they lose any thing by cleaving to God; by
keeping their garments undefiled? No says God, these are they that I own,
these shall walk before me in white, for they are worthy.

And therefore though this may be a reason which may seem to beat off some
from the profession of Christ, yet it should rather engage the Saints to follow
Christ, and to keep close to his ways, as knowing, that those that honor
God, he will honor them: and wherein can men honor God more then by a close
walking in a conformity to his will?

3. Rea. Why its best with the Saints when they cleave to the Lord, is because
that those who so do, are not only kept from shame and confusion, but likewise
they are kept from those distracting fears that are ready to lay hold on
persons of all sorts in times of danger, and therefore says David, I will not
be afraid of evil tidings, and what was the reason of it? he gives it
himself, because, (says he) my heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord: It Is
like if David's heart had bin wandering any where else, then he would quickly
have feared evil tidings; but he now (having his heart cleaving to God)
fears them not; and in the 23. Psalm. 3, 4. he restores my soul, and leads
me in the paths of righteousness: yea though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me; Mark I pray,
when once David was brought to walk in the paths of righteousness, then
(says he) though I walk even in the valley of the shadow of death, I will
not fear, as if he should say, though my life be as near taking away from me,
as the shadow of a man is to a man, yet I will not fear, for I walking in the
paths of righteousness know, that thou art with me. And truly it is no small
privilege, (especially in times of fears) to be kept and secured from fears,
for many times the consequences that fears produce upon a person, brings more
dangerous events along with it, then if the very thing feared had come upon
them, and more is required to keep a man from the fear of danger, then from
the danger it self, as for instance, a little apparel will keep a man from
nakedness, when a great deal both of money and apparel will not keep him
from the fear of nakedness and therefore if ye would be kept in times of
trouble from overflowing fears of trouble, then keep close to God: for in ^o
doing you will see so much fulness of strength, and mercy and love in God, as
will swallow up all other inordinate fears.

1. Use. If it be so, that it is best with the servants of God when they keep
closest to him, let us then who profess the name of Christ, and appear to be
in the number of those who are made nigh unto God by the blood of Christ let us
be exhorted therefore to take heed of backsliding, and let us labor to know
that first it is an easy thing to backslide, if we consider the many
provocations hereunto by reason of the deceitfullnesse of our own hearts: and
the snares of the world, with the subtleties of Satan.

And secondly, its a dangerous thing to back-slide, if we do but consider,

1. From whom we back slide, namely God, who is the fountain of life and the
giver of all mercies.

Secondly, To what we back slide, namely, to that which is not able to relieve
us, nor help us in any misery or strait that we fall into.

Thirdly, If we consider what the cariages of God has bin, and is to
back-sliders, you shall see its dangerous, he shall be filled with his own
ways, (says Solomon) and if any one draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him, (says God) 10. Hebr. 38. we shall therefore for the
preventing of this great evil, lay down some signs of a soul declining from
God.

And secondly, we shall lay down some means of prevention.

The signs of declining are these, first a disregarding of the truth of
Christ, 2, Chron. 24.20. when the minds of men, grow weary of the truths of
Christ, and their estimations of truth, (which formerly has bin) slackens,
it is one shrewd sign of declining.

A second sign is, when men begin to grow distrustful of God, and his truth,
when many things which God has said in his word seems harsh to men's spirits,
they cannot well relish it, as they in the 6. John 60. when the sayings of
Christ began to be hard and harsh to them, then they draw back, verse. 66.

A third sign is, unfruitfulnesse under the means and mercies which God
bestows 13. Luke 7. when men shall rather turn the truth of God which they
have received, into notions; and please themselves more with talking of truth
then of practicing what they know, then it is a sign that truth is bidding
them farewell, and they it.

The fourth sign is love of the world, when men's spirits begin to hanker after
the world or the honor thereof, they will soon loose Christ and his truth, 1 Timothy 6.10. the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have
covetted after they have erred from the faith, and therefore from love to
Christ, he that loves the world had rather loose Jesus Christ then the world,
and it must needs be so, because he loves it.

Fifthly, and lastly, another sign is spiritual pride, else-confidence. For
before destruction the heart is haughty: when a man is proud of that which is
^o^ his own, its no marvel if he soon prove a spiritual bankrupt, therefore
I beseech you, let us look to our selves, and if any man think he stand, let
him take heed least he fall. Therefore to prevent it let us consider of some
means.

First, let us labor for soundness of judgment in the truths of God, that so
we may receive nothing upon other men's judgments, and reports, but trying all
things we may hold fast that which is good, for ignorance is the mother of
error, and a corrupted life does soon follow an erroneous judgment, wherefore
let us be often in searching the Scripture and seeking of God by Prayer, that
he would be pleased to unfold those glorious mysteries of his will in his word
unto us by his spirit, that so we may be able to judge of things that differ.

Secondly, let us labor to receive the truth in the love of it, for when truth
is received by men under this consideration of love, when men see an excellency
in truth and love, the truth from that excellency that they see in it, they
will labor for it: you know it is the property of love to do much, and suffer
much: and yet it looks upon all that it does; and suffers as little, because
where true love is, it will produce effects suitable to it self, see this in
that love of God, 3. Ioh. 16. God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. mark, if once God cast an eye of love up-the creature, this
very love will produce an effect suitable to its nature, even the giving of
Jesus Christ to dye for the creature: so indeed if once the love of our souls
be given up to the excellency of the truth, then our lives, our liberties, our
estates, or friends, will follow roundly, but if there be a defect in our love
to the truth, there will soon be a deffect in our standing to, or suffering
for truth.

The third means, let us consider that the truth of God is the portion of the
Saints, if we loose truth we loose Jesus Christ, where will you have comfort,
and where will you have salvation, if you loose truth? And therefore says
Solomon, Prove. 4.13. keep her, for she is thy life, and there fore David has
recourse upon all occasions to the word 119 Psalm. 49, 50. Remember thy word
made to thy Servant, (why) its my comfort in my trouble: as if he should say, I
have no other companion in my troubles but it; and so in the 92. verse. of the
same Psalm, says he, except thy law had bin my delight, I should utterly have
perished in mine afflictions. And therefore as worldly men count themselves with
all they have by what they have and are in the world, so let the servants of
God count themselves with what they have, and are, by nothing, but what they
have in Jesus Christ, who dwells in the truth, and conveyes himself through the
truth into the hearts and consciences of his People, and therefore let us
labor to count it our portion, and if Naboth would rather incur the
displeasure of the King, then part with the inheritance given him by his
fathers. 1 Kings 21.3, 4. how much more should we be willing to incur the
displeasure of all men, rather then to loose any part of the truth of Jesus
Christ given unto us, and purchased for us, at so dear a rate as his own
precious blood.

Now we should come to the next words, expressed in this 8th. verse. now she did
not know. that I gave her Corn and Wine and Oil, and multiplied her Silver
and Gold, which they have bestowed upon Baal.

These words seems to be a maine reason here given by God of this peoples
declining from him, and that is laid down in the general to be the not
taking notice nor observing the mercies and favors of God given unto her.

In which words four things are to be considered.

First, the mercies themselves laid down in these words, Corn and wine and
O^le, etc. Secondly, the author of these mercies, under the term I gave them,
that is, God. Thirdly, the persons to whom these mercies were given; they were
the Children of Jsrael. Fourthly, the carriage of this people toward God, in
the enjoyment of these mercies, and that is here declared.
First, they took no notice of them, from what hand they came, expressed in
these words, now she did not know that I gave her Corn, etc.

Secondly, in spending them, it should seem she taking no notice from whom the
mercies came, takes as little notice or care how they go, which appears in
these words, which they have spent upon Baal: the words being thus considered,
we may observe diverse things from them, for our instruction and comfort.

1. Obs. That God is the only giver of every mercy and favor that the creature
does enjoy. 2. Obs. That it is the duty of the Saints to take special notice
of the mercies and favors which God gives them. 3. Obs. That the not taking
notice of mercy and favors of God, is a special means to occasion men to
depart from God.
As concerning the 1. Observe. that God is the only giver of every mercy and
favor we enjoy.

I conceive none will deny the truth of it, because it is both a dommon truth,
and that which all generally will acknowledge, James 1.17. every good and every
perfect gift is from above and comes down from the father of lights, and
therefore the consideration of this truth should teach all of us to take notice
of the mercy of God, in all the good things we enjoy, to behold God in all the
passages of his providence to us, that so if we have any riches, any honors,
any friends, any grace, any gifts, all come from God. And therefore we should
take heed of sacrificing any thing to our own nets, but as all mercies we
receive come from God, so we must give the glory of all only to him, who is
^lly worthy of all honor and glory, and praise for eve^.

These b^^ng the Observations, and this the substance of all the matter which
God was pleased to help me to deliver where I was apprehended as I am
publicly called by many forth to suffer for them, so I am not unwilling being
requested to declare them to all, to such, and unto any it pleases God by his
good providence to dispose of them, desiring that all persons would try all
things, and hold fast that which is good. 1 Th. 5.21.

I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes, 1. Romans 16. Be not thou ashamed of the
Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the
affliction of the Gospel, 2. T^m. 1.8. FINIS.

