The Earl of LINDSEY his Title, by which himself, and his Participants, do
claim 24000 Acres of Land in the Fennes in Lincoln shire.
FIrst, We claim by the Law, Virtue, and Authority of several Decrees of
Sewers.

Secondly, we claim the same Equity that former Parliaments have afforded to
such undertakings, we having in this expended near 80000 l. to the very great
benefit of the Commonwealth, which we hope may merit the same confirmation this
Parliament has afforded to the Earl of Bedford.

Reg. 127.
That Commissions of Sewers were anciently part of the Commission of Oyer and
Terminer.

That they were issuable at the Kings pleasure, and that the King (as he who
had the Supreme care of things of public concernment) was bound to grant such
Commissions upon all emergences.

Ca. Rep. 10.1^^, In the R^g. 1276. F. N B. 113. 6. H. 6.5. 25 H 8.^10 13.
Eliz. c. 9. 6. H. 6.5.7. la. 20. 23 H. 8 5. 23 H. 8.5.
That this was the constant opinion, we find in our Ancientest Books of Common
Law, That it was constant practice; we find many such Commissions issued, two
especially, long before any Statutes now known in England were made, they were
both sent into Lincoln shire, and the first into the very parts where the
Earl made his Works, and at that time to have done this very Work that the
Earl has now done.

But because those Commissioners were temporary, to persons sometimes strangers
in the place, and ordinarily in redress of mischiefs already happened by some
former inundation, some Statutes have from time to time enlarged the power of
Commissions to act as well in prevention, as redress, and appointed those
Commissions to Gentlemen living on, or near the place, who by their timely
notice might prevent, and their Authorities were made constant for certain
number of years.

The first Statute to this purpose we find in Henry the third his time, which
is as ancient as any Statute now known in England, very many subsequent
Statutes have enlarged their powers in such particulars as in experience they
found necessary, viz to enable them to tax all Lands which might receive
benefit or avoid loss: to make new Dreins, if they upon their view and
observation found the ancient ones were not sufficient; to distraine, and sell
for not payment of those Taxes, or in their discretions to charge such Lands
perpetually, or to sell them for years, or lives, in Tail, or in Fee.

And because the Commissioners were Gentlemen of the Country, not ever so
intelligent in every scruple of Law, it is by later Statutes provided, That
their Decrees shall not be examinable but in Parliament, as diverse heretofore
have been; but those Parliaments never avoided them, if they found the course
taken by their Commissioners, might probably do the work, though it was not
yet really done. But on the contrary, rather then lose the benefit that might
thereby accrue to the State (although those Commissioners might in some thing
have erred in judgment) they did confirm their Decrees, and sometimes better
the Contract in behalf of the Undertakers, as they did Tindalls Law, Lovells
Law, etc.

That those Lands undertaken by the Earl of Lindsey were hurtfully surrounded
in Henry the fifth his time appears by Presentiments at a Session of Sewers at
that time.

That the Earl has pursued the most effectual course in doing the work,
appears by Acts of Sewer, at a Session at Donington before Charles Brandon Duke
of Suffolk, and many more eminent men in 34 H* 8. who decreed the making of
new Dreins in the very same place: and the same outfals to the Sea that the
Earl has done, only the Earl has made the same, and some more, and much
more capacious, and that the Commisioners then laid the Tax generally, as the
Commissioners now laid this last, before their Contract with the Earl.

That upon great complaint of the Inhabitants at a Session of Sewers at
Sempringham 8 Eliz before the Earl of Lincoln Lord high Admiral of England,
and many more, a general Tax was laid for the repairing and enlarging Dreins
to carry away waters that in those ^^^n then annoyed them.

At another Session 17 Eliz. at Swinstead, upon complaint of the Country that
they were then more drowned then formerly; the Commissioners then decreed the
making such Dreins as the Duke of Suffolk and others had decreed in Hen. 8.
his time, and such as the Earl has since made, and they then laid a Tax upon
the same Lands, but it was not paid, and so nothing was done.

At Bourne in 6 Iac. the Commissioners upon their view of the great inundations
that time, laid a general Tax for doing some works in the said Fennes.

Reg. 12^. 23. H. 8. c. 5. 7. Ia. 10.2c.
But about the 5. Car. Sir Anthony Irby, Sergeant Callis, and other
Commissioners of Sewers, and of the Peace, then finding all former Attempts
fruitless, by reason the Inhabitants would never pay the Taxes nor the Lands
by reason of the Surrounder had no Cattle upon them to render Distress, and
well understanding that the King was bound, as is expressed in the Preamble of
all Statutes of Sewers to give direction in works of this nature and
necessity. Those Commissioners we say upon those considerations, did by their
Letters remonstrate to the then King, the necessiti^s and profits of dreining
this Land, and beseec^'d his Majesty to recommend some person of Honor to
contract with them as undertaker, the King was pleased to recommend the Earl of
^^ndsey, however before they made any contract with the Earl, they yet laid
another Tax of 13 s. 4 d. per Acre, at a Session at Sleeford of 35
Commi^^ioners, many of them Lords and owners, and prime Gentlemen of the
Country, and after three years expectancy of that, and little or none paid,
Then 11. Car. lest their endeavors should have been as fruitless, as
formerly, at a public Session of Sewers, and in a general Assembly of Lords,
Owners and Commoners, where were 32 Commissioners, many Lords and Owners of the
said Fennes; after many proposals and refusals, it was fully agreed, and a
perfect contract made with the said Earl, that the said Earl should have as a
reward for dreining all between Bourne and Lincoln 24000 Acres, and as soon as
he should have finished that part between Bourn and Kime etc. he should have
14000 Acres as a proportionable part for so much to be put into his possession,
when by the Commissioners it should be adjudged dreined.

The Earl applied himself to the work, and 12 Car. at a Session at Boston the
Commissioners being 24 apportioned his part out of each particular Fenne.

At a Session at Bourn 13* Car. 10 Commissioners ascertained the place where
his proportion in every Fenne should lie.

This Law was after confirmed 15 Car. at Sleeford by 18 Commssioners.

After in the same years by 19 Commissioners it was viewed entirely upon the
place, after at a Session at Sleeford the said Commissioners did decree the
possession to the Earl. After which,

The Earl did enclose it, build, and inhabit it, plant, plough, sow and reap
two years without disturbance, the third year the Parliament then sitting and
having received six clamorous Petitions from some of the Country, and examined
many of their witnesses, did as they conceived just, grant Orders from both
Houses, to quiet the Earls possession, and secure the Croppes then upon the
Land: But the Petitioners in contempt of all, (pending their Petitions)
violently entered and destroyed the Dreines, Buildings and Crops then ready to
reap, and of a very great value, and have ever since held possession against
the said Earl, and perished his Works, which was the highest contempt that ever
was done to a Parliament sitting.

IN the year 1646, after the War ended, the Drayners did Petition the same
Parliament to restore them to their possession, and to settle the said Draining
as they had done Bedford Level, and the Parliament did refer the business
unto a Committee, where all the Members had voices, that would come, and after
seven years examination of all differences complained of by the Drayners and
the Rioters, with their Councels on both sides, until that both sides did
publicly declare to the Commit, that neither party had (...) refer the
(...) the Report unto the Solicitors and their Councels on both sides, out of
all the papers and examinations that lay in the Clerk of the Committees hands;
and accordingly the Report was by them drawn up, and (...) said Solicitors and
their Councels: And this was done by Master Thomas Hall's advise, who did ass^^
the Solicitor for the Rioters, and did approve of every particular before it
was entered into the said Report; which was after delivered by both Parties
unto the Committee, and by the Chaireman of the Committee, was presented unto
the House, and on the reading thereof, the Parliament did Order a Bill to be
brought in, for making an Act to settle the said undertakings, and did appoint
several days to read the said Bill, which was tendered by Master John Goodwin:
but that Parliament did end before it could be perfected.

Then the Drayners did Petition his Highness the Lord Protector, to perfect
what that Parliament had so near finished, and his Highness did refer the
consideration thereof, unto his Council, who after due examination of the
cause, by reviewing of the proceedings in Parliament, (which lay before them)
and by summoning of both parties, and hearing them therein, after seven months
examination of the business, did pass an Ordinance, But did spend so much
time therein, that his Highness the Lord Protector did not think fit to pass
the said Ordinance because the Parliament was to set within two days. So that
the Drayners (by the Rioters holding the possession of their Estates 12 years,
and by this long suit) are become so much indebted, and so much impoverished,
that they are unable to begin the suit a new, and must be ruined, unless
this Parliament, (in consideration of their great good done to the Nation, and
in compassion of their sufferings under so long opression of the Rioters and
their abetters) will be now pleased to perfect the first Act intended by that
Parliament, or the Ordinance lately passed by his Highness his Council, both
which do remain in Master Scobels hands.

THE premises considered, it is humbly conceived, that the Rioters ought not in
Justice or Conscience, to be rewarded for their barbarous Act of ruining that
public work, with twelve years enjoyment of the Drayners Land; nor can they
in equity claim the benefit of any Law, that have rooted up the foundation of
all Law, (as much as in them lay) by that Riot and contempt against that
Parliaments Order, whose Justice they declined, while their cause was in
hearing before the Committee: and yet these men do know that in the 23 year
of Henry the eighth, the words of the Statute are; that a Decree of Sewers
ratified and confirmed by the Royal Assent under the great Seal (as
Lindesey-Levell Decrees are) they cannot be altered but by Act of Parliament:
And unto the severe inquire of 7 years examination before a Parliament, the
Drayners have submitted, and have been justified, and do now again desire the
Justice of this Parliament in the said cause, which the Rioters have ever
appealed from.

William Killigrew.
Sept. 5. 1654.

