A Clear and Evident WAY For enriching the Nations OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND, And
for setting very great Numbers of Poor on Work.

2 Chronicles. 9. 27. And the King made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and
Cedar-trees made be as the Sycamore-trees, that are in the low plains in
abundance. LONDON, Printed by T. M. and A. C. and are sold by John Saywell at
the Greyhound in Little-Britain. 1650.

To the People of England and Ireland; Whether Nobles, Gentry, or Commons.
Right Honorable, etc.
FOR these thirty years past, it has been observed, That those in public
Place or Trust have plotted and contrived little, but how to enrich themselves;
Whether you look upon Protestant, or Puritan: Most, if not all of both, laying
about them like mad, until they could say with Dives; Soul, thou have enough
laid up for many years; eat, drink, and take thy rest!

In all which time, and with the generality of such persons, the public good
has been no further cared for, then the Egyptians did; That they have their
Tale of Brick or Taxes: Being not ignorant, that the hard labor in
Brick-making, with the want of Straw, had made the Israelites cry, and not
without fear that that cry was come up to Heaven.

Lest that after a getting over the Red Sea, with the destruction of very many
of these Taskmasters, these Two Nations should make Indentures in the
Wilderness for forty years, before they get to Canaan, and only Caleb and
Joshua get thither: Knowing that miracles are ceased, this Essay is published
for Advance of Trade; having ready another of excellent use for enriching by
Land, as this by Sea; which, if this have encouragement, shall follow: Thereby
to help You all either a nearer way to the Land of Promise, so much prayed
for, and so dear bought; Or to enable You to bear the difficulties and
miseries You are like to suffer in the journey. You shall do well to fall close
to the business, and set on work what is here laid down: You have old Laws
enough to bear you out; and certainly none will hinder your gathering Straw,
who will exact and need your Tale of Bricks, if they put you not upon bringing
in more: And for your encouragement, Whosoever shall agree in the City of
London, or any other part of this Nation, or that of Ireland, to set the
business on foot; A way shall clearly be laid down for the Income of Ten per
Cent. possibly Twenty, Thirty, or more, which will balance the experience, and
so underselling of others; and no more hazard of Principal or Profit, then is
in putting Money to Use upon good Security. This Edge (it is confessed) must have
an Additional Law. By this, you will do that really in way of help to the Poor,
that hundreds of thousands loins will bless you, All will be bettered, and
you had in everlasting honor. Which is all eyed by him, who desires no longer
to breathe, then he shall be ready to show himself

Your, or the Nation's Humble Servant, I. D.

SOme years past was presented to his late Majesty a Model of extraordinary
importance, honor and profit: which being laid aside (as was conceived) the
ensuing was tendered, consisting of several Propositions; gathered from the
fruition of those wonderful blessings England's Seas and Land were furnished
with; not only to enrich and fill Coffers, but increase such might and
strength, as would, being put in execution, make in short time this Nation of
so great power, that all the Princes-Neighbours shall be glad of its
friendship, and fearful to offend it. Peruse this Advertisement with care and
judgment, and you will discern as much.

By way of introduction consider, 1. The true ground, course and form by which
other Countries make themselves powerful and rich in all kinds of all
Merchandising, Manufacture, and fullness of Trade, and yet have no Commodities
in their own Country growing to do it withal.

2. That this Nation it self may improve its native commodities, with other
traffic, as well and better, yea to millions of pounds more yearly then now
they are; and bring not only to Englands Representatives coffers within the
space of two or three years millions of pounds, increase the Revenues many
thousands yearly, please, and greatly profit the people; But also set at work
all sorts of people in the Realm, as other Nations do, who raise their
greatness by the abundance of this Nations Commodities, whilst we are
parlying and disputing whether it be good for us or not.

For other Nations*
THose who have traveled the United Provinces, have observed those Countries
grow potent, and abound in all things to serve themselves and other Nations,
where little grows: raising their estate to such an admirable height, as they
are at this day even a wonder to the world* Which well weighed, will appear to
come from these Seas, and this Land; out of which they draine and still covet
to exhaust our wealth and coin, and with our own Commodities weaken us, and
finally beat us quite out of Trading in other Countries. Which experience
tells, they more fully obtain, by their convenient Privileges and settled
Constitutions, then England with all the Laws and super abundance of homebred
Commodities which God has vouchsafed these Seas and this Land. By these
Privileges they draw multitudes of Merchants to trade with them, and many
other Nations to inhabit amongst them, which makes them populous: They make
Storehouses of all foreign Commodities* wherewith upon every occasion of
scarcity and dearth, they are able to furnish foreign Countries with plenty of
those Commodities, which before in time of plenty they engrossed, and brought
home from the same places: which does greatly a^g^^^n^ Power and Treasure to
their State, besides the common good in setting their people and poor on work.

To these Privileges* they add s^^lnesse of Custom and liberty of Trade,
which makes them flourish; and their Countries plentiful of all kind of Coin
and Commodities, and their Merchants so rich, that when a loss comes they
scarce feel it.

They have also at present many advantages of us: One is by their fashioned
ships, called ^^^vers, Hoyb^rks, Hoyes, and others, that are made to hold (...)
bulk of Merchandise, and to sail with a few men for profit* For example:
Though an English-ship of 200 Tuns, and a Holland-ship o^ any other of the
Petty-States of the same Burden, be at Da^^k o^ any other place beyond the
Seas, or in England; they do serve the Merchant better cheap by 40l. in the
100. in his freight, then we can, by reason he has but nine or ten Mariners,
and we near thirty. Thus he saves twenty men's meat and wages in a Voyage, and
so in all other their ships accordingly to their burden; by which means they
are fraighted wheresoever they come to great profit, whilst our ships ^e still
and decay, or go to Newcastle for Coals.

Add to this their s^alnesse of Custom inwards and outward, whereof we have
daily experience: For if 2 English ships, or 2 of any other Nation be at
Bordeaux, both laden with Wines of 300 Tuns apeece, the one bound for Holland
or any other Petty-State, the other for England; the Merchant shall pay about
500l. Custom here, and other duties, when the other in Holland or any other
Petty-States shall be cleared for less then 50l. and so in all other Wares and
merchandises accordingly, which draws all Nations to traffic with them. And
although it seems but small Duties which they receive; yet the multitudes of
all kind of Commodities and Coin is so great that is brought in by themselves
and others, and carried out by themselves and others, that they receive more
Customs and Duties to the State (by the greatness of their Comerce) in one
year, then England does in two; for the hundredth part of Commodities are not
spent in Holland, but ven^^d into other Countries; which makes all the
Country, Merchants, to buy and sell, and increase ships and mariners to
transport them.

Notwithstanding their Excises brings them great Re^en^es; yet whosoever will
adventure to Bordeaux but for six Tuns of Wines, shall be free of Excise in
his own house all the year long. And this is done (of purpose) to animate and
increase Merchants in their Country.

And if it happen that a Trade be stopped by any foreign Nation (which they
heretofore usually had) or hear of any good Trading (which they never had) they
will hinder others, and seek either by favor, money, or force, to open the gap
of traffic for advancement of themselves, and employment of their people.

And when there is a new Trade or Course erected, they give free Customs
inwards and outward, for the better maintenance of Navigation, and
encouragement of the people to that business.

A little to enlarge upon the following particulars, to prove that thus they
and others glean the wealth and strength from us to themselves, and become the
Traders of the world.

1. Merchant-Staplers make all things in abundance, by reason of their
Storehouses continually replenished with all kind of Commodities. 2. The
liberty of Free-traffique for Strangers to buy and sell in Countries and
States, (as if they were freeborn.) 3. The small Dutles levied upon Merchants.
4. The fashioned Ships, continually fraighted before ours, by reason of their
few mariners and great bulk, serving the Merchant cheap. 5. The forwardness to
further all manner of Trading. 6. The wonderful employment of Busses for
fishing, and the great returns made. 7 The giving Free-custome inwards and
outward for any new-erected Trade: by means whereof they have already gotten
almost the sole ^^^de into their hands. And this is not in the Netherlands
only, but
All Nations may buy and sell freely in France, and there is free-Custome
outward twice or thrice in a year; at which times our Merchants themselves do
make their great sales of English commodities, and do buy and lade their great
bulk of French commodities to serve for the whole year. In Rochel and in
Britain; free Custom all the year long (except some small Toll) which makes
great traffic, and makes them flourish.

In Denmark, to encourage and enrich their Merchants, and to increase Ships and
Mariners, free Custom all the year long for their own merchants, (except one
month between Bartholmewtide and Michaelmasse.

The Hance-Towns have likewise advantage of us, and in most things imitate the
Hollanders, which makes them exceeding rich and plentiful of all kinds of
Commodities and Coin, and so strong in ships and mariners, that some of their
Towns have near 1000 sail of ships.

The merchandises of France, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Turkey, East, and West
Indies are transported most by the Hollanders and other Petty-States into the
East and North-east Kingdoms of Pomerland, Spruceland, Poland, Denmark,
Swe^hen, Leifland, and Germany; and the merchandise brought from the last
mentioned Kingdoms (being wonderfully many) are likewise by the Hollanders and
other Petty-States transported into the Southern and Western Dominions; and yet
the s^ituation of England lies far better for a storehouse to serve the
Southern, East, and North-east Regions then they, and has far better means to
do it, if we will bend our course for it.

No so^^er a Dearth of ^^^^, Wine, or Corn here, or other merchandise, but
forth with the Embdeners, Hamburgers and Hollanders, out of their Storehouses
lade 50. 100. or more ships, dispersing themselves round about this Kingdom,
and carry away great store of Coin and wealth for little Comn odities, in those
times of Dearth: by which means they suck our Commonwealth of their Riches, cut
down our Merchants, and decay our Navigation, not with their Natural
commodities which grows in their own Country, but the Merchandises of other
Countries and Kingdoms. Therefore it is far more easy for us to serve our
selves, hold up our Merchants, increase our Ships and Mariners, strengthen the
Kingdom, and not only keep our money in our own Realm, (which other Nations
still rob us of) but bring in their who carry ours away, and make the Bank of
Coin and Storehouse to serve other Nations as well and far better cheap then
they in England.

Amsterdam is never without 700000. Quarters of Corn, besides the plenty they
daily vent, and none of this grows in their own Country. A dearth in England,
France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, or other places, is truly observed to enrich
Holland seven years after, and likewise the Petty-States.

For example: The Dearth, November. 1614. the Hamburgers, Embdeners, and
Hollanders, out of their Storehouses furnished this Kingdom, and from
Southampton, Exeter, and Bristol, only in a year and a half, carried away near
Two hundred thousand pounds: which being true, Then what great quantity of
Coin was transported from all Ports of this Nation? it cannot be esteemed so
little as two Millions: to the great decay of this Realm, impovererishing the
People, discredit to the Company of Merchants, and dishonor to the Land, that
any Nation that have not Corn in their own Country growing, should serve this
famous Kingdom which God has so enabled within it self. And if so much in
1614. five times as much between 1648. and 1649.

These have a continual Trade into this Kingdom with 5 or 600 ships yearly,
with merchandises of other Countries and Kingdoms, and store them up, until
the prices rise to their minds: And we trade not with 50 ships into their
Country in a year; their number are about this Realm every Easterly wind for
the most part, to lade Coals and other merchandise. Again.

Unless there be a Scarcity, Dearth, or High-prices, Merchants do forbear that
place, where great Impositions are laid upon the merchandise; And those places
slenderly shipped, all served, and at dear rates, and oftentimes in scarcity,
and want of employment for the people. And those Petty-States finding truly by
experience, that small Duties imposed upon merchandise draws all traffiique
unto them; and free liberty for Strangers to buy and sell, does make continual
Marts: therefore whatever Excises or Impositions are laid upon the common
people; yet they still ease, uphold, and maintain the Merchants by all possible
means, of purpose to draw the wealth and strength of Christendom to
themselves: whereby it appears, though the Duties be but small, yet the
Customs for going out, and coming in, does so abound, that they increase their
Revenues greatly, and make great profit by sea and land, in serving themselves
and other Nations: likewise the great Concourse which comes by the same means,
enableth the Common People to bear their burden laid upon them; and yet they
grow rich, together with the great Comerce and Trade occasioned by their
convenient Privileges and commodious Constitutions.

There was an Intercourse of Traffic in G^^^a, and in that City was the
flower of Comerce, as appears by their ancient Records and sumptuous
Buildings; all Nations traded with merchandises to them, and there was the
Storehouse of all Italy and other places: But after they had set a great
Custom of XVI. per Cent. all Nations left trading with them, which made them
give themselves wholly ^o Usury; and at this day we have not; ships go thither
in a year. On the contrary, the Duke of Florence builded Ligo^^, and set small
Customs upon merchandise, gave them great and pleasing Privileges; which has
made that a rich and strong City, with a flourishing State and Trade.

Concerning the particular of Fishing, and the greatest in the w^^ld, which is
upon the Coast of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Fishermen living (to our
shame) in the Low Countries and other Petty-States, wherewith they serve
themselves and all Christendom.

In four Towns in the East-Kingdomes within the Sound, viz. Quinsborough,
Elbing, Statten, and Da^zick, there is carried and (...) in a year between 30
and 40000 Lasts of Herrings, sold at 15 or 16 pounds the Last, which is 170000
pounds; in such request are our herrings there, that they are oftentimes sold
for 20, 24, 30, and 36 pounds the Last. England sends not one Barrel into all
those Countries.

The Hollanders send into Russia near 1500 Lasts sold at or about 30^ the
^^r^el, which amounts to 27000 pounds. England, about 20 or 30 Lasts.

To Sto^d, Hamburgh, Breame, and Embden, up the river of Elve, Weazer, and
Embes, is carried and vented of Fish and Herrings about 6000 Lasts, sold at
about 15 or 16 pounds the Last, which comes to 100000 pounds yearly. England,
none.

Cleveland, Gulickland, and so up the Rhine to Cullen, Frankford on the Main,
and so over all Germany, is carried and vented of Fish and Herrings 20000
Lasts, sold at 20l. the Last, which is 440000l. and we none.

Up the River of Maze, Liege, Mastrick, Vendlow, Zu^phen, Deventer, Campen,
Swole, and all over Lukeland, is carried and vented of Herrings 7000 Lasts sold
at 20l. the Last, which is 140000. and we none.

To Gelderland, Artois, Henalt, Brabant, Flanders, up the River of Antwerp, all
over the Archdukes country, is carried and vented between 8 or 9000 Lasts of of
Herrings sold at 18l. the Last, which is 170000l. and we none.

The Hollanders and others carried of all sorts of Herrings to Roan only in one
year, besides all other Ports of France, 5000 Lasts of Herrings, sold at 20l.
the Last, which is 100000l. and we not 100 ^ast thither. They are sold
oftentimes there for 20, 24, and 30l. the Last.

Between Christmas and Lent, the Duties for Fish and Herrings came to 15000
Crowns at Roan, that year the late Queen dec^ased, (Sir Tho. Parry was Agent
there then, and St. Savours his man knows it to be true, who handled the
business for pulling down the Impositions.) Then what great sums of money
came to all the Port-towns to enrich the French Kings coffers, and to all the
Kings and States throughout Christendom to enrich their coffers? besides the
great quantity vented to the Straits, and the multitude spent in the
Low Countries, where there is likewise sold many 100000l. worth yearly. If this
stream were turned to the good of this N^tion, to whose Seacoasts only God
has sent and given these great blessings and multitude of riches for us to
take* how happy were it! The hurt, on the contrary, that any Nation should
carry out of this Realm yearly such great masses of money, for Fish they take
on our Seas, many of which sold again by them to us; must needs be great, and
as great dishonor to this Nation.

From any Port Town of any Kingdom in Christendom, the B^idge-master or the
Wharf-master, for 20s. a year, will deliver a ^^e Note of the Number of Lasts
of Herrings brought to their Wharfs, and their Prices commonly sold at. The
number brought To Dansick, Cullen; Rotterdam, and Enchusen, it will cost 3, 4,
or 5l. for a true Note.

The abundance of Corn grows in the East Kingdoms: but the great
Storehouses for Grain, to serve Christendom, and the Heathen Countries (in
the time of Dearth) is in the Low Countries, wherewith upon every occasion of
scarcity and dearth, they enrich themselves seven years after, and employ their
people, and get great freight for their Ships in other Countries; and we not
one in that course.

The mighty Vineyards, and store of Salt, is in France and Spain: But the great
Vintage, and Staple of Salt, is in the Low Countries; and they send near 1000.
Sail of ships with Salt and Wine only into the East-Kingdomes yearly, besides
many other places; and we not one in that course.

The exceeding Groves of Wood are in the East-Kingdomes: But the huge Piles of
Wainscot, Clapboards, Fir-deale, Masts, and Timber, is in the Low Countries,
where none grows; wherewith they serve themselves and other parts, and this
Kingdom with those Commodities. They have 5 or 600 great long Ships
continually using that Trade; and we not one in that course.

The Wool, Cloth, Lead, and Tyn, with diverse Commodities are in England: But
by means of our Wool and Cloth going out rough, undrest, and undyed, there is
an exceeding Manufacturie in the Low Countries, wherewith they serve themselves
and other Nations; which advances greatly the employment of their people at
home, and traffic abroad, and puts down ours in forain parts where our
Merchants trade unto, with our own Commodities: we dressing and dying it
basely; they to that perfection, that they will not fail color, or be
threed-bare in seven years wearing.

We send into the East-Kingdoms yearly but 100 ships; and our Trade chiefly
depends upon three Towns, Elbing, Kingsborough, and Dantzick, for making our
Sales, and buying their Commodities sent into this Realm at dear rates, which
this Kingdom bears the burden of.

The Low Countries send into the East-Kingdoms yearly about 3000 ships, trading
into every City and Port-Town, taking the advantage and vending their
Commodities to exceeding profit, buying and lading their ships with plenty of
those Commodities which they have from every of those Towns 20l. per cent.
better cheap then we, by reason of the difference of their Coin; and their Fish
yields ready money: which greatly advances their traffique^ and decays ours.

They send into France, Spain, Portugal, and Italy, from the East-Kingdoms,
(that passes through the Sound, and through our Narrow-seas) yearly of the
East-country Commodities about 2000 ships, and we none in that course.

They trade into all Cities and Port-Towns in France; We chiefly to five or
six.

They traffic into every City and Port-Town round about this Land, with 5 or
600 ships yearly; And we chiefly but to three Towns in their Country, and but
with 40 ships.

Notwithstanding the Low Countries have as many Ships and Vessels as all the
Kingdoms of Christendom have, (let England be one) and build every year near
1000 ships, and not a Timbertree growing in their own country; also all their
homebred commodities that grow in their land in a year, less then 100 good
ships are able to carry away at one time: Yet they handle the matter so (for
setting them all on work) that their Traffic with the Hance-Towns exceeds
in shipping all Christendom.

We have all things of our own in superabundance to increase Traffic, and
Timber to build ships, and Commodities of our own to load about 1000 Ships and
Vessels at one time, (besides the great Fishing) and as fast as they have made
their Voyages might lade, and so year after year* all the year long to
continue: yet our ships and mariners decline* and Traffic and Merchants daily
decay.

The main bulk and mass of Herrings, from whence they raise so many Millions
yearly, that enricheth other Kingdoms, Kings and States coffers, and likewise
their own people, proc^edeth from our Sea and Land; and the Return of the
Commodities and Coin they bring home in exchange of Fish and other Commodities,
are so huge, as would declare a large Discourse apart: All the amends they make
us, is, They beat us out of Trade in all parts with our own Commodities.

For instance: We had a great Trade in Russia 70 years ^ and about 14 years
past, we sent store of goodly ships to trade in those parts, and three years
past we set out but four, and this last year two or th^ee. But to the contrary;
the Hollanders about 20 years since traded thither with two ships only, yet now
they are increased to about thirty or forty, and one of their ships is as great
as two of ours; and the same time (in their troubles there) that we decreased,
they increased; and the chiefest Commodities they carry thither with them is
English Cloth, Herrings taken on our Coast, English Lead and Pewter made of our
Tin, besides other Commodities: All which we may do better then they. And
although it be a cheap Country, and the Trade very gainful, yet we have almost
brought it to naught by disorderly Trading, Joint Stock, and the Merchants
bandying themselves one against another.

We used to have 8 or 9 great ships to go continually a fishing to Wardhouse,
and this year but one; and so pro rato they out-goe us in all kind of Fishing
and Merchandising in all Countries, by reason they spare no cost, nor deny no
Privileges that may encourage Advancement of Trade and Manufacturie.

IF it stand with the good liking of the STATES to take notice of these things
conceived to be fit for their consideration, which is tendered unto them out of
unfeigned zeal to the Advancement of the general good of all Subjects; it
being apparent that no three Kingdoms in Christendom can compare with this for
support of Traffic, and continual employment of the people within themselves,
having so many great means both by sea and land to enrich, multiply the Navy,
enlarge Traffic, make the Nation powerful, and People rich, who through
idleness are poor, wanting employment; many Land and Coast-Towns much
ruinated; need of Coin; Shipping, Traffic, and Mariners decayed; whilst
Neighbour-Princes (without these means) abound in wealth, enlarge their Towns,
increase their shipping, Traffic, and Mariners, and find out such employment
for their people, that are all Advantages to their Commonwealth; only by
ordaining commodious Constitutions in Merchandising, and fullness of Trade to
all their people in Manufacturie.

God has blessed this Nation with incomparable benefits: As, with Copper, Lead,
Iron, Tin, Allome, Copperas, Saffron, Fells, and diverse other native
commodities, to the number of an hundred, and other Manufacturies vendible to
the number of a thousand, (as shall appear) besides Corn, whereof great
quantity of Beer is made, and most transported by strangers; as also Wool,
whereof much is shipped forth unwrought into Cloth or Stuffs, and Cloth
transported undyed, which does employ and maintain near 50000 people in forain
parts, our own people wanting that employment in England, many of them being
enforced to live in great want, and seek it beyond the seas.

Coals, which does employ near 600 strangers ships yearly to transport them out
of this Kingdom, whilst we do not employ twenty ships in that course.

Iron-Ordinance, which is a Jewel of great value far more then it is accounted,
by reason that no other Country could ever attain unto it, although they have
assayed it with great charge.

Timber for building of ships, and Commodities plenty to lade them, which
Commodities other Nations want; yet we decline in shipping, traffic, and
mariners.

These inconveniences happen by three causes especially.
1. The unprofitable Course of Merchandising. 2. Want of the true Course of
full Manufacturie of our homebred Commodities. 3. Undervaluing our Coins
contrary to the Rules of other Nations.
For instance: The Merchant-Adventurers by over-trading upon Credit, or with
money taken up upon Exchange, whereby they lose usually 10. or 12. and sometimes
15. or 16. per cent. are enforced to make sale of their Clothes at under-rates,
to keep their credit; whereby Cloth (being the Jewel of the Land) is
undervalued, and the Merchant in short time eaten out.

The Merchants of Ipswich, whose Trade for Elbing is chiefly for fine Clothes,
and some few sorting Clothes, (all died and dressed within this Land) do for
the most part buy their fine Clothes upon Time, and by reason they go so much
upon Credit, they are enforced (not being able to stand upon their Markets) to
sell, giving 15 or 18 months day of payment for their Clothes; and having sold
them, they then presently sell their Bills (so taken for Cloth) allowing after
the rate of 14 or 15* and sometimes 20 per cent. which money they employ
forthwith in Wares at excessive prices, and lose as much more that way, by that
time their Wares be sold at home. Thus by overrunning themselves upon Credit,
they disable themselves and others, inhancing the price of forain Commodities,
and pulling down the Rates of their own.

The West-Country Merchants that trade with Clothes into France or Spain, do
usually employ their Servants, Young*men of small experience, (and does not
London so likewise?) who by cunning combining of the French and Spanish
Merchants are so intrapped, that when all Customs and Charges be accounted,
their Masters shall handly receive their Principal-mony. As for Returns out of
France, their silver and gold is so high-rated, that our Merchants cannot bring
it home, but to great loss. Therefore the French Merchants set higher Rates of
their Commodities, which we must either buy dear, or let our money lie dead
there a long time, until we may conveniently employ the same.

The Northern Merchants of York, Hull, and Newcastle, trade only in
White-Kersies and Coloured-Dozens; and every Merchant (be his Adventure never
so small) does for the most part send over an unexperienced Youth, unfit for
Mechandising; which brings to the Stranger great advantage, but to his Master
and Commonweal great hinderance. For they, before their goods be landed, go to
the Stranger, and buy such quantities of Iron, Flax, Corn, and other
Commodities as they are bound to lade their ships withal, which ships they
engage themselves to relade within three weeks or a month, and do give the
price the Merchant-stranger asks, because he gives them Credit, and lets
them ship away their Iron, Flax, and other Commodities, before they have sold
their Kersies and other Clothes; by which means extraordinary dear Commodities
are returned into the Realm, and the Servant also enforced to sell his Clothes
underfoot, and oftentimes to loss, to keep his Credit, and to make payment for
the goods before shipped home, having some 20 days or a months respite to
sell the Clothes and to give the Merchant satisfaction for his Iron, Flax, and
other Wares; by which extremities our homebred Commodities are abased.

Touching Manufacturie.
THere has been about 80000 undrest and undyed Cloths yearly transported.
Which in 55 years, is near 20 Millions that would have been gained by the
labor of poor workmen in that time, with the Merchants gains for bringing in
dying stuffs and return of Cloths dressed and dyed* with other benefits to the
Realm; besides exceeding in larging of Traffic, and increase of Ships and
Mariners.

There would have been gained in that time about three Millions by increase of
Custom upon Commodities returned for Clothes dressed and dyed, and for dyeing
stuffs, which would have more plentifully been brought in and used for the same.

There has been also transported in that time yearly by Bayze, five Northern
and Devonshire Kersies white, about* 50000 Clothes, accounting three Kersies to
a Cloth, whereby has been lost about five Millions by these sort of Clothes in
that time, which would have come to poor workmen for their labor, with the
Custom of Dyeing stuffs, and the peoples profit for bringing them in, with
returns of other Commodities.

Bayze are transported white unto Amsterdam, and being there dressed and dyed are
shipped into Spain, Portugal, and other Kingdoms, where they are sold in the
name of Flemish Bayze, setting their own Town-Seale upon them: so that we lose
the very name of our homebred Commodities, and other Countries get the
reputation and profit thereof. Lamentable it is, that this Land should be
deprived of so many aforementioned Millions, and that our Native Commodities of
Cloth (ordained of God for the natural subjects, being so royal and rich in it
self) should be driven to so small advantage of reputation and profit to the
people, and so much improved and intercepted by strangers, considering that God
has enabled and given this Nation more convenience to advance dressing, dying,
and transporting of all Cloths.

All the Companies of the Land transport Cloths dressed and dyed to the good of
the kingdom (except the Merchant-Adventurers) whereby, the Easterland and
Turkey Merchants with other Companies do increase Customs by bringing in and
spending Dyeingstuffs, and setting people on work by dressing and dying before
they transport them; and they might increase far more Custom to, and make much
more profit to themselves and this Realm, and set many thousands of poor
people more on work (for dressing and dying) and likewise employ more ships and
Mariners for bringing in dyeing stuffs, were it not for the
Merchant-Adventurers who transport their Cloths white, rough, undrest, and
undyed into the Low Countries, where they sell them to the strangers, who
afterward dress, dye, and stretch them to such unreasonable lengths (contrary
to our Law) that they prevent and forestal our Markets, and cross the just
prohibition of our State and Realm by their Agents and Factors lying in diverse
places with our own Cloths: to the great decay of this Nation in general, and
discredit of our Cloths in particular.

If the account were truly known, it would be found that they make not clear
profit (only by Cloth undyed) 60000. l. a year. But it is most apparent in
Customs, the Merchants in their sales, and prizes; Subjects, in their labors
for lack of not dressing; ships and Mariners in not bringing in of Dying
stuffs, and spending of Allome, is hindered yearly a million of pounds. So that
trade is driven to the great hinderance of the people, by putting native
Commodities to pass rough, undrest and undyed by the Merchant-Adventurers.

Touching Fishing.
THe great Sea-businesse of Fishing does employ near 20000 ships and vessels,
and 400000 people are employed yearly upon the Coasts of England, Scotland and
Ireland, with 60 ships of war, which may prove dangerous.

The Hollanders only have about 3000 ships to fish withal, and 50000 people are
employed yearly upon the Coasts of England, Scotland and Ireland.

These 3000 fishing-ships and Vessels of the Hollanders, does employ near 9000
other ships and vessels, and 150000 persons more by Sea and Land, to make
provision to dress and transport the fish they take, and return Commodities;
whereby they are enabled, and do build yearly 1000 ships and vessels, having
not one Timber tree growing in their own Country, nor homebred Commodities to
lade 100 ships, and yet they have 20000 ships and vessels, and all employed.

King Henry the seventh, desirous to make his kingdoms powerful and rich by
increase of ships and Mariners, and employment of his people, sent unto his
Seacoast Towns, moving them to set up the great and rich Fishing, with promise
to give them needful privileges, and to furnish them with Loans of money (if
need were) to encourage them; yet his people were slack. Having traced this
business, and made known to this State, the Merchants and others, it will do
well, the able and well-affected set down under their hands for more assurance
and promise, to disburse sums of money for building this great and rich large
Sea-City, which will increase more strength to the Land, give more comfort and
do more good to all Cities and Towns, then all the Companies of the Kingdom,
having fit and needful privileges for the upholding and strengthening of so
weighty and behoveful a business.

For example, twenty Busses built and put into a Seacoast Town where there is
not one ship before; there must be to carry, recarry, transport and make
provision for one Busse, 3 ships: likewise every ship sets on work 30
several Trades and occupations, and 400 persons by Sea and Land, insomuch as
300 persons are not able to make one fleet of Nets in 4 months for one Busse,
which is no small employment.

Thus by 20 Busses are set on work near 8000 persons by sea and land, and an
increase of above 1000 mariners, and a fleet of 80 sail of ships to belong to
one Town, where none were before; to take the wealth of the Sea, to enrich and
strengthen the Land, only by the raising of 20 Busses.

Then what good a thousand or two will do, I leave it to consideration.

It is worthy to be noted how necessary Fishermen are to the Commonwealth, and
how needful to be advanced and cherished, viz.

1. For taking Gods blessing out of the Sea, to enrich the Realm, which
otherwise we lose. 2. For setting the people on work. 3. For making cheapnesse
and plenty in the Realm. 4. For increasing of shipping to make the Land
powerful. 5. For a continual Nurcerie for breeding and increasing of Mariners.
6. For making employment of all sorts of people, as blind, lame, and others, by
Sea and Land, for 10, or 12 years upwards. 7. For increase of Custom upon
Merchandises returned from other Countries for Fish and Herrings. 8 For
increase and inabling of Merchants, which now droope and daily decay.
Touching the Coin.
FOr the most part all Free-states (both Heathen and Christian) as Turkey,
Barbary, France, Poland, and others do hold for a rule of never failing profit,
to keep their Coin at higher rates within their own Territories, then it is in
other Kingdoms. The Causes.
1. To perserve the Coin. 2. To bring unto themselves that of foraigne
Princes. 3. To enforce Merchant strangers to take their Commodities at high
rates, which this Nation bears the burden of.


For Instance.
The King of Barbary perceiving the trade of Christian Merchants to increase in
his Kingdom, and that the returns out of his Kingdom was most in gold, whereby
it was much inhanced, raised his Ducket (being then current for three ounces)
to 4. 5. and 6. ounces; Nevertherlesse it was no more in England, being so
raised, then when it went for three ounces.

This Ducket current for three ounces in Barbary, was then worth in England 7s.
6d. and no more, being raised to vj. ounces, since which, adding to it a small
piece of gold, he has raised it to 8. and lastly to 10 ounces, yet at this day
it is worth but xs. and one penny, notwithstanding the raising gold in England.

Having thus raised his Gold, he then devised to have plenty of silver brought
into his Kingdom, raised the Royal of 8. being but 2 ounces current, to 3. and
3. and ^. which caused great plenty of silver to be brought in, and to continue
in his Kingdom.

IN FRANCE.
The English Jacobus goes for 23s. in Merchandising.

The French Crown for 7s. 6d. Also silver is raised 4. Souce in the Crown.

NORTH-HOLLAND.
The double Jacobus goes for 23s. sterling.

The English Shilling is there 11 stivers, which is two shillings over in the
pound.

POLAND.
The King of Poland raised his Hungary Ducket from 56 to 77. and. Polish
groshes; and the Rich-dollar from 36 to 47. and. groshes: the Rich-dollar worth
in Poland 47. and. groshes, is by Account valued at 6s. 4d. sterling, and here
in England is worth but 4s. 6d. The Hungary Ducket is worth by account in
Poland 10s. 4d. and in England is worth but 7s. 10d. The Jacobus of England
here current for 22s. in Poland 24s. at the rate of 7s. 10d. for the Hungary
Ducket.

Now to turn the stream of Riches raised by native Commodities, into the
natural Channel from whence it has been a long time diverted; Consider these
points following.

1. Whether it be not fit, a State-Merchant be settled in these Lands; which may
both dispose more profitably of the riches thereof, and encounter policies of
Merchant-strangers, who now go beyond us in all kind of profitable
Merchandising. 2. Whether it be not necessary that the Commodities should
receive their full Manufacturie in these dominions. 3. Whether it be not
necessary the great Sea business of fishing, be forthwith set forward. 4.
Whether it be not fit the Coals should yield us a better value, by permitting
them to pass out of England, and that they be in English shipping only
transported. 5. Whether it be not fit, presently to raise Coin to as high a
rate as it is in the parts beyond the Seas.
If these Considerations be approved, then is it necessary to put them in a
right Course of execution; and (by Gods help) in short time Customs will be
exceedingly increased, Ships and Mariners trebled, Land-waste-Towns (now run
out of gates) better replenished, and People employed, to the great enriching
and honor of the Nation, (with the applause) and to the comfort of all loyal
Subjects.

THis pains is the rather undergone, because the Hollanders have been heard
profess, They hoped to get the whole Trade of Christendom into their hands,
not only for Transportation, but also the Command of the Seas. To which end
they do daily increase their Traffic, augment their Shipping, multiply their
Mariners, strength and wealth in all kinds. Whereat there is the more cause of
grief, when we consider how God has afforded more to this Nation then any
three Kingdoms in Christendom, with diverse varieties of homebred Commodities,
which others have not, and cannot want; besides sundry other means to continue
and maintain our Trade of Merchandising and Fishing above them all; whereby we
might prevent the Deceivers, ingrosse the Commodities of the Ingrossers, enrich
our selves, and increase our Navigation, Shipping* and Mariners: so as it would
make all Nations to veil the Bonnet to England, if we would not be still
wanting to our selves in employment of our people.

Which people being now divided into Three parts, two parts of them are mere
Spenders, and Consumers of a Commonwealth. Therefore, this done, You

1. Allure and encourage the people (for their private gains) to be all
Workers, and Erectors of a Commonwealth. 2. Enrich and fill the Coffers of the
STATE by a continual coming in; and make the people wealthy by means of their
great and profitable Trading and Employment. 3. Vent our homebred Commodities
to far more reputation, and much more Custom, and benefit to the Merchant and
the Nation. 4. Return the Merchandises of other Countries at far cheaper rates
then now they are, to the great good of the Realm in general. 5. Make the Land
powerful, by increasing and multiplying of Ships, Mariners, and People. 6.
Make the peoples Taking in general much more every day then now they are,
which (by Gods help) will grow continually more and more by the great Concourse
and Comerce that will come by settled Constitutions and convenient Privileges,
as in other parts they do, by this their great freedom of Trade.
If this and much more be done in other Countries (where nothing grows) Then
how much might we make, where so great abundance and variety of homebred
Commodities and rich Materials grows for the people to work upon, and
plentiful means to do it withal, which other Nations have not, nor cannot
want, but of necessity must be furnished from hence? And now whereas our
Merchandising is wild, utterly confused and out of frame, (as at large
appears) a State-Merchant will roundly and effectually bring all the premises
to pass, fill the Havens with Ships, those Ships with Mariners, the Nation
full of Merchants, their Houses full of Outlandish Commodities, and the STATES
Coffers full of Coin, (as in other parts they do) And the people shall have
just cause to hold in happy memory the Beginners of so profitable,
praiseworthy, and renowned a work: This, (with other that might be added)
being the true Philosophers stone, to make a rich and potent State, and a happy
people, only by settling as before; whereby the people may have fullness of
Trade and Manufacture, and the Government made both honorable and profitable.

There Is but one Objection against this noble and gallant Enterprise; which is,
-- They who shall adventure as a State-Merchant, must expect to lose for diverse
years, as in all new Beginnings of Trade men do. The answer is, That the
Publisher of this will undertake to lay down a way how to bring in 10. 15. or
20. in the Hundred profit, from the first, as evidently as a man shall expect 8
percent. upon good Security.

FINIS.

