THE Bishop of BATH and WELLS's SERMON Before the KING and QUEEN At WHITE HALL,
March 12. 1692.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, MARCH 12. 1692.
Being the Second Sunday in Lent.

BY RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill.
1693.

Matthew. V. 43,44. Ye have heard that it has bin said, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you.


THese Words are a part of our Savior's Sermon on the Mount. In which Sermon
Jesus puts his Followers upon a greater pitch of Holiness and Perfection than
what the bare Letter of the Law of Moses, and the interpretation of the Jewish
Doctors exacted from them. This appears abundantly from what our Savior has
said before with respect to those Laws of Moses which forbid Murder, Adultery
and Perjury, and which allowed an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth. He
tells us here how we ought to be affected toward our Enemies, and what he
requires more of his Followers than was required by the Letter of the Law of
Moses. And First, He lays before us what provision was made in the Law of
Moses. Ye have heard that it has bin said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and
hate thine enemy. Secondly, He lets them know what he requires of all his
Followers. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
etc.


I.
Jesus lays before us the Law of Moses. Ye have heard that it has bin said,
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.

For the former part of the words, Thou shall love thy neighbor, we find it
expressly said, Lev. xix. 18. For the latter part, And hate thine enemy, we are
to seek.

Here arises a difficulty that must be removed. A late Jewish Writer R. Isaac,
Chizuk Emun. l. ij. c. 11.
objects this against St. Matthew as a falsifier. For these words are not to be
found in all the Old Testament. So far are they from being a Precept of the Law
of Moses, that by that Law the Jews were obliged to do kindnesses to their very
Enemies. E. g. Exodus xxiij. 4,5.
If thou meet thine ENEMIES Ox or Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it
back to him again. If thou see the Ass of him that HATES thee lying under
his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him.
How then can Jesus be justified for citing these words, And hate thine Enemy,
as a Law of Moses, when he is so far from having such a Precept that he
expressly Commands the contrary?

I have given the Objection its entire force. And it seems at first sight a
considerable difficulty, and will require an answer.

In removing of which I will use no manner of artifice, nor lay hold of any
thing that looks like a Subterfuge. I will not say that Jesus does not quote
the Law of Moses for these words, And hate thine Enemy. And yet Jesus does not
say, It Is written in your Law. He does not use his foregoing Style (where he
cites the Law) It has bin said by them of old time. All that Jesus says here
is, Ye have heard that it has bin said. I pass this by; Let the Jew or any
other make the most of the Objection. I will suppose Jesus to quote the Law of
Moses: Yet will this be of no force against the Credit of the Holy Gospel. And
this will be Evident to him who shall duly consider the following particulars.

I. That the Sense of these words, Hate thine Enemy, is found in the Law of
Moses. If the substance of the thing be there, it is no matter whether the
formal words be there or not. The Prophet Ezekiel tells us what God said to the
Israelites when He undertook to deliver them out of Egypt, (which is as
manifest a quotation of the History as the words of Jesus are of the Law of
Moses) Ezekiel. xx. 7.
Cast ye away every man the Abominations of his Eyes, and defile not your
selves with the Idols of Egypt. I am the Lord your God? It Is expressly said
that God said thus unto them. Let any Jew show where this is said in so many
words. If it be enough that the substance of this is said, 'twill be sufficient
to justify Jesus to show that the substance of what he says, was said in the
Law of Moses. And that so it is, is evident beyond all exception. It Is well
known what Law the Jews were under as to the Seven Nations. They were forbid to
make any Covenant, or to contract any affinity with them: Exodus xxxiv. 12,16.
Deuteronomy. vij. 2,3.
They were commanded to smite and to destroy them utterly and forbid to show
them mercy. And for the Amalekites they were obliged to blot out their
remembrance from under Heaven, and expressly charged to remember and not to
forget it. Deuteronomy. xxv. 17,19. Exodus xvij.
Hence might Jesus truly say it had bin said, Hate thine Enemy.

II. For the pretense of the Jew, that they were obliged by their Law to show
kindness to their Enemies, it will be found to be of no force if that Law be
duly examined. For the Enemy mentioned in that Law extends no farther than to
one of their own Nation or Religion, to an Israelite or Proselyte at farthest.
This will appear by comparing Exodus xxiij. 4. with Deuteronomy. xxij. 1,2,3. He that
in one place is called an Enemy, is in the other called a Brother three times
together. And it is plain from the Context that that Law could not be extended
to Forainers. The Jew was not obliged to bring the strayed Ox to the Dwelling
of a Forainer. Thou shall not avenge nor bear any grudge against THE CHILDREN
OF THY PEOPLE; and then it follows, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
Lev. xix. v. 18. where Neighbor is restrained to the Jew by Nation or Religion
at most. Thus was the kindness limited and determined. The Seventh year was a
year of release; The Jew might not then exact his debt from his Neighbor or
Brother, of a Forainer he might. Deuteronomy. xv. 2,3. They might not lend upon Usury
to a Brother, to a Stranger they might. (...) Philo l. de Charitate.
Deuteronomy. xxiij. 19,20. By a Brother they meant an Israelite. He that steals a
man, etc. says the Law of Moses, shall surely be put to death, Exodus xxj. 16.
Onkelos, the Chaldee Paraphrast, V. Onkel. and Targ. Jonath.
adds something to the Text. He that steals a man of the children of Israel,
says He; nor does he deserve any blame for it. For we find the Law so explained
in a parallel place. If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the
children of Israel, etc. That Thief shall dye, Deuteronomy. xxiv. 7. The oppression of
an hired Servant is indeed forbidden, but then this is to be understood of that
Servant only who was an Israelite or Proselyte (v. 14.)

III. Agreeably hereunto have the Jewish Doctors and Casuists taught in their
books. Bava Kama c. 4.. 3. cum Rambam. Maimon. H. Deoth. c. 6.. 3. Bechai in
legem fol. 78. col. 3.
They allow kindness due to one another, but they have advanced in their
Writings such propositions as have plainly shown they have bin little concerned
for the Lives or Estates of those of another Nation or Religion. And no wonder,
when neighbor signifies no more with them than an Israelite, and stranger no
more than a Proselyte: For whatever kindness they are put upon toward their
neighbors and toward strangers, will not be thought due to men of another
Nation and Religion. These men must not expect kindness, 'Twill be well if they
meet with common justice from them.

IV. The Practice of the Jews confirms this their sense of the Law of Moses:
They were very morose toward strangers, and particularly toward the
Samaritans who were placed in their neighborhood. John iv. 9.
They were Enemies to those of another Nation and Religion; They refused to
show common civilities to them, and those offices which we judge due to
humanity wherever we meet with it. This surly disposition of theirs was taken
notice of by Heathen Writers. Juven.
Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti;
Quaesitum ad fontem Solos deducere Verpos.
They would not direct a Traveller, of another Nation or Religion, in his way;
nor show him common civilities. Tacitus Histor. l. v.
takes notice of their Enmity and Hatred toward all Strangers, Et quia apud
ipsos fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu: SED ADVERSUS OMNES ALIOS
HOSTILE ODIUM.

This is sufficient to justify our Blessed Savior, and may also be of use to
the better understanding the Law of Moses.

The Jews we see were obliged to destroy some people, and for the kindness to
be showed it was to their Brethren, i. e. Men of their own Nation or Religion.

It cannot be denied that there are in the Laws of Moses many Precepts of Mercy
and Beneficence, that speak a merciful regard to the poor and miserable, and
commend Humanity and Good Will. This Philo observes and calls it Philanthropy,
and the Cousin, the Sister and Twin of Godliness: That Author has written a
book on that Subject, and observes that it was much commended in the Law of
Moses. And certain it is that that Law did oblige the Jews to kindness to
strangers, it did forbid oppression and malice: It did provide for the Poor,
the Widow and Fatherless; For Servants, and Laborers; They might not detain
the wages of the hireling, nor keep the poor man's garment as a pledge, nor
take the millstone as such. There were great provisions for the needy from the
Laws concerning the forgotten sheaf, the gleaning, the corner of the Field, and
remainder of the Vineyard. Deuteronomy. xv. 7. xxiv. 19.
The Law of the Third years Tithe, of the Sabbatical Year and that of Jubilee
were very merciful provisions also for the necessitous.

Several other Laws there were which tended to preserve Friendship and
Good Will among each other. The appearing of the several Tribes three times a
year at Jerusalem (as Josephus observes) Antiq. l. iv. c. 8.
and feasting together preserved Friendship. And that Law which required men
not to keep by them the flesh of their Peace Offerings, Lev. vij. 15,16.
but to eat it in such a time, constrained them to Hospitality and Bounty, as
one of the Ancients has well observed. Theodoret in Levit. qu. vj.


But all that has bin said amounts to no more than this, That they were
obliged to be kind to one another, and were at the same time obliged to be in a
state of War and Enmity with other people. Their neighbor and the stranger
took in the Israelite and Proselyte, but did not reach to all the race of
mankind. Thus we see how this matter stood under the Law of Moses. Ye have
heard that it has bin said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate, etc.

II.
I proceed now to consider what Jesus requires of his Followers. But I say unto
you, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that bate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you.

I. Before I proceed any farther, I cannot but observe the Extent of a
Christian's Charity: It is directed to our Enemies, to them that curse, that
hate us, that despitefully use and persecute us. That is, to the whole race of
mankind; To those who are not of our Religion, of our Kindred, or our Nation.
The Jewish kindness was confined, and limited. Their Charity began and ended at
home. He was neighbor to the Jew, who was himself a Jew, as ye have heard. But
our Savior has enlarged our Charity and Kindness: Every other man is the
Christian's neighbor according to the Doctrine of Jesus. This appears from the
Answer He gave to the Question of the Lawyer: He said unto Jesus, being willing
to justify himself, Luke x. 29.
Who is my neighbor? Our Savior's answer settles this matter, and extends the
notion of it as far as to every other man. St. Paul, who well understood the
Christian Doctrine, teaches the same Doctrine. Romans xiij. 8,9.
He interprets (...), i. e. Neighbor by every other man. This is (not the
Jewish indeed, but) the Christian notion of it. It Is a mean thing to love our
friends and relations, our own tribe and party. A Publican can do it, and
deserves no praise on that account. He would be a monster that should not do
this. The Christian Charity extends to the whole race of mankind. And this is
that Charity that is truly Divine; That our Holy Religion commends, and this
Benignity and Philanthropy adorns our Holy Institution. To love none but our
Tribe and Sect is an argument of a stingy and narrow Soul. We must love our
Neighbor for God's sake, and because he bears his Image. And as this is an
excellent Principle, so it extends our Charity to the whole race of mankind.
For every man has something of the Image of God. But it is but reasonable to
love him for our own sakes, as he shares with us in the Common nature. And this
Consideration obliges us to this Universal Kindness. The Jews Sanedr. c. 4.. 5.
inquire into the reasons why God made but one man to be the Common parent of
mankind, and did not Create some number of men to be the several Heads of
distinct Families: I know no better reason than this, that we should be kindly
affected to one another as Coming all from the same root and stock. Besides
what has bin said, It Is certain that Jesus took our nature upon him, He Hebr.
ij. 9.
tasted death for every man. 'Twas a love to mankind that he manifested when he
became Man and when he died on the Cross, which Consideration is of mighty
force to engage us to this Extensive Charity. He loved his Enemies, he prayed
and died for them. And God (as Jesus tells us) causes his Sun to rise on the
evil as well as the good. That is, He does good to his Enemies that we might
think our selves obliged to do good to ours.

II. In the next place I consider the Degree of this extended Charity. It does
not only extend to our Enemies, to them that curse and hate us, that
despitefully use, and persecute us, but it does this in a great degree. We must
love them, bless them, do them good and pray for them. For our Enemies we ought
not indeed to study revenge upon them, and we are apt to think we acquit our
selves fairly if we do not, but our Lord carries it farther; But I say unto
you, Love your Enemies. For them that curse us, it is not enough that we
forbear to curse them; our Lord says, Bless them that curse you. For them that
hate us, it is well indeed that we do them no harm; but our Lord goes farther,
Do good to them that hate you. For those who despitefully use us and persecute
us, we do well not to imitate them, and not to return upon them with spiteful
injuries, and ill turns. (Thus far the best of the Heathen Philosophy directs
us.) But our Lord carries it higher still; Pray for them that despitefully use
you, and persecute you. This is the greatest pitch and the highest flight of
Charity. This is above the rate and measure of any other Philosophy or
Institution; We shall be apt to say as, upon alike occasion, the Apostles said
unto the Lord, Increase our faith.

This extent and degree of Charity does speak it Christian, and does
distinguish it from the limited and less Charity required by the Letter of the
Law of Moses. And as this is required by Jesus, so what has bin said upon this
occasion will help us to understand our Savior's words: I mean those words of
his; John xiij. 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one
another; as I have loved you, that ye love one another. Here our Lord requires
both the greatest extent and the highest pitch of Charity. And now it will be
very easy to understand why Jesus (who elsewhere calls it the great
Commandment, Matt. xxij. 39.
and his Commandment) should call it a New Commandment. John xv. 12.
It is true indeed that, Thou shall love thy neighbor, was a Precept as old as
Moses: And yet this Precept, as required by Jesus, is a New Commandment,
because it extends to new objects, and requires an higher pitch, besides that
the motive from whence it stands commended to us is new also. As I have loved
you, that ye love one another. What St. John says elsewhere is no objection
against this account of our Savior's words. It Is true, when he speaks of this
Precept, He tells us that it is not a new Commandment but an old Commandment,
and which we heard from the beginning. 1 John ij. 7. with 2 Ep. v. 5. and 1 Ep.
iij. 2.
There is no difficulty arising hence; For it was no new Commandment to
Christians at that time when St. John wrote those Epistles. For as the Precept
it self was old (even as old as Moses) so they had bin acquainted with the
extent and degree of it, from the beginning, i. e. from our Savior and the
beginning of Christianity. For that expression imports no more in that place
and in that sense it is also used, 1 John ij. 24. Let that therefore abide in
you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that, which ye have heard from
the beginning, shall remain in you, ye shall also continue in the son and in
the father. The beginning here imports the beginning of Christianity, as is
evident from the Context. And so it signifies in those words, This is the
message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another, 1
John iij. 11.

These Holy Precepts are not hard to be understood. There Is no difficulty
appears as to that matter if we look them over severally. To love our Enemies
imports Benevolence and a disposition to do them kindnesses: Bless them that
curse you; This is explained sufficiently by St. Peter. 1 Pet. iij. 9.
Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; But contrariwise Blessing,
knowing that ye are thereunto called. For the next, Do good to them that hate
you, though it be plain enough without a Comment, yet St. Paul gives us a short
Paraphrase upon it. Romans xij. 20,21.
If thine enemy hunger, feed him: If he thirst, give him drink. -- Be not
overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good. For what follows, Pray for
them that despitefully use you, and persecute you, nothing is more easy to be
understood. And the dying words of our Lord, and of St. Stephen, are most
conspicuous Exemplifications of it.

These Precepts also, as they stand commended to us in our Holy Religion, are
very reasonable and just. We have no cause to complain of them, or find any
fault with them. The practice of them is very much for the Peace of Societies
and Communities, and will prevent innumerable mischiefs which follow from
malice, revenge, and rendering evil for evil. Besides, the practice of these
lessons is commended from the most powerful Considerations, and such they are
as speak our Obedience reasonable and render it easy also. And they are such
as these. (1.) The Example of God himself. God is kind to his Enemies, and
therefore it is very fit we should be so to ours. It Is our Savior's argument in
the words next following the words of my Text. Matt. v. 45.
That ye may be the children of your father which is in Heaven: For he makes
his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain upon the just and
upon the unjust. God feeds and preserves, and heaps his Benefits upon those who
deny his Being or his Providence, and that call not upon his Name. (2.) Our
Blessed Savior loved his Enemies, he died for them, and prayed for them even
when they were putting him to death. Romans v. 8.
Father forgive them -- God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us. This is a very powerful Consideration to
every sincere Disciple of Jesus. (3.) Forgiveness of Enemies is made the
condition of our own pardon and acceptance with God. Matt. v. 23,24. vj. 14,15.
xviij. 35.
And now it is not only our duty but our interest, which generally lays the
surest hold of Mankind. To which I may add (4.) That we are all very obnoxious
to God. We need great forgiveness. Who can understand his Errors? In many
things we offend all. There is no kind of proportion between our many and
aggravated Sins against God, and the little injuries and trespasses which we do
to each other. The first are expressed by Talents, the other by Pence. Matt.
18.24.25.
The first by the number of Ten thousand, the other of an Hundred. It Is not
hard to remit a small Sum when we need the remission of so vast an one. He
cannot find any difficulty to forgive a small debt that so much needs to be
forgiven the greatest. In a word, to love our Enemies is an imitation of God,
and our dear Master: It Is an argument of a great and generous Mind. It Is
equally our duty and our interest. It Is for the good of this lower. World, and
the way to a better. It Is the Ornament of our Religion, and speaks the
perfection of our Nature, and an high degree and pitch of Virtue.

As to the latter part of the words of my Text, Pray for them that despitefully
use you, and persecute you. That will require a more particular and separate
Consideration. For though those words are-easie to be understood, and our duty
from them was commended by the Example of our Savior; Yet it may still be
demanded if all manner of Prayer against our Enemies be there strictly forbid?

Obj.
For we find the Psalmist frequently praying against his Enemies. And the book
of Psalms makes up a considerable part of our public Service, and we commonly
bear a part in our Responses therein. And yet we find there a great many Curses
and Imprecations, which we repere in our daily Service, without any scruple or
remorse. Thus we find him praying, Psalm. vj. 10.
Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed; And, x. 2.
Let them be taken in the devices -- Again, Psalm. xxxv. 4.
Let all them be confounded and part to shame, etc. xl. 8.
Let the sentence of guiltiness proteed against him: lv. 16.
And now that he lies, let him rise up no more. Again, lviij. 6,7.
Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into Hell. lix. 5.
Let them be rooted out; and consume away like a snail. We elsewhere find him
speaking of seeing his desire upon his Enemies. cxviij. 7.
To which I answer in the following particulars.

I. That it is certain that the Hebrews have no such thing in their Language as
an optative Mood. And therefore we cannot from the bare formation of the Verb
conclude the desire or wish of him that speaks. For the truth of this, I appeal
to those who are best skilled in that language.

II. That however they have a way by which they express their wish or desire
that a thing should come to pass. This the Psalmist does by two words which
express the desire of the speaker. (...)
Thus, Psalm. xiv. 7. liij. 6.
O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion. And, lv. 6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, etc. After this manner does the Psalmist
express his wish or desire. But he nowhere uses this expression where he is
supposed to pray against his Enemies.

III. That it is very evident that the Psalmist was far removed from that
Spirit of revenge supposed in the Objection. Psalm. vij. 3,4.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands: If I
have rewarded Evil to him that is at peace with me: (yea, I have delivered him
that without cause was mine Enemy.) Again, Psalm xxxv. 13.
They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul. But as for me when
they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth. I humbled my soul with fasting, and
my prayer returned into mine own bosom; I behaved my self as though he had bin my
friend or brother. I howed down heavily as one that mourns for his mother.
The Psalmist elsewhere tells how he was affected as to his Enemy. lv. 12.
It was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it. David might
well say so. He did with singular meekness bear the Reproaches and Curses of
Shimei, and the causeless Persecutions of Saul without rendering evil for evil,
or railing for railing. It is not then very credible that he should curse his
Enemies in his prayers and solemn devotions, and which he wrote by Divine
Inspiration.

IV. That the Verbs in the Hebrew, in the places above cited, and elsewhere,
are in the future tense. And if some there be of the imperative mood, it alters
not the Case, because the Hebrew Grammarians agree that the imperative is but
another future. R. Mos. Kimchi Grammat. cum L'Empereur.
There is not in any one of these places any Expression that imports any wish
or desire. And then these Expressions are rather predictions than prayers, and
tell us what shall come to pass rather than what the Psalmist desires. This is
no new opinion, nor without ground. Non optat sed praevidet. Prophetia est
praenunciantis, non votum maledicentis. August.
This agrees well with the Psalmist's manner of speech elsewhere. Psalm. i. 5,6.
ix. 3. xcij. 9. xciv. 23.
He tells us that the ungodly shall not stand in judgment; that their way shall
perish; that his Enemies shall fall, and that all the workers of iniquity shall
be scattered, and that He shall cut them off in their own wickedness. In these
places our Interpreters have kept to the future: They had the same reason to
have done it elsewhere, especially in those words, Let his days be few, and let
another take his office. They might as well have rendered them, His days shall
be few, and another shall take his office. cix. 8. with Act. i. 16.
It Is certain this contains a prediction of the fate of Judas, and St. Peter
mentions this Scripture as a Prophecy not as a Prayer. He tells us that this
Scripture must needs be fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David
SPOKE BEFORE concerning Judas. And if this be so, no man can blame the Psalmist
for denouncing Evil against Evil men, any more than he ought to blame the
Prophets for Prophesying Evils against the greatest Sinners and Persecutors of
God's Church and People.

V. It is farther to be considered, that many of those places in the book of
Psalms are to be understood of the Enemies of God and of his Church. Psalm. v.
10. x. 2. lxix. 22. lxxix. 12. lxxxiij. 13. cix 8. cxxix. 5.
And therefore the Psalmist is not to be supposed to indulge himself the
liberty of Imprecations and Curses against his private and particular Enemies,
when he denounces Woes against the Enemies of God and his Truth. Besides, it is
certainly lawful to pray against the Enemies of God, and of the truth and
public peace, and those whom gentle means are not likely to reduce; and such
there are many times who are incorrigible. We have an antecedent obligation to
God and to the Community whereof we are members, and where our Cause is
righteous, and Truth is oppressed. We may lawfully appeal to God by War, and
consequently pray to him for success, and desire him to abate the Pride and
confound the Devices of the Common Enemy. This does not clash at all with the
Precept in my Text. For in this case the Enemies are not considered as our
Enemies so much, as the Common Enemies of God and of his Truth.

VI. After all, if we consider the places singly and separately, we shall not
find them import so much harm as may be supposed at the first sight. That our
Enemies should be ashamed, and confounded; that their way should be dark and
slippery, in short comes but to thus much, that they may be disappointed in
their Evil attempts. I have not time to descend to particulars. Thus much is
certain, that some places sound harsh, and appear very severely in our Version,
when they do not so in the Original. I will give an instance or two. Psalm. lv.
16.
Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into Hell. Here
the word we render Hell commonly signifies no more but the Grave or place of
the dead. And he that looks on the words as they lie in the Hebrew, can infer
no more than this, that the Psalmist predicts the sudden death of men in whose
dwellings is wickedness: There is nothing farther that the words do import.
Again, where we read of the good man's seeing his desire upon his Enemies: The
expression is indeed Elliptical, but his desire is added to supply the
Ellipsis, it is not in the Original Text. Psalm. cxij. 8. cxviij. 7.


I shall now proceed to make some application of what has bin said.

I. If we stand obliged by the Law of Jesus to love our Enemies, etc. And Jesus
has in this Law obliged us to a greater extent and degree of Charity and
Kindness than the Letter of the Law of Moses. How inexcusable are those men,
who instead of obeying these Precepts of Jesus, come short of what Moses
requited. These men certainly deserve reproof, and are very unworthy of the
title of Christians. There are two sorts of these.

First, Those who are so far from loving their Enemies that they do not love
one another. They are so far from coming up to the pitch of Charity which Jesus
requires, that they come short of the lowest measure which was taught by Moses.
By the Law of Moses the Jews were obliged to love those of their own Nation and
Religion, though otherwise they were Enemies. I wish we went thus far; I am sure
our Savior goes higher; And we must do so too as we hope to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, There are others who are so far from loving their Enemies as our
Savior requires, that they are Enemies, without any cause at all to their
Brethren. Instead of loving our Enemies, blessing them that curse us, doing
good to them that hate us, praying for our Persecutors; there are those who
hate, who curse, who injure, who reproach those who have done them no harm.
They speak Evil of them of whom they know none: They contend with those that
are for Peace. They are so far from obeying Jesus, that they have not complied
with Solomon's easy lesson. Prove. iij. 30.
Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm. These are
so far from the Christian and Divine Charity that they come short of the
Jewish. So far are they from loving their Enemies, that they hate the most
conspicuous Virtue, and the greatest Benefactors to mankind. No Virtue can be a
security against such as these. These men can hardly love those that love them:
They are so far from the Jewish and Christian, that they hardly arrive at the
unrewardable Charity of the Publicane. Matt. v. 46.
These men are in the Gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. God open their
eyes and turn their hearts.

II. Let me exhort you to the practice of the lesson laid before us in the
words of my Text. Love your Enemies, etc. We shall never want an occasion to
exercise this virtue. Our Savior that gives us this Rule, gave us also the
greatest Example of it. Hence it is most powerfully commended to us. It may be
thought difficult; but we may be reconciled to it, when we consider that He who
requires it, did Himself practice it also. We call him Lord, and it is fit we
should obey and follow him. We need God's pardon; and if we have a due sense of
what that imports, and that this is the way to obtain it, we shall not think
much to forgive one another. Let me speak in the Apostles words; Ephesians. iv.
31,32. v. 1,2.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put
away from you, with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Be ye
therefore followers of God as dear Children; And walk in love as Christ also
has loved us, and has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God
--

To God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be all honor and praise. Amen.
FINIS.
BOOKS Writ by RICHARD Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.
A Demonstration of the Messiah: in which the Truth of the Christian Religion
is proved, especially against the Jews. The Judgment of Private Discretion in
Matters of Religion defended, in a Sermon on 1 Thessalonians. V. 21. Preached at St.
Paul's Covent Garden, Feb. 23. -- 86. A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor
at S. Sepulchers Church on Easter Tuesday, Apr. 21. 1690. A Sermon preached
before the House of Peers on January 30. 1691/2. The Charge of Richard Lord
Bishop of Bath and Wells, to the Clergy of his Diocese, at his Primary
Visitation begun at Axebridge, June 2. 1692. A Sermon preached before the King
and Queen at White Hall, March 12. 1692. being the Second Sunday in Lent.
Newly published Four Sermons concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our
Blessed Savior: by his Grace John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in 8o. Of
Industry, in five Discourses: Viz. In General; In our General Calling, as
Christians; In our Particular Calling, as Gentlemen; In our Particular Calling,
as Scholars: By Isaac Barrow, D.D. late Master of Trinity-College in Cambridge.
Published by his Grace John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
All sold by B. Aylmer.


