AN ANSWER TO Such Objections as were made by some COMMONERS of Lincolnshire;
AND Presented to both Houses at the first sitting of this PARLIAMENT; AGAINST
ROBERT, Earl of LINDESEY, and his Participants: Concerning the Draining of
those Fenns which lie between Lincoln, Berne, and Boston.

Set forth by Sir Will: Killigrew, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1647.

The OBJECTIONS.
1. THat these said Fennes did not need to be Drained.

2. That the Commissioners did proceed by view, and not by Jury.

3. That the Commissioners were Parties interessed with the Earl.

4. That the Country was defrauded by giving the Earl too much Land for his
Contract.

5. That the Earl did give some of those Lands unto Great men for gratuities.

6. That the Earl has taken more Land from the Country, then his proportion.

7. That the Earl has taken the best of the Fenns for himself, and left the
worst for the Commoners.

8. That the Earl has not performed his Contract, by draining those Fennes
sufficiently.

9. That the Earl did fetch up some of the Commoners by Pursevants, and by
Warrants from the Councell-Table, and did imprison others.

An Answer to such Objections as were made by some Commoners of Lincolnshire,
etc.
1. Obj. THat these Fennes did not need to be drained.

Answ. 1. It appears upon Record, the Commissioners of Sewers of those parts,
with the Country, did intend, and did endeavor (in the 34 of Henry the 8th,
and in the 17th of Elizabeth) to draine the same Fennes which the Earl has
now drained; and did proceed therein as the Earl has now done.

2. It appears by a letter signed by Sir Anthony Earbye, and M. Sergeant
Gallis, with diverse other Commissioners of Sewers, and Justices of Peace in
those parts, that the said Fennes did need to be drained: For by their Letter
they inform His Majesty, that the Fennes of those parts were annoyed with
waters, which for the good of the Country they desire His Majesty might be
drained: to which end they are suitors, that the King would recommend some
Person who should undertake the draining thereof, as a work honorable and
profitable for the Commonwealth.

3. The KING recommends ROBERT Earl of LINDESEY unto the Commissioners; who
was accepted for undertaker at a public Session of Sewers at Sleford in the
face of the whole Country; where Argument was, what quantity of Land they
should contract with the Earl for, and on what terms, but no question was
ever made whether those Fennes did need to be drained. The whole Assembly
seemed as eager to have the Fennes drained, as the Earl was to undertake the
work: and after some debate at several meetings about the proportion, the
Earl demanding 30000 Acres: at last the Commissioners proffer him 24000 Acres,
which he accepts with the general approb^tion of every Commissioner p^^se^t:
and acclamations of joy from the Commoners, who did wait on the Earl to his
lodging from the Church, with loud pray^rs for the good success of his work^.
By this it appears that the said Fennes did need to be drained. This contract
was made between the Earl and the Country, by thirty two Commissioners: who
would not have made this contract if the draining had not been necessary.

2. Obj. That the Commissioners which laid the Taxes, and did adjudge the Lands
to the Earl, were Parties interessed with him.

Answ. That when the contract with the Country was made, no Commissioners were
interessed, nor could be, because the Earl had then no interest himself: but
after the work was begun, three or four of the Commissioners did become
Adventurers with the Earl, and did put in their moneys for their own Fennes:
They paid forty shillings per Acre, at which rate the Earl offered to admit
all that would of the Country to adventure with him, which was done by
public Proclamation. But those Fennes were then so drowned, and of so little
worth, and the work so ha^^rdous, that none would purchase any of the Lands
allotted to the Earl at forty shillings the Acre, besides Sir Edward Heron,
and Sir John Brook (since Lord Cobham) who are the Commissioners excepted
against: where as the Commoners might well wish that more Commissioners had
been of their mind, who no doubt would be careful to see that the Earl should
perform his work according to his contract, for their own sakes.

3. Obj. That the Commissioners did proceed to Tax, and to adjudge the Lands
by view, which they should have done by Jury.

Answ. That Juries are in this Case only to inform the Commissioners, and that
the Commissioners being themselves sworn, may by their own view be better
informed, then by the eyes of others, as has been usually done in former times;
and no doubt the integrity of such men of such quality as are trusted to be
Judges, may be trusted to judge upon their own view, as well as on the view of
mean and ignorant men; for of such are most Juries made. I have here inserted
the Names of the Commissioners that laid the first Tax of 13s 4d an Acre upon
the Earls Fennes: Many of them being those that did view the Fennes without a
Jury; because in a business of such consequence they would trust no eyes
before their own.

The Earl of Lindsey Earl of Lincoln Lord Willoughby Sir Henry Fines Sir
Rob. Killigrew Sir William Armyn Sir Edw. Heron Sir John Munson Sir John Brook
Sir Ham: Whichcott Sir John Brown Sir Christop. Wray Sir Ralph Maddison Sir
Will. Quadring Sir Iervace Scroop Sergeant Callis Doct. Farmery Will, Langton,
Esquire. William Dallison Robert Long Edw. Skipwith John Brownelowe John Burrell
Robert Cawdron Robert Tredway John Bassett Robert Marshall Mayor of Lincoln
Rich. Westland Mayor of Boston John Hobson Robert Boswell Tho. Haughton George
Thorold Joshua Whichcott Rich Barefott George Smith.
The Question now is, whether these Commissioners may make Decrees upon their
own view as well as on the report of a Common Jury? Which we leave to the
judgment of the Parliament.

4 Object. That the Country was defrauded, by giving the Earl too much Land
for his Contract.

Answ. That the 24000 Acres passed, and Decreed unto the Earl, can be justly
valued but at the price the said Lands bore at that day, which was forty
Shillings an Acre to be sold. So that 48000 li. was then the value of the 24000
Acres decreed to the Earl; then which the Earl has expended a much greater
Sum in his works, and therefore the Country was not defrauded as is
objected. But some men do look on the Earls Land now he has made it worth
twelve Pounds an Acre, and will not consider his hazard that has brought to
pass what many before him have been ruined by attempting, nor consider his
moneys taken up at use, or on harder terms to do his whole work; but in mercy
to the poor Commoners will think them abused, and not once consider that
their Commons now remaining to them, are worth at this day ten Shillings the
Acre, which never did yield twelve Pence the Acre before the draining. Another
kind of men there are too, that would repay the Earls charges, and resume the
Lands; but when those men shall examine his charges they will be of another
mind, and find that those Lands have been purchased by the Earl and his
Participants at too dear a rate to be re-purchased. Methinkes such men may
with the same justice purchased all the East India Ships at their return for
the same money Merchants set them forth: 'twill be a good course to encourage
Trade, and much for the public good to destroy all activity in ingenious Men,
to give the reward of their industry and hazard unto idle Drones: such an
example of injustice I conceive will in some kind concern every man's estate
that by providence and industry is better then when 'twas first purchased. Now
I have argued against this injurious project. I will be glad to relinquish all
my interest in the Fennes, for the money which these Fennes have cost me, all
things being justly considered.

5. Object. That the Earl has given great part of his Fenne-Lands unto great
men for gratuities.

Answ. That the Earl might dispose of his Lands as he pleased; whether he gave
them, or sold them, concerns not the draining, nor those adventured with
Earl: if any injustice were done, let it appear, and let them answer it, that
it particularly concerns.

6. Object. That the Earl has taken more Land from the Commoners then his
proportion.

Answ. That the Lands were laid out by sworn Surveyers, and that the Drainers
are desirous to have the Lands a new surveyed, and have often made proffer to
be^^e the charge, and to make restitution in case they have erred: the
Commoners will do the like in case it appear they have complained without a
cause: but the Commoners have hitherto rejected it, and only desire to cl^mour,
well knowing that the Lands are justly measured, and allotted unto the Earl.

7. Object. That the Earl has taken the best of the Fennes to himself, and
left the worst unto the Commoners.

Answ. This Objection made a great noise in the ears of all honest men, and
did procure the Commoners many favors. And about this there has been 100
Witnesses sworn pro and con: and at several hearings in the Lords house with
Counsel on both sides this business has been debated; as also before a
Committee of the House of Commons it has been diverse days heard. After much
trouble and charge at a full hearing in the Lords House, the Earl and his
Participants did proffer to exchange all the Lands allotted unto them, and to
accept of their proportion in some other place, where the Commoners should like
best, thinking this would give satisfaction; But those that complained refused
to accept what they so violently sought; by which the Lords saw that they only
sought occasion of clamor, and had no just cause to complain, their Petition
was therefore cast out of the Lords House, and the possession settled unto the
Earl. And if yet the Commoners do like the Drainers Land better then their
own, it is still at their choice; so they will observe the contract to make the
Earls proportion part of every Fenne, and the whole lying in a straight tract
according to contract, that the Draines may not be crooked, which will not then
do the work of draining; if they shall refuse this exchang, it is clear that
the Ear^es Land is not the best of the Fennes, and the Country not injured: The
truth is, all juditious men of those parts do know the Commoners will as soon
eat their Land as make this exchange with the Earl and his Participants,
whose alotment was the very sink, and pan of all the Fennes, and ever most
drowned; and besides, lying in the midst of all the Fens, farthest from all
their Towns, and so leaving all their Commons as most commodious for them next
unto their houses: which does avoid all trespasses that must daily happen, if
their Commons and the Earls severalls were intermingled. It will appear upon
the Mapp, that the wit of man cannot lay out the Earls Lands more
advantagiously for the Country then now it is. Again I say, themselves now an
exchange is offered, dare not accept it.

8. Object. That the Earl has not performed his contract by draining the said
Fennes sufficiently.

Answ. If this were true, they might have laid by all their unnecessary
clamours; for the Earl by his contract is to have no Land unless he perform
his work according to his Contract. To justify which, the Earls works were
several days viewed by the Commissioners themselves, who rod with diverse of
the Commoners in public from place to place to hear all objections could be
made against the said works; and after a due consideration, they did judge the
Lands drained, and the works done according to the Earls Contract. Now the
question is whether this judgment and decree of the Commissioners shall be of
force, or the opinions of the Plaintiffes in their own case? But lest some men
may think that Commissioners may be perjured, or mistaken, the Drainers have
clear arguments to justify this judgment of the Commissioners, and to dash
the scandalls of their accusers.

1. That these Fenne-Lands allotted to the Earl, do bear Cool Seed, Rape
Seed, and all kind of winter Corn; which could not be, unless those Lands
were sufficiently drained,

2. The Commons which belong unto the Country, by the Earls contract ought to
be made either Meddow, Arrable, or Pasture, and accordingly are as good
pasture, and as dry as Commons can be: and if they were enclosed in severals,
as the Earls Lands are, they would bear as good winter Corn as his Lands do;
but it is their own work to enclose their Commons and no part of the Earls
contract.

3. It has been proved at a Committee of the House of Commons, by sufficient
Witnesses on Oath, and also in the Lords House at several hearings, that the
said Fennes in general were communibus Annis worth but twelve pence the Acre
before the draining, and that now by the dr^ining they are so much improved,
that the Earl did the offer the Commoners at the Lords Bar to become T^^ant
to all the common Fennes to them remaining at t^n Shillings the Acre per annum,
and to take a Le^se for 100 years, giving them security in the City of London
for their Rent, which they refused, and by refusing showed they valued their
Fennes to be more worth. So that the Common Fennes improved from one shilling
to ten, will prove to have needed draining, and to be sufficiently drained.

4. The Drainers have ever desired to have a Committee sent from the Parliament
to view their works, and to judge if the Earl have performed his contract,
and deserved his reward, but the Commoners have ever by their power hindered it.
It Is now hoped that judicious men will not hearken unto their clamor and
noise, but look on them as ungrateful men that would ruin those that have so
much enriched them; as men that do refuse to accept what they seem to desire;
as men that can prove nothing that they accuse the Drainers of; and a^ men not
worthy of favor or countenance, that have put both Houses of Parliament to so
much trouble upon unjust complaints.

9. Object. That the Earl did fetch up many poor men by Pursevants, and did
imprison them by warrants of the Councell-Board.

Answ. That in those days the whole Kingdom did submit unto the
Councell-Board warrants; and that when it shall be showed upon what cause that
proceeding was used, it is hoped that those complaints will prove no great
crimes; for if any fault were in the Earl, 'twill not be such as ought to
forfeit his Lands, nor to ruin all those that have adventured with him, if by
any such mistaken course any man have just cause to complain. Neither will
this excuse the Riot for which he was so punished, though it may now be a fault
in those that punished him that way. It clearly appears that no wilful acts
has been by the Drainers done to the prejudice of any man, and then it is hoped
that if any accidental error have been committed; it may be remitted, or
dispensed with upon a moderate satisfaction, rather than to destroy so many
innocent persons as have interest with the Earl, because those that managed
the Earls business did mistake in the way of punishing such Rioters.

To conclude, It appears that the draining of Fennes is beneficial to the
Common wealth, by the Antiquity, and Authority of the Commission of Sewers, and
by several Statutes encouraging men to undertake such works, and granting
immunities to such as should adventure therein: it appears also that works of
the same nature, with this of the Earl of Lindesies, (as that of Lovels, and
that of Tindals) have been approved, and confirmed by former Parliaments, which
did encourage the Earl and his Participants in their work.

And left any man may not clearly see the state of the case in equity, between
the Earl of Lindesey and the complaining Commoners, I have thought sit to show
it here: There is a common Fenne containing twelve hundred Acres, worth per
annum twelve pence the Acre before the draining. The Earl has 300 Acres of
this Fenne as a fourth part allotted him for draining the whole: And he by
draining the said Fenne, brings the Land from twelve pence an Acre, to be worth
ten Shillings an Acre: So then the question is, whether the nine hundred Acres
remaining to the Commoners now worth ten Shillings an Acre, be better for them
then the twelve hundred Acres was at twelve pence the Acre before draining?
That is, whether 450 li. be more than 60 li. and thus clear is the benefit
which these complaining Commoners do receive by the Earls draining: besides
what the Commonwealth gains by the Earls 4th part allotted him, which is
clear profit. Though it is no wonder to find malicious and envious spirits ever
ready to defame the best proceedings of the best men, it is very strange to see
such injustice, and so high ingratitude countenanced by any man of worth.

It may now be time for the Drainers, and all that are interessed with the said
Robert Earl of Lindesey, to show the hard measure they have received from
these Commoners, and from their Abettors.

1. WHen the Earls works were working, some men that maligned the Earls
undertaking did set on poor men to cut the banks in the night, which did much
hinder the work, and much increase the charge.

2. When the Earl had one year possessed 14000 Acres of the Lands decreed
unto him, and that his Participants had built great houses, and planted, and
plowed much Land, some of the poorer sort of men were again set on to break
the Sluices in the night, and to cut the banks, by which the Drainers Corn
then growing was destroyed, to the value of ten thousand pounds, and for these
men did the Pursevants (formerly mentioned in the ninth Objection) come down.

3. About two years after the Earl had possession, a great multitude of the
poorest Commoners of other remote Fennes were brought and encouraged, and did
pull drown all the Drainers houses, throw out all their Tenants, some into the
Rivers, others were wounded and beaten, and driven away: And thus they did
destroy all their Plantations, their Seed, and Corn, to the value of twenty
thousand Pounds sterling, and by force took possession of all the Earls Lands.

4. The Commoners adjacent did join with these Rioters, and have now six
years enjoyed the said 14000 Acres belonging to the Drainers; which at ten
shillings an Acre amounts unto near forty thousand Pounds sterling, to which
Land they have no right. Thus the whole damages done by the Commoners to the
Earl and his Participants does amount unto near seventy thousand pounds
sterling.

5. It Is hoped that the Parliament will take notice that all these Riots were
committed, the Parliament sitting, and before the War began, and that most of
this was done in disobedience to many Orders from the Lords House, before whom
all the disputes had been often heard; and also in contempt of an Order to the
Lord Willougby, Lord Lieutenant of that County, who was with the Sheriff and
the Justices, to quiet the Possession unto the Earl and his Participants,
until the Parliament should further determine of the matter, and also in
contempt of the directions from the House of Commons by their Speakers Letter;
and above all, in scorn to the Committee of the House of Commons, which was
granted upon the Commoners Petition, and before whom the business was diverse
days heard, and debated by Counsel on both sides, and a hundred witnesses
sworn; but while this suit depended, the Commoners waved the judgment of the
Committee sitting, and of the Parliament also, and became their own judges in
their own case, to a very evil ex^mple.

And now I have said all these things by way of justification of the Drainers
proceedings, and recrimination of the Country People; it is not without good
ground believed by us that are interested, that if the whole business were
brought to a due hearing, and examination, it would appear all these
complaints of the Commoners the notorious Riots that they have committed, and
the Losses which the Drainers have sustained, have neith^r proceeded from any
injustice done to the people, nor yet from any dislike in them arising from any
other groun^, but merely from the malice of some rich ones, and the unjust
desire of gain in others instigating the Commoners to it: For there are
Grasiers of the high Countries, men of great substance, who have no right of
common in these Fennes; yet do under color of some poor Commoners Title put
in great herds of Cattle, eatingt up the Pasture from the Poor; and these men
fearing by the Drainers re-possession they must be put by this profit, have
set on the Commoners to make these clamours. And how can it be thought that the
Commoners should oppose the draining by which they have so great benefit, and
which was at first so pleasing to them, that many thousands of the Commoners
did work two years in the draines, and thousands of them did since gain very
well by helping in the Drainers first Harvests, as also by plowing, and Renting
of the Earls Lands; If therefore a hearing were granted in Parliament, no
doubt but it would appear who did set on these ignorant poor people to make
this destruction; but we suspect a hearing is cried down for no other cause,
but for fear left the Commoners should peach those that set them on these
Riots. The Drainers therefore cannot choose but earnestly solicit a hearing
with their opposers, assuring themselves they shall not only be acquitted by
all just Judges of those imputations of being Court Projectors, and Opposers of
Common People, but be re-instated in their Lands, with some public
acknowledgement and thanks for their good service done their Country; after the
custom of other Nations who were wont to decree Statues and Honorary
Inscriptions to well deserving Subjects: A Remuneration which their enemies
themselves owe them, the Drainers having performed all contracts to them: I say
not, according to the strictest Law, but the strictest rule of Equity and
Conscience, as if they had bin ambitious rather to set out a Pious Act to the
world for an example, then to perform a civil Compact only according to the
Obligation of justice.

FINIS.

