Thomas Killegrew Page of Honor to King Charles the first Groom of the
Bedchamber to King Charles the Second and his Ma:ties Resident with the
Republique of Venice in the year 1650.



COMEDIES, AND TRAGEDIES.

WRITTEN BY Thomas Killigrew, Page of Honor to King CHARLES the First, AND
Groom of the Bedchamber to King CHARLES the Second.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New-Exchange. 1664.

To the Reader,
I Shall only say, If you have as much leisure to Read as I had to Write these
Plays, you may, as I did, find a diversion; though I wish it you upon better
terms then Twenty Years Banishment.

Yours, THO. KILLIGREW.

A Catalogue of the Names of the Comedies and Tragedies contained in this
Volumn.
THe Princess; or, Love at first Sight: A Tragi-Comedy. The Scene Naples and
Sicily.

The Parsons Wedding: A Comedy. The Scene London.

The Pilgrim: A Tragedy. The Scene Millain.

Cecilia and Clorinda; or, Love in Arms: A Tragi-Comedy, in two Parts. The
Scene Lombardy.

Thomaso; or, The Wanderer: A Comedy, in two Parts. The Scene Madrid.

Bellamira her Dream; or, The Love of Shadows: A Tragi-Comedy, in two Parts.
The Scene Naples and Sicily.

Claricilla: A Tragi-Comedy. The Scene Sicily.

The Prisoners: A Tragi-Comedy. The Scene Sardinia.

THE PRINCESS: OR, Love at first Sight. A TRAGI-COMEDY: The Scene NAPLES and
SICILY.

Written in Naples BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

Dedicated to his dear Niece THE LADY ANNE WENTWORTH, WIFE TO The LORD LOVELACE.

LONDON: Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Herringman; and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Blew-Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New Exchange.
1663.

THE Scene in SICILY and NAPLES.
Dramatis Personae.
FAcertes, late Prince, now King of Sicily (by his Fathers late death in
Battle) taken Prisoner by the Romans. Lucius, (under the name of Cilius)
Brother to Facertes. Virgilius, Son to Julius Caesar. Minetes, his Servant.
Nigro, Foster-father to Facertes. Viceroy of Sicily for Facertes. Bragadine,
Son to the Governor of Naples. Terresius, a Sicilian Commander, turned Pirate.
Lieutenant, his Associate. Tullius, an humorous Companion of theirs. Crabb, a
Soldier of theirs. Other Soldiers of their Gang. Roman Soldiers. Prisoners.
Pimp and Baud of Naples (Baud's name Olympia.) Bravo 's. Servants. Sophia,
Sister to Virgilius. Cicilia, Sister to Facertes and Lucius. Paulina, a
Neapolitan Lady.
THE PRINCESS: OR, Love at first Sight.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter two Soldiers retiring, beaten in by three others, with them, the
Lieutenant, holding Sophia in his hand. Lieu. SLaves, you have her? you have
your Throats shaved with a short sword.


1 Sold. By what title is she yours? We fought for her.


2 Sold. And by our Laws you ought to stand to your Lot.


Lieu. By what Laws? By the Roman Law, you Rascals? broad-sword-law; besides
she looks as if she were sweet and sound, which are things you will scarce bring a
President, to prove your interest by.


1 Sold. We will not quit our shares for words; We have swords.


Lieu. And no money; Go ye Rascals: do you show your teeth? Go, truss, be gone,
to the next woods side, there speed with your Ploughs; do you threaten me with
your cold Iron?


1 Sold. Your odds makes you presume, but if we meet you alone, of the Guard.


Lieu. Then I Will cut thy Throat.


2 Sold. No, we'll spare you that labor, and have yours cut.


Lieu. Yes, yes, I know thou art good at killing, by Attorney.


1 Sold. God's Death, come away, follow, We shall a have time.


[Exeunt the two Soldiers, Lieut. And that is all, but a wheel and a crowd,
that thy end can claim, --

How now? weeping? come, dry, dry; I Will be a Father to thee. Art honest?


Sophia. Dare not you be honest too?


Lieut. Honest? Faith, pretty one, he that dares fight is as honest a Soldier
as needs to be.


Sophia. O! ye Gods. She lies down


Lieut. They are the prettiest kind of commodities, these women, that a man can
deal in, there is nothing like 'em, but ready money.


Sold. Pray, Sir, leave talking, and fall to, that we may have Here they put
up their swords. your leavings.


Lieu. Not a bit, go home to your Doll, and fall to your cold meat, friends.


Sold. Hang her, she is old.


Lieut. Speak reverently of her Age, the Jade brought great loads to our
pleasure, in her youth, and must not be forgotten.


Sold. O but this, Sir, has such an excellent face.


Lieut. Away, you Rogues, old chins, and naked chins, Boys of the first beard,
and find distinction? must your weak stomachs have face-sauce, before you can
fall to? the sex (you Varlets) was enough, when I was young; and I confess they
have been sad days with me, since the Face and Peticoat came in esteem: look
where she lies, (what? weeping, pretty one? now if I should dote in my latter
days, and draw in at my eyes a punishment, they say the Gods are just, and may,
through my doublet, punish the sins of my youth -- Hum, I Will think no more
on it; -- Faith I must kiss thee. He lies down and she rises.


Sophia. O Sir, be not so barbarous as to bring those dangers you have beaten
hence; why do you lay such rude hands on me? Think you, the innocence of Maid
and Virgin have no power to He lays hands on her. guard me?


Lieut. A Maid! by my faith, its strange, I should ha'jugded you at the second
age, when women fall; have you no witness of what you say? I have no faith your
witness, or I kiss. He still pulls her.


Sophia. Away, unhand me, and force me not to call down a Plague to guard me,
scorn not my words, if thou do this wickedness, thou will find the curse of
an injured Maid strike as sure, as lightning, and as fatal; nor can all thy
skill and courage defend thee, but despairs will find thee, and inhabit in
thee, till thou art dissolved in the horrors of thy fear. But if this calm,
which seems to allay He lets her go and looks on her. thy troubled blood, be
real, upon my knees, I Will fall, and to the Gods send my Prayers for thee, and
they will prove as great a guard, and thou shall find this good act interpose
between thee and thy greatest dangers.


Lieut. By this light she talks unhappily, should I keep her company, I must
beg; no more of this discourse, pray.


Sophia. Let me be safe in my Honor, and I Will be silent, and beside the reward
that heaven will pay you, my Ransom shall be what you will name.


Lieu. You have prevailed, and shall be free from force; but take heed of
talking of Heaven before these; to tempt them with such promises, is bidding
them to their loss; for what can such fellows hope for there, but to become
some odd Saints without Holy Days?


Sold. Lieutenant, you are somewhat free in your Opinion of us.


Lieu. Why, do thou sweet heart, hope for better? look upon him has he not a
promising face? I Will prophecy, Crabb, continue in thy calling, and thou art
safe, for thou have endeavored long, and I fear not, but have made good
friends below, and may be of a good rank in hell.


Sold. Faith, Lieutenant, me thinks, you spurred fairly forwards, and, upon my
Conscience, will be richly damned.


Lieu. Who I? Faith and troth I think I shall, and yet, while Shakes his purse.
this lasts, I have good hopes; for I am of Opinion, no Man is damned that has
money in his purse; nor do I see how poor folks can be saved; What noise is
that?


Sold. I hear our Captains voice.


Lieu. Away, take her to my quarter, and, upon your lives, no Insolence; pray
step off with them, till I see what occasions this noise.


Sophia. I will go, But if this be Treachery
Know, though it is easy to abuse the Gods,
Yet it is heavy for to bear their rods.

Lieu. Away, you are safe.


[Exeunt omnes but the Lieut. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Captain and Soldiers, with the Romans bound, that were taken with
Sophia. Sold. SIR, these are some poor Rogues.


Captain. Hang 'em then for being poor.


1. Roman. Cannot our prayers find thy Mercy?


Capt. A pox upon your prayers, they could not protect thee; hang 'em I say.


Lieu. Hold Sir, mistake not these Men, for, if I guess right, they are no
beggars.


Capt. Bring the Torture then.


Lieu. I believe, I know a way to gain the Truth without a Rack: There is a
Wench --


Capt. I, What became of her?


Lieu. She Is in my power, and talks not like a beggar; by this day, she
threatened me, and frighted me from my pleasure, she profer'd a Ransom too,
things that beggars never dream on.


Capt. Where is she? We will load her with chains, till they confess.


Lieu. Patience a little, and I Will instruct you; do but threaten to kiss her,
(you understand me) and, upon my life, she will tell all.


Capt. To the Dungeon then with these, and fetch her; but do thou hear,
Lieutenant, is she likely? is it a handsome Wench? do thou see ready money in
her face?


[Exeunt Sold. and Prison. Lieu. O, it is a proper Wench, and bravely built,
such Eyes, so black, so great, of a Beauty that is current every where, Then
her Cheeks, and such Lips; ha! by this hand I could ha dwelt for ever there.


Capt. She came luckily for this Mart; what became o'th Boys we took a
swimming in Baio?


Lieu. They are safe, and will be ready for the same freight.


Capt. And all will scarce quit cost.


Lieu. Faith Captain, we have no luck of late, our old Soldiers are immortal
too, they will not die, there comes no profit that way of late; When the Moor
was Captain, in his years there fell as many of those rotten plums, as were
worth ten thousand Drachms.


Capt. And since my reign, I cannot count a thousand. The young Cicilian, the
bold Cilius, is returned too, and now I have no hope to continue another year.


Lieu. Which? he that was the Prisoner?


Capt. Yes, the same, his hopes stand fair for the next Election, nor shall I
envy him if he gain it, for it is a gallant Fellow, and indeed ought to command
here.


Lieu. Faith Captain, a competent ill nature (I thank the Gods) I have gained
in the service, and to me it is indifferent who is Captain, for I must be
Lieutenant still, till my lot falls, and yet I have so much gratitude as to be
angry with old Tullius.


Capt. Why do thou blame a Man for desiring to live?


Lieu. By my Faith, when a Man desires it so unreasonably, I do; he knows he
cannot live, and yet he has not so much good nature as to die; what if he may
linger out this month? he will die the next, and then your reign expires.


Capt. Marry, and the Villain is rich, and 'twere not amiss to be his Heir.


Lieu. If he die in time; but if he live he will not be worth one Dram; for
since they told him he could not escape, The slave that grudged himself Bread
before eats Gold now, and considering you are his Heir, it is your Gold he
eats; would I had such Title to his Estate, by this light, I Would choke him,
slave.


Cap. Thou art in the right, if he die this month, I am his Heir, by the Laws
of our Band, if next, he that succeeds; and I am certain, he made his Fortune
under me.


Lieu. Why I, there is the point, Faith Captain, if you please, I Will go speak
with him, and try what good nature will do, it may be he will hear reason, I Will
urge how much he is bound to you.


Capt. Thou may go, but I Am afraid it will be lost labor.


[Exixit Lieut. Enter Cilius, and a Soldier. Cilius. A party of Romans taken,
where? guide my hate, that with fatal wounds I may empty their proud veins.


Capt. How now Cilius, what Rage is this?


Cilius. O Teresius, can you be content, because our persons lie hid, to let
our shames continue visible, and thus sleep out the sufferings of our Country?
I past over her bosom in my Journey, Oh! had you, with me, seen the general
calamities she groans under, ruined even to a Chaos, and the wretched people,
grown so degenerate in their sufferings, that they begin, with joy, to obey the
insulting Conqueror.


Capt. It is wisdom now to obey.


Cilius. Wisdom? Is Teresius grown so tame, to think so? let the Dogs, not
Cilius, practice it.


Capt. Why thus impatient?


Cilius. Our Country and our miseries call for our swords to protect her, and
to see you thus tame makes me so.


Capt. This rage serves her as little -- And it is now in vain to attempt their
ruin, whose Conquest has taken such firm root.


Cilius. Those that bled in the last battle thought not so.


Capt. To what rash attempts would your rage guide you! is the sad issue of
that day no example which our brave Prince Facertes was forced to survive, and
adorn their Triumphs? But that being past, he had died upon the Hook, nor could
the Intercession of Virgilius letters have deferred the doom, though he bestrid
him in the heat of battle, had not the far-fam'd Sophia, in his approaching
Fate, called to mind that which he (though an Enemy) protected her Brother
from, and in the instant kneeled and embraced Caesar's knees, divinely pleading,
Pallas inspired her, and with her own Beauties clothed the Virgin, and with
such power the Goddess moved in her, that when Caesar gazed upon her blew eyes
he left to be Caesar, and rather obeyed then granted, and to be her Father
could scarce secure him from being fettered with those white wrists which
circled his imperial knees.


Cilius. Was Virgilius then in the Power of Facertes, that day, and did he let
him escape, did he fawn upon the Roman?


Capt. It was but to return the Piety Virgilius showed his Foster-father, who
(you know) protected him in that sad day our King was slain, and, by his power,
he grew able to give that last blow for his Countries Freedom, which when the
aged Nigro saw inclining to the Romans, covetous to have his Age set in some
glorious Act, he charged the youthful Virgilius, but over loaded with Courage,
his silver hairs sunk under the Roman, whose Piety bestrid him like his Father,
vowing to sacrifice upon that breast, sooner then wound it.


Cilius. 'Twas done like the Son of the first Julius; These are degenerate, and
succeed only in the others Fortune, not his Merit, Yet -- had I been by --


Capt. What could your single Arm have done?


Cilius. Killed Virgilius, in Revenge of the Rape the Roman Ploughes has made
upon my Mothers womb. For other Parent then my Country, I yet could never find.
Oh! that I had been that day with the brave Facertes, who knows but I might
have dug a glorious Monument in some lucky wound, given in the face of this
admired Virgilius, and after such a Fortune, I could have smiled, and, unshook,
stepped into my graye. Or if slav'd, such bold truths I would have uttered, they
should not have destroyed me for cold Example, but rather because Rome durst
not let me live. And yet I beg if there be any Power favorable to Cilius, let
it set within my swords reach this Virgilius, this King of Men, This Sicilian
scourge, that makes us kneel and kiss our Afflictions; Then, then, Teresius,
thou shall see, how with this sword I Will hunt his pale Soul to her last home.


Capt. It Is a Gallant Youth, how his Spirit boyles, to be in Action.


[aside. Cilius. If I be chose Captain of our Band, by all our bondag'd Gods,
in some disguise, I Will see that Rome, I will Teresius, and with a few wounds
well dealt, gather a numerous Revenge; say, would not you obey, if I command,
to join in such a Sacrifice, where, to fall, The Offering is as glorious, as to
stand the Priest, and such attempts are becoming Sacrifice for Men, let Women
incense burn, it is properer for us to expiate with wounds, then Prayer or
Fasting, and had those we vainly dealt in Sacrifice been given upon our
Enemies, our Herds had now been fair, and Rome Ashes.


Capt. May all thy thoughts prove Prophetic, and here I vow to obey what ere
thou injoynest. -- Though it be not safe to let thee know the Reason, nor the
Interest thou have in thy Countries sufferings.


[aside. [Enter Lieut. Lieut. Sir, will you come to the Examination, The
Prisoners are at the Quarters.


Cilius. What Prisoners?


Capt. The Romans.


Cilius. Why are they not staked?


Lieut. There Is a Woman amongst'em.


Capt. You will not stake her, will you?


Cilius. No, I make no war with Women.


Lieut. If she must die, I beg the staking of her.


Cilius. What is she?


Lieut. More then young, and handsome, and one that talks unhappily; I know not
--


Cilius. I Will go see her; Captain, I Will meet you at the Oak.


Capt. I Will to my Quarter, and attend you.


ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Virgilius and Facertes. Virgil. O Let me stretch my self, and thus
enlarged possess my Joys; for know, my longing Soul made a Crown a Burden,
and with greater joy I have put off an Empire, then thou thy chains; and now
transported with my hopes, the Bird that from the Cage is flown, and broke that
Prison, where she was wont to mourn, and sings all Tunes at once, That Bird, I
say, cuts not the yielding Air with more joyful Freedom, then I, to find my
self, and delivered from that imprisoning state.


Facer. Sir, Thus far I have obeyed your Commands, which enjoined me to
accompany you from Gallia hither: But what your design should be, that makes
you thus, with Joy, quit your Command there, and be pleased to find your self
unknown and hid in a disguise at Naples, I cannot guess, nor shall I be so rude
to ask; for sure if it were fit I knew it, you, that dare trust your sleeping
self in my power, would not hide it from me.


Virg. Does not my Friend guess, whither I am bound?


Facert. Not the particular; but I am certain it is some great design, to
conquer which, you thus in ambush lay the great Virgillius.


Virgil. The Body was made the Souls slave, and now but serves her to advance
my ends; nor is my Mind less, or thoughts more subject to fear, then when an
Army compassed me.


Facert. Sir, That you are alone makes you not less in my esteem; for it is not
your power I admire, (the loss of mine own tells me, that is mortal) but your
Mind; which, when Virgilius is nothing but what my Memory gives life to, will
make me worship his Monument.


Virg. No more, Prince Facertes, my Friend, and to confirm him take a secret,
by which I Will bind him to me for ever; for secrets have stronger ties then Love,
or Vows; for whilst thou have Honor that binds thee, the other may by mistake
or Passion (which Friendship's self is subject to) fall even to hate.


Facertes. Then, when I have honor, I shall know your design.


Virg. When thou have! O Facertes, my friend, it was born with thee; and where
it is not natural, swords cannot acquire it; Take therefore into thy heart all
the secrets of mine, and in a word, all my hopes, and all my fears, Cicilia.


Facert. What of her, Sir?


Virg. She is all my hopes, all my wishes, and all my fears; and if she smile,
I am fortunate: for know, my journey is to lay at her feet my self, and all
that Conquest gave me. What thinks Facertes? will she accept it, and not
destroy the destroyer? For nothing can be conquest, where she suffered, but
height of Murder.


Facert. What, do I hear my prayers forestalled, and those joys Our Country
ought to sacrifice for, offered to us? I hope Virgilius is not still pleased to
triumph over our miseries, and throw a scorn upon that, which he thought worthy
of his sword?


Virg. Have you not yet forgiven what was my fate? while these thoughts dwell
in thee, I must not hope Facertes will join the power of a Brother to assist my
wishes.


Facert. If you are real, you shall tread upon my neck, but if this be scorn,
it is so unlike my friend, and so unbecoming the brave Virgilius, that I should
not fear to call him enemy, nor despair his conquest.


Virg. Real, Facertes! why when have I jested with my friend? Real? yes, as thy
vows to Sophia. Never start, nor put on amazement, was I less worthy of a
trust, because thou thought me worthy to have been thy enemy? call me
friend, and hide thy love? Either thou have not found the knowledge, or lost
the value of thy friend: I tell Prince Facertes, she, whom he sacrifices to,
has greater ties upon me as Friend then Sister.


Facert. That I do love the divine Sophia, witness my part of heaven, which is
all thou have left me to swear by; but if thou have gained the knowledge of
that secret, by jealous guesses, purchased treachery, or with thy power have
wrought upon her sex to betray her innocent affection, draw thy sword, for, by
all our Gods, no Facertes draws his sword. distance, as enemy, nor neerness of
Friendship shall divide us, or secure thee from my vengeance.


Virg. I am innocent, and you are angry; here read that, it will tell you, you
have injured me. He gives Facertes a Letter.


Facert. Can Virgilius pardon me, and still have patience to learn me how to
conquer Nations first, and then my self, by his great Example?


Virg. Your friendship I shall never decline; and if Sophia be just, you have a
warrant for you faith of mine. When I went for Gallia to take command of those
Legions there, at parting, we fell into discourse of you, and the
never-enough-admir'd Cicilia, whose beauties and virtues she always mentioned
with admiration: I confessed to her, that her former descriptions had engaged
my affections to your Sisters fame so much, that I was resolved, in some
disguise, to see her. O're-joyed with this news, she recommended you to me for
a guide, And though I ever admired the honor I found in Facertes, yet I
confess, I made a little stop ere I resolved to put my self in the power of
one, whom I had tempted with such a ruin, as obeying my Fathers injunctions,
had made me lay upon your suffering Country; to remove which doubt she blushed
out this secret; I asked her then, why she suffered thee to be led in triumph?
she said, she pleaded against it, what she durst, and had she loved less, she
could have said more, but seeing her own guilt, she feared it might have been
trouble to all: Now if this truth can satisfy Facertes, that I have not
wronged him, and now I beg, he will give me leave to return his vows, to Cicilia;
and now I conjure thee by that power which thou have given her, in Sophia's
name, here to bury all thy fears, all thy anger, all remembrance that I was a
misfortune to thee, in return of which upon thy breast, the Altar of
friendship, I Will lay mine a sacrifice, and vow my self to fair Cicilia, and her
Country, a constant friend.


Facert. Oh! Sir, The joys you load your slave with, I wish you may find, when
you sigh under such a pleasing burden, as the enjoying all your wishes brings.
And if my prayers be prosperous, Virgilius will prove our Physician, and the
wounds he gave, but Prescriptions, and we have bled for our health only.


Virg. From hence then, I Will count my conquest over Facertes, and think I have
brought more strength to our Empire, by his friendship, then his Country.


Facert. If you intend a sudden journey, give me leave to furnish you with a
Galley, I have some acquaintance in the Town; I Will dispatch, and meet you
presently upon the Mould: will you not send, to see whether your Sister be
arrived at Baio?


Virg. Yes, and we'll touch there, as we go.


Facert. When I kissed her hands, to go for Gallia, she said, she was
immediately to retire to Baio.


Virg. We need not bid each other haste, since Love's our guide.


ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Sophia and the Lieutenant. Lieu. HItherto, fair one, your beauty has
preserved you; but let not your pride teach you, from success, to scorn a
proffered love, that brings safety with it; for me, I confess I durst not enter
where that beauty guarded; there was something in that Angel from that stroke
me, and I boast a wound received from you, more then a conquest over another.


Sophia. This Act shows you truly valiant, and this fear, you pay the Gods, is
courage: Fools and Cowards only dare their power, and you shall find success
and conquest still await you, when you strike not against them; and my prayers
shall invert the kind of this offering, and make a sacrifice of that which is
duty: and you shall receive a reward for paying, as if you had given Hecatombs.


Lieu. Faith, pretty one, I am pleased with what you say, though I understand
it not, Pray, what kind of place is yours, in heaven? By this hand, I think she
keeps the sweetmeats, or else, is woman Butler there.


Soph. Alas, Sir, I am so mortal, I am subject to you: for heaven, I know it
not, but by faith, and that tells me, when I am injured, my curses wound, and
when served, my prayers heal.


Lieu. Then you have nothing to show, under the hands of those, what do ye
call'um? those Gods?


Soph. Nothing, but the examples of their justice; which, with punishment,
visit the wicked.


Lieu. Now do I begin to find, I was a fool, and this wench a talker, By this
hand I thought she had had some of the Gods in Liveries, at her Elbow, and
there is no such thing, all is but a dream; He offers to kiss her. but I Will be
no longer fooled by my fears. Faith, pretty one, let us try whether they be at
leisure, or no; or if they be, they cannot have the face to punish us for those
faults they were so subject to themselves.


Soph. They are in a sad condition, that instead of repentance, seek examples
for their sins; and the second is worse then the first; as insolence, is worse
then weakness: why do you lay such rude hands upon me, You will not destroy
what you have built?


[Enter Cilius. Cil. Wait without.


Lieu. Are you there? Then I am prevented, a Pox upon my Cilius gazes upon her.
tender nature, this it is to be ignorantly wicked, and subject to fits of
conscience.


Cil. Lieutenant, is that the Prisoner, you spoke of?


Lieu. Yes Sir.


Cil. Thou lie.


Lieu. Sir.


Cil. I tell thee, its false, its here the Prisoner stands. Touches himself.


Lieu. That Is she, I spoke of.


Cil. Leave us then.


Soph. Ye Gods, new miseries.


Lieu. Why so; there is but three steps to a woman's bed, liking, alone, and
consent. Two of them he has past already, if she consent, I would he might pay
her: look how they gaze, This is Love, and I have bought wit, But if a long
staff keep me from the next, let 'em geld me.


[Exit Lieu. Cil. Fair one, what Country boasts these Beauties?


Soph. Sir, I can answer for my self, But for those Beauties, you speak of, let
them find a friend, I have misfortunes enough to busy my time, and I find it
business enough to make it appear fit to live: The thoughts of beauty, are fit
for those that have fortunes like their faces, and if mine be like my fortune,
(as a friend I counsel you) not to let your eyes dwell longer here, for its a
dangerous habitation, Not safe to me, that am native there, and I should mourn
more for your dangers, then mine own, for I know how to be just, but I could
never find, how to be fortunate.


Cil. A Curse find him, and all passed Plagues be but stored for him, that
would seek to deface that Temple, and what ere your modesty can urge. -- Thus
I Will pay my duty, for I know, such a He kneels to her. worship can be no new
thing to the Deity, that is shrouded in their eyes.


Soph. If you kneel, I must kneel too, for the guilt is no less to take a
worship where it is not due, then to pay it. She kneels likewise.


Cil. But if the guilt be equal, pray refuse not to receive an unfeigned one.


Soph. I dare not rise, while you kneel; for although the fault be equal, yet
civility makes this fitter. They both rise.


Cil. I Will not dispute; for know, should you command, through sin, I Would serve
you; and therefore you may be confident, I Will obey you, when you command me
shun it; and here, with shame, I confess, I came prepared with lust, hungry
with sin, and looked to have met a sacrifice to me. -- But I have found the
power, and now return as from the Altar, struck with holy despairs, and shall
feed on what I have already fed my eyes and ears with.


Soph. Sir, I find there is honor in your breast, but I fear that safety dwells
not every where; for the Soldier that you found with me, repents him of the
good that saved me.


Cil. He dares as soon suck in a Pestilence, as breathe on that air, I frown
in; he is my slave, and to my will his fate is tied, if he dares breathe ought
but obedience, it is his own sentence; say, fairest, shall he live, By our Gods
(but to serve you) he should not. What, ho! Lieutenant, Sirrah, what was it you
said, to disturb this calm.


[Enter Lieu. and two Soldiers. Lieu. Faith little Sir, something that tended
to the use of handsome women.


Cil. Slave, did thou look upon her, and not kneel? by her self, I swear
(purer then which our Temples show nothing) if any act or word of thine shall
henceforth pay less reverence here, then at the Altar, thou art Earth; mark me;
this shall wound the into Earth. He lays hand on his sword.


Lieu. Sir it shall, and I Will call it justice, death has taken six I think, and
is drunk with her beauty, a pox upon me: I must be praising her forsooth.


Soph. Sir, you need not threaten, the reward is not worth the hazard, and I am
safe.


Cil. The reward! oh, that it were to be purchased at the rate of Kingdoms,
then the sword might gather those Beauties! but they are neither within the
compass of conquering, nor dying for, else I durst say, after all my wounds and
triumphs, see your slave; but now I am lost in my despairs.


Soph. Sir, Truth has such affinity with truth, that I can scarce hide one from
you, which I fear will be displeasing.


Cil. To serve you, is the first thoughts of my heart, and since I cannot, my
self be happy, let me contribute my Power to make you so; dare you tell me who
you are?


[Enter a Soldier. Soph. A vow forbids me.


Sold. Sir, the Captain expects you.


Cil. Me? I Will wait him presently: Lieutenant, see you cheerish your first act,
and with honor treat this Lady, and you shall command me; your pardon, fair
one, our Captain commands me hence, but you shall be safe from all dangers, but
what your sadness brings, and I shall be proud to be called yours, though
despised.


Soph. Witness heaven, all that honor can spare me is yours; And therefore I
beg you will not injure me, to say I despise you: When we have not, we cannot
pay, and I shall mourn to think I must dye your Debtor.


Cil. Madam, But I can admire and sacrifice in thoughts, pray command me to do
something for you, oh! that these five tedious days were wasted, that, without
a treachery, I might say, you are free, but if you can find a strength to
resist these miseries, till then, By our Gods, you are as free as they, and as
readily I Will obey you.


Sophia. Sir, your first bounties make me happy; and since I have your
protection for my Honor, all the rest, when they are blown over, bring but a
pleasure in the relation.


Cilius. I must go -- There is a necessity that forces me to obey, I cannot
else command your safety. -- Lieutenant.


Lieut. Sir.


Cilius. Need I say again, Protect this Lady?


Lieut. No Sir, By this hand, he has gelt me with a look, Madam, will it
please you to walk?


[Exit Cilius. Sophia. Yes Sir, I Will follow you, and I hope I shall not be
ashamed to follow my Facertes, whose Soul, I think, holds Intelligence with
this Soldier; and were it not that I been accustomed to see such Virtue, this
would start me.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Nigro wounded, and Cicilia holding him by the Arm. Nigro. FLy, oh fly,
and save your self, Madam, This Piety will give wings to your Innocence; for it
is just, ye Powers, A noise of fighting within. by Miracle, to save that
Miracle.


Cicilia. No Father, The fears and nicities of our Sex I have long since
banished hence; and so many have been my days of mourning, that I thought not
to have shed a tear for any new misery; But this is a loss I could not foresee,
and by surprise this grief has got into my heart, look, if I have not tears
left. -- Oh! ye Heavens, Where is that Justice and Mercy we sacrifice to? Why
were you absent when his sword struck in your own cause? He faints. Wounds,
and Age! There is a kind of Sacrilege in this Murder, and I could be wicked
in my anger, to see his faithful youth preserved thus to a punishment, and,
instead of a reward, see him pursued like the wicked, and his Age set in Blood.


Nigro. O excellent Maid! let not my ruin beget faults in thee; A noise
within. nor do thou thus repine at the last and greatest of my Honors; is it
not better to sink thus, Then blushing say I surfeited, or go shaking out with
an Ague, like a Coward Schoolboy, to my Grave! Fairest, I have been bred a
Soldier; and had it been as noble to yield as conquer, I could have died as
easily, as killed. -- Your Hand, Madam, for I find I faint, Why should I grieve
to die, that have this to lay me in the Earth! O weep not, By this last smile I
conjure you, weep not; But let your sadness die, and my Memory live; For
witness that power, to whom I am now offering my self, as my last Sacrifice, I
have all that dying Nigro could wish; am I not blessed with my Countries cause to
die in, while a Princess mourns at my Funeral, and an Angel Virgin is He
swounds. She looks sadly upon him.

They seize Cicilia.

sent to close mine Eyes.


Cicilia. He Is dead. --


Enter the Viceroy and Soldiers, the Viceroy is wounded and taken, he falls.
1. Sold. Hands off, This is my Prisoner.


2. Sold. She Is finely built, I think she was furnished for the Mart.


Crabb. I Will have her Clothes, I spied them first.


1. Sold. I Will have her, and let whose will take the rest; I desire but to be
lost in the wood with her, for a night, and let him take her that finds her in
the morning.


2. Sold. He were a bold fellow, that would come after thee.


Crabb. Come, leave this squabling, lest the Lieutenant come, and then you get
not a bit.


1. Sold. Faith, and thou art in the right, and I confess I would be glad to
find a way to be revenged for the last he took from us.


3. Sold. I could tell you how to do it, and profitably too, if you would all
take my counsel.


2. Sold. Propose, propose.


3. Sold. Then quit your thoughts of this dainty bit, and lets away with her,
and the rest, to Naples, and sell 'em, This fine Points to Cicilia. thing shall
yield Money, that will buy Wine, and Wenches, that bring no fears along with
'em; This gay thing, should we touch her forbidden fruit, we were damned; and
we are sure, our Lieutenant will pursue us with fire and sword.


All. Agreed, Agreed.


3. Sold. Thus rigged then, lets away, But we had best leave one to tell our
Captain we are put to Sea, in pursuit of a Galley that bore the Roman Eagle,
that will take off suspicion while we are absent; then we may return, and say,
they out sailed us.


2. Sold. I Will stay, but remember my share.


3. Sold. What, do thou think we are Thieves amongst our selves? Come, help
draw these dead Bodies into the Wood, we will bury them when we return.


1. Sold. Bring her away too, and take care of her, lest she spoil her self,
and undo our Market.


3. Sold. Come, pretty one. -- Nay, you must part. She sits by the body of
Nigro all this while.


Cicilia. Fools, you pull on your Fates, and labor to steal that Vengeance
that would find you were you hidden in the Earth; and my Prophetic Soul tells
me, I go but to see you punished.


1. Sold. What says she?


2. Sold. I know not what she says, but I hope she lies; do you hear, what
kind of Women are your Witches?


1. Sold. A pox, they are old, Come Mistress, Dangers and handsome Women dwell
not together; if they do, let me fall into them. --


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Captain, and Crabb. Captain. WHat were those Romans, that fell to my
share?


Crabb. They were taken when the pretty Wench was taken, that Cilius would have
had.


Capt. Did you deliver 'em to the Lieutenant, and bid him come hither with his
Account?


Crabb. I left 'em there, and bid him come to your Worship, but I found him a
little troubled, he had been at the Soldiers; but the fellow is wilful.


Capt. But I have taken an order to bring him to Reason.


Enter Lieutenant drunk and angry. Lieut. Whoreson Clown, refuse to pledge me or
die; Rascal, neither drink, nor die. Umh.


Capt. How now, Lieutenant, what passion's this?


Lieu. Rogue, refuse to dye, or drink my Captains health, at my suit, and yet
confess a Beer-glass would kill him.


Capt. Oh! is that the cause?


Crabb. I Will swear, he is very unreasonable.


Capt. And ought to be put to death, for refusing a health.


Lieu. That was spoke like my Captain, and I Will kiss his foot, nay, nay, do not
hold me, let me go, let me go, I say, that I may kneel, and wish thou may
live, till I refuse a Beer-glass.


Capt. What have thou there?


Lieu. A Julip. He has a little bottle in his hand.


Capt. What are the ingredients?


Lieu. Simple Aquafortis, to warm his stomach. Dog, offer to live, when wine
is a poison to him?


Capt. You shall not poison him.


Lieu. No, I Will get his Doctor to prescribe it, and then it is Physic.


Capt. No, no poison.


Lieu. Then he will live.


Capt. No I have prevented his living, for I was afraid thou would not
succeed. Thou have no Oratory, thou can not persuade, Then, thou art so
subject to choler; Did you mark the old woman you met at my Quarter? it was
his wife. In six words, I made a price with her, to kill him, without any of
the difficulties you found in persuading him.


Lieu. Captain, you are weak, Captain; I not Eloquent? your Argument is weak;
Death, do you think it is no more to persuade one to dye, then to hire another
to kill him.


Capt. No.


Lieu. Stand fair, and I Will confute you. Crabb.


Crabb. Lieutenant.


Lieu. What will thou give me to kill him.


Capt. Come, leave your fooling, and give me your Account.


Lieu. Am I Eloquent then? Lieu. offers to draw his sword.

The Lieu. pulls out a piece of dirty paper, and gives it him.




Capt. Yes, yes, give me your Account, and I Will believe you Eloquent, what is
this?


Lieu. Your Account.


Capt. My Account?


Lieu. Yes, and an Eloquent Account.


Capt. What Is here? paid, lent, given, and rests due; faith it is an Eloquent
account indeed: But Lieutenant, is this all?


Lieu. All? why would you have more?


Capt. Kind Lieutenant, I would have an Account.


Lieu. Why have you not an Account? All is but this over and over; but if you will
give it me again, you shall have a longer Bill.


Capt. But Lieutenant, Eloquent Lieutenant, is that all that is left of my four
thousand Sestertia.


Lieu. Why, what account should I make you? would you not pay what you owe? and
lend a good fellow that drinks fair; or is your Charity dead to pretty sinners
in their necessity, and militant in the world?


Capt. But grant these uses, what is the sum? what paid, what lent?


Lieu. Why, what you will.


Capt. Very good. But what means this, Rests due, of whom must I enquire for
that?


Lieu. Of me Torrafuco, lodging at the sign of the Lieutenant.


Capt. Crabb, knock, and if the Party be within, tell him, I would speak with
him, and require an Account of certain living creatures that were given to his
trust, Women and Children.


Crabb. They, Sir, are increased, the Moore has a Calf running by her side, of
his own getting, the other Barbary is with Fool to; and she that you sent to
day had like to have been leaped in his Collar.


[Enter a Soldier. 2 Sold. The Alarm, Sir, is given, from the shore, and the
Lion is in chase of a Galley that bears the Roman Eagle, and Cilius waits
directions at your Quarter.


Capt. Tell him, we come, and, do you hear, get the Leopards Gang ready; what
will my careful Steward do, visit the sick? Pray, let the Prisoners be bathed
first, and well fed, against the Mart.


Lieu. Crabb.


Crabb. Here, nobel Lieutenant, I am always ready to serve. -- When he is in
this humor I cleanse his Pockets, and that is my Revenue. Aside.


Lieu. Crabb, talking is not good for me when this fit is upon me; for I find,
I am subject to grow angry, weak and drowsy.


Crabb. Therefore you must master your passion, at first, ere it grow upon you;
but there is no speaking to you when you are in an Argument.


Lieu. I find thee an able man, and therefore I Will lean upon thee: what is that,
Crabb?


Crabb. What Is what, Sir?


Lieu. I felt a live thing in my Pocket, Crabb. Crabb, picks his pocket as he
leans on him, he finds his hand in his pocket.


Crabb. It may be your worships breeches are torn.


Lieu. I will reward thy faith with a Trust, Crabb, here, to let thee see, how
dear thou art to me, keep my Tobacco-box.


Crabb. Noble Lieutenant.


Lieu. No thanks, but help to lay me down behind some tree, in the shade.


[Exeunt both behind the Curtains. Crabb. Your worships head is full. -- I
could have gelt him, the slave has drunk himself stiff.


[Enter Crabb again with his money in his hat. Lieu. Crabb, Crabb. Lieu. as he
lies holds up the Curtain, and calls Crabb.


Crabb. Here, here.


Lieu. Prithee stick a bough for a mark, that thou may find me again, lest I
be lost in my thoughts.


Crabb. I shall, I shall.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter at one Door the Soldiers, with Cicilia and the rest of the Prisoners,
to be sold; at the other Door a Pimp, and a she Baud. Baud. CAptain, a word
with you, I have viewed your ware, but is there any special piece amongst 'em?


Sold. As you see; they are young, and sound.


Baud. Will you give a trial?


Sold. With the eye, and the tongue, question, or search them, nothing else.


Baud. Not a little freedom alone? you were not wont to be thus hard.


3 Sold. Faith, we have had no luck of late, Mistress, this is the first Mart
we have made this month.


Baud. And you come to our house, it shall cost you nothing.


Pimp. At what price do you hold that fine thing?


1 Sold. That? it is the cream of our Mart, she will cost two thousand
Sestertia.


Pimp. Is she a maid?


1 Sold. I Will warrant that, if I sell her.


Pimp. Come, a thousand is fair, and take you the profit of the first night.


1 Sold. No, altogether, or nothing, view her, she is worth the money naked.


Baud. But, my friend, I hope you have tried your self, ere now? are you
fruitful? She speaks to one of the slaves.


Slave. Yes, Mistress, and if you agree upon the price, you shall find me a
faithful servant; and for the sport, if I raise you not a Crop from the Common,
geld me.


Baud. Geld thee? Marry God forbid man; I Will lame thee first, art sound too?
else I may live to curse your doings.


Slave. Sound as a Bell, and as ever you hope to be satisfied, buy me. The
slave bugs her.


Baud. Away, away, you are a wag, is your breath sweet, let me smell, you are
very forward, pray turn, and let us see your price, He kisses her. here
Soldier, take your money.


1 Sold. Thank you, may his back never fail you.


Pimp. Faith, you are too dear. -- Stay, here comes the Prince Bragadine, the
Viceroys Son.


[Enter Bragadine and a servant. Bragad. How now, Soldier, what famous Prize
is that?


1 Sold. A Greek Sir, a Virgin.


Bragad. What Is her price?


1 Soul. Two thousand Sestertia.


Bragad. It Is dear, and yet its a proper Wench.


Enter Virgilius and his man. Virg. My Sister not arrived yet at Baio? its
strange.


Serve. No Sir, not yet, but she has been expected these ten days.


Virg. What crowd is that?


Serve. The slave-mart is held to day.


Bragad. What stranger is that?


Virg. Was that fellow drunk? As Virgilius comes in, he meets Bragadine going
out, they justle, and look scurtily at one another.

Virgilius spies Cicilia. and falls in Love with her.




Serve. Either drunk or worse.


Virg. Is that excellent piece to be sold?


Serve. Yes Sir.


Virg. She is not, who can buy her? or who dares set a price upon that Beauty?
Fairest, what Country is (at this time) cursed with your absence, for sure it is
perpetual night when you are thence.


Cicilia. Greece, Sir, is my Country, more particulars I must not tell.


Virg. Fools that we are, to call our selves Conquerours of Greece, when one
slave, one handful of that Earth, has power to conquer me, and lead me bound,
even in my own Country.


Cicilia. It is not becoming your youth, nor fortune (how great so ever) to
make a scorn of those miseries which chance throws upon the Innocent.


Virg. A strange curse find me when I scorn you; dare you not tell me what you
were before this ruin?


Cicilia. I must not, Sir.


Virg. And are there no statues fixed in the Temples, or History, that
preserves your Story? must all but your Beauty sink with this ruin?


Sold. Sir, if you will buy her, take her upon her price; if not, The Soldier
interrupts him. give others leave to bid.


Virg. Fool, thou can not sell her, for thou know not how to value her,
yet cozen thy self; what do thou ask?


Sold. Two thousand Sestertia.


Virg. Is that all?


Sold. All! yes.


Virg. And is she free when that is paid?


Sold. Yes, if you please.


Virg. Madam, not to call you mine, but to have a power to appear yours, give
me leave, with the loss of mine own, to find your Freedom. Go fetch two
thousand Sestertia. -- unbind her. Virgilius puts her chains upon his arm.


[Exit Servant. Cicilia. What mean you, Sir?


Virg. They are proper here; and I beg you will not refuse (when Honor
consents) to release me.


Cicilia. I hope my miseries will not beget Ingratitude in me, for I confess,
it is some Joy in the midst of these troubles, to find that Honor that shines
throughout this act; and though my bonds be as new and strange to me as your
self, yet let me say, if there be a faulty thought that bids you hope to find a
slaves heart here, you are deceived; for I would sooner sell my self to
slavery, or, by a wound seek a freedom.


Virg. By thy self, by thy Angel self, I approach thee with thoughts as pure
and as constant as those our Vestals wait on the holy flame with; and but that
I know you would scorn a Sacrifice that is offered by profane hands, those
Attributes are given to the Gods I Would kneel and pay to you.


[Enter the Princes Servant. Serve. Soldier, the Prince would speak with you.


Paul. Which is that fine thing you spoke of? Above in the window appears
Paulina and the Baud.


Baud. That that the stranger stands by.


Paul. That stranger, know thou that stranger?


Baud, No, not I.


Paul. Now by the sins of my youth, it is a God-like form! -- Why do they pull
the Woman so? The Soldier returns, and lays hold on Cicilia.


Virg. How now, unhand her Villain, is she not free?


Sold. You have not paid your money, and I must not lose my Market you
talked, and another has gone through with the bargain.


Virg. Another, what other?


Sold. One that will find the way to her Sex, before you will come to kissing
her hand: take her away.


Virg. Slave, do thou glory in thy Villainies? -- There, now let Virgilius
stabbs him. him that dares claim her follow me and take her.


Cicilia. What have you done, Sir?


Virg. Fairest, begun a Justice I hope the Gods will finish. The rest of the
Soldiers draw and call for help. Murder.


Bragad. How, killed! whose act is this?


[Enter Bragadine. Virg. Mine, and I Will answer it; some one that knew him
follow me, and take the money for this Lady.


Bragad. That Woman I have paid for, and I will not quit my purchase; either
yield her, or I shall force her.


Virg. I know what it is command, but never yet heard that voice (unless an
Oracle) that I would have obeyed when the Speaker frowned, and thou lookst not
like him whose voice is thunder.


Paul. Gallant Youth. He lays hold of her.

He ^^ikes him and (...).

Bra^adine and the Soldiers d^aw.

They fight.

Enter Soldiers armed.

Exeunt ^^nes.




Bragad. I cannot talk, Sir, but I shall take my own.


Virg. Touch her not, yet I have patience, let her alone. -- Nay, if you will
be insolent, I Will punish it if I can.


Bragad. Kill the Dog.


Paul. Hold Sir, as you have any sense of Honor, hold for shame, betray not
thy Fame so poorly as to let a slave share in thy Revenge; this base odds calls
thee Coward, though thou conquerest.


Bragad. Who made you a Judge of mine Honor?


Paul. So, I fear you will find your Treachery no guard.


1 Sold. This way, this way he is gone, seize her and secure her to the
Princes house, whilst we follow him.


ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Virgilius, and the Soldiers after him. Virg. VIllains, whither tends
your Rage?


Sold. To revenge: yield, or thou art dead.


Paulina above. Slaves, leave to pursue that stranger, or I Will send those shall
shake your wretched souls out of their Cases.


2 Sold. What Is she?


Virg. What ere you are that thus have lent your pity to a stranger, in
distress, may you never know what it is to want a pity.


[Enter Virgilius 's Servant with Facertes. Facert. To buy a slave?


3 Sold. Upon him, alive or dead, we'll have him.


Facert. Ha! the Prince engaged, draw.


ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Bragadine and Soldiers. Bragad. HEll upon you all, where were your
Mercenary swords when they should assist? God's Death, to let a single stranger, in
mine own door, brave me, and none by, to kill the dog? who now is escaped, to
brag that he snatched from Bragadine a slave that he bought and paid for.


Sold. Sir, we could not Prophecy, your Highness would go out; and none
called us; But for the slave, she is at home, and safe, The Sailers brought
her, and are now in pursuit of the stranger.


Bragad. If she be safe, let us lose no time, but follow them, lest he escape,
with his glories, which which way went they?


Sold. This way, Sir.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Virgilius, Facertes, and Minetes in rage, for the loss of Cicilia.
Facert. HOw do you, Sir?


Virg. Not well.


Facert. What accident was this?


Virg. Oh! Facertes, I have seen my Fate, and I conjure thee by all our
friendship, not to call me weak, nor dispute with my passion, but obey thy
friend, and suddenly, or I am lost for ever; for her innocence, I fear, will be
no guard against their power; and without impiety I may mistrust the Gods, for
they already have slept, and let her fall into misery; oh, Facertes, I am a
slave to a slave, and to hers my Fate is bound. And Temples, not chains are due
to her; and when thou see her thou will forgive me this change, for she has a
Beauty against which thy honor must arm, else thy love will be no more a guard
then was my resolution.


Facert. All this for a slave!


Virg. Oh! do not revile her; for when thou meet'st her, thy wonder and
repentance will make but one thought, and like me thou will be lost in a maze.


Facert. This is strange.


Virg. I confess it; yet when the world was innocent before the bloody sword
taught her pride by conquest, and learned the thirsty wool to drink the purple
dye, till it grew enriched with the farfetch'd stains, such innocence and
beauty as waits on her might any where have claimed a sacrifice.


Facert. Sir, though I grant all these beauties, yet to me they bring like
miseries to those the swift lightning leaves the wretched husbandman; who
instead of full joys, reaps from those wounding fires naught but weighty
griefs; yet I Will obey you, though in this chance I foresee my own despairs, to
the little hopes I had of happiness. Farewell.


Virg. Why do you conclude so? must you of necessity be miserable, if I be
happy? are my friends joys the less, 'cause mine are full?


Facert. Pardon me, Sir, if you find me troubled to see all my hopes withered,
and those wounds you gave my suffering Country now despairing of a cure.


Virg. O friend! friend! has that word no power?


Facert. Yes, and that makes me slight my interest; for I am so accustomed to
misfortune, it is almost natural to me: But when I think on whom you throw your
fortune, youth and fame, I find a greater trouble as your friend, then as I am
the lost Facertes; for you know not what she is; your love hunts thus in the
dark, A slave, a thing set at sale for lust. Virg. offers to go away.


Virg. That, that, Facertes makes me rage; and again by all that is powerful I
conjure thee fly with me to her rescue, before such a ruin find her.


Facert. Virgilius, Sir, Virgilius stay; I must obey him, or he is lost.


Virg. Draw thy sword then, and let me see thee plead with that against her
enemies, as thou did against me at Siracusa, and I Will conclude all hopes from
that powerful Argument.


Facert. Sir, I never used my Arguments to spare my sword; nor was my tongue
now drawn, because I meant that should sleep: See it is drawn, but in vain you
hope a service from it, as your self; and therefore stay here, while I fit you
with a disguise.


Virg. Be speedy then. As Virg. and Minetes are going out they meet the Baud,
Olympia.


Facert. I shall, but pray retire a little, this place is too public, I Will
return immediately.


[Exit Facert. Virg. I Will stay at the corner. --


[Enter Baud. Baud. May I be bold?


Virg. With whom?


Baud. With you, Sir.


Virg. No.


Baud. Sir, your pardon. He offers to go away, but she takes hold of him.

He offers her money.




Virg. For what? I forgive thee.


Baud. Sir, I would beg.


Virg. Here, I Will prevent thee, if thou will let me go. --


Baud. No, Sir, my business is no money; it is your self must satisfy me.


Virg. Thou art mistaken sure, thy business was to my man.


Baud. No, Sir, I go upon no such Errands. Did you not fight for a slave even
now?


Virg. Yes, what of her?


Baud. Are you he?


Virg. Yes, I tell thee.


Baud. Farewell then, till you are at leisure.


Virg. Prithee stay.


Baud. No, Sir, your man is busy.


Virg. Prithee excuse my trouble, which gave not ear to thee at first.


Paulina above. That Is he, why stays she so long to deliver her Message? she is
angry.


Baud. For once I excuse; you and look hereafter you entertain a woman with
more: But to the business; the slave you wot of -- (oh! that eye of yours)
there lies a wag in it that will make a world of mischief,) you know not who it
has struck, pray heaven I get not a wound.


Virg. Nay, to your story, good Mother, and leave this wandering.


Baud. Mother? whose Mother, good man boy? I am a Maid.


Virg. You mistake me, I meant, Mother of my joys, and so you will be if you
can lay by this youthful fire that makes you thus subject to choler, and
proceed with your story.


Baud. Yes, yes, do you jeer me?


Paul. I can endure no longer; Sir, what ere you are, take my faith for your
safety, and make this house your sanctuary; something concerning that slave I
would deliver to you.


Baud. Are you there, Hell and mischief find you.


Virg. Madam, who ere you are that offers this charity to a stranger; know, I
dare enter though I saw my ruin in the door. For fear I never found his pale
den yet, though I have often trod those paths that led both to dangers and to
death; and I should scorn my self, could I apprehend him now where beauty has
the guard. Which way do your commands guide me?


Paul. That door.


[Ex. Virg. and his man, and Paul. from above. Baud. Now a public Pox go with
thee, that thy face may serve thee in no stead; malicious Villain, to call up
my dead fears that had wont to tell me I had lost my time; proud scurvey
fellow, to put me thus in despair; and if he had any good nature, he would have
offered me a kindness, in courtesy to have comforted me; I shall not eat to
day; had he but called me Whore, yet it had been tolerable, for that carries
youth with it. But old Mother? Rascal, none of thy Mother. But I Will be revenged.


ACT. III. SCEN. II.
The Lieutenant appears under the Hanging, and Nigro by him groaning. Lieu.
CRabb, Crabb.


Nig. Oh!


Lieu. Crabb, what is that groans?


Nig. Help, help for charity, more wounds, or remedy.


Lieu. Ha! what is that? help, where am I? it is a man making his will, I Will be
his heir, ha! what is here? a man wounded? this is that Rogue, Crabb; he has
robbed him, and laid him here to make me accessory.


Nig. Help, if you have charity.


Lieu. With all my heart, and prithee, do me the favor to live till we come to
my Quarter.


Nig. If I do, I shall discover something pleasing to you.


Lieu. Marry, I Will carry thee, for thy testimony, there is nothing else in this
case can save me. -- You are no Rogue, Crabb! Who did this?


[Enter Crabb. Nig. Not he.


Crabb. That Is good evidence for me.


Lieu. Nor I, by this hand, you must quit me, while you can speak.


Nig. I acquit you both.


Lieu. Witness, witness, Crabb.


Crabb. Where did you find him?


Lieu. Find him? by this hand, he found me and lay down by me, as I was asleep.


Crabb. Why, faith he is going a long journey, and came to take you with him,
Thou art good company; but to leave this discourse, take my business: Our
Captain would have you go visit the sick party, and see whether he will be
persuaded yet or no to dye.


Lieu. I hate to see the Rogue; I have such battles in my head, since morning,
yet I Will go, while I am near him, and take you charge of this old man in the
mean time, and see him carefully dressed.


[Exit Lieu. Crabb. So, lean upon me, what Rogues were these to use an old man
thus?


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter the Lieutenant, he knocks. Soldier Who Is there?


within Lieu. Where is this old fellow, is he alive still?


Sold. Yes, Sir.


Lieu. Bring him out, to take a little fresh air.


Tull. Is he come again? why did you let him in? he will be a lasting a tedious
affliction to me.


[Enter Tullius on his Bed. Lieu. How now? how is it, how is it man?


Tull. Neither live nor die in peace?


Lieu. Yes, dye in as much peace as you can.


Tull. When my time comes; but I hope a man may have leave to live out his
days; my Physician says, I may escape yet.


Lieu. Your Physitian's an Ass, and you give him too great Fees.


Tull. He tells me I may escape this fit, if I can recover mine enemies; for he
assures me, my greatest danger is my heir.


Lieu. Does he say so? I cry him mercy then, he is a knowing man, I believe so
too: and you may, perhaps, at a great charge, recover; but, in my opinion, you
had better dye, and take our prayers with you; for to recover would but incense
the Captain, and lose your friends.


Tull. Sure my Captain would be loath to lose me; he ever loved me.


Lieu. Why I; and yet you refuse him to dye, and think much to hasten your
journey a day or two, for his sake.


Tull. Alas, I would be glad to serve my Captain in any thing that lies in my
power, I Will pray for him, and I hope he will excuse me for desiring to live,
and serve him.


Lieu. You may flatter your self, but I Will assure you, he takes it very ill at
your hands, that you, of all his company, should refuse him such a kindness,
nay, not to appear willing to do it, if it were in your power; But thus, with
an unnecessary charge, endeavor to live, crossing the disease that would be
friend him.


Tull. Alas, I do nothing to cross it, I do but suffer.


Lieu. Will you promise me that, and let the disease alone, it will be some
satisfaction to him, and to us that are your friends, to see that you endeavor
to satisfy him.


Tull. That I Will promise you: and from henceforth I Will seek no remedy, but put
my self into the hand of his friend, as you called it.


Lieu. Then you shall see how carefully we'll provide for you; for I hope you
do not think, that we or he desires this, because he is loath you should live
two or three days; for what were that to him, but that he is to go out then;
and the next Captain will be your heir.


Tull. Alas, Sir, how can I help it? it is against my will, if any body be my
heir.


Lieu. Well, look you keep Covenants, and endeavor to dye finely; banish your
Physician and gelly-broth, I Will provide noises to keep you waking. Crabb,
provide two Drums to beat here their watch a piece; and do you hear, beware of
a good diet.


Tull. As you have charity, let me rest, those Drums are Daggers to me.


Lieu. Nay, you will be unreasonable again, I see it.


Tull. Oh misery of wealth!


ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Paulina and Virgilius. Paul. I Confess, my first thoughts were like my
self, faulty: but now I have gained by losing a desire, and I shall serve you
faithfully in your love.


Virg. All my fears are, that he will violate her.


Paul. He dares not do it, I have conjured him from it, and when it may serve
you, I Will boast my power, though purchased with a fault; and though your virtue
secured you from that power, yet where sin has interest, mine never wanted a
Command; and I know he dares not stand those frowns which your goodness melted
into tears.


Virg. No more, when we have sighed for our faults, they vanish with the same
air; yet I fear him, though I believe your power great; for he that dares be a
coward will stop at no wickedness within his reach.


Paul. I made him ashamed of that base act, and vow not to pursue you; yet I
counsel you not to stay long in this Town after you have her.


Virg. What time did he appoint to bring her?


Paul. He parted hence just as you entered, with a promise immediately to
return; and if he should find you here, I am afraid it would prejudice my power
to serve you; else I should rejoice to be seen where so much honor dwells.


Virg. Your civilities and mercies, Madam, showed to me, a stranger, I shall
with a grateful mention acknowledge through the world; pray, what time will
your commands enjoin my return?


Paul. It will not be safe, Sir, to come at all; But pray be pleased to send a
friend after dinner, and you shall have notice of his first departure, what
time that will be; yet I know not, for I am so miserable, I cannot now be good,
but with a wicked pretense, There is another door leads into a street less
frequented then that you entered at.


Virg. Which way must I take to find it?


Paul. I Will guide you, Sir.


ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter Baud alone. Baud. IT is well, happy discovery; now I shall be revenged
at full; was it not enough to have his pride throw a scorn upon me, but she
must revile me too? Fool, in scorn thou called'st me Mother, and thou shall
find the Malice of an old Woman here, that in her years, not desires, is aged;
one that has lost that Mercy-kindling fire which should plead for thee, and
prevent that youthful Malice, whose fruitful mischiefs shall make thee old in
miseries; nor shall Religion, nor beauties of thy youth, protect thee from that
dangerous hate thy scorns have bred, till thy despaires have taught thee how
killing a Malice hot Lust in cold Limbs pursues. -- The plot is here;
Jealousy, it is thou must work my ends, with that I Will assault the Prince, and
from the wounds it brings, reap my Revenge; for Jealousy, though it leave no
scars behind, yet with desperate wounds it assailes the Mind.


ACT. III. SCEN. VI.
Enter Facertes. Facer. THis, by the description of the house, should be the
place that holds my miseries: from what a second height of happiness am I
fallen? Virgilius is young, and I fear, the guilt of having so many ways
ruined me will make him hate me for being innocent; But I am resolved, and will
rather fall by misfortunes then faults; and, for the excellent Sophia's sake,
will serve him till he blush to command me. And when his passion is over, he
shall confess, I can bear a loss better then he rule a victory. But what are
Enter Bra^adine, Cicilia, and others. these? I must stand close. It Is he, and
that (by her habit) the slave our Fortunes bow to: Gods! was it not enough we
fell a sacrifice to the Julian Deity, and filled the Triumph of that Monarchy,
that thus your rage pursues us? must all our Fortunes be slav'd to a slave, and
bound with chains to chains. -- Ye Gods! What They pass by, Cicilia l^^ks
sadly on the ground, Facertes knews her.

She looks about upon Facertes all the ^ay, till she goes off. Exeunt all but
Facertes.

do I see? Cicilia my Sister?


Cicilia. What said he?


Facer. It is she. Blessed chance. Ye powers of Sicily, your hands are visible
in this; forgive Facertes that confesses, Men may the metal bring, but the form
of our happiness the Gods appoint us still.


[Exit. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter the Captain, Lieutenant, Crabb, and Cilius. Lieut. FAith, Sir, hanging
of 'em will be but a hindrance to your self; it is true they are Rogues, and
have no Conscience, yet, at the worst, they are so much horse.


Capt. I say, hang 'em.


Lieut. I say so to, if hanging were a punishment, but to them it is freedom.


Capt. No more dispute, but hang 'em slaves, to rob me now when I am quitting
my Command.


Lieut. Well, they shall be hanged, but they shall stay till they be hungry,
and have digested their full Cups; if if you hang 'em now they are full and
drunk, they will think they have but swallowed awry or surfeited; and instead of
being punished, the Rogues will go out like Senators.


Cilius. The old Soldier confesses they were of Sicily, and of Quality, and
now sent for a Present to the Emperor, and that was the Viceroy that was
slain, he would have yielded good money.


Capt. And one of the slaves confessed the Woman was of such a Beauty, and so
ravishing, that they fought who should purchase her.


Lieut. There had been a fellow for your Bird at home, two such fleas would
suck a Man to death.


Capt. Come, talk no more on it now, there is no remedy, Go prepare those others
for the Mart, and see the slaves hanged: What? how do they look? is it a
handsome freight?


Lieut. Yes faith, Sir, there will be a jolly number with the Boys; and I would
advise you, Sir, not to show the Women and the Boys together, for they will spoil
the sale of the Wenches.


Capt. Why then we'll sell the Women first.


Cilius. Who these Sicilians should be, troubles me; if we made haste we might
hear some news of her at Naples, for there they were sold.


Capt. To morrow we'll provide for the journey; Lieutenant, see every thing in
readiness.


Cilius. Something I Will do, to give one of them her Freedom, as sure as you
count her, though you refuse to sell it me.


Capt. Is the old fellow dead?


Lieut. No. But I have prevailed with him to quit his Physic; and I am
certain, he has neither eat, nor drank, nor slept since.


Capt. Let Us go see him.


Lieut. Cilius is melancholy for the Wench.


Capt. No matter, I Would rather he were angry then lost; for though he know not
his own value, I know it, Come let us leave him.


Cilius. It Is not Treachery to save the Innocent. I Will do it.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Virgilius solus. Virg. I Will sacrifice to Fortune, she shall henceforth
be the Power I Will worship, to whom I owe this unexpected Joy, she has tamed
Lust, till it was Love, and lent only so much sin to the wicked as served me;
and I that could not stand safe among the Innocent, find a security among the
wicked. -- Facertes?


[Enter Facer. Facer. Look here, ere I speak my news, Does not Virgilius see a
Joy break like a Glory round about my Brow, to distinguish this my first happy
hour?


Virg. It is thy Friendship that sympathizes mine. Oh Facertes, such an
accident has happened since thou left'st me, that I must wink, rub mine eyes,
and call all my Reason to secure me I do not dream.


Facer. What e're your Joys are, they must give place to mine; for they are
yours and mine, not as we are barely friends, but from the assurance that we
shall ever be so.


Virg. I confess thy Joys bring to me a greater Comfort then mine own, prithee
give them a Name.


Facer. Do you believe a second view of her you have seen will not render her
common to your eye? or, to possess those Beauties make them cheap in your
Opinion? if not, I am happier then you, and when ever you enjoy your wishes I
reap mine.


Virg. By our Friendship I beg this blessing from you, yet this is not strange
where Friendship is not strange.


Facer. The slave is my Sister but by what accident fallen to this misery I
know not.


Virg. Who? the famed Cicilia?


Facer. She. Never free till now, and this fall was but to raise her to a
greater height.


Virg. Then I mistrust my Joys; they grow too near a height to continue.


Facer. Are you sorry, Sir, it is she? Then it was not Chance changed our first
design; is she less worthy of your Love now then before? I should be sorry to
find your ignorance of what you valued preferred before your knowledge; or is
there some second face you have met has blotted out this too?


Virg. O Facertes, why art thou so subject to mistake thy Friend?


Facer. If I mistake, why are you so sad? I found you full of joy.


Virg. Not that it is she makes me sad; for, witness Heaven, I have no wish
beyond her,; Her Eye circles my Heaven, and till I have place in her esteem I
am in Hell.


Facer. Why should that suspicion make you sad, considering you are, and what
you have done for her? Besides, am not I here with a Brother and a Friends
interest?


Virg. Who I am, That, Facertes, begets my despairs; for that it is I is all
Arguments against me; will she not, when she sees me, call to mind a Father
(whose piety the Gods spared) fallen, to satisfy the lust of Empire? are not
yet the wounds bleeding, and the yoke still laid upon her suffering Country?
Now judge what can be said of hope, when this pleads against me. Oh Facertes,
thou have not read thy Sister, thou look with a Brothers eye, This fate I
prophecy from one sight; and let me tell thee, if she be worthy of Virgilius
she must hate Virgilius.


Facert. Sir, I confess my friendship made me oversee what I was reconciled to,
and now I begin to fear; yet when she shall know how I have been obliged, That
mercy I found from the fair Sophia, her honor will guide her to return
Virgilius; for though it makes her to resent your injuries, yet she must be
just to her, and then her gratitude secures you; for though she has honor, yet
she has woman too, and mercy is as great an attribute as justice, and she
cannot be always angry.


Virg. Against any thing but her frown I could arm, and this night be happy.
For by a strange chance I have found a way (if she consent) to release her.


Facert. By what accident came you to that power? have you seen her since?


Virg. No, but this place is too public; let us retire, and you shall know all;
and when I would my Sister know, I Will read her through thy observations; but
here let thy interest give way to my love.


Facert. I shall obey, Sir.


ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Sophia sola. Soph. MY thoughts can find no rest; Love, will thou not
quit me in Prison? art thou covetous of my chains too? Fool! have thou not
miseries enough of thine own? And yet I ought not to revile him; for he that
has filled my heart is full of honor, and could he guess my fate, I know he
would quit a Crown, as a burden, and seek a freedom in these chains. The Gods
are just, to let me fall into these miseries, that we may taste what it is our
ambition imposes upon others, guilty only as I was, by being too weak. -- Whose
that? come in; Prisoners keep One knocks. no doors.


[Enter Cilius. Cil. Madam, I come to tell you, our Captain has refused to sell
me your freedom, and to morrow is the Mart at Naples; But if you dare trust
him, whose misfortunes have made him appear your enemy, I Will gage a life to
save your honor, and give you freedom. The plot is already laid, and those
that were taken with you I have already acquainted with it.


Soph. Sir, I shall willingly obey any directions, without a thought of fear,
for sure there is no condition below this.


Cil. I will not now dispute this misfortune, but remedy it if I can; know, to
morrow (lest the accident surprise you ere we put to sea) I have so ordered,
that all the slaves that row in the Galley shall be loose, the Captain is my
creature, and my self will still wait upon you, and be your guard; but be
pleased to sit still when the word is given, and let us work your fate; But
once free, command Cilius where you please, your friends too shall privately be
armed.


Soph. Sir, what to say in return of this, I know not, and if you that can be
thus gallant, thus good, cannot likewise from that honor that directs you now,
find a reward, I fear you will lose this good deed.


Cil. It is a debt all honest men owe your virtue; and I but obey my genius,
for I know not what it is, but something whispers to my soul, and bids me serve
you, and when my life can purchase you a good, you shall not need command it; I
beseech you no reply, a Soldiers prayers (that seldom importunes heaven) I
hope will protect you. --


[Enter Lieu. and meets them as they are going out. Cil. How now, what is the
news?


Lieu. I should speak with you, Sir.


Cil. Madam, I Will wait upon you straight. -- Are they all ready?


[Exit Sophia. Lieu. I have done it, they are all resolved, I gave them their
lives for it; and let him swear when he sees them there, it is no matter: they
are all loose and armed, their chains are but for show.


Cil. No matter for his rage, let him storm; once aboard, we are masters, for
he is but one, and what is a General without obedience? his power we give, and if
a multitude knew their own strength, who can command that beast?


Lieu. I Will away, and send the other Galleys off before, lest they assist him.


Cil. Be faithful, and I Will make thee fortunate.


Lieu. Sir, never fear it, I have said it, and I Will do it; he that refuses to
be a knave for a handsome woman, may he dye honest, and be executed for a knave.


[Enter Capt. and Crabb. Capt. Where Is the Lieutenant?


Lieu. Here, Sir, I have waited this hour for you.


Capt. Come, shall we go see the sick man?


Lieu. I Will follow you, Sir.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
Enter Tullius, sick in his Bed, a Soldier with him, and Drums beating. Tull.
NO rest! no ease! O miserable, miserable riches! some drink, O, some drink, ere
this thirsty flame has licked up all my life, meat, any thing to satisfy this
wolf here.


Sold. Have patience, it cannot last above a day or two, about which time I
hope to see you quit of all the troubles of this world.


Tull. Let me sleep then, quiet those Drums, that I may dream of meat and
drink; is there nothing to eat, no drink? oh misery of miseries! -- Who Is
there? One knocks.


Sold. The Captain, Sir, and Lieutenant are come to see you.


Tull. Is it they? not a word then that I am hungry or thirsty, I Will buy thy
silence at any rate.


[Enter Capt. Lieu. and Crabb. Capt. How now, how is this sick man, where is he?


Sold. He has vomited such stuff, since the Lieutenant went; sure, that your
worship gave him was good against an Impostume.


Lieu. By this good day, the same water that eat Crabb's knife; what shall we
do with this Rogue? a hole in his side, big enough to creep in at, will not
kill him.


Capt. Let Us speak with him.


Tull. Who Is there? my noble Captain, and kind Lieutenant; thank you for this
visit; truly, it joys me to see you both here, and He takes the Capt. by the
hand. He sits up in his Bed. specially my noble Captain; And I am pretty lusty
on the sudden; and I Will do what I do not use to do, I Will begin a health to my
noble Captain, that he may see he is welcome; do hear honest friend, fetch a
bottle of Sack, I Will even drink it, come what will after it, and my friend
there shall pledge me; and do hear, reach me one They sit down by his
Bedside. of the Gammons of Bacon out of the Chimney, it may be my Captain has
a stomach, -- If he has not, I Am sure I have.


[aside. Capt. I am glad to find you thus merry, and so resolved; it is the part
of a good man to prepare and dye cheerfully.


Lieu. I told you, you would find him well prepared; and what think you, is not
Sack and Bacon better then Barley-water and soaked Chickens?


Tull. I confess, I was a fool then, but now I Will pledge you all the Sack I
refused then; and to let my Captain see I resolve to dye, and serve him, look
you but on, and I Will eat all the Gammon alone, but you must not tell the
Physician.


Enter the Soldier with the Wine, Bacon, a great Bottle, a Napkin and Bread.
Tull. Give me a knife and some Bread, fill, fill a bowl of Sack, and bring it
hither. Lord! Captain, you would not think how it Tull. sings. rejoices me to
see all this good company here.


Capt. I am beholding to you; fill, fill the sack.


Tull. Help to set me up. They offer to give him the Sack.


Lieu. Hold, give me the Cup; I Will begin a health to the sick man.


Tull. No, pray give me leave to begin my noble Captain's? pray, pray let me
begin it.


Lieu. No faith, I Will begin.


Tull. Pray drink to me then. He sings again.


Capt. Why, you are very merry.


Tull. A Flincher, -- Two draughts to one Cup?


Lieu. This wine was musty, taste it.


Tull. Let me taste it, it may be 'twas an ill bottle, the wine's good wine,
admirable wine. He drinks.


Capt. Give me a bowl, I Will pledge it with a better will, because I see you do
not desire it should succeed.


Tull. Alas! I desire to live but till I have drunk your health; To me good
Captain, I Will pledge it with all my heart.


Capt. I hope so, I should take it ill to have you refuse me, for any nice
scruple of your health.


Lieu. As you did me, and cry, a Beer-grass would kill you.


Tull. Alas, I was a fool then, but now I am very desirous to redeem that
fault; To me good Captain, your wine cools. As the Capt. goes to drink the
Lieu. stops him.


Lieu. Your hat Captain.


Capt. Oh! it is true.


Tull. Nay, pray drink, and spare your Complement.


Capt. Prithee give me a bit of that Gammon, to taste my Wine with.


Tul. Pray help him and me too, I would fain taste whether it be as good as the
last was.


Capt. Yes faith, it is good, here Crab.


Tul. Nay pray let me drink to Crab.


Capt. No, by my faith, it shall go round.


Tul. Let me taste, was not your Wine musty too?


Capt. Here Is none. Turns the Cup.


Tul. Fill, fill Crab, and drink to me, for I long to do thee reason, and begin
my Captains. He gives Tullius a piece.


Lieut. It Is an excellent Gammon, taste.


Tul. Some more, pray, to taste.


Lieut. Where shall I carve you?


Tul, Any where, any where.


Crab. Sir, here is your Wine; will you pledge your health?


Tul. So, so, now I am happy; Noble Captain, a thousand times Crab gives Tulius
the Cup.

As he goes to drink the Lieutenant takes hold of the Cup.

I thank you, and with all my heart I Will pledge you.


Lieut. Hold, a pox take you, Crab, for a couzening Rogue, you have put water
in it.


Crab. No, by this hand.


Tul. No, by my life.


Lieut. Let me taste, I Will not trust you.


Tul. Why taste, Noble Lieutenant; oblige me so far, as to let me drink my own
health; nay Lieutenant, Noble Lieutenant. The Lieutenant takes the Cup and
drinks up all.


Crab. Now, was it not pure?


Lieut. Hup! by my Faith it was pure indeed; here fill it again, give him a
Brimmer.


Tul. I pray never spare me, Lieutenant, you were somewhat harsh the last time
you were here, but I Will drink to you.


Lieut. I was angry then, because you refused to pledge me; but now you will
drink, I am your Friend.


Tul. The Wine, where is the Wine?


Crab. Here Is none left Sir, shall I fetch another bottle?


Tul. Is all gone?


Crab. Yes, Sir.


Tul. All gone?


Capt. Go fetch another, for he shall pledge me, this trick shall not serve's
turn.


Tul. Pledge me, alas, Sir, rather then my life I Would pledge you.


Lieut. No, no, thou shall not; faith Captain he is now good natured, spare him;
it will but make him sick; and troth he is an honest fellow when he is himself.


Capt. He shall pledge me.


Lieut. Alas, Sir, when we are sick, the best of us are unreasonable sometimes.


Tul. Lieutenant, Noble Friend.


Lieut. I warrant thee, pray Sir let me excuse him for this time, he shall kiss
the Cup only.


Tul. I swear I Will drink it, not pledge my Captain, and 'twere present death
I Would do it, fetch some Wine?


Capt. Nay, then I Will pardon you; for since I find you willing, I Will excuse
your weakness.


Lieut. Let the Wine alone, Crab.


Tul. Lieutenant.


Lieut. Spare your thanks. They offer to go away.


Tul. Lieutenant.


Lieut. You know the Captain loves no Complements.


Capt. Farewell. Thank you for my Wine.


Tul. Captain.


Lieut. Farewell, Farewell.


Tul. Captain, one word before you go.


Capt. What Is the news?


Tul. Pray let me drink; for the truth is, I must either eat and drink or die.


Capt. How Is that? and would you drink and live?


Lieut. Why thou impudent Rogue; yesterday it was, if I drink I die, now some
drink or you are dead.


Capt. Nay then he shall not drink, is this your professions?


Tul. Well Gentlemen, I see you are resolved I must die; let me but have my fill,
and I Will die tomorrow.


Lieut. Why, faith, it is but abstaining till tomorrow, and then you are sure
of it.


Tul. And is it not all one how I die, so I be dead tomorrow? if it be alike to
you, pray let me choose; for if Surfeit or Famine can but kill, pray let me
surfeit.


Capt. I am indifferent how, so it be done.


Tul. Call me spade if it be not.


Lieut. And look we have no Equivocation, but see you be dead tomorrow.


Capt. I fear he will prove a Rogue.


Tul. I hope you would not desire that I should lay violent hands upon my self.


Lieut. Marry the Gods forbid, lay violent hands upon thy self; no, no, now you
have consented, I Will get one shall do it for you.


Tul. Give me some drink, and do what you will with me afterward.


Lieut. Set the Vessel by him.


Tul. But is it Sack, Lieutenant? is it Sack? excuse me if I be punctual too?


Capt. Give him a Bowl. Tullius drinks.


Tul. Give me another, give me a third.


Lieut. Farewell, Farewell, look you be dead to morrow, or by these hilts I Will
apply my Dagger to thy side, and that will be a certain cure; come, Sir, will
you please to go?


Tul. Captain, Captain, stay a little and see me die, give me another Tullius
is drunk. Cup.


Cap. By this light, the Rogue is drunk.


Tul. Now do I not see any Reason, why I should die.


Lieut. But I shall give you a Reason to morrow.


Tul. To die with all this Sack about me! No, I am immortal, let those die that
are dry. -- Hum, give me my sword.


Capt. Come leave him, he is drunk.


Lieut. How now, what would you have? As they go away, be rises out of his
bed and reeles after them to the door.


Tul. You Will give me leave to wait on my Captain down?


Capt. No Ceremony, good Tullius, no Ceremony.


Tul. It shall be yours Captain, indeed it shall be yours.


Lieut. Alas, Sir, give him leave to take cold.


Capt. Nay, if it must be so, I obey.


Tul. Nay, why Lieutenant, what do you take me for? how do you think I have
been bred?


[Exit Captain. Lieut. Remember to morrow.


Tul. Remember to morrow, let to morrow remember me.


ACT. IV. SCEN. V.
Enter Facertes solus. Facer. THis is the Place, Love be thou propitious, and
let my fears prove false; hereabout should be the door.


[Exit. Enter Paulina and Cicilia. Paul. It is true, I have promised him, when
he comes, to deliver you; but he has vowed to use you with Honor, do you not
know him?


Cicilia. No Madam, this is the first time I ever saw him.


Paul. Pray what Country claims your Birth?


Cicilia. Greece, Madam.


Paul. Pray grow not in Love with your griefs, but give some part of 'em to me,
that now but begin to be sad.


Cicilia. Why should you be sad, that know no grief of Mind? have you lost
Friends? or forfeited Freedom?


Paul. Fair one, I am more a slave then you; for I am bound by faults, and none
can set me free; your miseries are but for a time, and I can release 'em, and
yet cannot command my own Fate.


Cicilia. What strange misery can you apprehend? do you love unfortunately?


Paul. No, I love happily, but I have fallen unfortunately, and no length of
days can set a period to my misery; I love, but cannot hope a return, for I
should hate him I love if he could love me; yet, as his Honor forbids him
that, and me all hopes to enjoy him, so if he be a perfect Man he has Mercy
too, and he may pity and forgive, though not love Paulina.


Cicilia. I would ask another Question, but that I am afraid it would search
too near your griefs; dare you trust me with the knowledge who it is you love?
can I serve you?


Paul. You must not, and therefore cannot, for it is the stranger that fought
for you. When first my Eye met his, it shot a flame in here, and the nobleness
of that Act (which was sacrificed to you) shook me, and waked my sleeping
Honor, and I began to find desires that till then were strangers here, for
they had more of love then blood in them. -- What Is the business? One knocks.


[Enter Baud. Baud. There Is a young fellow without desires to speak with you.


Paul. Your pardon.


[Exit Paulina. Baud. I have spoiled your sport if all hit right.


ACT. IV. SCEN. VI.
Enter Facertes and Paulina. Facert. MAdam, I come from that stranger that this
morning your Charity preserved, what directions do you command me in his
affairs of Love!


Paul. Sir, you are welcome, and from him all is so; This night I would desire
him meet in the garden, where he shall receive her.


Facert. I must beg the favor to speak with that Lady, I have a message to
impart to her.


[Enter Cicilia. Paul. You shall command any thing my power can serve you in,
there she comes, and I Will wait upon you straight.


[Exit Paulina. Facert. What shall I say to her? my joys have robbed me of my
Tongue.


Cicil. It is he that this morning named me in the street. -- Sir, have you any
commands for me?


Facert. No Madam, I come to serve, if you will please to enjoin; and though a
poor Sicilian, yet I know what duty all that wretched Nation owes your
Excellence.


Cicil. Me Sir! sure you mistake.


Facert. No, Madam, I cannot mistake, nor can any miseries so cloud your
Beauties, but through all the Innocence and Majesty of such a Princess will
appear; sure you will not deny the name of Cicilia? She looks about her.


Cicil. To you, Sir, I will not, yet I conjure you to conceal me, and let me
know to whom I stand endebted for this Civil opinion.


Facert. My name is not worth your knowledge, but my fortunes I boast of, for I
had the honor to be a Soldier, and a Prisoner with your Princely Brother, and
fell with him the same day when we lost the battle at Siracusa.


Cicil. Who, Facertes? where is he, at Rome! Oh, tell me how does he bear the
Insolence of that unworthy Conqueror? It is many years since I saw that
beloved Brother, did he never speak of me?


Facert. Yes, Madam, I have often heard him mention you with Tears, and like a
Brother give your Character to the fair Sophia, sister to Virgilius, who saved
his Life when he was doomed to the hook.


Cicil. The Hook? Oh, ye powers, why do you let this wicked Tyrant thus triumph
over our miseries? But for Virgilius, that false seed of the old Tyrant, that is
young and false, and cruel in his youth, let him find some curse, strange as
his wickedness.


Facert. Madam, upon my life, you injure him; for, my soul to pawn, he loves
your Brother: and had no share in that guilty Triumph, for he was then in
Gallia.


Cicil. Oh, thou art deceived, he envies my Brother, and cannot love; and when
he could not by force conquer him, by falsehood he sought his ruin.


Facert. I perceive, Madam, you are a stranger to the Prince's affairs at Rome.


Cicil. What are they? new miseries?


Facert. Have you not heard how, at the Triumph, the fair Sophia and he, in a
look, changed hearts, and that now he has his freedom?


Cicil. No, this is the first time that I heard of it.


Facert. Madam, I saw him free; and (by his friendship with Virgilius) it is
hoped he shall marry the Princess Sophia: But this is a secret I dare not give
to any ear but your own.


Cicil. My Brother and Virgilius friends? it is false, it must be false, I know
he is too much my Brother to make a Friendship there.


Facert. His Love to the Sister, and her merits, who has a virtue equal to her
Beauty, made him forget the injuries which Virgilius (in ambitious honor, not
malice) threw upon him; besides, it will be a guard for Sicily hereafter, and
Facertes gains his ends upon them.


Cicil. Pray no more of this discourse; I hope my Brother has no ends beyond
his Honor; it cannot be he should forget mine and his own injuries, or so bury
a Brothers and a Fathers loss; but if absence can do all this, yet his Honor
is with him, and that may tell him how glorious, in story, a Slave appears,
whilst he keeps his Honor; and how mean and poor that Prince is that sells it
for his passion.


Facertes, aside, Excellent Maid -- Madam, I am sorry my discourse displeased
you.


Cicil. I would I were with him, or I would I could but write to him.


Facert. Madam, if you will please to write, I Will deliver it him.


Cicil. No, Sir, that would be too great a trouble, for I believe, those
Occasions which drew you hither are of more consideration then a letter.


Facert. None of such importance as to serve my Prince; It Is true, I have a
Comrade, a Prince that has disguised himself into that condition, and is
resolved, under that private habit, to see the world; a scurvy Accident befell
him to day, upon the Mole, at the Slaves Mart, where he escaped hardly with his
life; some wounds he has too, which will retard him, I fear, till my return.


Cicil. Was it not this morning? a young man, brown-hair'd?


Facert. Yes, it was about a slave he saw, and fell in love with; and while he
stayed for money to redeem her, another bought her; I was not at the beginning,
but, I thank my fate, I came time enough to his Rescue.


Cicil. Is he safe then?


Facert. Yes, Madam, but so impatient, for fear some violence should be offered
to her, I am now going in search of her; for I know he will find no Peace, till
he has gained her freedom.


Cicil. Is he a Prince, say you, and in love with that Slave?


Facert. Yes, Madam, and now his soul labors in pain, to know what condition
she is of; but I hope his flame is made of young men's fire, such as will not
last.


Cicil. Why do you hope so?


Facert. Because I have the honor to be his friend; and though I serve his
passion, yet I should be loath to see him continue his Love for a Slave, that
has nothing but miseries for his Honor to work upon.


Cicil. A Prince! then all my Prayers fall not to the Earth, nor lose their way
'twixt heaven and my miseries.


Facert. Your prayers, Madam? how, under pardon, are you concerned in his love
or birth?


Cicil. You are a Soldier, and by your honor I conjure you; you are a
Sicilian, and now I Will take the power you gave, and command you; or by my
Brother and his friendship I enjoin you.


Facert. What, Madam?


Cicil. Nothing, nothing; ye gods! whither am I falling? down, She stops and
turns from him. down Woman; All the pleadings of my Sex be gone, I will not be
a slave to my Passion.


Facert. Nor will I be so rude as to press a Secret from you; yet your Brother,
Madam, should not serve you more faithfully, nor more willingly, then I.


Cicil. I must not, no, I will not; yet I durst tell you, but it is not like
Cicilia, nor the Laws that she has ever followed.


Facert. Madam, your name has given Laws, and Cicilia's Acts have ever stood
Examples, as unquestioned as unimitable: and by your self, I beg this trust.


Cicil. Then, as you are a Soldier, take it, and protect it, (I know no
guilt,) why should I fear? I was that slave he fought for; and I rejoice, the
man I honor is so favored of the Gods.


Facert. O Madam, this is a blessing beyond my hopes; dare you trust me to
discover who you are? I Will first sound whether his Love aim with honor, and by
degrees work upon him till I have found the secrets of his heart; he shall
despair too, and in fear spend some days; But at length dare you not let him
know there is a hope? pray leave it to me, I Will see all the Laws of Love
observed, he shall doubt, and hope, and you shall defer his Joys; But still She
walks and looks down: he follows her. I Will wish your Love may increase too, for
I know he will deserve it.


Cicil. Sir, I have not said I love, nor will not, till I hear him say so
first; I confess I hope he loves, and what that hope can be called I
acknowledge.


Facert. Then all my Joys are full -- Nay, my Sister, you must not turn away.


Cicil. Sister?


Facert. Did I say Sister?


Cicil. Yes, and if my Ears abuse me not, this morning you called me sister.


Facert. Then I Will hide my self no longer from thee; and since you could
confess to a stranger you hoped he loved, I claim so He pulls off a patch from
his eye.

He shows her a Ring.

much trust as to confess you love; will this satisfy you who I am? I mean to
give it to the Prince.


Cicil. Oh, my Brother, why did you hide your self from me? is it true you told
of your self? are you in love? shall not I know your story, that I may rejoice
in your joys?


Facert. Thou shall know all, but let me not now defer the Prince's joy, who
waits without and suffers in the doubts which longing love brings.


Cicil. The Prince without? is that a truth? pardon me, for since you have
deceived me once, it is lawful to suspect.


Facert. Yes, and there is another truth which I durst not discover till thy
love warranted it me: But now know the man thou hated'st is the man thou
love; for Virgilius is that Prince; but when thou have made an acquaintance
with him thou will confess thy ignorance only could hate him.


Cicil. Virgilius, then I am miserable!


Facert. Do not say so, but take a Brothers knowledge of him, I have tried him,
friend and enemy, and by both find him pure; and I conjure you, give me your
griefs, and believe my love before your hate of the man you love.


Cicil. Is it Virgilius then?


Facert. By thy self, it is he.


Cicil. Swear not, unworthy; witness the Gods, that saw and piti'd not my
griefs, with what pain I lost thee; yet that was nothing, compared to this
affliction, that finds thee thus; Go boast to thy friend, what success thy
treachery, assisted by a Brothers interest, has gained upon a Sister, overcome
with misery.


Facert. Why do you accuse me thus? have I injured you? is it a fault, to tell
you your opinion wrongs a gallant man?


Cicil. Were he a God, and his friendship of so sovereign a nature, it would
protect us against their rods, when with a plague they make a curious search
amongst men: were he this, yet, in thee and me 'twere sin to sacrifice to him;
and I would sooner oppose that plague which only wounds my mortal part, then
meet Virgilius as a friend.


Facert. Why do you conclude me so unworthy, as to call him friend without a
satisfaction?


Cicil. Thou art not Facertes; he knows there can be no satisfaction: did he
not ruin our Country? fell not my aged Father under a Roman sword? is not
Lucius, our Brother, lost? and his Ghost still wandering for want of Funeral
Rites: But if thou art Facertes, remember how his falsehood let thee adorn a
triumph; but these are past. Am not I this day sold a slave? does not our
Country still bleed; and whilst we talk, the licensed lust of the common
Soldier add new crimes? Oh! my Brother, let me not have reason to repent that
neerness, but learn to hate him; and while he is in our power take a brave
revenge; that he would do something to redeem these faults is no Argument to
prefer him before your Country; and though it be gallant in him to love, yet in
thee or me a low mean sin.


Facert. Had he not said all this, had he not condemned himself, I had done it;
but when I see his youth soul-sick with love, and full of despairs, ready to
sacrifice himself to redeem the misfortunes of a conquest (which he was but a
servant in) I must tell Cicilia, when he leaves thus to be an enemy, I must be
a friend, for I scorn to hate what loves me; but he loves thee, and to destroy
him now is murder, and not revenge.


Cicil. That he loves I owe him nothing, for it was chance and fate; and that I
love him will be no guard: if I did not love him, 'twere easy to destroy the
thing I hate; but it shall be my glory, through my love and loss of peace, to
find revenge.


Facert. But his love was no chance; this journey we designed by the counsel of
his Sister, whose interest pleads here, and we were bound for Sicily, and his
intents were to heal, by marriage, the wounds you thus lament in our Country;
and if now you destroy this means of peace, you have ruined it; Cicilia has
destroyed her Country, and to obey her passion wilfully sacrificed our freedom.


Cicil. Still thou blowest new fires; were your designs for Sicily and me? what
has rendered me so cheap to my Brothers thought, as to believe I would receive
such a visit from a vain swollen Conqueror, promising to himself success? But he
shall find I dare, and can scorn him; and now if I had all the passions that
our sex ever yet sunk under, I Would forbid him to my self; and he and you shall
find Cicilia's mind not subject to his conquest.


[Exit Cicilia. Facert. Women, when they have said they are angry are half
revenged; and friends, when they have avowed a quarrel. I know her soul full of
softness, however her fortune makes this war betwixt her nature and her
justice. -- Sir, you have heard, I fear, the little hope she gives; yet she
loves, let that secure you.


Enter Virgilius. Virg. Will you take my opinion of your Sister hereafter? This
I He appears very sad and pensive. foresaw.


Facert. What shall we do?


Virg. Something I will do, pray, let me serve her in some disguise, till she
be freed from this place while I have an interest here.


Facert. If I can, I Will persuade her to escape this night.


Virg. I would I had spoke with her, I would fain say something to her before I
dye.


Facert. Dye, Sir?


Virg. Yes dye, Facertes, now when I would fainest live; for why should I
linger here when that which makes her excellent must render me miserable? for
had she forgiven me, I could not have forgiven her; for she has justice, and I
despair; farewell Facertes, I Will meet thee at the Galley.


Facert. Pray stay, Sir, you shall speak with her, and it may be she cannot
find that strength against you.


Virg. If you will gain me the liberty of speaking with her, I shall gladly do
it; and then what I will do shall ask no long time to consider.


Facert. Pray, Sir, follow me.


Virg. I dare not press in there; I that have forced a passage through the
world dare not enter there where love only has the guard.


ACT. IV. SCEN. VII.
Enter Bragadine, and the Baud. Baud. THey are now there; she is false, and you
abused; she threatened me with wounds, unless I would obey her, and invite him
to her bed, and the slave would scarce be won to come.


Bragad. But has she given the slave to him that I presented to her to day?


Baud. She has given him all, and to lay the greater scorn upon you, to your
enemy, she is one who loves the slave, and wants the common excuse of being
wooed.


Bragad. Was this the reason she commanded me not to pursue my revenge? Fool,
it shall now fall on you both.


Baud. You must be speedy then; for this night they are gone, and the garden is
the appointed place to receive the slave in; but if you will obey my counsel, they
shall find their graves there; and then the old woman will laugh at the young
Rascals.


Bragad. But how shall I come to this opportunity of revenge?


Baud. Go arm your self, and take such to your assistance, whose faith you have
tried, and bring'em in the evening to our garden, where I Will place you so, that
you shall have a full view of them, and take your revenge safely.


Bragad. The Moon will assist us, for she shines early this night. -- This in
earnest. He offers her money.


Baud. Sir, I expect no money, I have said, I love you.


Bragad. O, excuse me till to morrow.


[Exit Bragadine. Baud. I thank you, Sir, -- How all these young things are
subject to oversee a woman when she is stricken a little in years! and this
Fool too, whom I choose, because I thought all had been alike to fools, and yet
see how hardly he is drawn on; as I live, but that there is one young man that
I love, I would make him kill'em both, and take the wench; Ah! farewell the
memory of my dear Britain, Gorgianus; well did he deserve to be their Patron,
he never refused and old woman, but they knew his virtue, and while he was
young called him home. O happy Island, that has one young man in it that will
be charitable to the old woman: Every one strives to feed the young till their
bellies burst again, while we praise and beg, and can scarce get'em to sell us
their ware. -- How now, what have we here? oh is it you? I Will retire.


[Exit Baud. Enter Facertes and Cicilia. Cicil. If thou have not lost all thine
honor, By the memory of thy Fathers ashes, By that chaste Mother, whose memory
thou so often have worshipped, give me leave to retreat to my strength, and while
I have power preserve my honor, lest there be none left in our family, for
thou have thrown off thine, as if it had been a burden to thee.


Facert. Dare you not hear him speak? if you have no Argument to deny what he
said, why do you accuse me of weakness, when I was conquered?


Cicil. I dare not longer hear him speak? for all the weakness that our sex or
nature is subject to plead against me, and I have only honor to defend me; yet
I can give you powerful Reasons that can destroy all his hopes.


[Enter Virg. Facert. No, no, give 'em him when you see him.


[Exit Facertes, and pulls to the door. Virg. It Is just you fly me, it is just
you scorn me, and here I stand mine own judge, my own accuser and executioner
too, if you frown, and bid me strike.


Cicil. Sir, you mistake me, if you think I scorn you; there are other ways,
and just ones, to be revenged without a fault.


Virg. Facertes, you do not covet a revenge more then I thirst to give it; and
now I know what you desire, with wings I Will haste to serve you.


Cicil. You cannot, her fruits are seldom sweet, unless we pluck them our
selves.


Virg. Let me beg you will not pay such a rate as your innocence for it, can
you not forgive? Is there nothing can expiate what my fate was only guilty in?
for I was never faulty to you.


Cicil. Nothing; my honor tells me I must not find a peace, -- But my heart
tells me I belie it.


[Aside. Virg. Oh, do not frown; can you not be just but you must be angry too?
The Judge that speaks the Malefactors fate, and tells him to morrow thou shall
dye, he does it because it is just, not that he is pleased with the wretches
misery. Oh, be you but so merciful; let my doom come but as a necessity from
you, and not appear to affect my miseries.


Cicil. Brother Facertes, what shall I say? Cicilia, be thy self, or thou have
lost the glory of thy revenge.


Virg. No, divinest, do not wrong me so, as to think I plead for life; it is for
your pity only that I beg; do not you destroy me, command some one that the
act but adds to his guilt; stain not with blood that innocence, nor with
cruelty punish cruelty.


Cicil. No, Sir, I know your friend has said enough to secure you I cannot be
cruel; but since such a sullen fate attends me that my passion will rob me of
the revenge I hoped to have had on you, I Will take it on my self; and if thou
love through my own wounds, strike thy false heart which I see, yet have no
power to punish.


Virg. False? oh, do not say so, any thing, but false.


Cicil. Did thou not plead thus, till thy Arguments prevailed with my
Brother, that Brother under whose Sword thou fel^^^, and found'st protection,
though his enemy? did thou not vow there he should not be led in triumph,
who else would not have lived? for he defended himself only to let thy pride
see thou could not overcome him; and when he had taught thee with his sword
that he could conquer, he yielded to let thee see he durst dye.


Virg. Dare you be judged by that Brother?


Cicil. Yes, when he is himself; but these injuries are silent, when I call to
mind that barbarous rage that did not spare the aged snow of my honored
Father. What glory could his death add to your conquest, whose heart had not
blood enough to stain the sacrilegious weapon.


Virg. Oh! Madam, for these misfortunes which call me their head, I plead the
duty I owed a Father, whose Battle I fought; and it became me to obey mine, as
it does you to mourn yours.


Cicil. Then, to these add the vanity of this journey, promising your self a
victory over our hearts too; and because your sword is forbid in this war,
alone you undertook the journey; as if Virgilius name were enough to slave the
world.


Virg. Madam, witness Facertes, how full of despairs I obeyed my fate, and your
misfortunes will quit me of vanity; for when they had set a rate upon your
beauty, when there was a price made for the excellent Cicilia, yet then I durst
not hope a purchase. Vain, false and cruel! think me any thing but such a
monster.


Cicil. Oh Brother! cruel Brother! Sir, if I have injured you, I shall teach
you to forgive by forgiving greater faults: my faith, and my faith, alas, that
can neither advantage me, nor prejudice Virgilius.


Virgil. Do not say so; it is the saving balm; it is mercy it self; and your
faith of me must save me here, as mine hereafter; Oh, Divinest, stop not your
mercy, but let it fall here; your eyes are full of pity; let that precious dew
drop upon my thirsty heart, and save me, ere despair has licked all my life
thence; Turn not away, but look upon me as I appear in repentance, in the
whiteness of my He kneels. tears, in their Innocence, in my Souls Love to
Cicilia, strewed upon the Earth in submission. Behold me, and view me, not as I
stand stained with thy miseries, but speak to me, and speak mercy, Mercy whose
figure thy fair self wears, and adorns; O let her softness guide thy tongue,
and let my Souls bleeding sadness make thy fathers wounds dumb.


Cicilia. Oh, ye gods, why did not ye make him Innocent? pray Sir, Why do you
kneel?


Virgil. For mercy, is there no mercy? your tears should be He rises. friendly;
can you weep when you are Angry?


(He rises.) Cicil. No, Sir, my tears have Prophetique misery, and so much
weakness in them, they deserve your pity.


Virgil. Oh, Madam, do not call it weakness, This is Charity, and her Alms
yields a double benefit, and adorns as well as saves; Oh, my fate, would you
had made me any thing that is most scorned, rather then an Enemy here.


Cicil. That had been too great a Blessing; for kno^ Sir, you do not, more then
I, wish your Innocence, or with sadder thoughts mourn your guilt.


[Enter Facertes. Facert. She must not see this Passion; Sir, pray let your
love give way a little to Our safety; Paulina is coming, and 'twill be
dangerous, by the discovery of yours, to put her Love to a despair; Sister, I
hope your Reason has found a way to be reconciled to this Prince, whose
misfortunes I know cannot deserve your hate; when your Justice guides; pray let
her not see you here.


Cicil. I can forgive him, and you; But I can never forgive my self; and
something I Will do shall save my honor.


[Exit Cicilia. Facert. Pray, Sir, put off this sadness, and solicit Paulina
to deliver her this Night; is she as unsensible of your Love as she appeared to
be?


Virgil. She is all honor, all her self; All thy Sister, and I happy only to
be more miserable.


Facert. Pray retire, before Paulina comes.


Virgil. I Will follow you.


Facert. This way we shall meet her, courage Sir; After Parley Woman's wars give
Quarter still, and she cannot long be cruel.


ACT. IV. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Bragadine and Bravo's. Bragad. ARe you all provided?


Barv. Yes, Sir, how many are they?


Bragad. Three is the most; give me a Pistol, it is about the time she
appointed, stay here, and whistle, if she comes; I Will look out.


[Ex. 1. Brav. This wench has every day a Quarrel; I killed two for her, the
last Olympic.


2. Brav. Marry, the gods send her many Quarrels, peace Brings us no harvest;
Who comes here?


[Enter Baud. Baud. The Moon is up, and he not come. They are upon departure;
This Coward will fail me, and they will escape, and the Rascal will scorn me to
death.


1. Brav. Who Is there?


Baud. It Is I, whose that? the Prince?


1. Brav. No, Madam, but one of his Creatures.


Baud. Who Is that? Ennius? why, where have you been many a day?


1. Brav. Faith, I durst not be seen till last night.


Baud. You promised me a visit once, but you broke your word.


1. Brav. Lets retire, and call my Lord; I'Ie pay it now.


Baud. Follow me then, is my Lord this way?


1. Brav. Yes, let me guide you.


[Enter Bragadine. Bragad. Who Is that passed by?


2. Brav. It Is the old Woman, that serves Paulina.


Enter Baud and Bravo again. Baud. O, are you ready, Sir, you have stayed the
utmost time; she expects him with longing thoughts, they are all provided, and
a Gally lies ready at the Mole, to convey them away; but if your hearts be
true, we will stay their Journey.


Bragad. We are all ready, and resolute.


Baud. Follow me then, I Will see you placed where they must pass by.


Bragad. Lead the way.


ACT. IV. SCEN. IX.
Enter Cicilia and Paulina. Cicilia. WHat return to make you, for this good
Act, I know not; But I shall ever admire you for daring (in so wicked a Place)
to be so singly good.


Paul. I, that durst be wicked, ought not to dispute now; but with shame to
look upon my faults, and offer this, as my first sacrifice, to witness I
repent; and may my wishes prove fortunate, and make you happy in that Love that
makes me miserable.


Cicil. You cannot be so miserable as I, -- That must love my Aside. Enemy.


[Enter Baud. Baud. Madam, are you ready, they stay at the Garden gate, shall I
let them in?


Paul. Yes, yes, and see the gates shut that lead to the street.


Baud. All is safe, pray make haste.


Paul. We Will meet you, call at my window.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. X.
Enter Virgilius and Facertes. Facert. THis Moon is friendly, come, pray let
not this cloudy sadness hang upon our Joys; you see she consented to put her
self into your protection; her tears too are your warrant, for all Women's
storms are past when those showers fall.


Virgil. I do not now grieve for fear she should be angry, but that I am so
unlucky as to deserve it; and my Friends can witness my heart never sinned
against her, yet something lies heavy upon it I cannot remove; for my fears
tell me she will take some Revenge upon her self; for you saw it was her Passion,
not her reason, that forgave me.


Facert. I know her Religion will protect her against her self, and she has too
much honor, to wish health, and put poison in the Cup; and though she
threatened revenge, yet she scorns to take it when she is reconciled.


Virgil. Oh, she is too Excellent to be false; Peace. Whose there?


[Enter Baud. Baud. Is the Galley ready, they Expect you.


Facert. All Is ready, lead the way.


Baud. Follow me.


[Exeunt omnes. Bragad. within. Stand close, I hear 'em come.


Enter Virgil. Facertes, and Baud again. Baud. Stay here, while I return, with
the Key.


Facert. This is the Garden. Bragadine s^^^s, Virgil puts his hand to his eye,
with a bloody s^unge and the ble^d runs down. Facertes draws his sword, and
takes him in his Arms.


Virgil. Oh! This may be just: but whether it be fair, or no, Heaven, thou
see.


Facert. How do you, Sir?


Virgil. Why well, Facertes; The Bullet but glanced.


Facert. Oh my sister, If thou have a hand in this Treachery, may Plagues
sudden and lasting find and sink thee with despairs, when mercy flies thee as
thou have done thy honor; nor shall all Virgil. is still in Facertes Arms. the
ties of love, or nature, prove thy guard, nor the mercies due to thy weeping
penitence; No, thy sex shall not protect thee from the Justice of my swollen
rage, which with sword, and words (that wound more) shall afflict thee.


Virg. Why do thou rage and curse her, still mistaking that excellent Maid?
Upon my Soul, she has no hand in it, she is too full of Honor, to take so base
a way to her Revenge, or seek by Treachery a life that is only worn to serve
her; and when she frowns, may command me put it off.


Facer. Draw your sword then, and take my counsel, if your strength fail not,
and fall, as if their malice had been more prosperous, He speaks softly to him.
perchance the Villain, Author of this deed, lurks here about, and expects such
a sign ere he dare discover himself. -- Pray, Sir, Aloud. let me bear you home.


Virg. No, Facertes, let me die here. Virgilius draws his sword and lies down.


Facer. Unfortunate Youth, Murder, Villains, where are you, you accursed
Actors of this black deed? do you hide already Cowards? dare you not look on
your Act? Cicilia and Paulina above.


Cicilia. It was my Brothers voice that cried Murder.


Paul. I heard a Pistol, where is Olympia?


Enter Bragadine, Baud, and Bravoes. Cicilia. Hark, there is some body comes.


Facer. Villains, dare you not yet appear?


Bragad. Yes, fool, we dare, and laugh upon your miseries.


Baud. Yes, an old Woman will laugh; fool, thou had better have destroyed
thy Mother, then with scorn have awaked my Malice, now where is all your young
wits? am not I proved a Mother of your Joys? fool, I am revenged now.


Cicilia. What cry was that?


Bragad. How now, what ailes you? Virgilius as he lies, runs his sword into the
Baud, and kills her* she squeckes


Baud. Oh me, oh me, I am dead.


Facer. Then, though our miseries be great, they are not so ill as I feared;
what moved thee, Villain, to this base Act?


Bragad. Revenge, fool; thought thou, I could forgive a wound, and such an
Injury as to have her I call mine possessed by another?


Facer. Villain, thou shall dearly pay for this base Act; Rise, Sir, Virgilius
rises, and kills one of the Bravoes. the Truth is now at large discovered.


Brav. Oh!


Bragad. Ha, alive?


Virg. Yes, and I hope shall find so much Mercy as to punish thy Treachery.
They fight.

Virgilius and Bragadine. Facertes and Ennius.

They are all wounded, Bragad. faints and falls.

Kills him.

Facertes and Ennius struggle on the ground, Facertes kills him.

Dies.




Bragad. Draw, Ennius, we have yet as many swords as they.


Ennius. I warrant you, Sir, and as good hearts.


Virg. Traitor, thou want the cause.


Cicilia above. It is they, they are set upon, I hear their swords too; let us
haste, our presence may bring some aid; for Heavens sake, let us not look on
and see them murdered.


Bragad. Hold, as thou have Mercy, hold; and as thou have faults, show Mercy.


Virg. Yes, in this Justice, for Justice is ever merciful.


Facer. There, Villain, There Is thy treacheries first reward; thou art going
for thy last.


Enter Cicilia and Paulina; whilst they are fighting upon the ground, Cicilia
runs to Facertes. Cicilia. Ha! upon the ground, Facertes, what accident is this?


Facer. Where Is the Prince?


Virg. Here, how fares Facertes?


Facer. Well, only a little scratched.


Paul. Sir, I hope you believe I had no hand in this Treachery.


Virg. No Madam, we know the unworthy cause.


Cicilia. What was it?


Facer. All our Joys (within this minute) had a cloud on them; and I confess,
I was afraid it had hid my Sisters faults, whilst I feared a mistake of Justice
had betrayed thee to a Murder; yet then in his wounds the Prince was himself,
and collected; I chid my mistrust; see, he bleeds still, does not that expiate?
This is twice he has shed it in sacrificing to thy liberty; and now to be angry
is wilful and humor, not honor.


Cicilia. Do you command, Cicilia shall obey; for I confess, the Prince is
Master of that honor I but talked of; will you mediate a pardon for the
Injuries my Passion threw upon him? and I shall joy to find I was mistaken.


Virg. O Madam, do not speak of pardon, for your Innocence knows not the way to
that Injury I could not forgive; But I will not talk; for I should hate my
self, if I had words to express this Joy.


Paul. Ha! The Prince slain, and Olympia dead? as you love your safety haste
hence; he whom your Justice has found is the Viceroy's Son, and its present
death if you be taken.


Facer. No distraction; The Galley is ready, and waits us at the Mole, thither
we'll immediately; Sister, dare you yet put your self into the Princes
Protection?


Cicilia. Yes, but not now; when I am free I will; and as I refused at first,
because it was early, so now, 'cause it is forced, and looks like giving upon
the Deathbed; and I would be loath to become the Princes Legacy.


Virg. I beseech you, let not a nicity interrupt my Joys; but trust me with
your protection, till I have made good my vows to your Brother, whose Joys my
Affairs have deferred: But when you see him possessed of his Country, then I Will
kneel for a Blessing in the fair Cicilia; dare you bid me hope?


Cicilia. I promise to do what honor shall warrant (...) and when these wounds
are healed, I shall not call it weakness that makes me yield to my passion.


Facer. This Cloud is blown over by Fate; and now I Will smile and prophecy,
through all our wounds and tears, a joyful issue.


Virg. We'll for Sicily first, the Viceroy being dead they dare not refuse my
Authority; besides, if they do, the Army is mine, and that shall secure
Facertes. Madam, what Commands have you to enjoin me, that I may return this
favor?


Paul. When you appeared a private Man and compassed with dangers you had a
power here, which now is turned to duty; and I beg a protection in your
company, for the Prince was known to have an Interest here; and to be found
dead in my Garden will bring a certain ruin upon me; For that I am Innocent
will be no guard, but I shall fall now to expiate my other faults; and I
confess, I would fain live now, for I am certain I repent, and shall ever
sacrifice to the Prince Virgilius as my good Genius.


Cicilia. Sure we shall not deny you a safety, to whom we owe all ours.


Facer. No Complement, but this way through the Garden to the Galley, the wind
is somewhat high.


Virg. The Clouds are black, we'll keep under the shore, that if need be, we
may put in upon the Coast of Calabria.


Facer. Not I, as I live.


Virg. Let me beg that Olive branch sign of Peace; and witness He refuses to
lead his S ster. all, I joy more to be thus bound, then to have conquered
Sicily.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Cilius solus. Cilius. THe Captain has refused to give me the freedom of
her I Love, but if the Lieutenant keep his word, I shall make him repent it at
as sad a rate as I bear my misery; it is not Love, sure, that afflicts my Heart,
for I have heard 'em say, That it is a soft and gentle Passion, which strokes
and courts the Mind, and his Cilius lies down. service perfect freedom, for
Love is both the Famine and the Food, none of these chains afflicts them; I
have seen Women and Boys play with this Power: It Is the sport of Virgins, and
yet their Hearts last Ages; Nay, they can be false too, and yet not lose one
Grace, nor one Beautyfalls; Even the perjured Lovers wear their quiet Minds
and fair Faces still, whilst I pine and wither under these two days misery. I
cannot eat nor sleep since I saw her, and my frinds are irksome to me, I love
loanness, and hunt Corners, and prize a thought of being her slave, more then a
Conquest over the world; Yet I stammer still, and cannot speak sense when my
griefs would tell her, the story of what I ail. I have lost my Courage too of
late; for, by all our Gods, I start and tremble when I see her; Nay, I am a Dog
if I do not weep when I behold her; no Boy at School has his tears readier then
I, I could weep like froward Children. This makes me mad, to find my self
abandoned by all the Gods, whose ends I cannot guess, nor why they send me this
new way to misery.


[Enter Lieut. Lieut. How, Sir, upon the ground? up, Sir, the Soldiers are
prepared, and expect your presence only to finish the work; The slaves too are
loose and privately armed; and when he is once aboard, give but the sign, and
be Master both of him and her. -- Fie, Sir, what means this dejection? up, for
shame.


Cilius. See Lieutenant, I am grown the obedient'st thing that He helps him up.
ever sighed himself away; O Lieutenant, kind old Friend, if we miscarry in this
design, I am lost for ever; for I am become the wretched'st thing thy heart can
fancy. -- Prithee pray. -- He leans upon him.


Lieut. Bondue, pray? you have found your Man indeed.


Cilius. The Angry Gods to send Men and bold wounds, not cowardly thoughts and
Women when they will, call Cilius to the Earth again.


Lieut. Death! what ayle you, Sir?


Cilius. Oh Friend! this trouble of my Mind is sent like some new disease to
scourge thy Friend, and act what sword and sickness could not do; and my
despair will throw me upon some horrid Crime, against which it is in vain to
oppose or Arms or Virtue; The Tyrant-Boy Lords it over my Heart, and now he
has wounded me will make me kiss the Dart.


Lieut. Oh! is this it you complain of? Let me know Man or boy that dares wrong
you; By this hilt, I will send him on a cold Errand.


Cilius. Thy threats are vain, for my griefs are a disease I never felt before;
The remedy too is hid from Gods and Men, the Maid, the lovely Maid thou gav'st
me.


Lieut. A pox on her, the Wench, is she the cause? was she not sound, Sir?


Cilius. Sound!


Lieut. I, sound, by this hand for all that I know she was; I am a Dog if I
touched her; and but for a kiss or two you had her as pure as I found her.


Cilius. Peace, Beast.


Lieut. By this Light, Sir, I am in earnest, and unless 'twere Crab had a
touch, -- for no body else was alone with her, it is that old Rogue has spoild
her.


Cilius. Villain, Slave.


Lieut. Why, in passion, Sir? you are not the first; why this, what a pox, a
Clap is no such dishonor to a Soldier.


Cilius. Peace, wretch.


Lieut. He is modest; a Plague upon her for a dissembling prating Whore: By
this hand I would have ventured my life she had been sound.


Cilius. Dog, do thou know her whom thou thus profan'st? Strikehim.


Lieut. Know her? mischiefs know her and the whole sex, they are nothing but
dissimulation: why do you strike me? you beg of me to be your Baud, and are
angry for a mischance, thank your self; you were never quiet till you had a
bout with her.


Cilius. He will mistake me still.


Lieut. Mistake you? It Is you mistake your self; can I help it if you have a
Clap; if you will tell me what you ail, there are ways and easy cures enough
for such chances, without the sword; you have but one remedy for all diseases,
that damned sword, you think, can cure all.


Cilius. Fool, thou have profaned a Maid with thy base thoughts purer then thy
Prayers.


Lieut. I understand not your Raptures; if she has given you a touch, I Will help
you to a Surgeon, and my self to another; if you will be modest and lick your
self whole you may.


Cilius. How natural it is for him to apprehend such dangers as he has found.
Fool, thou have mistaken me all this while, and would thou have been silent
I had told thee; it is her Eyes that have wounded me, and my disease is Love,
desperate Love; if I can judge of that strange Passions; for it is Love for her
that dies for another; have thou a remedy for such a wound in the Mind?


Lieut. Love, is that your disease? I am glad it is no worse; by my troth, Sir,
if you will starve with meat before you, I will bury you, but I will never pity
you; Love and Marriage are the only two mischiefs that belong to the Sex which
I have not had, and therefore can only prescribe you Wine and Women for a
remedy.


Cilius. Prithee no more and if thou lov's^ me, let thy kindness excuse my
Passion, without making Mirth of my misery.


Lieut. Now. cannot I be angry with him though I bleed; Sir, I would fain serve
you if I knew how. Can you tell what it is your Love would have? what does the
blind Child cry for, would he lie with the Wench? by this hand I will fetch her
to you once more, if I thought that would cure your disease.

No more as you are a Soldier, by your Honor no more; your Honesty in other
things excuses your Ignorance in this; no more I say. Alone I will find my
remedy; and this sword, as I said before, has a Cure for all my miseries; for
he that dares die may defy the worst of Fates.


Lieut. Faith, Sir, but he that dies for a Woman in Italy is but a small friend
to the Sex and Lachrymae, and by my consent should be buried in a feather-bed.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter the Lieutenant, and Soldiers chained. Lieut. WHat, are you all resolved?


All. Yes, Sir, release us and we'll do it.


Lieut. Or must I make an Oration to persuade you to this Geer?


All. No, Sir, we need no persuasions.


Lieu. Methinks you should not, considering I humbly desire you not to be
hanged, and shall take it for an obligation, if you will throw away your cold
water, and pledge me in Greek wine, and entreat your worships to quit these
iron Jewels, and hard benches, for Gold-chains and pretty Wenches.


1 Sold. Sir, we hope you do not mean to abuse us, and show us this heaven
only in words.


Lieu. By this good day I am real, and you shall all be loose and armed; and
when he comes aboard, put off speedily, and then discover your selves; if he
resists, kill him, if not, only bind him; by these hilts, I have order to hang
you every man, and mine own safety tells me I were best to do it.


All. Oh! Lieutenant, noble Lieutenant, you know we have been honest Rogues to
you always.


Lieu. All but my friend that would cut my throat the other day, because I
would not give him my Wench.


2 Sold. It Is true, Lieutenant, I was faulty, and you may leave being a Lion,
and take revenge upon a Dog; but you know you spoil a good fellows drinking
when ever you hang me; and it may be, you will not find one to bear my part in
your Catches when I am gone; and then you will wish you had not been so revengeful.


Lieu. No, you Rogues, you know I am of a most merciful nature, and that makes
you so presumptuous; and to confirm you, I Will have all join hands, and you
shall see what a miracle I Will work; so now, circle me about while I conjure up
a spirit that shall tell me all your thoughts, and you mine.


Here they make a ring about him and sing a Catch. The Catch in three Parts.
All I.
Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing, with wine and mirth let us conjure him.




Juno's deceit,




Bacchus. Lo I appear, lo I appear.

All II.
Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing, with wine and mirth let us conjure him.
Ariadne's wrongs,








All
Kind God in Bottles here.

Bacchus. Drink and I will appear.
Drink deep and I am here.

All III.
To Bacchus bow, to Bacchus sing,
It Is wine and mirth that conjures him.
By this blood of the Vine,
Thus poured on thy shrine;
By this full glass
To the last kind lass,
'Twas a girl twice nine
That clasped like thy Vine.
By this and that appear, appear, appear
Kind and kinder God in Bottles here.

Bacchus, All Lo I appear, one kind bottle more and I will dwell here.

All IV.
Then thus again we will conjure him
Because he has propitious been.
Hence this glass, a poor and single sacrifice,
A Hecatomb in this bottle dies,
By the men that thou have won,
And the women thou have undone.
By the friendships thou have made,
And the secrets thou have betrayed.
By this cure of our sorrow,
Thus charmed till to morrow.
Appear, appear, appear

All Kind God in bottles here.

Bacchus, All Lo I appear, lo I am here,
And there and there;
Lo, I am every where.



1 Sold. Is Bacchus a Devil, Lieutenant, that he obeys your charm? I thought
he had been a God.


Lieu. Faith, that is as he is used, and may be both; But I mean he shall play
the Devil now; and therefore each man take into his hand one of these
Familiars; and when he has sucked the secret from him, let him release the
spirit into the Cellar again.


3 Sold. But what secret, Lieutenant?


Lieu. Converse with that spirit, and he will instruct thee: whisper to him
thus. -- Hup, and thou shall find liberty slip down thy He drinks, they all
drink. throat.


1 Sold. Have thou met him yet?


3 Sold. Not yet, but I believe he is hard by, for I met his baggage; I could
be angry to think he should have so many fine Wenches and we none.


Lieu. He Is in the right, anger and lust, liberty is hard by, I warrant They
all drink again. They throw all the bottles in at a hole upon the Stage, and
cry liberty, liberty. it; but she is in the last drop, and have at her; will
you take my word hereafter?


1 Sold. Yes, but good Lieutenant, call to the devil for one Bottle more, and
let it be burnt sack.


Lieu. It is too late, yonder comes our chief, The brave Cilius.


Enter Cilius. 2 Sold. Chief, Lieutenant? We have no Chief, Lieutenant, but
liberty.


Cil. How now, Lieutenant, what noise is this?


Lieu. We have been consulting, Sir, about this business; I, and my fellow
Soldiers here, -- I have ground the Rogues to such an edge they will cut iron;
and being persuaded they are free, you may command them like Dogs.


[aside. Cil. Haste then to the Galley, I Will stay the Captain and his company
till you are aboard; and honest friends when this is done, command your own and
my power to serve you.


All. Long live Cilius, long live Cilius.


Cil. Thanks to all, did the storm last night do no mischief amongst the
Galleys?


Lieu. I had taken six when I lay down, and it did but rock me.


Cil. Pray lose no time, but haste aboard; for I must wait upon the Captain.


[Exit Cilius. Lieu. Fear not us; how now, who have we here?


[Ent. Tull. Tull. Gentlemen, and my fellow Soldiers, I have an humble suit to
you.


All. What is it, what is it?


Tull. That I may have leave to live.


All. Live? why not?


Tull. You must ask my Lieutenant that, he knows the reason better then I; for
he has a bill of my hand, to be dead to morrow.


Lieu. Thou art a fool, here is nothing but liberty; and he that dares drink
shall never dye.


Tull. Nay, I Will drink, so I may live.


1 Sold. Hum! Fellow Tullius, no covenants, no conditions for drinking while
you live, drink freely.


Lieu. Join hands, and sing aboard, there is liberty.


[Exeunt omnes singing. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Cilius and Sophia, with some of those Romans were taken Prisoners with
her. Cil. MAdam, be confident, for it shall not be in his power to wrong you,
my self will be your guard.


Soph. Sir, last night (but that I threatened, not to outlive his injury) he
had forced me.


1 Roman. We appeared upon her call, and with our cries made him suspect the
noise might have given notice to the Soldiers.


Cil. Force you? he dares not do it, by our Laws he dies, or any that forces a
Virgin after she is in our public Treasury, which you are now; for your price,
Madam, if you were sold, is to be divided; it is true, if he will marry you,
that privilege he has as Captain; he pays our shares, and takes you, but from
all those dangers, my life and honor to pawn, I Will secure you.


Soph. The gods, Sir, I hope, will reward this goodness, and join with you to
protect our Innocence.


2. Roman. Will it be long, Sir, ere we go to the Galley?


Cilius. No, he is now coming with the rest of the Slaves; I beseech you be not
sad, it looks prophetickly, and it is a kind of ill Omen; The Soldiers are all
firm for you, I dare not stay; for to be seen with you might breed Suspicion.
-- I kiss your hand.


[Exit Cilius 1. Roman. Be not dejected, Madam, you see by what strange means
your stars have raised you a power among your Enemies. This gallant youth will
not be so false as to deceive your trust; and once in Italy Sophia's name is
guard enough.


[Enter Capt. and Nig. Capt. Sir, had you named your self, or Country, The
famed Nigro had found no Enemies here; for we are all a part of that
unfortunate Island, that are thus forced to live by spoil of them that have
destroyed us; and I am sad to think of the misfortune of Our Princess,
especially this last Accident, wherein the virtuous Cicilia suffered; But for
those slaves whose falsehood were the Authors of her Misery, This day the Dogs
shall, upon the hook, find a Justice.


Nig. Sir, I have no joy now left; for I have seen all my Masters family
ruined; and Our Country sold to slavery, yet if we make haste, we may again
redeem the unfortunate Cicilia; for being sold at Naples, it is not likely they
will so suddenly remove her.


Capt. We are this morning bound thither, the Slaves Mart is held there to day.


Soph. What do I hear? Nigro named, was not that he my Brother saved in the
Siracusan battle?


1. Roman. Yes, Madam, and that was he that saved the Prince Facertes in that
battle where his Father fell.


Soph. And the Princess Cicilia was she that Prisoner that the slaves stole?
Oh, my Facertes, then thy hopes and mine are sunk.


1. Roman. Have patience, Madam, lest you discover who you are; these new
griefs of their lost Princess may bring a certain ruin upon us, should they
know how near a relation you have to the cause.


Nig. I am instructed Sir, what are they that stand bound? They appeared busy
be^^re.


Capt. Roman Prisoners, slaves for the Mart.


Nig. Though their Tyrannies have made them odious; yet when I see them
miserable it finds a pity.


[Enter Cilius. Cilius. Are you ready, Sir, all stays; The wind is fair too.


Capt. Did the storm do no harm, last night? it was very violent for the time.


Cilius. Not much, the Galleys were well moored, only the Lion drove.


Capt. Come Sir, We have now a double Occasion; and I hope we shall in Naples
find our last hope; Cilius, bring off the Slaves, and follow.


[Exeunt Captain and Nigro. Cilius. I shall follow, to your pain, Come Madam,
now let your prayers strengthen our designs; for where they side, the party
cannot lose.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Virgilius, Facertes, Cicilia, Paulina, after the storm. Virg. MAdam, the
unfriendly winds have forced us to an unfrequented place, and brought new
troubles; but I hope your virtue can arm against them.


Cicil. I am so used; Sir, to misery, that this is a common chance, and here
only the Gods war with us.


Facert. Pray let me serve you, your charity deserves a greater care then this.


Virgil. Madam, the unruliness of the weather made you lose the benefit of last
nights sleep; pray repose here while we watch, lest some rude passengers
interrupt you.


Cicil. I cannot sleep, Sir, I have too many cares, and waking thoughts upon
me, Brother; how does our Friend do?


Facert. She will not rest neither, she seems to be less able to bear troubles
then you; pray give Example, and try to sleep, lest sickness find you, and add
a heavy accident to your other misfortunes.


Cicil. If the Prince will sleep too, I will try to betray my Lies down, She,
and Virgilius kneeling by her. thoughts; for truly I am weary.


Virgil. Till you are safe I cannot; but I Will kneel by you; are you not afraid
of me? for it is my fortune and cross fate that brings you all these troubles;
and where I am you cannot be happy; say Divinest, am not I troublesome to you?


Cicil. Oh, Sir, do not make me blush, to say you are welcome; for I grieve
more, that you are so unfortunate as to have a share in my miseries, then that
I was unfortunate; for I have now no wish, but that the Prince Virgilius had no
Interest in the cause.


Facert. No more of sadness now; but pray try if you can take some rest.


Cicil. It Is not sadness now; there is a Joy in this grief; and when we are
happy, it is a pleasure to recount our passed miseries.


Virgil. What noise is that? The Lieutenant and Soldiers singing the Catch.


Facert. It draws nearer.


Virgil. Some Bacchanale, by their Song, -- whether tends this noise, turn back
again, there is no way this way.


Enter singing, first the Soldiers, then the Lieutenant, the Catch of, To
Bacchus bow. 2. Sold. Sir, we have seen strange things, and therefore let us
go.


Lieu. How now, my Friend, who would you speak with?


Virgil. With none of you; pray turn, and take another Path.


Lieu. Turn, no not we; and I advise you not to stop us, for we have a world of
Sack about us, and our way lies this way.


1. Sold. Lieutenant, by these hilts, it is he that killed our Corporal, he that
fought for the Slave at Naples.


Lieu. Is it so? Look about, it may be, she is here too.


Facert. What do you stare at? He points to Cicilia.


Lieu. I look for a thing that troubles you; Oh, there it lies; come fellows,
we will help 'em to carry it.


Virgil. Away, be gone, or I Will make thee curse the time thy erring feet
strayed this way.


Lieu. Draw, Mates, Sir, we dare fight; you shall not brave us He winds a Horn.
at home, though you did at Naples.


Virgil. Draw, Facertes, these are the same Pirates we charged when thy fair
Sister was sold at Naples.


Lieu. Yes, yes, these are they, and we will sell your worships there.
Lieutenant winds a Horn again.


Facert. Lose no time, for that Horn was a Call, and I fear some aid.


[Exeunt Fighting. They all fight, Virgilius wounds the Lieutenant, Facertes
kills a Soldier. Enter the Captain, Virgilius charges him, he retires, and
Virgilius follows him off the Stage. Enter Cilius and Soldiers, Facertes and
he fight. They take Facertes, Cicilia, and Paulina Prisoners. Cicil. Though
courage be a virtue, and beauteous conquest courted amongst men, yet murder
has no share in either; and those that be disarmed cannot be called enemies,
nor their death conquest; and if ever you knew what it was to want it, you will
find mercy, and hear me, a kneeling Virgin that never bowed to any (but the
Gods) before, and save my Brother.


Cil. And save thy Brother?


Cicil. If there be any thing that is dear to thee, by that I conjure thee; save
him.


Cil. Fair one, I have already unfortunately struck against one who now
commands my fate; and know, I do not use to war with miseries; or if I could,
who durst destroy what your prayers protect? or what desperate fool hope a
safety, when your prayers have called down his ruin? -- Take his life, unbind
him, and bind me, if you cannot forgive; for know, there is one in Beauty,
Innocence and Miseries so like you, that I glory to serve you; for it is a kind
of sacrifice to her; for whose dear sake had you interposed those eyes, you had
divided us more then seas; and would I were able to say too that she were free
as well as safe; and something, it may be, I shall do for that liberty too.


Cicil. May your Prayers, your Sword, nor your Love never find a stop, but such
as adds glory to the conquest, for being thus good, thus merciful.


Cil. Madam, I cannot talk. -- Soldiers, carry these to the Captains Quarter,
and with your lives protect them from all insolence; let them be apart with the
Romans, and stay with them till I come. Your pardon, Madam, I must hence, lest
this accident discover a Plot, whose good success may make me capable to serve
you; if it miss, it brings a ruin where I must love, and cannot hope return.
Sir, you that know so well how to deal wounds, I am certain will forgive them.


Facert. Sir, I never hated the person of mine enemy, much less you that have
proved a friend.


Cil. I dare not stay; your pardon. Be careful of your charge; and do you hear,
be speedy, and meet me at the Captains Quarter; my peace dwell for ever here.


[Exit Cilius. Enter Captain wounded, leaning on a Soldier. Capt. I am paid,
how the slave has notch'd me!


Sold. How do you, Sir?


Capt. How do I? why thou see I am spoiled: a douzen of Surgeons will scarce
repair me; how now, what are those?


Sold. Prisoners, Sir.


Capt. There Is some comfort in that, come, bring 'em away, bring 'em away, set
half a douzen of Surgeons to work.


Cicil. Oh Facertes, I fear the Prince is lost.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Virgilius wounded. Virg. HA! gone, fool that I was, whither did my rage
guide me? I have fought and conquered to my ruin, as rashly and unreasonably
as beasts, forgetting the cause for which I fought; they are gone, which way
shall I take? Love, either guide me to her rescue, or to my grave.


[Exit Virg. Enter Lieutenant wounded. Lieu. I am paid; what a case I am in --
The Bottle is whole, He cries hup, and holds his breath. that is some comfort
still; I live now by the Spirit of sack, for all my blood's gone. -- H'as lamed
my drinking hand too: How shall I stop a Pipe? I leak apace, and reel as if I
were drunk; how I stumble? dying is a king of being drunk; It grows night by my
eyes; I shall faint ere I get to my Quarter. A pox take him that set me
abroach, he has quite spoiled my skin, a Tanner will not give a groat for it,
-- This is the first time that I remember He stumbles and falls. I ever fell
when I was sober; if I die alone, I shall be as Melancholy, as a lame man in a
ditch, Oh! for a Beer Glass of Sack, or Crab, and a Catch, to prepare for the
Melancholy, and a cold grave.


[Enter Tullius wounded. Tull. This was my Lieutenants plot, All the world is
my Enemy; how they have hacked me, it is a scurvy trade, this fighting it wears
out ones clothes, worse then drinking; I will hide me in this Wood till the
storm is over; and if I get safe to Naples, Celia and I will live out my few
days merrily, and spoil my Captains plot; I Tullius lies down in the Wood. will
spend all, and die mine own heir.


Lieu. Sure I heard Tullius his voice; who is there?


Tull. I am pursued, yet if I can counterfeit dead well, I may live; My fear
will betray me; O that I were valiant enough but to lie still; I never found
the use of courage till now: Lord, how I shake!


Lieu. It Is his voice; Tullius, Tullius, prithee stay a little.


Tull. It Is my Lieutenant; if he should take this opportunity now, and kill me,
and say the Enemy did it, and share with my Captain in all I have; Oh, the
misery of Wealth! men can neither be happy with it, nor without it; I dare not
look toward him, I Will creep backward, and run away.


Lieu. The ill-natured Rogue is gone, and left me; I shall bleed to death
before any Friend finds me; Now the Rogue is revenged upon me for the frights I
put him in to day.


Tull. Hum! say you so, bleed to death -- His wounds have healed mine -- Now do
I grow strong, and valiant -- Lieutenant He goes to the Lieutenant. how is it?


Lieu. Faith, quite spoiled, I fear the Rogues have made lanes quite through
me; prithee help me to my Quarter, for I am faint.


Tull. Has been something uncivil with your Breeches, I smell it, -- How fell
you out? did he refuse my Captains health? Tull. smells to him.


Lieu. No, no, there was no wine in the business, yet there was a Wench, the
other half of man's mischief; but it is no time now for to talk, for unless thou
help'st me to a Surgeon, thou will find me a mortal Lieutenant. -- Give me thy
hand good Tullius, oh! what Tull. shakes him by the hand, and instead of
helping him up lets him fall. have thou done.


Tull. Alas! farewell, noble Lieutenant, We must all dye; there is a tall man,
and a fair drinker, gone; I will say that for thee.


Lieu. Why Tullius, thou will not leave me in this misery? I have not fingers
enough to stop the holes; get a Surgeon, or I shall dye.


Tull. It Is sack, pure sack, and it is pity it should leak thus; but Tull. put
his finger to the Lieu. side and smells. that I will not hinder our Captain the
occasion of being your heir, when you die so conveniently now, just upon his
going out.


Lieu. A pox of this fooling, it is unseasonable; be but kind to me, and thou
shall be my heir.


Tull. How! your heir? By this light, and it is well considered, now I think
on it; I will be thy heir, or at least a careful steward for my Captain; let me
see, this sword has a good guard, this hat and feather how sits it?


Lieu. What do thou mean?


Tull. This Buff-coat will not be amiss neither. -- He begins to strip him.


Lieu. Villain, unhand me.


Tull. Nay, nay, you must part.


Lieu. Dog. -- Kicks him as he lies.


Tull. And these Breeches too, and this Doublet, I Will wear them for your sake;
nay, no resisting.


Lieu. Slave, Villain.


Tull. See how impatient you are, come, come, you are going to another world
(as you say) quit the thoughts of these transitory things now, and prepare to
dye finely like a fine gentleman, and a Lieutenant.


Lieu. Hell take thee, slave.


Tull. It Is more then ever I got by a Legacy before; by my faith, it is a fair
Coat; a pox take'em that cut it thus: Now for the Breeches.


Lieu. Why, thou will not murder me?


Tull. No, no, only borrow your Breeches; for look, Sir, what need you such gay
things as these now when you are going to lie alone in the dark?


Lieu. Oh! misery of miseries!


Tull. Ha, ha, this revenge is better then long life.


Lieu. O inhumane slave! A noise within.


Tull. What noise is that?


Lieu. It Is vengeance, slave; I will make thee curse thy self.


Tull. Silence, my small friend, or else I have a Plaster of cold He draws his
Dagger. iron, hight a Dagger; By this hilt, I will apply the point to your
side, if you breathe one loud syllable more; marry, if you will, curse
inwardly; 'twas my own case once, and I forgive it.


Lieu. Patience, oh patience.


Tull. I, I, come when she will, you will have use of her; this noise draws
this way, I must pluck him into the wood, and then I Will cut his throat; you had
best bethink you of some odd prayer, for it must be so. He pulls him by the
heels off the Stage.


Lieu. Murder, Villain, Dog.


Tull. Come, come along, Sir; why should you grudge to dye when I am to be your
heir?


Lieu. Oh misery, misery of miseries, is there no revenge?


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Sophia and Romans. Soph. WHence grew this sudden Alarm?


1 Romans I fear, from the discovery of the Plot; if it be so, we are lost for
ever.


Enter Captain and Nigro, after them Facertes, Cicilia and Paulina. Capt. Lead
them in and bind 'em, and some one run for a Surgeon.


Nig. What are these, Sir?


Capt. I know not; pray heaven they be worth the purchase: We have paid dear
for 'em; prithee help me off.


[Exeunt Capt. and Nigro, Soph. Facertes! it is he, and women in his company; I
will not suspect him she that is jealous; sets a cheap rate upon her self; for
if he be worthy of such a pain as jealousy, he cannot be so faulty as to
deserve it.


Facert. I am amazed, it is the Princess Sophia.


Cicil. Sophia?


Facert. What miseries do I see, Madam, to add to mine own afflictions; I never
thought I should have lived to see the day wherein I should have grieved to
have met the fair Sophia.


Soph. Why are you afflicted to meet me now?


Facert. Oh! Madam, my love begets my sorrows; for what shall I think? my
thoughts are divided, to meet your Highness, where license sows, and sin reaps;
here, where rage fetches her fire, and murder bathes his bloody hands; and
unsensibly recounts in security the treacherous stabs.


Soph. Say this guilt be here, must I be subject to the infection?


Facert. I do not think you are guilty, yet my fears tells me, where tired lust
retires to pant, such beauties as adore the fair Sophia, must kindle fresh
fires.


Soph. Why do you wound me thus with your suspicion, and rob me of the joy I
had to see you? it is not kindly done to add such a pain to my misfortune; had
you fallen into the power of our sex, though sold to sin; like these, I could
have died sooner then have injured you so as to think you would-out live your
honor; and when you are just to me, you will not believe I prize mine so
little as to sell it for a shamed life.


Facert. Oh! divinest, pardon my love, whose fears still apprehend the worst.


Cicil. Madam, let the impatiency that begets this rudeness excuse it while I
profess my self, by all ties, yours; for though, till now, a stranger to you;
yet I am one that owes your civil mentions a life, which your mercy lent this
unfortunate Brother.


Soph. Speak, Facertes, is this the Princess, Cicilia?


Facert. This was; but what she is now the Gods only know. They embrace and
weep.


Soph. Oh! Madam, in love and miseries we are become one; and my whole stock of
tears I would waste here, could that wash off my Countries crime, or remove the
stain.


Cicil. I have forgot my part of them; so new and so strange are the favors
you and your gallant Brother have loaded us with, that his dangers now are all
my fears.


Soph. My Brother! where is he? have you seen him?


Cicil. Yes, Madam; and I fear he is at this instant hunting, with certain
danger, our uncertain safety.


Enter Nigro, Captain, and a Soldier. Capt. Ha! the same Prisoners that were
stole, and sold at Naples.


Sold. Upon my life, Sir, it is true.


Nig. It Is, it is she, and the Prince Facertes too. Nig. kneels, and they
embrace him.


Facert. The honored Nigro?


Cicil. Alive? oh ye Gods! This day is full of your hands; and all is like you
(wonder.)


Facert. Rise, why do you kneel? oh, lay that aged head here; where are we?
what strange place is this the Sicilian Deity is run to hide her self in?


Capt. Though I do not know thy face; yet to Facertes name, here kneels a
subject, and one of those your dead Father called faithful, my name Terresius.


Nig. Terresius?


Capt. Yes Terresius, Nigro, that with him from the same battle, when you fled
with this gallant Prince, bore away the hopeful Lucius; we have run strange
fortunes since; but I durst not tell him what he was, lest his fiery nature
should have pulled on a certain ruin.


Facert. My Brother Lucius living?


Capt. Yes, Sir; and that, I hope, will expiate the fault my ignorance this day
committed.


Cicil. Where is he, Sir?


Capt. I left him pursuing the victory, but I Will haste and tell him this news
it will stay his rage, which else may pursue his own ruin upon his friends.


Cicil. For heavens sake haste, lest he and the Prince Virgilius meet; for
either of their conquests brings my ruin.


Facert. Let me accompany you.


Capt. I dare not, Sir, for yet the Soldiers know you not; and their mistake
of duty to me may bring on a sad consequence.


Nig. For heavens sake lose no time, but haste to prevent this danger.


Capt. I Will send an Officer, Sir, to guard you; and then with safety you may
come but till then; I beseech you stir not.


[Exit Capt. Soph. Pray, Madam, what blessed chance brought my Brother to have
the power to serve you.


Facert. Defer that story till a fitter time, and haste now to the saving of
your Brother.


Cicil. Pray lead the way, lest our ceremony hinder our charity.


Soph. If you will give me leave to command, I Will obey; you must not refuse me
your hand; oh! that the Gods had made our Countries join thus in peace.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. VII.
Enter Virgilius solus. Virg. THey cannot escape; I have fired their Galley,
and mine lies loose, in wait for any that shall come to their aid. Miserable
Virgilius! unfortunate that I am, preserved only to a greater loss; this way a
Soldier (whose dying words could only guide me) said they took; I Will hunt them
to their den but I Will find the monsters.


[Exit. ACT. V. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Cilius and a Soldier. Cil. THe Galley fired, and the Lieutenant slain;
Hell upon him, he has crossed all my designs; Fate thou art Fate still, but
whither just or no thus to strike against the intentions of the honest, the
Gods be Judge; All my hopes are sunk; that excellent Maid is lost too, and I
shall appear guilty and treacherous to her; But if I find the cursed
Incendiary, with his hateful Blood I Will quench the flame: Take that path, if
you find him, call.


Sold. Sir, this is he. As the Soldier goes o^^, he calls Virgilius.


Virg. This, by description, should be him I seek.


Cilius. What art thou, that walk'st with such confidence in these forbidden
Woods? Know, thou have kindled a fire nothing but thy Blood shall extinguish.


Virg. Unless thou will fall too, and make one in that ruin, I counsel thee
immediately to deliver (without repetition) those whom thy treacherous odds
have ravished hence.


Cilius. I will not revile thee, because I mean to fight with thee; Yet I would
gladly know whence thou art, that hopest with thy threats to wash off this
glorious color, and shake those fruits that Conquest gave a growth to here.


Virg. Rome claims my Birth.


Cilius. So it do'es of him I hate more then the loathed Issues of the Earth.


Virg. What art thou, that dare avow such a hatred of a Roman to a Roman's
face?


Cilius. I am of Sicily, the unfortunate subject of your Rage.


Virg. So is she I prefer equal with the Gods; yet her interest in the Nation
shall not protect thee that art so base as to make spoil of thine own nest.


Cilius. You Will find words of no force here, and thou look as if thou
would not yield upon entreaty.


Virg. Nor can thou conquer me, when I fight in her cause, though thou take
the odds of his sword.


Cilius. His? he dares not strike, where he sees my sword drawn upon a single
opposite.


Virg. You will not deliver these Ladies then?


Cilius. I Will give thee all my glory first; yet I know thou art the Author of
all those miseries that shall succeed; for had not thou burnt my Galley, I
had decreed their safety, but now thou have sold them to perpetual slavery.


Virg. The guilty never want excuses, but I shall punish both those falsehoods.


Cilius. Soldier, upon your life stir not a foot to my rescue, I scorn to live
upon Charity.


Virg. I Will talk no longer, their freedoms or thy sword; for my vows are writ
in Heaven, never to sheath this sword till I found them or a Grave.


Cilius. One of them I Will guide you to, or miss my aim. -- Fortune, They
fight, and are both wounded. Cilius staggers. have thou decreed that I shall
blush to death? Loose where my Love and Countries Genius both strike? If thou
be a Deity save my Honor.


Virg. Will you yield, or try a farther Fate? They fight, and in the close
Vigilius takes bold of Cilius sword.

They struggle upon the ground, a noise within crying follow follow.

Virgil. and Cilius rise together and part.




Cilius. No, Roman, we may be overcome, but we scorn to yield.


Virg. Ask thy life, or thou art dead.


Cilius. No, when thou can give it, it is not worth asking.


Virg. Then it is not worth taking.


Cilius. What noise is that?


Sold. I know not, Sir.


Cilius. Draw, and kill any thing that offers to rescue me; for when Cilius
cannot stand alone in this cause, let him fall for ever.


Virg. I would thou had not deserved my sword.


Enter Captain and Nigro. Sold. Stand, he that advances a step as Friend or
Enemy, till they have done, shall kill or die.


Capt. How now, Sirrah? Cilius, if the name of Facertes or Cicilia have a
power, you will cease to be an Enemy there. They go to them.


Nigro. Or if the brave Virgilius be satisfied with shedding of Scicilian
Blood, he will now spare the lost Lucius, and reconcile himself They part 'em,
they gaze upon one another. to that Brother Enemy.


Virg. Prince Lucius!


Cilius. Virgilius!


Capt. Yes, Sir, Virgilius, and there are coming those whose Interest in either
will quickly clear this doubt.


Enter Facertes, Cicilia, Sophia, Paulina, and Romans. Facer. Sir, by the name
of Brother; I conjure you to defer this hate till you have heard us speak.


Sophia. And if I have a Sisters interest it will disarm Virgilius.


Virg. Sister? what strange accident brought thee hither? -- Madam, will you
pardon that uncivil Joy that passed you to find To Cicilia. a Sister?


Cicilia. Yes, Sir, if you will help me find a friend to Virgilius, and a lost
Brother to Cicilia.


Cilius. Terresius, unfold this Riddle, amazement yet withholds my sword, and
has almost bound my Reason; what means this shuffling of Facertes, Cicilia,
Virgilius and Lucius together? Those names, and this dearness, what means it?


Nigro. Dare you trust me?


Cilius. The honored Nigro.


Sophia. Or me, whose faith you have bought; and give us leave to reconcile
this wonder?


Cilius. Madam, I am all your slave, and when your hand deals it destruction
shall fall on Cilius unresisted.


Sophia. Dare you show your breast? it is all I beg.


Cilius. Yes, fair one, and every thought of it shall to you be visible.


Nigro. Here, here, it is a thousand witnesses to prove the lost Lucius.


Capt. It Is so, and upon his knees Teresius begs his pardon for keeping this
secret so long from you; But now it comes accompanied with many blessings; see
here your Brother, the Prince Facertes, and the Excellent Cicilia, whose Loves
have been by Fate appointed to restore our Country to her long-lost liberty.


Facer. And if Lucius finds a part of this Joy, let him with friendly arms
embrace Virgilius, who is now a Brother, and ever a Friend.


Cicilia. Dare you from my hand take him?


Cilius. That I have been thus long silent, let the wonder you have begot plead
for me; And, Sir, that we durst be Enemies should They embrace be no stop to
that faith, which confirms we dare be friends.


Virg. Sir, your last act assures Virgilius, who cannot believe he is safe till
you embrace him; for I know, such an Enemy as Prince Lucius reconciled will
prove a conquering friend.


Sophia. The Gods make this friendship as lasting as it is strange.


Cilius. Madam, does this change bring no hope to Lucius? must he still be the
despairing Cilius? dare you not yet tell me who you They embrace again. are?


Sophia. Yes, my Name's Sophia.


Cilius. Ha, the Princess Sophia?


Facer. Yes, Lucius: But why is my Brother sad? does he mourn my Interest there?


Cilius. No, Sir, I neither mourn yours there, nor the Excellent Sophias here;
but I am hunting out a way to bear my self like Lucius in this great day; your
hand, Madam, -- Here Facertes from Fate receive this Jewel, it is a Wealth I
cannot hope to possess, but by being unworthy of it; and it shall be Lucius his
glory to say, To keep his Fame, he gave that away.


Nigro. Let no replies defer the Joys that attend this day.


Cilius. To the Temple then, while with healing sacrifice Virgilius loads the
Altars.


Virg. I shall follow, if Lucius will lead the way. Thus blessed, and thus
embraced, more a God then they.

Yet lest we leave our Enemies behind,
Let Us know how these our Judges stand enclind.

[Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
THE Parsons Wedding, A COMEDY. The Scene LONDON.

WRITTEN AT Basil in Switzerland: BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE LADY URSULA BARTU, WIDOW.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

Dramatis Personae.
Mr Careless, A Gentleman, and a Wit. Mr Wild, A Gentleman, Nephew to the
Widow. Mr Jolly, An Humerous Gentleman, and a Courtier. Captain, A Leading Wit,
full of Designs. Parson, A Wit also, but overreached by the Captain, and his
Wanton. Mr Constant, Two dull Suitors to the Lady Widow, and Mris Pleasant. Mr
Sadd. Lady Wild, A rich (and somewhat youthful) Widow. Mris Pleasant, A
Handsome young Gentlewoman, of a good Fortune. Mr Secret, Her (Indifferent
honest) Woman. Lady Love-all, An old Stallion Hunting Widow. Faithful, Her
(errant honest) Woman. Mris Wanton, The Captains Livery Punk, Married to the
Parson by Confederacy. Baud. Servants. Drawers. Fiddlers.
THE Parsons Wedding A COMEDY.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter the Captain in Choler, and Wanton. Capt. No more, I Will sooner be
reconciled to want, or sickness, then that Rascal; A thing, that my Charity
made sociable; one, that when I smiled would fawn upon me, and wag his stearn,
like starved Dogs; so nasty, the Company cried foh upon him; He stunk so of
Poverty, Ale, and Bawdry. So poor and despicable, when I relieved him, he could
not avow his calling, for want of a Cassock, but stood at Corners of Streets,
and whispered Gentlemen in the Ear, as they passed, and so delivered his Wants
like a Message which being done, the Rogue vanished, and would dive at
Westminster like a Dabchick, and rise again at Temple-gate; The ingenuity of
the Rascal, his Wit being snuft by want, burnt clear then, and furnished him
with a bawdy Jest or two, to take the Company; But now the Rogue shall find he
has lost a Patron.


Want. As I live, if I had thought you would have been in such a fury, you
should never have known it.


Capt. Treacherous Rogue, he has always rayl'd against thee to me, as a danger
his Friendship ought to give me warning of; and nightly cried, yet look back,
and hunt not, with good Nature and the beauties of thy Youth, that false Woman;
But hear thy Friend, that speaks from sad Experience.


Want. Did he say this?


Capt. Yes, and swears ye are as unsatiate as the Sea, as Covetous, and as
ungrateful: that you have your Tempest too; and Calmes, more dangerous then it.


Want. Was the slave so Eloquent in his malice?


Capt. Yes, faith, and urged, you (for your part) were never particular, and
seldom sound.


Want. Not sound? Why, he offered to marry me, and swore he thought I was
chaste, I was so particular; and proved it, that consent was full marriage, by
the first Institution, and those that love, and lie together, and tell, have
fulfilled all Ceremonies now.


Capt. Did he offer to marry thee?


Want. Yes, yes.


Capt. If ever then I deserved from thee, or if thou be'st deer to thy self, as
thou have any thing thou hop'st shall be safe or sound about thee, I conjure
thee, take my Counsel; Marry him, to afflict him.


Want. Marry him?


Capt. If I have any power I shall prevail; thou know he has a fat
Benefice, and leave me to plague him, till he give it me to be rid of thee.


Want. Will you not keep me then?


Capt. I keep thee? prithee, will thou keep me? I know not why men are such
Fools to pay? We bring as much to the sport, as Women; Keep thee? I Would marry
thee as soon; Why? that is Wedding sin; No, no keeping I, that you are not your
own, is all that prefers you before Wives.


Want. I hope this is not real.


Capt. Art thou such a stranger to my humor? Why I tell thee, I should hate
thee if I could call thee mine, for I loath all Women within my knowledge, and
it is six to four if I knew thy sign I Would come there no more; A strange Mistress
makes every night anew, and these are your pleasing sins; I had as live be
good, as sin by course.


Want. Then I am miserable.


Capt. Not so, if you will be instructed, and let me pass like a stranger when
you meet me.


Want. But have you these humors?


Capt. Yes faith; yet if you will observe them, though you Marry him, I may
perchance be your Friend; But you must be sure to be coy; for to me the hunting
is more pleasure then the Quarry.


Want. But if I observe this, will you be my Friend hereafter?


Capt. Firm as the day; Hark, I hear him; I knew he would The Parson calls
within. follow me, I gave him a small touch that wakened his guilt; Resolve to
indear your self to him, which you may easily do, by taking his part when I
have vexed him; No dispute, Resolve it, or as I live here I disclaim thee for
ever.


Want. It Is well, something I Will do.


[Exit Wanton. Capt. Open the door, I say, and let me in; your favorite and his
Tithes, shall come no more here.


[Enter Parson. Pars. Yes, but he shall; it is not you, nor your braced Drum,
shall fright me hence, who can command the souls of men; I have read Divine
Seneca; thou know nothing but the earthly part, and can cry to that, Faces
about.


Capt. Thou read Seneca? thou steal his Cover, to clothe thee, naked and
wicked, That for money would sell thy share of the Twelve, and art allowed by
all that know thee, fitter to have been Judas, then Judas was for his treachery.


Pars. Rail, do Rail, my illiterate Captain, that can only abuse by memory; and
should I live thou could read my Sentence, I should never die.


Capt. No ungrateful, live till I destroy thee; and thankless Wretch, Did all
my care of thee deserve nothing but thy malice, and treacherous speaking darkly
still? with thy fine, No, not he, when any malicious discourse was made of me,
and by thy false faint, No, Faith; Confess, in thy denials, whilst thy smiling
Excuses stood a greater and more dangerous Evidence against me, then my Enemies
Affidavits could have done.


Pars. I Will lie for never a lean Soldier of you all.


Capt. I have, for thee, slave, when I have been wondered at for keeping Company
with such a face; But they were such as know thee not; all which thy looks
deceived, as they did me; They are so simple they would Cousen a Jury, and a Judge
that had Wit would swear thou ly'dst, should thou confess what I know to be
true, and award Bedlam for thee; it is so strange and so new a thing, to find so
much Rogue lodge at the sign of the Fool.


Pars. Leave this injurious language, or I Will lay off my Cassock, for nothing
shall privilege your Braggers tongue, to abuse me, a Gentleman, and a Soldier
ancienter then thy self.


Capt. Yes, thou were so; and now I think on it, I Will recount the Cause, which,
it may be, thou have forgot, through the variety of sins; It was a Hue and Cry
that followed thee a Scholar, and found thee a Soldier.


Pars. Thou lie; thou, and scandal have but one tongue, hers dwells with thy
Cowards teeth.


Capt. Oh! do you rage? nay, I Will put the cause in Print too, I am but a skirvy
Poet, yet I Will make a Ballad shall tell how like a faithful disciple you
followed your poor Whore, till her Martyrdom in the Suburbs.


Pars. I Will be revenged for this scandal.


Capt. Then shall succeed, thy flight from the University, disguised into
Captain only the outside was worse Buff, and the inside more Atheist, then they
furnished with an Insolent Faith, uncharitable heart, envious, as old Women,
cruel and bloody as Cowards; thus armed at all points, thou went out,
Threatening God, and trembling at men.


Pars. I Will be revenged, thou poor man of War, I Will be revenged.


[Enter Wanton. Want. And why so bitter? whose house is this? who dares tell
this story?


Capt. Why sweet? has he not treacherously broke into our Cabinet, and would
have stolen thee thence? By these hilts, I Will hang him; and then I can conclude
my Ballad with, Take warning all Christian People by the same: I will, you lean
Slave; I Will prosecute thee, till thou art fain to hide in a Servitors gown
again, and live upon Crumbs with the Robin Red-breasts that haunt the Hall, your
old Mess-Mates; Do you snarle? I Will do it, I will, and put thee to fight with
the Dogs for the Bones that but smell of meat; those that your hungry Students
have polished with their teeth.


Want. If you do this, good Captain, Lieutenant, and Company (for all your
Command, I think, is within your reach) I say, if you dare do this, I shall
sing a song of one that bad stand, and made a Carrier pay a dear Rent for a
little ground, upon his Majesty's highway.


Capt. How now, Mistress Wanton? What Is this? What Is this?


Pars. This? It Is matter for a Jury, I Will swear, and positively, I Will hang
thee, I Will do it, by this hand, let me alone to swear the Jury out of doubt.


Capt. But you are in Jest, Mistress Wanton, and will confess (I hope) this is
no truth.


Want. Yes Sir, as great a truth, as that you are in your unpay'd-for Scarlet;
Fool! did think, I Would quit such a Friend, and his stayed fortune, to rely
upon thy dead pay, and hopes of a second Covenant?


Capt. His fortune? what is'st? Th'Advowson of Tybourn Deanery?


Pars. No, nor Rents brought in by long staff-speeches, that asks Alms with
frowns, till thy looks and speech have laid violent hands upon men's Charity.


Want. Let him alone, I Will warrant, he will never be indicted for drawing any
thing but his tongue, against a man.


Capt. Very good.


Pars. Dear Mrs Wanton, you have won my heart, and I shall live to dote upon
you for abusing this impetuous Captain; will you listen to my old suit? will
you marry me, and vex him? say, dare you do it, without more dispute?


Capt. 'Twas a good Question; she that dares marry thee dares do any thing; she
may as safely lie with the great Bell upon her, and his Clapper is less
dangerous then thine.


Want. Why, I pray?


Capt. What a miserable condition will thou come to? his wife cannot be an
honest Woman; and if thou should turn honest, would it not vex thee to be
chaste and Paxat, a Saint without a Nose? what Calendar will admit thee, by an
incurable slave that is made of Rogues flesh, consider that.


Want. Why, that is something yet; Thou have nothing but a few scars, and a
little old Fame to trust to, and that scarce thatches your head.


Capt. Nay then I see you are base, and this Plot (not Accident,) and now I'doe
not grudge him thee; go together, it is pity to part you, Whore and Parson, as
consonant.


Want. As Whore and Captain.


Capt. Take her, I Will warrant her a breeder, I Will prophecy she shall lie with
thy whole Congregation, and bring an Heir to thy Parish, one that thou may
enclose the Common by his Title, and recover it by Common Law.


Pars. That Is more then thy dear Dam could do for thee, thou Son of a thousand
Fathers, all poor Soldiers, Rogues, that ought mischiefs, no Midwives for
their Birth; But I cry thee Mercy, my Patron has an Estate of old Iron by his
side, with the Farm of old Ladies he scrapes a dirty living from.


Want. He earn from an old Lady? hang him, he is only wicked in his desires; and
for Adultery he cannot be condemned, though he should have the vanity to betray
himself; God forgive me for belying him so often as I have done; the
weak-chin'd slave hired me once to say, I was with Child by him.


Capt. This is pretty, Farewell; and may the next Pig thou farrow'st have a
promising face, without the Dads fool or Gallows in it, that all may swear, at
first sight, That Is a Bastard; and it shall go hard but I Will have it called
mine; I have the way, it is but praising thee, and swearing thou art honest
before I am asked: You taught me the trick.


Pars. Next Levy I Will preach against thee, and tell them what a piece you are;
your Drum and borrowed scarf shall not prevail, nor shall you win with Charms
half-ell-long, (hight ferret Ribband) the youth of our Parish, as you have done.


Capt. No, lose no time, prithee study and learn to preach, and leave railing
against the Surplice, now thou have preached thy self into Linen; Adieu,
Abigal, Adieu, Heir apparent to Sir Oliver Marre-text; To Church, go, I Will send
a Beadle shall sing your Epithalamium.


Pars. Adieu, my Captain of a tame band, I Will tell your old Lady how you abused
her breath, and swore you earned your money harder then those that dig in the
Mines for it. Exit Captain. A fart, fill thy sail, Captain of a Gally Foyst.
He Is gone, come sweet, let us to Church immediately, that I may go and take my
Revenge; I Will make him wear thin Breeches.


Want. But if you should be such a Man as he says you are, what would my
Friends say, when they hear I have cast my self away?


Pars. He says? Hang him, lean, mercenary, provant Rogue; I knew his beginning
when he made the stocks lousy, and swarmed so with vermin we were afraid he
would have brought that Curse upon the County; He says? but what is matter what
he says? a Rogue, by Sire and Damm; his Father was a broad fat Peddler, a what
do you lack, Sir, that haunted good houses, and stole more then he bought; His
Damm was a Gypsy, a pilfering canting Sibyll in her youth, and she suffered in
her old age for a Witch; Poor Stromwell, the Rogue was a perpetual Burden to
her, she carried him longer at her back then in her belly; he dwelt there, till
she lost him one night in the great Frost upon our Common, and there he was
found in the morning candid in Ice: a pox of their Charity that thawed him, you
might smell a Rogue then in the bud, he is now run away from his Wise.


Want. His Wife?


Pars. Yes, his Wife; Why, do you not know he is married according to the Rogues
Liturgy? a Left Handed Bridegroom; I saw him take the Ring from a Tinkers
Dowager.


Want. Is this possible?


Pars. Yes, most possible, and you shall see how I Will be revenged on him; I
will immediately go seek the Ordinance against Reformadoes.


Want. What Ordinance?


Pars. Why, they do so swarm about the Town, and are so destructive to Trade
and all Civil Government, that the State has declared, No person shall keep
above two Colonels and four Captains, (of what Trade soever) in his Family; For
now the War is done, Broken breech, Wood-monger, Rag-man, Butcher, and
Link-boy, (Comrades that made up the ragged Regiment in this holy War) think to
return and be admitted to serve out their times again.


Want. Your Ordinance will not touch the Captain, for he is a known Soldier.


Pars. He a Captain? an Apochryphal Modern one, that went Convoy once to
Brainford with those Troops that conducted the Contribution-Puddings in the
late holy War, when the City ran mad after their Russet Levites, Apron-Rogues,
with horn hands; Hang him, he is but the sign of a Soldier; and I hope to see
him hanged for that Commission, when the King comes to his Place again.


Want. You abuse him, now he is gone; But, --


Pars. Why? do thou think I fear him? No Wench, I know him too well for a
Cowardly slave, that dares as soon eat his Fox, as draw it in earnest; the
slave's noted to make a Conscience of nothing but fighting.


Vant. Well, if you be not a good Man, and a kind Husband --


Pars. Thou know the Proverb, as happy as the Parsons Wife, during her
Husbands life.


ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Mistress Pleasant, Widow Wild her Aunt, and Secret, her Woman, above in
the Music Room, as dressing her, A Glass, a Table, and she in her night
clothes. Pleas. SEcret, give me the Glass, and see who knocks.


Wid. Niece, what, shut the Door? as I live this Music was meant to you, I
know my Nephews voice.


Pleas. Yes, but you think his friends has more Music in it.


Wid. No Faith, I can laugh with him, or so, but he comes no nearer then my
lace.


Pleas. You do well to keep your smock betwixt.


Wid. Faith, Wench, so will thou and thou be wise, from him and all of them,
and be ruled by me, we'll abuse all the Sex, till they put a true value upon us.


Pleas. But dare you forbid the traveled Gentlemen, and abuse them and your
servant, and swear, with me, not to marry in a twelve month, though a Lord
bait the hook, and hang out the sign of a Court Cupid, whipped by a Country
Widow; then I believe we may have mirth cheaper then at the price of our
selves, and some sport with the wits that went to lose themselves in France.


Wid. Come, no dissembling, lest I tell your servant, when he returns, how much
you're taken with the last new fashion.


Secret. Madam, it is almost Noon, will you not dress your self to day?


Wid. She speaks as if we were Boarders; Prithee, Wench, is not the dinner our
own, sure my Cook shall lay by my own Roast till my stomach be up.


Pleas. But there may be Company, and they will say, we take too long time to
trim. Secret. Give me the flowers my servant sent me, he swear 'twas the first
the Wench made of the kind.


Wid. But when he shall hear you had Music sent you to day, 'twill make him
appear in his old clothes.


Pleas. Marry, I would he would take exception, he should not want ill usage to
rid me of his trouble; as I live, custom has made me so acquainted with him,
that I now begin to think him not so displeasing, as at first; and if he fall
not out with me, I must with him, to secure my self. Sure (Aunt) he must find
Sense and Reason absent, for when a Question knocks at his head, the Answer
tells that there is no body at home; I asked him, the other day, if he did not
find a blemish in his understanding, and he swear a great Oath, Not he; I told
him 'twas very strange, for Fool was so visible an eyesore, that neither Birth
nor Fortune eould reconcile to me.


Wid. Faith, methinks his humor is good, and his purse will buy good company,
and I can laugh and be merry with him sometimes.


Pleas. Why, pray, Aunt, take him to your self, and see how merry we will be; I
can laugh at any bodies Fool, but mine own.


Wid. By my troth, but that I have married one Fool already, you should not
have him. Consider, he asks no portion, and yet will make a great jointure; a
Fool with these conveniences, a kind loving Fool, and one that you may govern,
makes no ill husband; Niece, there are other Arguments too, to bid a Fool
welcome, which you will find without teaching; think of it, Niece; you may lay
out your affection to purchase some dear wit, or judgment of the City, and
repent, at leisure a good bargain, in this Fool.


Pleas. Faith, Aunt, Fools are cheap in the Butchery, and dear in the Kitchen;
they are such unsavory infipid things that there goes more charge to the sauce
then the Fool is worth, ere a woman can confidently serve him, either to her
bed or board; then if he be a loving Fool, he troubles all the world a days,
and me all night.


Secret. Friendship-love, Madam, has a remedy for that.


Pleas. See if the air of this place has not inclined Secret to be a Baud
already. No, Secret, you get no Gowns that way, Upon my word; if I marry, it
shall be a Gentleman that has wit and honor, though he has nothing but a sword
by his side; such a one naked is better then a Fool with all his Trappings,
Bells and Baubles.


Wid. Why, as I live, he is a handsome fellow, and merry; mine is such a sad
soul, and tells me stories of Lovers that died in despair, and of the
lamentable end of their Mistresses (according to the Ballad) and thinks to win
me by Example.


Pleas. Faith mine talks of nothing but how long he has loved me; and those
that know me not, think I am old, and still finds new causes, (as he calls
them) for his love; I asked him the other day if I changed so fast or no.


Wid. But what think thou, Secret; my Nephew dances well, and has a handsome
house in the Piazza.


Pleas. Your Nephew? not I, As I live; he looks as if he would be wooed; I Will
warrant you, he will never begin with a woman till he has lost the opinion of
himself; But since you are so courteous, I Will speak to his friend, and let him
know how you suffer for him.


Wid. Him! marry God bless all good women from him; why, he talks as if the
Dairy-maid and all her Cows could not serve his turn; then they wear such
baudy-breeches, 'twould startle an honest woman to come in their company, for
fear they should break, and put her to count from the fall of them; for I Will
warrant, the year of the Lord would sooner out of her head then such a sight.


Pleas. I am not such an enemy now to his humor as to your Nephews, he rails
against our sex, and thinks by beating down the price of women to make us
despair of Merchants; But if I had his heart strings tied on a
True-lovers-knot, I would so firk him till he found physic in a Rope.


Secret. He Is a scurvey tongued fellow, I Am sure of that; and if I could have
got a staff, I had marked him.


Wid. What did he do to thee, Secret?


Pleas. Why, he swore, he had a better opinion of her then to think she had her
Maidenhead; but if she were that Fool, and had preserved the toy, he swore he
would not take the pains of fetching it, to have it; I confess, I would fain be
revenged on them, because they are so blown up with opinion of their wit.


Wid. As I live, my Nephew travels still; the sober honest Ned Wild will not be
at home this month.


Pleas. What say you? will you abuse them and all the rest, and stand to my
first Proposition?


Wid. Yes, faith, if it be but to bury my servant, Sadd; for he cannot last
above another Fall, and how, think you, will your servant take it?


Pleas. Mine! oh God help me, mine is a healthy Fool, I would he were subject to
pine and take things unkindly; there were some hope to be rid of him; for I Will
undertake to use him as ill as any body.


Wid. As I live, I am easily resolved; for if I would marry, I know neither who
nor what humor to choose.


Secret. By my troth, Madam, you are hard to please; else the Courtier might
have served turn.


Wid. Serve turn! Prithee what haste, Secret? that I should put my self to bed
with one I might make a shift with; when I marry, thou shall cry, I, marry,
Madam; this is a husband without blushing wench, and none of your so-so
husbands; yet he might half overcome my aversion, I confess.


Pleas. Overcome! I think so, he might have won a City his way; for when he saw
you were resolved he should not eat with you, he would set himself down as if
he meant to besiege us, and had vowed never to rise till he had taken us in;
and because our sex forbad force, he meant to do it by famine; yet you may
stay, and miss a better market; for hang me, I am of Secrets opinion; he had
but two faults, a handsome fellow, and too soon denied.


Wid. It Is true, he was a handsome fellow, and a civil, that I shall report
him; for as soon as it was given him to understand; I desired he would come no
more, I never saw him since, but by chance.


Pleas. Why did you forbid him?


Wid. There were diverse exceptions; But that which angered me then, was, he came
with the Kings Letters Patents, as if he had been to take up a wife for his
Majesty's use.


Pleas. Alas! was that all? why, it is their way at Court, a common course among
them, and was it not one the King had a great care of? when my mother was
alive, I had such a packet from the Court directed unto me, I bid them pay the
Post, and make the fellow drink, which he took as ill as I could wish, and has
been ever since such a friendly enemy.


Wid. Nay, as I live, she was for the Captain too; his Scarf and Feather won
her heart.


Secret. Truly, Madam, never flatter your self; for the Gentleman did not like
you so well as to put you to the trouble of saying, no.


Pleas. Lord, how I hated and dreaded that Scarf and Buffc^at?


Secret. Why, Mistress Pleasant, a Captain is an honorable Charge.


Wid. Prithee, Secret, name them no more, Colonel and Captain, Commissioner,
Free-quarters, Ordance and Contribution; When Buff utters these words, I
tremble and dread the sound; it frights me still when I do but think on them;
Cuds body, they 're twigs of the old Rod (Wench) that whipped us so lately.


Pleas. I, I, and they were happy days, Wench, when the Captain was a lean,
poor, humble thing, and the Soldier tame, and durst not come within the City,
for fear of a Constable and a Whipping-post; they know the penal Statutes give
no Quarter; Then Buff was out of countenance, and sculk'd from Alehouse to
Alehouse, and the City had no Militia but the Sheriffs-men; In those merry
days, a Bailiff trod the streets with terror, when all the Chains in the City
were rusty, but Mr. Sheriffs, when the people knew no evil but the Constable
and his Watch; Now every Committee has as much power, and as little manners,
and examines with as much ignorance, impertinence and authority, as a Constable
in the Kings key.


Wid. See, who is that so loud? People talking without.


Secret. The men you talked of, newly come to Town. --


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Jack Constant, Will. Sadd, Jolly, and a Footman, they comb their heads,
and talk. Joll. Remember our covenants, get them that can, all friends; and be
sure to dispatch the Plot, to carry them into the Country, lest the brace of
new-come Monsieurs get them.


Constable. Those flesh-flies? I Will warrant thee from them, yet 'twas foolishly
done of me to put on this gravity; I shall break out, and return to my self if
you put me to a winters wooing.


Sadd. A little patience does it; and I am content to suffer any thing till
they are out of Town: Secret says, they think my pale face proceeds from my love.


Joll. Does she? that shall be one hint to advance your designs, and my
revenge; for so she be cozened I care not who does it, for scorning me, who
(by this hand) loved her parlously.


Footm. Sir, what shall I do with the horses?


Sadd. Carry them to Brumsteds.


Footm: What shall I do with your worships.


Joll. Mine? take him, hamstring him, kill him, any thing to make him away,
lest having such a convenience I be betrayed to another journey into the
Country. Gentlemen, you are all welcome to my Country House; Charing Cross, I
am glad to see thee, with all my heart.


Constable. What? not reconciled to the Country yet?


Sadd. He was not long enough there to see the pleasure of it.


Joll. Pleasure? what is it called? walking or hawking, or shooting at Butts?


Constable. You found other pleasures, or else the story of the Meadow is no Gospel.


Joll. Yes, a pox upon the necessity. Here I could as soon have taken the Cow,
as such a Milk-maid.


Sadd. The wine and meat's good, and the company.


Joll. When, at a Tuesday-meeting the Country comes in to a match at two
shillings Rubbers, where they conclude at dinner what shall be done this
Parliament, railing against the Court and Pope, after the old Elizabeth-way of
preaching, till they are drunk with zeal; and then the old Knight of the Shire
from the boards end, in his Coronation breeches, vies clinches with a silenced
Minister, a Rogue that railed against the Reformation merely to be eased of the
trouble of preaching.


Constable. Nay, As I live, now you are to blame, and wrong him, the man's a very
able man.


Joll. You Will be able to say so, one day, upon your wives report; I would he
were gelt, and all that hold his opinion: By this good day, they get more souls
then they save.


Sadd. And what think you of the Knights Son? I hope he is a fine Gentleman,
when his green Suit, and his blew stockings are on; and the welcomest thing
^live to Mrs. Abigail, but Tib and Tom in the Stock.


Joll. Who, Mr. Jeoffry? Hobinol the second; By this life, it is a very Veal,
and he licks his Nose like one of them; By his discourse you would guess he had
eaten nothing but Hay; I wonder he does not go on all four too, and hold up his
leg when he stales; he talks of nothing but the stable. The Cobblers Blackbird
at the corner has more discourse; he has not so much as the family-jest, which
these Coridons use to inherit; I posed him in Booker's Prophesies, till he
confessed he had not mastered his Almanac yet.


Constable. But what was that you whispered to him in the Hall?


Joll. Why, the Butler and I, by the intercession of March beer, had newly
reconciled him to his Dads old Cod-piece Corslet, in the Hall; which, when his
zeal was up, he would needs throw down, because it hung upon a Cross.


Constable. But what think you of my neighbor? I hope her charity takes you.


Joll. Yes, and her old Waiting-womans devotion; she sighed in the Pew behind
me; A Dutch Skippe^ belches not so loud, or so sower; my Ladies miserable
sinner, with the white (...) she does so squeeze out her prayers; and so wring
out, Have (...) upon us; I warrant her, she has a waiting-womans sting in her
conscience; she looks like a dirty soul'd Baud.


Constable. Who is this, my Lady Freedom's woman that he describes?


Joll. The same, the Independent Lady, I have promised to send her a Cripple or
two by the next Carrier; her subject husband would needs show me his house one
morning; I never visited such an Hospital, it stunk like Bedlam, and all the
servants were carrying Poultisses, Julips, and Glisters, and several Remedies
for all Diseases, but his; The man sighed to see his Estate crumbling away; I
counseled him either to give or take a ounce of Rats-bane, to cure his mind.


Constable. She is my Cozen; but he made such a complaint to me, I thought he had
married the Company of Surgeons Hall; for his directions to me for several
things for his Wives use, were fitter for an pothecaries-shop then a Ladies
Closet.


Joll. I advised him to settle no Jointure, but her old Stills, and a Box of
Instruments upon her; she hates a man with all his Limbs; a Wooden-leg, a
Crutch and Fistula in Ano, wins her heart; her Gentleman Usher broke his leg
last Dog Days, merely to have the honor to have her set it, a foul rank Rogue,
and so full of salt humors, that he posed a whole College of old Women with a
Gangrene; which spoiled the jest, and his ambling before my Lady, by applying a
hand-saw to his gartring place; and now the Rogue wears booted Bed-staves, and
destroys all the young ashes to make him legs.


Sadd. I never saw such a nasty affection; she would ha done well in the
incurable; a Handmaid to have waited on the Cripples.


Jolly. She converses with naked men, a^^ handles all their members though
never so ill affected, and calls the Fornication Charity; all her discourse to
me was flat bawdry, which I could not chide, but spoke as flat as she, till she
rebuked me, calling mine beastliness, and hers, Natural Philosophy; By this
day, if I were to marry, I would as soon have chosen a drawn whore out of mine
own Hospital, and cure the sins of her youth, as marry a she-Chirurgeon; one
that for her sins in her first Husbands days cures all the crimes of her Sex
in my time. I would have him call her Chiron, the Centaur's own Daughter; a
Surgeon by Sire and Damm, Apollo's own Colt, she is red-hair'd too, like that
bonny beast with the golden Mane and flaming tail.


Sadd. You had a long discourse with her, Jolly; what wa'st about?


Jolly. I was advising her to be divorced, and marry the Man in the Almanac;
'twould be fine pastime for her to lick him whole.


Sadd. By this day, I never saw such a Mule as her Husband is, to bear with her
madness; the house is a good house, and well furnished.


Jolly. Yes, but it is such a sight to see great French Bedds full of found
(...), sons of Batchelors, Priests Heirs, Bridewell Orphans; there they lie by
dozens in a Bed, like sucking Rabbets in a dish, or a row of pins; and then
they keep a whole Dairy of milch Whores to suckle them.


Sadd. She is succesful, and that spoils her, and makes her deaf to counsel; I
bad him poison two or three, to disgrace her; for the Vanity and Pride of their
remedies make those Women more diligent then their Charity.


Jolly. I asked him why he married her; and he confessed, if he had been sound
he had never had her.


Constable. He confessed, she cured him of three Claps before he married her.


Jolly. Yes, and I believe some other member (though then ill affected) pleaded
more then his tongue; and the Rogue is like to find her business still, for he
flies at all; My God, I owe thee thanks for many things; but it is not the
least, I am not her Husband, nor a Country Gentleman, whither I believe you
cannot easily seduce me again, unless you can persuade London to stand in the
Country; To Hide Park, or so, I may venture upon your Lady-fair days, when the
Filly Foales of fifteen come kicking in, with their Maines and tails tied up
in Ribbands, to see their eyes roll and neigh, when the Spring makes their
blood prick them; so far I am with you by the way of a Country Gentleman and a
Beer-drinker.


Sadd. For all this dislike, Master Jolly; your greatest acquaintance lies
amongst Country Gentlemen.


Jolly. I, at London, there your Country Gentlemen are good Company, where to
be seen with them is a kind of credit; I come to a Mercers shop in your Coach;
Boy, call your Master; he comes bare, I whisper him, Do you know the Constants
and the Sadds of Norfolk? yes, yes, he replies, and strokes his beard; they are
good Men cry I, yes, yes; No more, cut me off three suits of Satin, he does
it, and in the delivery whispers, Will these be bound? pish, drive on Coachman,
speak with me to morrow.


Constable. And what then?


Jolly. What then? why, come again next day.


Sadd. And what if the Country Gentleman will not be bound?


Jolly. Then he must fight.


Sadd. I would I had known that before I had signed your Bond, I would have set
my sword sooner then my Seal to it.


Jolly. Why, if thou repent there is no harm done, fight rather then pay it.


Sadd. Why, do you think I dare not fight?


Jolly. Yes, but I think thou have more wit then to fight with me; for if I
kill thee, it is a fortune to me, and others will sign in fear; and if thou
should kill me, any body that knows us would swear 'twere very strange, and
cry, there is Gods just judgment now upon that lewd youth, and thou procur'st
his hang-mans place at the rate of thy Estate.


Constable. By this hand, he is in the right; and for mine I meant to pay when I
signed; hang it, never put good fellows to say, prithee give me a hundred
pounds.


Sadd. It Is true, it is a good ganty way of begging; yet, for being killed, if I
refuse it, would there were no more danger in the Widows unkindness, then in
your fighting; I would not mistrust my design.


Jolly. Why I, there is a point now in nicity of Honor, I should kill you for
her; for, you know I pretended first; and it may be if I had writ sad lines to
her, and hid my self in my Cloak, and haunted her Coach, it may be in time she
would have sought me; not I, by this hand, I Will not trouble my self for a
Wench, and married Widows are but Customary authorized Wenches.


Constable. Being of that Opinion, how can thou to think of marrying one?


Jolly. Why, faith, I know not, I thought to rest me, for I was run out of
breath with pleasure, and grew so acquainted with si^, I would have been good
(for variety;) in these thoughts, 'twas my fortune to meet with this Widow,
handsome, and of a clear Fame.


Constable. Did love her?


Jolly. Yes, faith? I had Love, but not to the disease that makes men sick; and
I could have loved her still, but that I was angry to have her refuse me for a
fault I told her of my self, so I went no more.


Sadd. Did she forbid you but once?


Joll. Faith, I think I slipped a fair Opportunity, a handsome wench, and three
thousand pounds per annum in certainty, besides the possibility of being saved.


Constable. Which now you think desperate? Widow and Pleasant looking out at a
window.


Pleas. That is you; Cross or Pile, will you have him yet or no?


Wid. Peace, observe them.


Joll. Faith no, I do not despair, but I cannot resolve.


Enter Wild, Careless, and the Captain, going in haste, he comes in at the
middle Door. Wid. Who are those?


Carel. Captain, whither in such haste? what defeated? call you this a retreat,
or a flight from your friends?


Pleas. Your Nephew, and his Governor, and his Friend! here will be a Scene,
sit close, and we may know the secret of their hearts.


Wid. They have not met yet since they returned, I shall love this bay window.


Capt. Prithee let me go, there is mischief a Boiling; and if thou shak'st me
once more thou will Jumble a lie together I have been hammering this hour.


Carel. A pox upon you, a studying lies?


Capt. Why, then they are no lies, but something in the praise of an old Ladies
Beauty, what do you call that?


Joll. Who are those?


Sadd. Is It not the Captain, and my Friend? They spy each other.


Jolly salutes them, then he goes to the Captain to embrace him, the Captain
stands in a French posture, and slides from his old way of embracing. Joll. Ned
Wild? Tom Careless? What ayl'st thou, do thou scorn my embraces?


Capt. I see you have never been abroad, else you would know how to put a value
upon those whose careful observation brought home the most Exquisite Garb and
Courtship that Paris could sell us.


Joll. A pox on this fooling, and leave off Ceremony.


Capt. Why then agreed, off with our masks, and let us embrace They embrace.
like the old knot.


Joll. Faith, say, where have you spent these three years time? in Our
Neighbor France? or have you ventured over the Alps, to see the seat of the
Caesar's?


Sadd. And can tell us (Ignorant, doomed to walk upon our own Land) how large a
seat the Goddess fixed her flying Trojans in.


Constable. Yes, yes, and have seen, and drunk (perhaps) of Tybers famous stream.


Jolly. And have been where Aeneas buried his Trumpeter, and his Nurse; Tom
looks as if he had sucked the one, and had a Battle sounded by the other, for
Joy to see our Nation ambitious not to be understood or known when they come
home.


Capt. So, now I Am welcome home, this is freedom, and these are Friends, and
with these I can be merry; for Gentlemen, you must give me leave to be free to.


Jolly. So you will spare us miserable men, condemned tc London, and the
Company of a Michelmas Term, and never traveled those Countries that set
Mountains on fire a purpose to light us to our lodging.


Wild. Why this is better then to stay at home, and lie by hearsay, wearing out
your selves and Fortunes like your clothes, to see her that hates you for
being so fine, then appearing at a Play dressed like some part of it, while the
Company admire the Mercers and the Tailors work, and swear they have done their
parts to make you fine Gentlemen.


Carl. Then leap out of your Coach, and throw your Cloak over your shoulder,
the Casting Nets to catch a Widow, while we have seen the world, and learned
her Customs.


Capt. Yes, Sir, and returned perfect Mounsieurs.


Sadd. Yes, even to their diseases; I confess my Ignorance; I cannot amble, nor
ride like S. George at Waltham. The Captain has a patch over his Nose.


Jolly. Yet, upon my Conscience, he may be as welcome with a trot, as the other
with his pace; and faith, Jack, (to be a little free) tell me, do thou not
think thou had been as well to pass here, with that English Nose thou
carryedst hence, as with the French tongue thou have brought home?


Capt. It is an Accident, and to a Soldier it is but a scar; it is true, such a
sign upon Mr. Jolly's face had been as ill as a Red Cross, and Lord have mercy
upon us, at his lodging door, to have kept women out of Court.


Jolly. For ought you know of the Court.


Capt. I know the Court, and thee, and thy use, and how you serve but as the
handsomest movables, a kind of Implement above stairs, and look much like one
of the old Court Servants in the hangings.


Wild. But that they move, and look fresher, and your Apparel more Modern.


Carl. Yet, faith, their Office is the same, to adorn the Room, and be gazed
on: Alas! he is sad, Courage man, these riding clothes will serve thee at the
latter day.


Capt. Which is one of their grievances, for nothing troubles them more then to
think they must appear in a foul winding sheet, and come undrest.


Jolly. Gentlemen, I am glad to find you know the Court; we know a Traveller
too, especially when he is thus changed and Exchanged, as your Worships, both
in Purse and Person, and have brought home foreign visages and Inscriptions.


Constable. Why that is their perfection, their ambition to have it said, there go
those that have profitably observed the vices of other Countries, and made them
their own; and the faults of several Nations, at their return, are their Parts.


Jolly. Why there is Jack Careless, he carried out as good stable manners as any
was in Suffolk, and now he is returned with a shrug, and a trick to stand
crooked, like a skirvy Bow unbent, and looks as if he would maintain Oil and
Sallads against a Chyne of Beef; I knew a great Beast of this kind, it haunted
the Court much, and would scarcely allow us (fully reduced to Civility) for
serving up Mutton in whole joints.


Constable. What, silent?


Sadd. Faith, the Captain is in a study.


Jolly. Do, do, Conn the Rivers and Towns perfectly, Captain; thou may
become Intelligencer to the People, and lie thy two sheets a week in Corrantoes
too.


Constable. And could you not make Friends at Court, to get their Pictures cut
ugly, in the Corner of a Map, like the old Navigators.


Jolly. We Will see, we will see.


[Enter Widow and Pleasant above. Wid. I Will interrupt them; Servant, you're
welcome to Town; how now, Nephew? what, dumb? where are all our traveled
tongues?


Joll. Servant! who does she mean? By this hand, I disclaim the Title.


Pleas. Captain, Secret has taken Notes, and desires you would instruct her in
what concerns a waiting Woman, and an Old Lady.


Capt. Very good, yet this shall not save your Dinner.


Wid. Nay, while you are in this humor I Will not sell your Companies; and though
Master Jolly be incensed, I hope he will do me the favor to dine with me.


Jolly. Faith, Lady, you mistake me if you think I am afraid of a widow; for I
would have the world know I dare meet her any where, but at Bed.


[Exit Jolly. Wild. No more Aunt, we will come; and if you will give us good
meat, weel bring good humors, and good stomachs. Widow shuts the Curtain.


Carel. By this day I Will not dine there, they take a pleasure to raise a spirit
that they will not lay, I Will to Banks's.


Capt. A Pox forbid it, you shall not break Company, now you know what we are
to do after Dinner.


Carel. I will consent, upon condition you forbid the spiritual Nonsense the
age calls Platonic Love.


Capt. I must away too; But I Will be there at Dinner, you will join in a Plot
after dinner.


Wild. Any thing, Good, Bad, or Indifferent, for a Friend and Mirth.


[Exeunt all but the Captain. Capt. I must go and prevent the Rogues mischief,
with the Old Lady.


Exit Captain. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Jolly, and the old Lady Love-all. Love-all. AWay, unworthy, false,
ungrateful; with what Brow dare thou come again into my sight, knowing how
unworthy you have been, and how false to love?


Jolly. No, it is you are unworthy, and deserve not those truths of Love I have
paid here; else you would not believe every report that Envy brings, and
condemn, without hearing me, whom you have so often tried and found faithful.


Love. Yes, till I too credulous had pity on your tears; till I had mercy you
durst not be false.


Joil. Nor am not yet.


Love. What do thou call False? is there a treachery beyond what thou have
done; when I had given my Fame, my Fortune, my self, and my husbands honor,
all in one Obligation, a sacrifice to that Passion; which thou seem to
labor with despair of, to tell and Brag of a conquest over a Woman, fooled by
her Passion, and lost in her love to thee, unworthy; --


(she turns away her head. Joll. By this Day, it is as false as he that said it;
hang him, son of a Batchelour; a slave that envying my Fortune in such a
happiness as your love, and chaste embraces, took this way to ruin it; Come,
dry your Eyes, and let the guilty weep; if I were guilty I durst as soon
approach a Constable drunk, as come here; you know I am your slave.


Love. You swore so, and honor made me leave to triumph over your miseries.


Joll. Do you repent that I am happy? if you do, command my death.


Love. Nay, never weep, nor sit sadly, I am Friends, so you will only talk and
discourse; for it is your company I only covet.


Joll. No, you cannot forgive, because you have injured me; it is right woman's
Justice; Accuse first, and harder to reconcile when they are guilty, then when
they are Innocent, or else you would not turn from me thus.


Love. You know your youth has a strong power over me; Turn those bewitching
Eyes away; I cannot see them with safety of mine honor.


Joll. Come you shall not hide your Face, there is a Charm in it against those
that come burnt with unchaste fires; for let but your Eyes or Nose drop upon his
heart it would burn it up, or quench it strait.


Love. No Cogging, you have injured me; and now though my Jolly kisses her, and
she shoves him away with her mouth. love plead, I must be deaf, my honor bids
me; for you will not fear again to prove unworthy when you find I am so easy
to forgive -- Why, you will not be uncivil.


Joll. So, the storm is laid, I must have those Pearls -- she should me away
with her mouth, I Will to her again.


Love. Where are you? what do you take me for? why you Still as he offers to
touch her, she starts as if he plucked up her coats. will not be uncivil?


Joll. Uncivil! By thy chaste self, I cannot, Chick; thou have such a terror,
such a guard in those eyes, I dare not approach thee, nor can I gaze upon so
much fire; Prithee, Sirrah, let me hide me from their power here.


Love. You presume upon the weakness of our sex; what shall I say or do? Tyrant
Love!


Joll. There Is a charm in those Pearls; pull them off; if they have a Frost in
them, let me wear them, and then we are both safe.


Love-all. I would you had taken them sooner, I had then been innocent, and
might with whiteness have worn my love which I shall never outlive.


Joll. Dear, do not too fast pour in my joys, lest I too soon reach my heaven.


Love-all. Be gone then, lest we prove (having gained that height) this sad
truth in Love; The first minute after noon is night.


Joll. Part now? The Gods forbid; take from me first this load of joys you have
thrown upon me; for it is a burden harder to bear then sadness; I was not born
till now, this my first night in which I reap true bliss.


Love-all. No, no; I would it had been your first night, then your falsehood had
not given argument for these tears; and I hate my self to think I should be
such a foolish fly, thus again to approach your dangerous flame.


Joll. Come, divert these thoughts; I Will go see your Closet.


Love-all. No, no, I swear you shall not.


Joll. You know, I am going out of Town for two days.


Love-all. When you return, I Will show it you; you will forget me else when you
are gone, and at Court.


Joll. Can your love endure delays? or shall business thee from hence remove?
these were your own Arguments; come, you shall show it me.


Love-all. Nay, then I perceive what unworthy way your love would find; Ye
Gods, are all men false?


Joll. As I live, you shall stay; come, you ought to make me He pulls her
Bodkin, that is tied in a piece of black Bobbin.

He pulls her, and says this.

amends for slandring of me; Hang me, if ever I told; and he that reports it is
the damn'dst Rogue in a Country, Come, I say. --


Love-all. Ah! As I live, I will not, I have sworn; do not pull me, I will not
be damned, I have sworn. --


Joll. As I live, I Will break your Bodkin then, a weeping Tyrant! Come; by this
good day, you shall be merciful.


Love-all. Why, you will not be uncivil; you will not force me, will you? As I
live, I will not.


Joll. Nay, and you be wilful, I can be stubborn too. He pulls still.


Love-all. Hang me, I Will call aloud, why Nan! nay, you may force me; But, As I
live, I Will do nothing.


[Exeunt ambo. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Captain. Capt. A Pox upon you, are you eathed? The Rogue has got her
Neck-lace of Pearl; but I hope he will leave the Rope to hang me in, how the
pox came they so great? I must have some trick to break his neck, else the
young Rogue will work me out; it is an excellent old Lady, but I dare not call
her so; yet would she were young enough to bear, we might do some good for our
heirs, by leaving such a charitable brood behind; she is a woman after the first
kind; it is but going in to her and you may know her; then she will oblige so
readily, and gives with greater thanks then others receive, takes it so kindly
to be courted. I am now to oblige her (as she calls it) by professing young
Wilds love, and desiring an assurance; she is sensible of his sufferings, which
though it be false, and beyond my Commission, yet the hopes of such a new young
thing that has the vogue of the Town, for handsomest, 'twill so tickle her age,
and so blow up her vanity, to have it said, He is in love with her, and so
endear her to me for being the means that the Parsons malice will be able to
take no root; -- She comes, I must not be seen. --


[Enter Love-all, and Jolly. Love-all. Give me that Letter I Will swear, you
shall not read it.


Joll. Take it, I Will away, What time shall I call you, in the evening? there is
a Play at Court to night.


Love-all. I would willingly be there, but your Ladies are so censorious, and
malicious to us young Ladies, in the Town, especially to me, because the Wits
are pleased to afford me a visit, or so; I could be content else to be seen at
Court; Pray what humor is the Queen of? the Captain of her Guard I know.


Joll. The Queen? Who Is that knocks at the backdoor. -- The Captain Knocks.


Love-all. Smooth my Band, I know not, go down that way, and look you be not
false; if you should be false, I Will swear, I should spoil my self with weeping.


Joll. Farewell, in the evening I Will call you.


[Exit Jolly. Love-all. Who Is there? Captain? Where have you been all this
while; I might sit alone, I see, for you, if I could not find conversation in
Books. She takes a book in her hand and sits down.


Capt. Faith, Madam, friends newly come to Town engaged me, and my stay was
civility rather then desire, what Book's that?


Love-all. I Will swear he was a Witch that writ it; for he speaks my thoughts as
if he had been within me; the Original, they say, was French.


Capt. Oh, I know it, it is the accomplished Woman, Your self, he means by this,
while you are your self.


Love-all. Indeed, I confess, I am a great friend to conversation, if we could
have it without suspicion; But the world's so apt to judge, that it is a
prejudice to our honor now to salute a man.


Capt. Innocence, Madam, is above opinion, and your fame's too great to be
shook with whispers.


Love-all. You are ever civil, and therefore welcome; pray, what news is there
now in Town? for I am reclus'd here; unless it be yours, I receive no visits;
and I Will swear, I charged the Wench to day not to let you in; I wonder she let
you come.


Capt. Faith, Madam, if it had been my own business I should not have ventured
so boldly; But the necessity that forces me to come concerns my friend, against
whom if your mercy be now bounded with those strict ties of honor, and cold
thoughts which I have ever found guard your heart, My friend, a young and
handsome man, is lost, is lost in his prime, and falls like early blossoms; But
methinks you should not prove the envious frost to destroy this young man, this
delicate young man, that has whole bundles of Boys in his Breeches; yet if you
be cruel, he and they dye, as useless as open Arses gathered green. She must be
earnest in her looks all the time he speaks; desrous to know who he speaks of.


Love-all. Good Captain, out with the particular, what way can my charity
assist him; you know by experience I cannot be cruel, remember how I fetched
you out of a swoond, and laid you in my own bed.


Capt. That act preserved a life, that has always been labored in your
service; and I dare say, your charity here will find as fruitful a gratitude.


Love-all, But, I hope, he will not be so uncivil as you were; I Will swear, I
could have hanged you for that Rape, if I would have followed the Law; but I
forgave you upon condition you would do so again; but what is this young man you
speak of?


Capt, Such is my love to you and him, that I cannot prefer mine own particular
before your contents; else I Would have poisoned him ere I Would have brought him to
your house.


Love-all. Why, I pray?


Capt. Because, he is young, handsome, and sound parts; that I Am sure will
ruin me here.


Love-all. His love may make all these beauties, else I have an honor will
defend me against him, were he as handsome as young Wild.


Capt. Why I, there it is; that one word has removed all my fears and
jealousies with a despair; for that is the man whose Love, Life and Fortune,
lies at your feet; and if you were single, by lawful ways he would hope to
reach what now he despairs of.


Love-all. Let him not despair, Love is a powerful pleader, and youth and
beauty will assist him; and if his love be noble I can meet it; for there is
none that sacrifices more to friendship-love, then I.


Capt. My friends interest makes me rejoice at this; dare you trust me to say
this to him, though it be not usual, pray speak; Nay, you are so long still a
resolving to be kind: Remember, charity is as great a virtue as chastity, and
greater, if we will hear nature plead; for the one may make many Maids, the
other can but preserve one: But I know you will be persuaded, let be my
importunity that prevailed, shall I bring him hither one evening?


Love-all. Why do you plead thus? pray be silent, and when you see him, tell
him he has a seat here, and I -- She turns away,


Capt. Out with it, what is it? shall he call you Mistress? and his Platonic?


Love-all. Away, away; Me?


Capt. No niceness, is it a match?


Love-all. Lord, would I were as worthy as willing (pray tell him so) he shall
find me one of the humblest Mistresses that ever he was pleased to honor with
his affections.


Capt, Dare you write this to him, and honor me with bearing it? I confess, I
am such a friend to friendship-love too that I would even bring him on my back
to a mid-nights meeting.


Love-all. If you will stay here, I Will go in and write it. -- She Is going out
and he calls her.


Capt. Madam, I forgot to ask your Ladyship one Question.


Love-all. What was it?


Capt. There happened a business last night betwixt Mr. Wild and one Jolly, a
Courtier that brags extremely of your favor; I swear, if it had not been for
friends that interposed themselves there had been mischief, for Mr. Wild was
extreme zealous in your cause.


Love-all. Such a Rascal I know; Villain, to bring my name upon the Stage, for
a subject of his quarrels, I Will have him cudgeld.


Capt. And I Will swear, he deserved it; for the quarrel ended in a Bet of a
Buck-hunting-nag, that sometime to day he would bring a Neck-lace and chain of
Pearl of yours (not stolen, but freely given) to witness his power.


Love-all. Did the vain Rascal promise that?


Capt. Yes, but we laughed at it.


Love-all. So you might; and, as I live, if the Neck-lace were come from
stringing I Would send them both to Mr. Wild, to wear as a favor, to assure him I
am his, and to put the vain slave out of countenance.


Capt. I marry, such a timely favor were worth a dozen Letters, to assure him
of your Love, and remove all the doubts the others discourse may put into his
head; and faith I Would send him the chain now, and in my Letter promise him the
Neck-lace, he will deserve such a favor.


Love-all. I Will go in and fetch it immediately, will you favor me to deliver
it?


Capt. I Will wait upon your Ladyship.


Love-all. I Will swear you shall not go in, you know I forswore She goes and he
fallows her, she turns and bids him stay. being alone with you.


Capt. Hang me, I Will go in; does my Message deserve to wait an Answer at the
Door?


Love-all. I, but you will be naught.


Capt. O, never trust me if I break.


Love-all. If you break some such forfeit you will lose; Well, come in for once.


Capt. You are so suspicious.


Love-all. I Will swear, I have reason for it, you are such another man.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Wanton and Baud. Want. IS he gone?


Baud. Yes, he is gone to the old Ladies, high with mischief.


Want. Fare him well, easy Fool, how the Trout strove to be tickled, and how
does this Ring become me? Ha! they are S^s plays with a Wedding Ring upon ber
finger. fine kind of things these Wedding Rings.


Baud. Besides the good custom of putting so much Gold in 'em, they bring such
conveniences along.


Want. Why I, now I have but one to please; and if I please him, who dares
offend me? and that Wife's a fool that cannot make her Husband one.


Baud. Nay, I am absolutely of Opinion, it was fit for you to marry; but
whether he be a good Husband or no.


Want. A pox of a good Husband, give me a wise one; they only make the secure
Cuckolds, the Cuckold in grain; for die a Husband that has wit but with an
Opinion thou art honest, and see who dares wash the color out; Now your fool
changes with every drop, dotes with confidence in the Morning and at Night,
jealous even to Murder, and his Love (Lord help us) fades like my Gredaline
Petticote.


Baud. This is a new Doctrine.


Want. It Is a truth, Wench, I have gained from my own Observations, and the
Paradox will be maintained. Take wise Men from Cuckolds, and fools to make
them; for your wise Man draws eyes and suspicion with his visit, and begets
jealous thoughts in the Husband, that his Wife may be overcome with his parts;
when the fool is welcome to both, pleases both, laughes with the one, and lies
with the other, and all without suspicion; I tell thee, a fool that has money
is the Man. The wits and the we's, which is a distinct Parreal of Wit bound by
it self, and to be sold at Wit-hall, or at the sign of the King's Head in the
Butchery; these wise things will make twenty jealous, ere one Man a Cuckold;
when the family of fools will head a Parish ere they are suspected.


Baud. Well, I see one may live and learn; and if he be but as good at it now,
you are his own; as he was, when he was your Friends Friend, (as they call it)
you have got one of the best hiders of such a business in the Town; Lord, how
he would Sister you at a Play!


Want. Faith, it is as he is used at first; if he get the bridle in's teeth he will
ride to the Devil; but if thou be true, we'll make him amble ere we have
done; the Plot is here, and if it thrive I Will alter the Proverb, The Parson
gets the Children, to, the Parson Fathers them.


Baud. Any thing that may get Rule; I love to wear the Breeches.


Want. So do we all, Wench; Empire? it is all our aim; and I Will put my ranting
Roger in a Cage but I Will tame him; he loves already, which is an excellent Ring
in a fools nose, and thou shall hear him sing. --

Happy only is that Family, that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.

Baud. Do this, I Will serve you for nothing; the impetuous slave had wont to
taunt me for beating of my Husband, and would sing that song in mockery of me.


Want. In Revenge of which, thou (if thou will be faithful) shall make him sing.

Happy is that Family that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows.

[Exeunt ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Parson, Love-all, and Faithful. Love-all. GO, you are a naughty Man; do
you come hither to rail against an honest Gentleman? I have heard how you fell
out, you may be ashamed on it, a Man of your Coat.


Pars. What? to speak Truth and perform my Duty? the world cries out you are a
scab'd sheep, and I come to tarr you, that is, give you notice how your Fame
suffers in the opinion of the world.


Love-all. My Fame, Sirrah? it is purer then thy Doctrine, get thee out of my
house.


Faithf. You uncivil fellow, do you come hither to tell my Lady of her faults,
as if her own Levite could not discern 'em?


Love-all. My own Levite? I hope he is better bred then to tell me of my faults.


Faithf. He finds work enough to correct his dearly beloved sinners.


Pars. And the Right Worshipful my Lady, and your self, they mend at leisure.


Love-all. You are a saucy fellow, Sirrah, to call me Sinner in my own house;
get you gone with -- your Madam, I hear, and (Madam) I could advise, but I am
loath to speak; take heed, the world talks, and thus with dark sentences put
my Innocence into a fright, with you know what you know good Mistress
Faithful; so do I, and the world shall know too thou have married a Whore.


Pars. Madam, a Whore?


Faith. No, Sir, it is not so well as a Madam-whore, it is a poor Whore, a
Captains cast Whore.


Love-all. Now bless me, marry a Whore? I wonder any Man can endure those
things, what kind of Creatures are they?


Pars. They Are like Ladies, but that they are handsomer; and though you take a
privilege to injure me, yet I would advise your Woman to tie up her Tongue,
and not abuse my Wife.


Love-all. Fie, art thou not ashamed to call a Whore, Wife? Lord bless^ns, what
will not these men do when God leaves them! But for a Man of your Coat to cast
himself away upon a Whore, come Wench, let us go and leave him! I Will swear, it is
strange, the State does not provide to have all Whores hanged or drowned.


Faithf. I, and it is time they look into it, for they begin to spread so, that
a man can scarce find an honest woman in a Country; they say, they are voted
down now, 'twas moved by that charitable Member that got an Order to have it
but five miles to Croyden, for ease of the Market-women.


Love-all. I, I, it is a blessed Parliament.


[Exit Love-all and Faithful. Pars. That I have played the fool, is visible;
this comes of rashness; something I must do to set this right, or else she will
hate, and he will laugh at me, I must not lose him, and my revenge too, something
that is mischief, I am resolved to do.


[Exit Pars. ACT. II. SCEN. V.
Enter Wild and Careless. Wild. NOW is the Parsons Wife so contemptible?


Carel. No, but I Am so full of that resolution to dislike the sex, that I will
allow none honest, none handsome; I tell thee, we must beat down the price with
our selves, court none of 'em; but let their Maiden-heads and their Faces lie
upon their hands, till they are weary of the commodity, then they will haunt us to
find proper Chap-men to deal for their ware.


Wild. I like this, but 'twil be long a doing, and it may be er'e they be
forced to sell, our bank will be exhausted, and we shall not be able to
purchase.


Carel. I, but we will keep a credit, and at three six months, thou and the
Captain shall be my Factors.


Wild. You had best have a partner, else such an undertaking would break a
better back then yours.


Carel. No partners in such commodities, your Factor that takes up
Maiden-heads, it is upon his own account still.


Wild. But what course will you take to purchase this trade with women?


Carel. I am resolved to put on their own silence and modesty, answer forsooth,
swear nothing but Gods nigs, and hold Arguments of their own cold Tenants, as
if I believed there were no true love below the line, then sigh when it is
proper, and with forced studies betray the enemy, who seeing my eye fixed on
her, her vanity thinks I am lost in admiration, calls and shakes me ere I wake
out of my design, and being collected, answer out of purpose. Love, divinest?
yes, who is it that is mortal and does not, or which amongst all the Senate of
the Gods, can gaze upon those eyes, and carry thence the power he brought? This
will start her.


Wild. Yes, and make her think thee mad.


Carel. Why that is my design; for then I start too, and rub my eyes, as if I
waked, then sigh and strangle a yawn, 'till I have wrung it into tears, with
which I rise, as if overcome with grief; then kiss her hands, and let fall
those witnesses of faith and love, bribed for my design. This takes; for who
would suspect such a Devil as Craft and Youth to live together?


Wild. But what kind of women do you think this will take?


Carel. All kind of women, those that think themselves handsome; it being
probable, concludes it real; and those that are handsome in their opinion, that
small number will believe it, because it agrees with their wishes.


Wild. And when you are gone, it may be they sigh, and their Love breaks out
into Paper, and what then?


Carel. What then? why then I Will laugh, and show thee their Letters, and teach
the world how easy it is to win any woman.


Wild. This is the way, and be sure to dislike all, but her you design for; be
scarce civil to any of the sex besides.


Carel. That Is my meaning, But to her that I mean my prey, all her slave; she
shall be my Deity; and her opinion my religion.


Wild. And while you sad it thus to one, I Will talk freer then a priviledg'd
fool, and swear as unreasonably as losing Gamesters, and abuse thee for
thinking to reclaim a woman by thy love, call them all bowls thrown that will
run where they will run, and Lovers like fools run after them, Crying, Rub, and
fly, for me; I believe none fair, none handsome, none honest, but the kind.


Carel. We must make the Captain of our Plot, lest he betray us; this will gain
us some revenge upon the Lovers to whom I grudge the Wenches, not that I
believe they are worth half the cost they pay for them; and we may talk, but
it is not our opinion can make them happier, or miserable.


[Enter Jolly. Wild. Jolly, Will, where have thou been? We had such sport with
the Parson of our Town, he is married this morning to Wanton.


Joll. Who? the Captains Wench? he is in a good humor then; as you love mirth,
let us find him, I have news to blow his rage with, and 'twill be mirth to us,
to see him divided betwixt the several causes of his anger, and lose himself in
his rage while he disputes, which is the greater; your opinion, Gentlemen; is
this, or his Wench, the greater loss? Here he pulls out the Pearl.


Carel. What have thou there? Pearl! they are false, I hope.


Joll. Why do you hope so?


Carel. Because I am thy friend, and would be loath to have thee hanged for
stealing.


Joll. I will not swear they are honestly come by; but I Will be sworn, there is
neither force nor theft in it.


Wild. Prithee, speak out of Riddles, here is none but your Friends.


Joll. Faith, take it, you have heard the Captain brag of an old Lady, which he
thinks he keeps close in a Box; but I know where hangs a key can let a friend
in, or so: From her, my brace of worthies, whose wits are dulled with plenty,
this morning, with three good words, and four good deeds, I earned this toy.


Carel. The mirth yet, we will all share; I am in pain till we sind him, that
we may vex his wit that he presumes so much on.


Wild. Let Us go, let us go, I will desire him to let me see his Wench; I will
not understand him if he says she is gone.


Carel. I Will beg of him, for old acquaintance sake, to let me see his old Lady.


Joll. Hark, I hear his voice. --


Capt. Which way?


Carel. The Game plays it self; begin with him, Ned, while we talk, as if we
were busy, we will take our Q.


Wild. When I put off my hat.


[Enter Capt. Capt. 'sBlood, I thought you had been sunk, I have been hunting
you these four hours. Death, you might ha left word where you went; and not put
me to hunt like Tom Fool, it is well you are at London, where you know the way
home.


Wild. Why in choler? We have been all this while searching you; come, this is
put on to divert me for claiming your promise, I must see the Wench.


Capt. You cannot a dad, a dad you cannot.


Wild. I did not think you would have refused such a kindness.


Carel. What Is that?


Wild. Nothing, a toy, he refuses to show me his Wench.


Carel. The Devil he does; what have we been thus long Comrades, and had all
things in common, and must we now come to have common Wenches particular? I
say, thou shall see her, and lie with her too, if thou will.


Joll. What? in thy dumps, Brother, call to thy aid thy two edged wit; the
Captain sad? it is prophetic, I Would as live have dreamt of Pearl, or the loss of
my teeth; yet if he be musty, I Will warrant thee, Ned, I Will help thee to a bout;
I know his Cloak, his long Cloak that hides her; I am acquainted with the
Parson, he shall befriend thee.


Capt. It Is very well, Gentlemen; but none of you have seen her yet?


Wild. Yes, but we have, By thy self, by thy anger, which is now bigger then
thou; By chance we crossed her, coming from Church, leading in her hand the
Parson, to whom she swore she was this day married.


Joll. And our friendships were now guiding us to find thee out, to comfort
thee after the treachery of thy Levite.


Capt. Come, bear it like a man, there are more Wenches, What have thou spied?
-- He gives no answer, but peeps ^n Jollies ^at.


Wild. His Pearl, I believe.


Capt. Gentlemen, I see you are merry; I Will leave you; I must go a little way,
to enquire about a business.


Wild. Has got a sore-eye, I think.


Capt. I will only ask one Question, and return.


Carel. No faith, stay, and be satisfied.


Joll. Do, good Brother, for I believe there is no question that you now would
ask, but here is an Oracle can resolve you.


Capt. Are those Pearl true?


Joll. Yes?


Capt. And did not you steal them?


Joll. No.


Carel. Nor he did not buy them with ready money; But took them upon Mortgage
of himself to an old Lady.


Joll. Dwelling at the sign of the Buck in Broad-street; are you satisfied, or
must I play the Oracle still?


Capt. No, no, I am satisfied.


Joll. Like Jealous men, that take their wives at it, are you not?


Capt. Well, very well, it is visible, I am abused on all hands; But Gentlemen,
why all against me?


Carl. To let you see your Wit's mortal, and not proof against all.


Wild. The Parson has shot it through with a Jest.


Capt. Gentlemen, which of you, faith, had a hand in that?


Joll. Faith, none; only a general Joy, to find the Captain over reached.


Capt. But do you go sharers in the Profit, as well as in the Jest?


Joll. No faith, the Toy's mine own.


Capt. They are very fine, and you may afford a good penny worth, will you sell
them?


Joll. Sell them? I, where is a Chapman?


Capt. Here, I Will purchase them.


Joll. Thou? No, no, I have barred thee, By and Mayn, for I am resolved not to
fight for them; that excludes thy purchase by the sword; and thy wench has
proved such a loss, in thy last Adventure of Wit, that I Am afraid, it will
spoil thy credit that way too.


Capt. Gentlemen, as a Friend, let me have the refusal, set your price.


Wild. He Is serious.


Carel. Leave fooling.


Joll. Why if thou could buy them, what would thou do with them.


Capt. They Are very fair Ones, let me see them, methinks they should match
very well with these.


Joll. These, which?


Omnes. Which?


Carel. They are true.


Capt. Yes, But not earned with a pair of stolen verses, of, I was not born till
now, this my first night, and so forsooth; nor given as a Charm against lust.


Carl. What means all this?


Joll. What? why it is truth, and it means to shame the Devil; by this good day,
he repeats the same words with which I gathered these Pearls.


Wild. Why then we have two to laugh at.


Carel. And all Friends hereafter, let us fool altogether.


Capt. Gentlemen with the fine Wits, and my very good Friends do you, or you,
or he think I Will keep you Company, to make you laugh, but that I draw my honey
from you too?


Carel. Come, come, the Captain's in the right.


Capt. Yes, yes, the Captain knows it, and dares tell you, your Wit, your
Fortune, and his Face, are but my Ploughs; and I would have my fine Mounsieur
know, who, in spite of my Counsel, will be finer then his Mistress, and
appears before her so curiously built she dares not play with him for fear of
spoiling him; and to let him know the truth I speak, To his fair hands I
present this letter, but withal give him to understand, the Contents belong to
me. He reads the Letter.


Wild. The Pearl are sent to me.


Capt. I deny that, unless you prove you sent me; for the Letter begins, Sir,
this noble Gentleman, the bearer, whom you are pleased to make the messenger of
your love, and so forth; And now you should do well to enquire for that noble
Gentleman, and take an Account of him how he has laid out your Love, and it
may be he will return you Pearl for it; and now Gentlemen, I dare propose a
peace, at least a Cessation of Wit (but what is defensive) till such time as
the Plot which is now in my head be effected, in which you have all your shares.


Wild. So she knows I have not the Pearl, I am content.


Capt. She Will quickly find that, when she see's you come not to night,
according to my appointment, and hear's I have sold the Pearl.


Joll. Here then cease our Offensive War.


Capt. I Will give you Counsel worth two Ropes of Pearl.


Carel. But the Wench, how came the Parson to get her?


Capt. Faith it is hard to say which labored most, he, or I, to make that
Match, but the knave did well; There it is (if you assist) I mean to lay the
Scene of your mirth to night, for I am not yet fully revenged upon the Rogue;
for that I know him miserable is nothing, till he believe so too; Wanton and I
have laid the Plot.


Joll. Do you hold Correspondence?


Capt. Correspondence? I tell thee the plots we laid to draw him on would make
a Comedy.


[Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, the Ladies stay Dinner.


Joll. And as we go I Will tell you all the story, and after Dinner, be free from
all Engagements, as we promised thee; and follow but your directions, I Will
warrant you mirth and a pretty Wench.


Omnes. Agreed, any thing that breeds mirth is welcome.


Joll. Not a word at the Widows, let them go on quietly, and steal their
Wedding too.


Capt. I heard a Bird sing, as if it were concluded amongst the Couples.


Wild. They have been long about it; my Couze is a girl deserves more haste to
her Bed, he has arrived there by Carriers Journeys.


Carel. But that I hate wooing, by this good day, I like your Aunt so well and
her humor she should scarce be thrown away upon Pale-face, that has sighed her
into a Wedding Ring, and will but double her Jointure.


Capt. Why I, thus it should be, pray let us make them the Seat of the war all
Dinner, and continue united and true among our selves, then we may defy all
foreign danger.


Joll. And with full Bowls let us crown this peace, and sing, Wit, without
war, no Mirth does bring.


Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. VI.
Enter Parson and Wanton. Want. WAs she deaf to your report?


Pars. Yes, yes. The Parson walks troubled up and down.


Want. And ugly, her Abigail, she had her say too?


Pars. Yes, yes.


Want. And do you walk here biting your Nayls: do you think I Will be satisfied
with such a way of righting me?


Pars. What would have me do?


Want. Have you no Gall? be abused and laughed at by a dull Captain, that a
strict Muster would turn Fool? you had Wit, and could rail, when I offended
you, and none so sudden, none so terrible, none so sure in his Revenge, when I
displease you.


Pars. Something I Will do.


Want. Do it then, or I shall curse that e're I saw you Death, let the sign of
my Lady, an out of fashion whore, that has paid for sin, ever since yellow
starch and wheel Fardingales were cried down, let her Abuse me, and say
nothing? if this passes.


Pars. As Christ bless me, but I did (sweet heart:) and if it were not Church
livings are mortal, and they are always hitting me in the teeth with a man of
your Coat, she should find I am no Church man within, nor Mr. Parson but in my
Coat; Come to Dinner, and after Dinner I Will do something.


Want. I shall do something will vex some body.


[Enter Baud. Baud. Will you please to come to Dinner? the Company stays.


Pars. Come, let us go in.


Want. No, I must walk a little to digest this breakfast, the guests else will
wonder to see I am troubled.


Pars. Come, let this day pass in Mirth, spite of mischief, for lucks sake.


[Exit Parson. Want. I Will follow you, and do what I can to be merry.


Baud. Why, he stands already.


Want. Peace, let me alone, I Will make him Jostle, like the Millers Mare, and
stand like the Dun Cow, till thou may milk him.


Baud. Pray break him of his miserableness, it is one of the chief Exceptions I
have against him; he reared a puppy once, till it was ten days old, with three
hap' worth of milk, and then with his own Dagger slew it, and made me dress it:
blessed my self to see him eat it, and he bid me beg the Litter, and swore it was
sweeter and wholsomer then sucking Rabbets, or London Pigs, which he called
Belmens issue.


Want. Hark, he calls me, we must humor him a little, he will Parson calls
within. Why sweet heart. rebel else.


ACT. II. SCEN. VII.
Enter (at the windows) the Widow and Master Careless, Mistress Pleasant and
Master Wild, Captain, Master Sad, Constant, Jolly, Secret, a Table and Knives
ready for Oysters. Wid. YOu re welcome all, but especially Master Jolly; no
reply, with I thank your Ladyship.


Pleas. I beseech you, Sir, let us never be better acquainted.


Jolly. I shall endeavor, Lady, and fail in nothing that is in my She speaks
to Master Jolly power to dis-oblige you; for there is none more ambitious of
your ill Opinion then I.


Pleas. I rejoice at it, for the less Love, the better welcome still.


Wid. And as ever you had an ounce of Love for the Widow, be not Friends among
your selves.


Wild. Aunt, though we were at strife when we were alone, yet now we unite like
a Politic State against the common Enemy.


Pleas. The common Enemy, what is that?


Wild. Women, and Lovers in general.


Wid. Nay, then we have a party Niece, claim; quickly, now is the time,
according to the Proverb; Keep a thing seven years, and then if thou have no
use on it throw't away.


Pleas. Agreed, let us challenge our Servants; by the Love they have profes'd,
they cannot in honor refuse to join with us; and see where they come. --


Enter Sadd and Constant, and meet Secret, she whispers this to Sadd. Secret.
Sir, it is done.


Sadd. Be secret and grave, I Will warrant our design will take as we can wish.


Constable. Sweet Mistress Pleasant.


Wid. Servant Sadd.


Sadd. Madam.


Wid. We are threatened to have a War waged against us, will you not second us?


Sadd. With these youths we'll do enough, Madam.


Widd. I Will swear my Servant gave hit for hit this morning, as if he had been a
Master in the Noble Science of Wit.


Pleas. Mine laid about him with spik and span new Arguments, not like the same
Man, his old sayings and Presidents laid by.


Wid. Thus armed, then, we'll stand and defy them.


Wild. Where Is your Points, sure Aunt, this should be your Wedding day, for you
have taken the Man for better for worse.


Wid. No, Nephew, this will not prove the day that we shall either give or take
a Ring.


Carel. Hang me, if I know you can go back again with your Honor.


Wild. Or in Justice refuse him Liberty, that has served out his time; either
marry him or provide for him, for he is maimed in your service.


Wid. Why Servant Sadd? you will arm; my Nephew has thrown the first dart at you.


Capt. Have hit, have hit?


Wild. No, Captain, 'twas too wide.


Capt. Too wide? Marry he is an ill Marks-man that shoots wider then a Widow.


Jolly. We are both in one hole, Captain; but I was loath to venture my
Opinion, lest her Ladyship should think I was angry; for I have a good mind to
fall upon the Widow.


Pleas. You're a constant Man, Master Jolly; you have been in that mind this
twelve-months day.


Constable. You are in the right, Madam; she has it to show under his hand, but she
will not come in the List with him again; she threw him the last year.


Wid. Come, shall we eat Oysters? Who Is there? call for some Wine, Master
Jolly; you are not warm yet, pray be free, you are at home.


Jolly. Your Ladyship is merry.


Wid. You do not take it ill, to have me assure you you are at home here?


Wild. Such another invitation (though in jest) will take away Master Sadds
stomach. Oysters net brought in yet.


Sad. No, faith, Ned, though she should take him, it will not take away my
stomach; my Love is so fixed I may wish my wishes, but she shall never want
them to wait upon hers.


Pleas. A Traitor, bind him, has pulled down a side; profess your Love thus
public?


Jolly. I by my faith, continue Master Sadd, give it out you Love, and call it
a new Love, a Love never seen before, we'll all come to it as your Friends.


Sadd. Gentlemen, still I Love; and if she to whom I thus sacrifice will not
reward it, yet the worst Malice can say, is, I was unfortunate and
misfortunate; not false made me so.


Jolly. In what Chapter shall we find this written, and what verse? you should
preach with a Method, Master Sadd.


Wid. Gentlemen, if ever he spoke so much dangerous sense before (either of
Love or Reason) hang me.


Sad. Madam, my Love is no news where you are; Know, your scorn has made it
public; and though it could gain no return from you; yet others have esteemed
me for the Faith and Constancy I have paid here.


Pleas. Did not I foretell you of his Love? I foresaw this danger, shall I
never live to see Wit and Love dwell together?


Capt. I am but a poor Soldier, and yet never reached to the Honor of being a
Lover; yet from my own observations, Master Sadd, take a Truth; it is a folly to
believe any Woman loves a Man for being constant to another, they dissemble
their hearts only; and hate a Man in Love worse then a Wencher.


Jolly. And they have Reason; for if they have the grace to be kind, he that
loves the Sex may be theirs.


Carel. When your constant Lover, if a Woman have a mind to him, and be blessed
with so much grace to discover it; He, out of the noble mistake of Honor hates
her for it, and tells it perchance, and preaches Reason to her Passion, and
cries, miserable Beauty, to be so unfortunate as to inhabit in so much frailty.


Capt. This counsel makes her hate him more then she loved before; These are
troubles, those that love are subject to, while we look on and laugh, to see
both thus slav'd while we are free.


Carl. My prayers still shall be, Lord deliver me from Love.


Capt. It Is Plague, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, and sometimes sudden death.


Sadd. Yet I love, I must love, I will love, and I do love.


Capt. In the present tense.


Wid. No more of this Argument, for Loves sake.


Capt. By any means, Madam, give him leave to love, and you are resolved to
walk tied up in your own Arms, with your Love as visible in your Face, as your
Mistresses colors in your Hat; that any Porter at Charing Cross may take you
like a Letter at the Carriers, and having read the superscription, deliver
Master Sadd to the fair hands of Mistress or my Lady such a one, lying at the
sign of the hard heart.


Pleas. And she, if she has wit (as I believe she has) will scarce pay the
Post for the Packet.


Wid. Treason, how now Niece, join with the Enemy?


Capt. A health, Ned, what shall I call it? They give the Captain Wine.


Carel. To Master Sadd, he needs it that avowes himself a Lover.


Sadd. Gentlemen, you have the Advantage, the Time, the Place, the Company; But
we may meet when your wits shall not have such advantage as my Love.


Pleas. No more of Love, I am so sick on it.


Constable. By your Pardon, Mistress, I must not leave Love thus unguarded, I vow
my self his follower.


Jolly. Much good may Love do him, give me a Glass of Wine here; Will, let them
keep company with the blind Boy, give us his Mother, and let them preach again;
hear that will, he has good luck, persuades me it is an ugly sin to lie with a
handsome Woman.


Capt. A pox upon my Nurse, she frighted me so when I was young with stories of
the Devil, I was almost fourteen er'e I could prevail with Reasons to unbind my
Reason, it was so slav'd to Faith and Conscience; she made me believe Wine was
an evil spirit, and Fornication was like the Whore of Babylon, a fine face, but
a Dragon under her Pety-coats; and that made me have a mind to peep under all I
met since.


Wid. Fie, fie, for shame, do not talk so; are you not ashamed to glory in sin,
as if variety of women were none.


Joll. Madam, we do not glory in Fornication; and yet I thank God, I cannot
live without a woman.


Capt. Why, does your Ladyship think it a sin to lie with variety of handsome
women? if it be, would I were the wicked'st man in the company.


Pleas. You have been marked for an indifferent sinner; that way Captain.


Capt. Who I? No faith, I was a fool, but and I were to begin again, I would
not do as I have done, I kept one; but if ever I keep another, Hang me; nor
would I advise any friend of mine to do it.


Joll. Why, I am sure it is a provident and safe way; a man may always be
provided and sound.


Pleas. Fie upon this discourse.


Capt. Those considerations betrayed me, A pox; it is a dull sin to travel,
like a Carriers-horse, always one Road.


Wid. Fie, Captain, repent for shame, and Marry.


Capt. Your Ladyship would have said, Marry, and repent; No, though it be not
the greatest pleasure, yet it is better then marrying; for when I am weary of
her, my unconstancy is termed virtue, and I shall be said to turn to grace.
Beware of women, for better for worse; for our wicked nature, when her sport is
lawful, cloyes straight; therefore, rather then Marry keep a Wench.


Joll. Faith, he is in the right, for it is the same thing in number and kind;
and then the sport is quickened, and made poynant with sin.


Capt. Yet it is a fault, faith, and I Will persuade all my friends from it;
especially here where any innovation is dangerous; 'twas the newness of the sin
that made me suffer in the opinion of my friends; and I was condemned by all
sorts of people; not that I sinned, but that I sinned no more.


Carel. Why I, had thou been wicked in fashion, and privily lain with every
body, their guilt would have made them protect thee; so that to be more wicked
is to be innocent at lest safe; A wicked world, Lord help us.


Capt. But being particular to her, and not in love, nor subject to it, taking
an Antidote every morning, before I venture into those infectious places where
Love Beauty dwells; this enraged the Maiden, Beauties of the Time, who thought
it a prejudice to their Beauties to see me careless, and securely pass by their
conquering eyes; my name being found amongst none of those that decked their
Triumphs. But from this it is easy to be safe, for their Pride will not let
them love, nor my leisure me. Then the old Ladies that pay for their pleasures;
they, upon the news, beheld me wirh their natural frowns, despairing when their
money could not prevail; and hated me when they heard that I for my pleasure
would pay as large as they.


Joll. Gentlemen, take warning; a Fee from every man; For by this day, there is
strange counsel in this confession.


Wid. Captain, you forget to pledge Mr. Careless; here, will you not drink a
cup of wine, who is there? Bring the Oysters.


Capt. Yes, Madam, if you please.


Wild. Proceed, Captain.


Pleas. Fie, Mr. Wild, are you not ashamed to encourage him to this filthy
discourse.


Capt. A glass of wine then; and I Will drink to all the new married Wives that
grieve to think, at what rate their Fathers purchase a little husband. These
when they lie thirsting for the thing they paid so dear for.


[Enter a Servant with Oysters. Carel. These, methinks, should be thy friends,
and point thee out as a man for them.


Capt. Yes, till the faithful Nurse cries; Alas, Madam, he keeps such a one, he
has enough at home; then she swells with envy and rage against us both, calls
my Mistress ugly, common, unsafe; and me, a weak secure fool.


Joll. These are strange truths, Madam.


Wid. I, I, but these Oysters are a better jest.


Capt. But she is abused that will let such reason tame her desire, and a fool
in Loves School; else she would not be ignorant that variety is such a friend
to love, that he which rises a sunk coward from the Ladies bed would find new
fires at her Maids; nor ever yet did the man want fire, if the woman would
bring the fuel.


Pleas. For Gods sake, leave this discourse.


Wid. The Captain has a mind we should eat no Oysters.


Wild. Aunt, we came to be merry, and we will be merry, and you shall stay it
out; Proceed Captain.


Wid. Fie Captain, I Am ashamed to hear you talk thus: Marry, then you will
have a better opinion of women.


Capt. Marry! yes, this knowledge will invite me, it is a good encouragement,
is it not think you? What is your opinion? were not these Marriages made in
Heaven? By this good day, all the world is mad, and makes haste to be fooled,
but we four: And I hope there is none of us believes there has any Marriages
been made in Heaven, since Adam.


Joll. By my faith, it is thought the Devil gave the Ring there to.


Wid. Nephew, I Will swear I Will be gone.


Capt. Hold her, Ned, she goes not yet; there is a fourth kind of women that
concerns her more then all the rest, Ecce signum -- She is He points to Sadd.
one of those who, clothed in Purple, triumph over their dead husbands; these
will be caught at first sight, and at first sight must be caught; it is a Bird
that must be shot flying, for they never sit; if a man delay they cool, and
fall into considerations of Jointure, and friends opinion; in which time, if
she hears thou keep'st a Wench, thou had better be a Beggar in her opinion;
for then her Pride, it may be, would betray her to the vanity of setting up a
proper man; (as they call it) but for a Wencher no Argument prevails with your
Widow; for she believes they have spent too much that way, to be able to pay
her due benevolence.


Wid. As I live, I Will be gone if you speak one word more of this uncivil
subject.


Joll. Captain, let me kiss thy cheek, for that Widow; you understand this,
Widow? I say no more; Here Captain, here is to thee; as it goes down, A pox of
care.


Wid. Jesus! Mr. Jolly, have you no observations of the Court, that are so
affected with this of the Town?


Constable. Faith, they say, there is good sport there, sometimes.


Pleas. Mr. Jolly is afraid to let us partake of his knowledge.


Joll. No faith, Madam.


Capt. By this drink, if he stay till I have eaten a few more, I Will describe it.


Joll. What should I say, it is certain the Court is the bravest place in the
Kingdom, for sport, if it were well looked to, and the Game preserved fair; But
as it is, a man may sooner make a set in the Strand. And it will never be
better, whilst your divine Lovers inhabit there.


Carel. Let the King make me Master of the Game.


Capt. And admit us Laiety-lovers.


Joll. I would he would; for as it is, there is no hopes amongst the Ladies;
besides, it is such an example to see a King and Queen good, Husband and Wife,
that to be kind will grow out of fashion.


Capt. Nay, that is not all, for the women grow malicious, because they are not
courted; nay, they bred all the last mischiefs, and called the Kings chastity a
neglect of them.


Joll. Thou art in the right; An Edward, or a Harry, with seven Queens in
Buckram, that Haught among the men, and Stroakt the women, are the Monarchs
they wish to bow to; they love no tame Princes, but Lions in the Forest.


Capt. Why, and those were properly called the Fathers of their People, that
were indeed akine to their Nobility; now they wear out their youth and beauty,
without hope of a monumental Ballad, or Trophee of a Lie-bell that shall
hereafter point at such a Lord, and cry that is the royal Son of such a one.


Joll. And these were the ways that made them powerful at home; for the City is
a kind of tame Beast; you may lead her by the horns any whither, if you but
tickle them in the ear sometimes. Queen Bess, of famous memory, had the trick
on it; and I have heard them say, In Eighty eighty, er'e I was born, as well I
can remember, she rode to Tilbury on that bonny Beast, the Mayor.


Capt. I would I might counsel him; I Would so reform the Court.


Carel. Never too soon; for now, when a stranger comes in, and spies a Covey of
a Beauties, would make a Faulconer unhood, before he can draw his Leash he is
warned that is a marked Partridge; and that, and every he, has by their example a
particular she.


Wild. By this light, the six fair Maids stand like the Workingdays in the
Almanac; one with A scored upon her breast, that is as much to say, I belong
to such a Lord; the next with B for an elder Brother; C for such a Knight; D
possessed with melancholy, and at her breast you may knock an hour er'e you get
an answer, and then she will tell you there is no lodging there; she has a constant
fellow Courtier that has taken up all her heart to his own use: in short, All
are disposed of, but the good Mother; and she comes in like the Sabbath, at the
weeks end; and I warrant her make any one rest that comes at her.


Carel. I marry; but if she were like the Jews Sabbath, it were somewhat; but
this looks like a Broken Commandment, that has had more work done upon her,
then all the week besides.


Capt. And what think you, is not this finely carried? you that are about the
King, counsel him, if he will have his sport fair, he must let the Game be
free, as it has been in former Ages; then a stranger that has wit, good means,
and handsome clothes, no sooner enters the privy Chamber, and beat about with
three graceful legs, but he spring a Mistress that danced as well as he, Sung
better, as free as fair; those at first sight could speak, for wit is always
acquainted: These fools must be akin er'e they can speak; and now the friends
make the bargain, and they go to Bed er'e they know why.


Joll. Faith, he is in the right, you shall have a Buzzard now hover and beat
after a pretty Wench, till she is so weary of him she is forced to take her Bed
for covert, and find less danger in being trussed then in flying.


Capt. And what becomes of all this pudder, after he has made them sport for
one night, to see him towse the Quarry, he carries her into the Country, and
there they two fly at one another till they are weary.


Carel. And all this mischief comes of Love and Constancy; we shall never see
better days till there be an Act of Parliament against it; Enjoining Husband
not to Till their Wives, but change and lay them fallow.


Joll. A pox, the women will never consent to it; they will be tilled to death
first.


Wid. Gentlemen, you are very bold with the sex.


Capt. Faith, Madam, it is our care of them; why you see they are married at
fourteen, yield a Crop and a half, and then dye, it is merely their love that
destroys'em; for if they get a good husbandman, the poor things yield their
very hearts.


Pleas. And do you blame their loves, Gentlemen?


Joll. No, not their love, but their discretion; let them love, and do, a Gods
name; but let them do with discretion.


Wild. But how will you amend this?


Joll. Instead of two Beds and a Physician; I Would have the State prescribe two
Wives and a Mistress.


Wild. Ho! it will never be granted; the State is made up of old men, and they
find work enough with one.


Joll. We will petition the lower House, there are young men, and (if it were
but to be factious) would pass it, if they thought the upper house would Cross
it; Besides, they ought to do it, Death! they provide against cutting down old
Trees, and preserving highways and Posthorses, and let pretty Wenches run to
decay?


Carel. Why may it not come within the Statute of Depopulation? As I live, the
State ought to take care of those Pretty creatures; Be you Judge, Madam; Is It
not a sad sight to see a rich young Beauty, with all her Innocence and Blossoms
on, subject to some rough rude Fellow, that ploughs her; and esteems and uses
her as a chattel, till she is so lean, a man may find as good Grass upon the
Common, where it may be she will sit coughing with sunk Eyes, so weak that a Boy
(with a Dog) that can but whistle, may keep a score of them?


Wid. You are strangely charitable to Our Sex, on a sudden.


Capt. I know not what they are; but for my part, I Will be a Traitor ere I Will
look on, and see Beauty go thus to wrack; it is enough, custom has made us
suffer them to be enclosed; I am sure, they were created common, and for the
use of Man, and not intended to be subject to jealousy and choler, or to be
bought or sold, or let for term of lives or years, as they are now, or else
sold at Out-crys; Oh! Yes; who will give most take her.


Wid. Why do not some of you, Excellent men, Marry, and mend all these Errors,
by your good Example?


Joll. Because we want Fortunes, to buy rich wives, or keep poor ones, and be
loath to get Beggars, or whores, as well as I love 'em.


Pleas. Why, are all their Children so that have no fortune think you?


Joll. No, not all; I have heard of Whittington and his Cat, and others, that
have made Fortunes by strange means; But I scarce believe my Son would rise
from Hope, a half penny, and a Lambsskin; And the Wenches commonly having more
Wit and Beauty then Money, foreseeing small Portions, grow sad, and read
Romances, till their Wit spy some unfortunate merit like their own, without
money too, and they two sigh after one another, till they grow mysterious in
Colors, and become a Proverb for their constancy; and when their Love has worn
out the cause, marry in the end a new Couple, then grown ashamed of the
knowledge they so long hunted, at length part, by consent, and vanish into
Abigail and Governor.


Wid. Well Gentlemen, Excuse me for this One time; and if ever I invite you to
Dinner again, punish me with such another discourse, in the mean time let us go
in and dine, meat stays for us.


[Exe. Omnes. Capt. Faith Madam, we were resolved to be merry; We have not met
these three years till to day, and at the Bear we meant to have dined; and
since your Ladyship would have Our Company, you must pardon Our humor; here
Mistress Sadd, here is the Widows health to you.


ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter all from Dinner. Wid. NEphew, how do you dispose of your self this
afternoon?


Wild. We have a design we must pursue, which will rid you of all this
troublesome Company; and we will make no Excuse, because you peeped into our
privacies to day.


Carel. Your humble servant, Ladies; Gentlemen, we will leave you to pursue your
fortunes.


[Exit Carel. Joll. Farewell Widow, may thou live unmarryed till thou run'st
away with thy self.


[Exit Jolly. Capt. No, no, When that day comes, Command the humblest of your
Servants.


[Exit Captain. Wild. Farewell Aunt; sweet Mistress Pleasant, I wish you good
fortune.


[Exit Wild. Wid. Farewell, farewell Gentlemen; Niece, now if we could be rid of
these troublesome Lovers too, we would go see a Play.


Pleas. Rid of them? Why, they are but now in season; as I live, She speaks
aside. I would do as little to give mine content as any she in Town, and yet I
do not grudge him the happiness of carrying me to a Play.


Wid. I, but the world will talk, because they pretend; and then we shall be
sure to meet my Nephew there, and his wil'd Company, and they will laugh to see
us together.


Pleas. Who will you have? Tym the Butler, or Formal your Gentleman Usher? I
would take Philip the foreman of the shop as soon.


Wid. Let Us mask our selves, and take Secret, and go alone by water.


Pleas. Yes, and follow her like one of my Aunts of the Suburbs; it is a good
way to know what you may yield in a Market; for I Will undertake, there are those
shall bid for you before the play will be done.


Secret. As I live, Madam, Mistress Pleasant is in the right; I had such a
kindness offered me once, and I came to a price with him in knavery; and hang
me, if the Rogue was not putting the earnest of his affection into my hand.


Wid. Let Us go to the Glass-house then.


Pleas. I Will go to a Play with my Servant, and so shall you; hang Opinion, and
we will go to the Glass-house afterward; it is too hot to Sup early.


Secret. Pray Madam go, they say it is a fine Play, and a Knight writ it.


Pleas. Pray let Secret prevail, I Will propose it to the Lovers; in the mean
time go you, and bid the Coachman make ready the Coach.


(Secret whispers Sadd, 'twill take.) Secret. Alas, Madam, he is sick, poor
fellow, and gone to bed, he could not wait at Dinner.


Wid. Sick?


Pleas. Why, see how all things work for the young men, either their Coach, or
a Foot; Mr. Constant, what think you of seeing a Play this afternoon? is it not
too hot to venture, this Infectious time?


Constable. Fie, Madam, there is no danger, the Bill decreased Twenty last week.


Sad. I swear, they say, it is a very good Play to day.


Wid. Shall we go, Niece?


Pleas. Faith it is hot, and there is no body but we.


Sadd. Does that hinder? pray Madam, grudge us not the favor of venturing your
self in Our company.


Wid. Come, leave this Ceremony, I Will go in, and put on my Mask; Secret shall
bring you yours;


Pleas. No, I Will go, and put it on within.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Wild, Careless, Captain and Jolly. Carel. BY this day, you have netled
the Widow.


Wild. The Captain neglected his dinner for his mirth, as if he had forgot to
eat.


Joll. When did he oversee his drinking so?


Capt. Gentlemen, still it is my fortune to make your worships Merry.


Wild. As I live, Captain, I subscribe, and am content to hold my wit as Tenant
to thee; and to night I Will invite you to Supper, where it shall not be lawful
to speak till thou has victual'd thy Man of War.


Capt. Shall's be merry? what shall we have?


Wild. Half a score dishes of meat, choose them your self.


Capt. Provide me then the Chines fried, and the Salmon Calver'd, a Carp, and
black sauce, Red-Dear in the blood, and an Assembly of Woodcocks, and
Jack-snipes, so fat you would think they had their winding Sheets on; And upon
these, as their Pages, let me have wait your Sussex Wheat-Ear, with a Feather
in his Cap; Over all which let our Countryman, General Chyne of Beef,
Command: I hate your French pottage, that looks as the Cook maid had more hand
in it then the Cook.


Wild. I Will promise you all this.


Carel. And let me alone to Cook the Fish.


Capt. You Cook it? No, no, I left an honest fellow in Town, when I went into
Italy, Signiour Ricardo Ligones, one of the ancient house of the Armenian
Ambassadors; if he be alive he shall be our Cook.


Wild. Is he so Excellent at it?


Capt. Excellent? You shall try, you shall try; Why, I tell you, I saw him once
dress a shooing-horn, and a Joyners apron, that the Company left Pheasant for
it.


Wild. A Shooing-horn?


Capt. Yes, a shooing-horn; marry, there was Garlic in the Sauce.


Wild. Is this all you would have?


Capt. This, and a Bird of Paradise, to entertain the rest of the night, and
let me alone to Cook her.


Wild. A Bird of Paradise, what is that?


Capt. A Girl of Fifteen, smooth as Satin, White as her Sunday Apron, Plump,
and of the first down: I Will take her with her guts in her Belly, and warm her
with a Country dance or two, then pluck her, and lay her dry betwixt a couple
of sheets; There pour into her so much oil of Wit as will make her turn to a
man, and stick into her heart three corns of whole love, to make her taste of
what she is doing, then having strewed a man all over her, shut the door, and
leave us, we will work our selves into such a Sauce as you can never surfeit on,
so Poynant and yet no Hogough; Take heed of a hogough, your Onion and woman
make the worst sauce; This shook together by an English Cook (for your French
seasoning spoils many a woman) and there is a Dish for a King.


Wild. For the first Part, I Will undertake.


Capt. But this for Supper; Capt. No more of this now; This afternoon, as you
are true to the Pettycoat, observe your Instructions, and meet at Neds house in
the Evening.


Omnes. We will not fail.


Capt. I must write to Wanton, to know how things stand at home, and to
acquaint her how we have thrived with the Old Lady to day.


Wild. Whither will you go to write?


Capt. To thy house, it is hard by, there is the Fleece.


Joll. Do, and in the mean time I Will go home and dispatch a little business,
and meet you.


Wild. Make haste then.


Joll. Where shall I meet you?


Wild. Whither shall we go till it be time to attend the design.


Carel. Let Us go to Court for an hour.


Joll. Do, I Will meet you at the Queens side.


Wild. No, prithee, we are the Mounsieurs new come Over; and if we go fine they
will laugh at Us, and think we believe Our selves so; if not, then they will
abuse our clothes, and swear we went into France only to have our cloaks cut
shorter.


Carel. Will you go see a Play?


Capt. Do, and thither I Will come to you, if it be none of our Gentlemen Poets,
that excuse their writings with a Prologue that professes they are no Scholars.


Joll. On my word this is held the best penned of the time, and he has writ a
very good Play; By this Day, it was extremely applauded.


Capt. Does he write Plays by the day; Indeed a man would ha judged him a
laboring Poet.


Joll. A Laboring Poet? by this hand he is a Knight; upon my recommendation
venture to see it; hang me if you be not extremely well satisfied.


Carel. A Knight and write Plays? it may be, but it is strange to us; so they
say there are other Gentlemen Poets without Land or Latin; this was not
ordinary; prithee when was he knighted?


Jolly. In the North; the last great knighting, when 'twas Gods great Mercy we
were not all Knights.


VVild. I Will swear, they say, there are Poets that have more Men in Liveries,
then Books in their studies.


Capt. And what think you, Gentlemen, are not these things to start a Man? I
believe it is the first time you have found them lie at the sign of the Page,
Footmen and gilded Coaches; They were wont to lodge at the thin Cloak, they
and their Muses made up the Family; And thence sent Scenes to their Patrons,
like Boys in at windows, and one would return with a Dublett, another with a
pair of Breeches, a third with a little ready Money; which, together with their
credit with a company, in three Terms you rarely saw a Poet repaired.


Jolly. This truth no body denies.


VVild. Prithee let us resolve what we shall do, lest we meet with some of
them: for it seems they swarm, and I fear nothing like a Dedication, though it
be but of himself; For I must hear him say more then either I deserve or he
believes; I hate that in a Poet, they must be dull, or all upon all Subjects;
so that they can oblige none but their Muse.


Jolly. I perceive by this you will not see the Play; what think you of going
to Sims, to Bowls, till I come?


Carel. Yes, if you will go to see that Comedy; but there is no reason we
should pay for our coming in, and Act too; like some whose interest in the
Timber robs them of their Reason, and they run as if they had stolen a Bias.


Wild. Resolve what you will do, I am contented.


Carel. Let Us go walk in the Spring-garden.


VVild. I Will do it for Company, but I had as live be rid in the Horse-market,
as walk in that fools fair; where neither wit nor money is, nor sure to take
up a Wench; there is none but honest Women.


Capt. A pox on it, what should we do there? let us go and cross the Field to
Pikes, her kitching is cool Winter and Summer.


Carel. I like that motion well, but we have no time, and I hate to do that
business by half; after Supper, if you will, we'll go and make a night on it.


Capt. Well, I must go write, therefore resolve of somewhat; shall I propose an
indifferent place where it is probable we shall all meet.


Omnes. Yes.


Capt. Go you before to the Devil, and I Will make haste after.


Carel. Agreed, we shall be sure of good Wine there and in Fresco, for he is
never without Patent snow.


VVild. Patent snow, what does that project hold?


Jolly. Yes, faith, and now there is a Commission appointed for Toasts against
the next Winter.


Wild. Marry, they are wise, and foresaw the Parliament, and were resolved
their Monopolies should be no grievance to the People.


Capt. Farewell, you will be sure to meet.


Omnes. Yes, yes.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Wanton and her Maid, with her lap full of things. Want. BId them ply
him close and flatter him, and rail upon the old Lady and the Captain; and, do
you hear, give him some hints to begin the story of his life, do it handsomely,
and you shall see how the Sack will clip his tongue.


Maid. I warrant you, I Will fit him.


Want. When he is in his discourse, leave him and come down into the Parlour,
and steal away his box with the false Rings that stands by his bedside; I have
all his little Plate here already.


Maid. Make you haste, I Will warrant you I Will dress him.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter the Captain with a Letter in his hand, and his Boy to him with a Candle,
his going to write the superscription. Boy. SIR, the Lady Love-all passed by
even now.


Capt. The Lady Love-all? which way went she.


Boy. To the rich Lady the Widow, where your Worship dined.


Capt. It Is no matter; here, carry this Letter, and bring an answer to the
Devil quickly; and tell her we'll stay there till the time be fit for the
design.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter Careless, Wild, and a Drawer, at the Devil. Careless. JAck, How goes the
world? Bring us some bottles of the best Wine.


Drawer. You shall, Sir; your Worship is welcome into England.


Carel. Why look you, who says a Drawer can say nothing, but anan, anan, Sir?
score a quart of Sack in the half moon.


Draw. Your Worship is merry; but I Will fetch you that, Sir, shall speak Greek,
and make your Worship prophecy, you drank none such in your journey.


VVild. Do it then, and make a hole in this Angel thou may creep through;
who is it that peepes, a Fiddler? Bring him by the Gives him an Angel. Ears.


[Enter the Tailor that pipes. Tailor. A Tailor, an't like your Worship.


Carel. A Tailor? have thou a stout Faith?


Tailor. I have had, an't like your Worship; But now I am in despair.


Carl. Why then thou art damned; go, go home, and throw thy self into thine own
Hell, it is the next way to the other.


Tailor. I hope your Worship is not displeased.


Carel. What do do here? a Tailor without faith, dos't come to take measure
of ours?


Tailor. No, I come to speak with one Master Jolly, a Courtier, a very fine
spoken Gentleman, and a just Compter, but one of the worst pay-masters in the
world.


VVild. As thou love me, let us keep him here till he comes, and make him
valiant with Sack that he may urge him till he beats Aside. him; we shall have
the sport, and be revenged upon the Rogue for dunning a Genleman in a Tavern.


Carel. I Will charge him: Here drink, poor fellow, and stay in the next room
till he comes.


Tailor. I thank your Worship, but I am fasting; and if it please your Worship
to call for a dozen of Manchets that I may eat a crust first, then I Will make
bold with a glass of your Sack.


VVild. Here, here, drink in the mean time, fetch him some bread.


Tailor. Will your Worship have me drink all this vessel of Sack?


Carel. Yes, yes, off with it, 'twill do you no harm. The Taylo drinks.


VVild. Why do you not take some Order with that Jolly to make him pay thee?


Tailor. I have petitioned him often, but can do no good.


Carel. A pox upon him, petition him, his heart is hardened to ill, threaten to
arrest him; nothing but Sergeant can touch his Conscience.


Tailor. Truly, Gentlemen, I have reason to be angry, for he uses me ill, when
I ask him for my money. Jolly speaks within.


Jolly. Where is Master VVild, and Master Careless?


Tailor. I hear his voice.


Jolly. Let the Coach stay. How now, who would he speak with?


[Enter Jolly. VVild. Do not you know?


Jolly. Yes, and be you Judge if the Rogue does not suffer deservedly; I have
bid him any time this twelve month but send his wife, and I Will pay her, and
the Rogue replies, no body shall lie with his wife but himself.


Carel. Nay, if you be such a one.


Tailor. No more they shall not, I am but a poor man.


Jolly. By this hand, he is drunk.


Tailor. Nay then, I arrest you in mine own Name at his Majesty's Suit.


VVild. As I live, thou shall not beat him.


Jolly. Beat him? I Will kiss him, I Will pay him, and carry him about with me, and
be at the charge of Sack to keep him in the humor.


Tailor. Help, rescue, I Will have his body, no Bail shall serve. He hugs the
quart pot.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Sir, yonder is a Gentleman would speak with you; I do not
like his followers.


Joll. What are they, Bailiffs?


Drawer. Little better.


Joll. Send him up alone, and stand you ready at the Stairs feet.


Carel. How can that be?


Joll. It is the Scrivener at the Corner, pick a Quarrel with him for coming
into our Company; the Drawers will be armed behind them, and we will so rout
the Rascals; take your swords, and let him sleep.


Carel. What Scrivener?


Joll. Cropp the Brownist, he that the Ballad was made on.


Carel. What Ballad?


Joll. Have not you heard of the Scriveners Wife that brought the Black-moore
from the holy Land, and made him a Brownist; and in pure charity lay with him,
and was delivered of a Mag-Pie; a pied Prophet; which when the elect saw, they
prophesi'd, if it lived, 'twould prove a great enemy to their Sect; for the
Midwife cried out, 'twas born a Bishop, with Tippet and white-sleeves; at
which the zealous Mother cried, Down with the Idol; so the Midwife and she in
pure devotion killed it.


Wild. Killed it? what became of them?


Joll. Why, they were taken and condemned, and suffered under a Catholic
Sheriff, that afflicted them with the Letany all the way from Newgate to the
Gallows, which in Rog'ry he made to be set up Altar-wise too, and hanged them
without a Psalm.


Wild. But how took they that breach of Privilege?


Joll. I know not, Gregory turned them off, and so they descended, and became
Brown-martyrs.


Wild. And is the husband at door now?


Joll. Yes, yes, but he is married again to a rich Widow at Wapping, a Wench of
another temper, one that you cannot please better then by abusing him; I always
pick quarrels with him, that she may reconcile us, the peace is always worth a
dinner, at least. Hark, I hear him. -- Save you Mr. Cropp, you are come in the
nick to pledge a health.


Crop. No, Sir, I have other business, shall I be paid my money, or no?


Joll. Yes. Jolly drinks.


Crop. Sir?


Joll. You asked whether you should be paid your money, or no, and I said, Yes.


Crop. Pray, Sir, be plain.


Carel. And be you so, Sir; how durst you come into this Room, and company,
without leave?


Crop. Sir, I have come into good Lords company, er'e now.


Carel. It may be so, but you shall either fall upon your knees, and pledge
this health, or you come no more into Lords companies, no, By these hilts.


Crop. It Is Idolatry; Do, martyr me, I will not kneel, nor join They tug bim
and make him kneel. in sin with the wicked.


Joll. Either kneel, or I Will tear thy Cloak, which by the age and looks, may be
that which was writ for in the time of the Primitive Church.


Crop. Pay me, and I Will wear a better; it would be honestlier done, then to
abuse this, and profane the Text; a Text that shows your Bishops in those days
wore no Lawn-sleeves; and you may be ashamed to protect him that will not pay
his debts; The cries of the Widow will come against you for it.


Joll. Remember, Sirrah, the dinners and suppers, fat Venison and good words, I
was fain to give you, Christning your Children still, by the way of Brokadge;
count that charge, and how often I have kept you from fining for Sheriff, and
thou art in my debt; then I am damned for speaking well of thee so often
against my conscience, which you never consider.


Crop. I am an honest man, Sir.


Joll. Then ushering your wife, and Mistress Ugly her daughter, to Plays and
Masks at Court; you think these courtesies deserve nothing in the hundred;
it is true, they made room for themselves with their dagger Elbows; and when
Spider your daughter laid about her with her breath, the Devil would not have
sat near her.


Crop. You did not borrow my money with this language.


Joll. No, Sirrah; then I was fain to flatter you, and endure the familiarity
of your family, and hear (nay fain sometimes to join in) the lying praises of
the holy Sister that expired at Tyburn.


Crop. Do, abuse her, and be cursed; it is well known she died a He offers to go,
and Jolly stays him. martyr; and her blood will be upon some of you, it is her
Orphans money I require; and this is the last time I Will ask it, I Will find a way
to get it.


Joll. Ar't serious? By that light, I Will consent, and take it for an infinite
Obligation if thou will teach the rest of my Creditors that trick; 'twill save
me a world of labor; For, hang me if I know how to do it.


Crop. Well, Sir, since I see your resolution, I shall make it my business.


Carel. Prithee, let us be rid of this fool.


Crop. Fool? let him pay the fool his money, and he will be gone.


Joll. No, Sir, not a farthing; 'twas my business to borrow it, and it shall be
yours to get it in again; nay, By this hand, I Will be feasted too, and have good
words; nay, thou shall lend me more er'e thou get'st this again.


Crop. I Will lay my Action upon you.


Joll. Your Action you Rogue, lay two. They kick him and thrust him out the
room.


Carel. Lay three for Battery; What have we here? a she Creditor too? who would
she speak with?


Enter Faithful, Wild and Careless return and meet her. Wild. She looks as if
she had trusted in her time.


Carel. Would you speak with any here, old Gentlewoman?


Faithf. My business is to Mr. Jolly.


Carel. From your self, or are you but a Messenger?


Faithf. My business, Sir, is from a Lady.


Carel. From a Lady? from what Lady, pray? Why so coy?


Faithf. From a Lady in the Town.


Carel. Hoh! hoh! from a Lady in the Town; Is it possible I should have guest
you came from a Lady in the Suburbs, or some Country-madam, by your riding face?


[Enter Jolly again. Joll. I think we have routed the Rascals. Faithful? what
makes thy gravity in a Tavern?


Faithf. Sport, it seems, for your saucy companions.


Joll. Ho, ho, Mull, ho; No Fury, Faithful.


Faithf. It Is well, Sir; my Lady presents her service to you, and has sent you
a Letter, there is my business.


Carel. Prithee, who is her Lady?


Joll. The Lady Love-all.


Carel. Oh, oh, does she serve that old Lady? God help her.


Faithf. God help her: Pray for your self, Sir, my Lady scorns your prayers.


Joll. Faithful, come hither; Prithee is thy Lady drunk?


Faithf. Drunk, Sir?


Joll. I, drunk, or mad, she would never writ this else; she requires me, here, to
send back by you the Pearl she gave me this morning; which sure she would never do
if she were sober; for you know, I earned them hard.


Faithf. I know? What do I know? you will not defame my Lady, will you?


Carel. By no means, this is by way of counsel; fie, give a thing, and take a
thing; if he did not perform, he shall come at night, and pay his scores.


Faithf. It Is well, Sir; is this your return for my Ladies Favors? shall I
have the Pearl, Sir?


Joll. No; and tell her it is the opinion of us all, he that opens her stinking
Oyster is worthy of the Pearl.


Faithf. You are a foul-mouthed fellow, Sirrah; and I shall live to see you
load a Gallows, when my Lady shall find the way to her own again.


Joll. If she miss, there are diverse can direct her, you know; adieu, Faithful,
do you hear? steal privately down by the backdoor, lest some knavish Boy spy
thee, and call thine age, Baud.


[Exit Faithful. Carel. Prithee, who is this thing?


Joll. It Is my Ladies Waiting Woman, her Baud, her she Confesfor, her self at
second hand; her beginning was simple and below stairs, till her Lady finding
her to be a likely promising Baud; secret as the Key at her Girdle, obedient as
her thoughts, those virtues raised her from the flat Peti-coat, and Kercher, to
the Gorget and Bum-roll; and I remember 'twas good; sport at first, to see the
Wench perp! ext with her Metamorphosis; she since has been in love with all the
Family, and now sighs after the Levite; and if he forsake her too, I prophecy,
a Waiting-womans curse will fall upon her, to dye old, despised, poor, and out
of fashion.


[Enter Capt. Capt. Why do you not hang out a painted cloth? and take two
pence a piece, and let in all the tame fools at door, those sons of wonder that
now gape, and think you mad.


Carel. It Is no matter what they think, madness is proper here; are not Taverns
Bacchus his Temples, the place of madness, Does not the sign of madness hang
out at the door?


Joll. While we within possess our joys and cups, as full of pleasure as
weeping Niobe's afflicted eyes were swelled with grief and tears; Blessing on
the cause that made our joys thus complete; for see Plutus in our Pockets, Mars
by our sides, Bacchus in our head, self-love in our hearts, and change of
Virgins in our Arms, Beauties whose eyes and hearts speak love and welcome; No
rigid thinkers, no niggard beauties that maliciously rake up their fire in
green sickness to preserve a spark that shall flame only in some dull day of
Marriage; let such swear and forswear, till (of the whole Parish) they love
each other least, whilst we wisely set out our cobwebs in the most perspicuous
places to catch these foolish flies.


Carel. He Is in the right; do think we retreated hither to beat a bargain
for a score of Sheep, or dispute the legality of Votes, and weigh the power of
Prerogative and Parliament, and club for concluding Sack, or read the Fathers
here, till we grow costive, like those that have worn their suffering Elbows
bare, to find a knowledge to perplex'em? A pox on such brain-breaking thoughts;
avoid them, and take with me into thy hand a glass of eternal Sack, and
prophecy the restoration of senses, and the fall of a Lover from grace, which
our dear friend, Mr. Jolly, will prove to whom the Lady Love-all (by Faithful
lately departed) sent for the Pearl you wot of.


Capt. But, I hope, he had the grace to keep them.


Joll. No, no; I Am a fool, I.


Capt. Was not my Boy here?


Joll. No, we saw him not.


Capt. A pox of the Rogue, he is grown so lasie.


Wild. Your Boy is come in just now, and called for the key of the backdoor,
there is women with him.


Capt. Oh! that is well, it is Wanton; I sent for her, to laugh over the story of
the old Lady and her Pearl; where have you been all this while, Sirrah?


[Enter Boy. Boy. I could overtake the Coach, Sir, no sooner.


Capt. The Coach? what Coach?


Boy. The Lady Love-alls.


Capt. The Lady Love-alls? why what had you to do with her Coach?


Boy. I went to give her the Letter your worship sent her.


Capt. The Letter? what Letter?


Boy. That your worship gave me.


Capt. That I writ, at Neds house, to Wanton?


Boy. The Letter you gave me, Sir, was directed to the Lady Love-all, and she
stormed like a mad-woman at the reading of it.


Carel. Why, thou will not beat the Boy for thy own fault? what Letter was it?


Capt. 'Twas enough, only a relation of the Pearl, wherein she finds her self
sufficiently abused to Wanton.


Joll. Now, Gentlemen, you have two to laugh at.


Capt. A pox of fooling, let us resolve what to do, there is no denying, for she
has all the particulars under my hand.


Boy. You must resolve of something, for she is coming, and stayed only till the
backdoor was opened.


Capt. How did she know I was here?


Boy. Your worship bad me tell her, you would stay here for her.


Carel. How came this mistake?


Capt. Why, the Devil ought us a shame it seems. You know I went home to give
Wanton an account how we advanced in our design; and when I was writing the
superscription, I remember the Boy came in and told me the Lady Love-all passed
by.


Joll. And so, it seems, you in pure mistake directed your Letter to her.


Carel. Well, resolve what you will do with her, when she comes.


Capt. Faith, bear it like men, it is but an old Lady lost; lets resolve to
defy her, we are sure of our Pearl; but lest we prolong the war, take the
first occasion you can all to avoid the room; when she is alone, I Will try
whether she will listen to a composition.


Joll. Have you no friends in the close Committee?


Capt. Yes, yes, I am an Essex man.


Carel. Then get some of them to move, it may be voted no Letter.


Joll. I, I; and after it is voted no Letter, then vote it false, scandalous and
illegal, and that is in it; they have a president for it in the Danish packet,
which they took from a foolish fellow, who presuming upon the Law of Nations,
came upon an Embassy to the King without an Order, or Pass from both houses.


Capt. Hark, I hear her coming.


[Enter Love-all and Faithf. Love. Sir, I received a Letter, but by what
accident I know not; for I believe it was not intended me, though the contents
concern me.


Capt. Madam, it is too late to deny it; is it peace or war you bring? without
dispute, if war, I hang out my defiance; if peace, I yield my weapon into your
hands.


Love. Are you all unworthy? your whole sex falsehood? is it not possible to
oblige a man to be loyal? this is such a treachery no age can match; apply your
self with youth and wit to gain a Ladies love and friendship only to betray it?
was it not enough you commanded my fortune, but you must wrack my honor too,
and instead of being grateful for that charity which still assisted your wants,
strive to pay men with injuries, and attempt to make the world believe I pay to
lose my fame? and then make me the He smiles. scorned subject of your Whores
mirth; Base and unworthy, do you smile, false one? I shall find a time for you
too, and my vengeance shall find you all.


Faithf. Yea, Sir; and you that had such a ready wit to proclaim my Lady, Whore
and me Baud, I hope to see you load a Gallows for it.


Capt. Once again, is it peace or war?


Love. Peace? I Will have thy blood first, Dog; where is my Pearl? -- You ought to
right me, Sir, in this particular; it was to you I She speaks to Wild. sent
them.


Wild. Madam, I sent not for them.


Capt. No more words; I have them, I earned them, and you paid them.


Faithf. You are a foul-mouthed fellow, Sirrah.


Love. Peace, Wench, I scorn their slander, it cannot shake my honor; it is too
weighty and too fixed for their calumny.


Joll. I Will be sworn for my part on it, I think it is a great honor; I am sure
I had as much as I could carry away in ten nights, and yet there was no miss
on it.


Capt. You? I think so; there is no mark of my work, you see, and yet I came
after thee, and brought away loads would have sunk a Sedan-man.


Wild. By this relation she should be a woman of a great fame.


Carel. Let that consideration, with her condition, and her age, move some
reverence, at least to what she was; Madam, I am sorry I cannot serve you in
this particular.


[Exe. Joll. and Carel. Love. I see all your mean baseness, pursue your scorn;
Come, let us go, Wench, I shall find some to right my fame; and though I have
lost my opinion, I have gained a knowledge how to distinguish of Love
hereafter; and I shall scorn you and all your Sex, that have not Soul enough to
value a noble Friendship.


Wild. Pray, Madam, let me speak with you.


Capt. We'll have no whispering; I said it, and I Will maintain it with my sword.


[Enter Drawer. Drawer. Sir, there is one without would speak with you?


Capt. With me?


Drawer. No, Sir, with Master Wild.


Wild. Madam, I Will wait upon you presently.


[Exit Wild. Capt. Madam, I know my Company is displeasing to you, therefore
I Will take my leave; Drawer, show me another Room? The Capt. makes a turn or
two, they look at each other, then be goes out.


[Exit Captain. Love-all. Oh Faithful, Faithful; I am most miserably abused,
and can find no way to my Revenge.


Faithf. Madam, I Will give them Rats-bane, and speedily too, ere they can tell;
for that Rascal the Captain has a Tongue else, will proclaim you, and undo
your Fame for ever.


Love-all. I, I, my Fame, my Fame, Faithful; and if it were not for mine
Honor, (which I have kept unstained to this minute) I would not care.


Faithf. This it is; you will still set your affection upon every young thing;
I could but tell you on it.


Love-all. Who could have suspected they would have been so false in their
Loves to me that have been so faithful to them. -- Honest Friend, where is
Master Wild?


[Enter Drawer. Drawer. The other Gentlemen carried him away with them?


Love-all. Are they all gone then?


Drawer. Yes, by this hand; These Gentlemen are quickly satisfied; what an ugly
Whore they have got! how she states it! Aside.


Love-all. Come, let us go Wench. She offers to go.


Drawer. Mistress, who pays the reckoning?


Love-all. What says he?


Faithf. He asks me, who pays the reckoning?


Love-all. Who pays the reckoning? why, what have we to do with the reckoning?


Drawer. Shut the door, Dick, we'll have the reckoning before you go.


Faithf. Why, good man sawce-box, you will not make my Lady pay for their
reckoning, will you?


Drawer. My Lady? a pox of her Title, she would need of something to make her pass.


Faithf. What do you say, Sirrah?


Drawer. I say, the Gentlemen paid well for their sport; and I know no reason
why we should lose our reckoning.


Love-all. What do you take me for, my Friend?


Drawer. In troth, I take you for nothing; but I would be loath to take you for
that use I think they made shift with you for.


Faith. Madam, this is that Rascally Captains plot.


Love-all. Patience, Patience, oh for a bite at the slaves heart. Friend,
mistake me not, my name is Love-all, a Lady; send one along with me and you
shall have your money.


Drawer. You must pardon me, Madam, I am but a Servant; if you be a Lady pray
sit in an Inner Room, and send home your Woman for the money; The sum is six
pounds, and be pleased to remember the Waiters.


Love-all. Go Faithful, go fetch the money; Oh Revenge, Revenge: shall I lose
my Honor, and have no Revenge.


[Exeunt omn. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Wanton, Captain, Careless and Wild. Want. BY all that a longing Bride
hopes for, which I am not, I am better pleased with this Revenge then mine own
plot, which takes as I could wish; I have so anointed my high Priests with
Sack, that he would have confuted Baal's Priest; and now he does so slumber in
his Ale, and calls to bed already, swears the Sun is set.


Capt. Faith, Wench, her abusing of me made me leave her for the Reckoning.


Carel. Yes, faith, they have treated her upsey Whore lain with her, told, and
then pawned her.


Want. Yes, yes, you are fine things; I wonder Women, can endure you; for me, I
expect you worse, and am armed for it.


VVild. Faith let us send and release her, the jest is gone far enough; as I
live, I pity her.


Want. Pity her? hang her, and rid the Country of her, she is a thing wears
out her limbs as fast as her clothes, one that never goes to bed at all, nor
sleeps in a whole skin, but is taken to pieces like a Motion, as if she were
too long; she should be hanged for offering to be a Whore.


Capt. As I live, she is in the right; I peeped once to see what she did before
she went to bed; By this light, her Maids were dissecting her; and when they
had done, they brought some of her to bed, and the rest they either pined or
hung up, and so she lay dismembered till Morning; in which time, her Chamber was
strewn all over, like an Anatomy School.


Want. And when she travels any where she is transported with as great a care,
and fear of spoiling, as a Juglers Motion, when he removes from Fair to Fair.


Carel. She is a right broken Gamester, who, though she lacks wherewithal to
play, yet loves to be looking on.


Enter Wantons Maid. Baud. He is awake, and calls for you impatiently, he would
fain be in Bed, the Company is all gone.


Want. Are you instructed?


Baud. Let me alone, I Will warrant you for my part.


Want. Farewell then, you are all ready; who plays Master Constable?


Capt. I, I; and Ned Jolly the sumner.


Want. Farewell, farewell then.


Exit Wanton and Baud. Wild. It is a delicate wench.


Carel. She has excellent flesh, and a fine face; by this light, we They
whisper this. must depose the Captain from his reign here.


Wild. I like her shrewdly; I hate a wench that is all Whore and no Company;
This is a Comedy all day, and a Fair at night.


Carel. I hope to exalt the Parsons horn here.


Capt. And what think you? is it not a sweet sin, this lying with another man's
Wife? Wanton above.


Want. Is Jolly come


Capt. No, but he will be here instantly.


Wild. Is he a bed?


Want. Yes, yes, and he sleeps as if he had been put to bed by his Sexton,
with dust to dust, and ashes to ashes.


Capt. And we'll wake him with that shall be as terrible to him as the latter
day.


Want. Let him sleep a while that he may be fresh, else the Jest is spoiled;
for it is his sense of his disgrace must work my Ends.


Wild. I Will go home then, and get supper ready, and expect you.


[Enter Jolly. Capt. Do, Our Scene lies here; Who Is there, Jolly?


Joll. Yes.


Capt. Are you fitted?


Joll. Yes, I have got the Blackfriars Music; I was fain to stay till the
last Act; and who do you think I saw there?


Wild. I know not.


Joll. Guess.


Wild. Prithee, I cannot guess.


Joll. Your Aunt and Mistress Pleasant, and trusty Secret.


Wild. What man?


Joll. The Lovers only, so close in a Box!


Capt. It will be a match, and there is an End; prithee let them go to it; what
is it to Us, let us mind our business now, and think on them hereafter.


Want. A pox upon them for a couple of Stauk-hounds; have they killed at last?
Why, this is Fools fortune; it would be long enough ere one that has wit got
such a wife.


Capt. No more of this now; have you borrowed the watchmens Coats?


Joll. Yes, and Bills, Beards, and Constables staff, and Lanthorn; and let me
alone to fit him, for the Summer; But when this is done I expect my Fee, a
Tithe Night at least; Wanton, I will lie with thee for thy Roguery; what are
you dumb, you will not refuse me, I hope?


Want. Not, if I thought thou desiredst it; but I hate to have it desired
indifferently, and but so so done neither when it is done.


Joll. I hope you will not disgrace my work, will you?


Want. Faith, they say thy pleasure lies in thy Tongue; and therefore, Though I
do not give thee leave to lie with me, yet I will give thee as good a thing
that will please thee as well.


Joll. Some Roguery I expected.


Want. No Faith, I am serious; and because I will please you both, Master Wild
shall lie here, and you shall have leave to say you do, which will please you
as well.


Joll. Faith, and my part is some pleasure, else, I have loved, enjoyed, and
told, is mistook.


Want. I, but never to love, seldom enjoy, and always tell? Faugh, it stinks,
and stains worse then Shoreditch dirt, and women hate and dread men for it; Why,
I that am a whore professed cannot see you, he digest it, though it be my
Profit and Interest. For to be a private whore in this Town starves in the nest
like young Birds when the old one's killed.


Carel. Excellent Girl, it is too true Jolly; your tongue has kept, many a woman
honest.


Want. Faith, it is a truth, this I shall say, you may all better your pleasures
by, if you will observe it; I dare say, the fear of telling keeps more women
honest then Bridewell Hemp; And were you wise men, and true Lovers of liberty,
now were the time to bring wenching to that perfection no age could ever have
hoped; now you may sow such seed of pleasure, you may be prayed for hereafter;
Now, in this Age of zeal and Ignorance, would I have you four, in old clothes,
and demure looks, present a Petition to both Houses, and say, you are men
touched in Conscience for your share in that wicked ness which is known to
their worships by the pleasure of Adultery, and desire it may be death, and
that a Law may be passed to that purpose; How the women will pray for you, and
at their own charges rear Statu's in memory of their Benefactors; the young and
kind would then haunt your Chambers, Pray, and present you, and Court the
Sanguine youth, for the sweet sin secured by such a Law; None would lose an
Occasion, nor churlishly oppose kind Nature, nor refuse to listen to her
summons, when youth and Passion calls for those forbidden sweets; when such
security as your lives are at stake, who would fear to trust; with this Law all
Oaths and Protestations are cancelled; Letters and Bawdes would grow useless
too; By instinct the Kind will find the Kind; and having one nature become of
one mind; Now we lose an Age, to observe and know a man's humor, ere we dare
trust him; But get this Law, then it is, like and enjoy; and whereas now, with
expense of time and Fortune, you may glean some one Mistress amongst your
neighbors wives, you shall reap women whole Armfulls as in the Common field;
there is one small Town, wise only in this Law; and I have heard them say,
that know it well, There has been but one Execution this hundred years; yet the
same party searched seven years, and could not find an honest woman in the Town.


Carel. An Excellent Plot, let us about it; Ink and Paper, dear Wanton, we
will draw the Petition presently.


Want. Will Master Jolly consent too? You must not then, as soon as a handsome
woman is named, smile, and stroke your Beard, tell him that is next you, you
have layen with her; such a lie is as dangerous as a truth, and 'twere but
Justice to have thee hanged for a sin thou never commitedst, for having defamed
so many women.


Joll. If all those Liars were hanged, I believe the scale would weigh down the
guilty.


Want. One Rogue hanged, for Example, would make a thousand kind Girls: If it
take it shall be called my Law, Wanton's Law; Then we may go in Pettycoats
again, for women grew imperious and wore the Breeches, only to fright the poor
cuckolds, and make the Fools digest their Horns -- Are you all ready, shall I
open the door?


Capt. Yes.


Wild. I Will expect you at my house.


[Exit Wild one way, and the rest of the Company another. Omnes. We Will come,
we will come.


Capt. So, knock louder. They knock within, and the Parson discovered in his
Bed and the Baud with him.


Pars. Who Is there? what would you have?


Capt. Here Is his Majesty's Watch, and Master Constables Worship must come in;
We have a warrant from the Lords to search for a Delinquent.


Pars. You come not here, I Will answer your warrant to morrow.


Joll. Break open the door.


Pars. I would you durst.


Baud. Lord! Dear what shall we do?


Pars. Why, sweet, I Will warrant you, art thou not my wife, my Rib, bone of my
bone? I Will suffer any thing ere one hair of thee shall be touched.


Baud. Hark, they break open the door.


Pars. They dare not; why do thou tremble so? alas, sweet Innocence, how it
shakes?


Capt. Break open the door.


Pars. I Will complain to the Bishop of this Insolence.


Baud. They come, they come, Lamb.


Pars. No matter sweet; They dare not touch thee; what would He delivers the
Warrant. you have Mr. Constable? you are very rude.


Capt. Read our Warrant, and our business will excuse us? do you know any such
person as you find there?


Pars. Yes, Sir, but not by this name; such a woman is my wife, and no
Lindabrides; we were married to day, and I Will justify her my wife the next
Court day; you have your answer, and may be gone.


Joll. We must take no notice of such Excuses now; if she be your wife, make it
appear in Court, and she will be delivered unto you.


Pars. If she be my wife Sir? I have wedded her and Bedded her, what other
Ceremonies would you have? Be not afraid, sweet heart.


Joll. Sir, We can do no less then Execute our Warrant; we are but Servants;
And, Master Constable, I charge you in the Kings Name to do your Duty; behold
the body of the Delinquent.


Pars. Touch her that dares; I Will put my Dagger in him, fear He takes his
Dagger..

Here they strive to take her out.

nothing, sweet heart; Master Constable you will repent this Insolence offered to
a man of my Coat.


Baud. Help, my dearest, will you let me be haled thus?


Pars. Villains, what will you do? Murder, Rape.


Capt. Yes, yes, it is likely; I look like a Ravisher.


Joll. Hold him, and we will do well enough with her.


Capt. What have we here, an old woman? As they go to pull her out of the Bed,
they discover the Baud. When they let him go he turn^ to her, and holds her in
his Arms.


Pars. Let me go, slaves and Murderers.


Capt. Let him go.


Joll. Do any of you know this woman? this is not she we looked for.


Pars. No? Rascal, that mistake shall not excuse you.


Joll. It is old Goodman what do you call him? his wife.


Capt. Hold the Candle, and let us see her face.


When they hold the Candle, she lies in his bosom and his Arms about her; She
must be as nastily dressed as they can dress her; when he sees her he falls into
a maze, and shoves her from him. Joll. What have were here, Adultery? take them
both, here will be new matter.


Pars. Master Constable, a little Argument will persuade you to believe I am
grossly abused; sure this does not look like a piece that a man would sin to
enjoy, let that then move your Pity, and care of my Reputation; consider my
calling, and do not bring me to a public shame for what you're sure I am not
guilty of, but by plot of some Villains.


Baud. Dear, will you disclaim me now?


Pars. Oh, Impudence!


Joll. Master Constable, do your duty; take them both away, as you will answer
it.


Capt. Give him his Cassock, to cover him. They put on his Cassock and her
coat, and lead them away.


Pars. Why Gentlemen, whither will you carry me?


Capt. To the next Justice, I think it is Master Wild, he is newly come from
travel, it will be a good way, Neighbors, to express our Respects to him.


Pars. No faith, Gentlemen, e'ne go the next way to Tybourn, and dispatch the
business without Ceremony, for yee'll utterly disgrace me; this is that damned
Captain; My wife is abroad too, I fear she is of the Plot.


Joll. Come, away with them.


Baud. Whither will they lead us, Dear?


Pars. Oh, oh, Impudence! Gentlemen, do not lead us together I beseech you.


Capt. Come, come, lead them together, no Ceremony's; your faults are both
alike.


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Wanton and Wild. Want. YOu had best brag now, and use me like my Lady
what'st ye call; But if you do I care not.


Wild. Come, you are a Fool, I Will be a faithful Friend, and make good conditions
for thee before thy husband be quit.


Want. You must do it now or never.


Wild. Hark, hark, I hear them -- What Is the news? Wild sits down with Wanton
in his Lap.


Enter Captain, Jolly, Watch, Baud and Parson. Capt. We have brought a Couple
of Delinquents before your Worship, they have committed a very foul fault.


Joll. And we have brought the fault along too, that your Worship may see it,
you will be the better able to judge of the offenders.


Pars. Ha! What do I see? my wife in Master Justices Lap?


Want. What has the poor fellow done?


Capt. Why Madam, he has been taken a Bed with this woman, another man's wife.


Want. In bed with her? and do you raise him to punish him? Master Constable,
if you would afflict him, Command them to lie together again; Is not the man
mad?


Pars. This is fine Roguery, I find who rules the roast.


VVild. Well, to the business; you say, he was taken in bed with another man's
wife.


Capt. Yes, and't like your Worship.


VVild. Make his Mittimus to the Hole at Newgate.


Want. Sure I have seen this Fellows face. -- Friend, have I never seen your
face before?


Pars. If I mistake not, I have seen one very like your Ladyships too, she was
a Captains cast-whore in the Town. I shall have a time to be revenged.


Wild. How now, Sirrah? are you threatening? away with him.


Capt. I Will fetch a stronger Watch, Sir, and return presently.


Wild. Do, Master Constable, and give the poor Woman something, and set her
free; for I dare say 'twas his wickedness, she looks like one that never
thought on such a thing.


Baud. God bless your Worship, I am innocent; he never left making Love till I
consented.


[Enter Captain in his own shape. Pars. Oh miserable! miserable!


Capt. How now, what is the news here? my honored Friend, and Master Parson,
what makes you here at this time of night? Why I should have thought this a
time to have envied you for your fair Brides embraces, do you give these
favors? are these your Bride-laces? It Is a new way. Plays with the cord that
binds his Arms.


Pars. Is it new to you?


Want. How now Captain?


Capt. Wanton, is this your plot to endear your Husband to you?


Pars. No, it is thy plot, poor beaten Captain, but I shall be revenged.


Capt. Yes, faith, it was my plot, and I glory in it, to undermine my
Machiavell, which so greedily swallowed that sweet bait that had this hook.


Pars. It Is well.


Capt. But my anger ends not here. Remember the base language you gave me, Son
of a thousand Fathers, Captain of a tame band, and one that got my living by
the long staffe-speeches; for which, and thy former Treacheries, I Will ruin
thee, Slave; I Will have no more Mercy on thee, then old women on blind puppies;
I Will bring you to your Commendations in Latin Epistles again, nor leave thee
any thing to live on, no, not Bread, but what thou earn'st by raking
Gentlewomens names in Anagrams; and Master Justice, if ever you will oblige me,
stand to me now, that I may procure the whipping of him from the Reverend Bench.


Pars. I am undone.


Wild. I can do nothing but Justice, you must excuse me; I shall only make it
appear how fit it is to punish this kind of sin in that Coat in time, and to
crush such serpents in the shells.


Pars. Mercy, Oh Mercy! They pull him away.


Wild. Officers, away with him.


Pars. No Mercy?


Want. Yes, upon Conditions there may be some Mercy. The Parson looks very
dejected.


Wild. And these they are -- let the watch stay in the the other Room. -- First,
your Wife shall have her liberty, and you yours, as she reports of you; and
when you bring her with you, you shall be welcome; then you shall not be
jealous, that is another point.


[Exit Watch. Capt. That he shall have a Cure for --


Want. Yes, yes, I Will apply something to his Eyes shall cure him of his doubt.


VVild. Then you shall ask the Captain pardon and your Wife; to him you shall
allow half your Parsonage to maintain her; The Deeds are ready within; if
you will sign them, and deliver your Wife to our use, she shall discharge you.


Pars. I submit, Sir, But I hope your Worship will desire no witness to the use
of my Wife; The Sumner and the Watch too; I hope your Worship will enjoin them
silence.


Want. You shall not need to fear, I Will have a Care of your Credit; She
discovers them. call in the Watch; Do you know these Faces?


Pars. Ha! abused?


Jolly. Nay, no flinching, if you do, I betake me to Master Sumner again.


Capt. And I become severe Master Constable in a trice.


Pars. No, no, I submit, and I hope we are all Friends; I Am sure I have the
hardest part, to forgive.


Want. And I, before all this Company, promise to forget and forgive thee, and
am content to take thee again for my dear and mortal Husband, now you are tame;
but you must see you do so no more, and give your self to be blind; when it is
not fit for you to see; and practice to be deaf; and learn to sleep in time,
and find business to call you away when Gentlemen come that would be private.


Capt. Why so, now things are as they should be; and when you will obey, you
shall command: But when you would be imperious, then I betake me to my
Constables Staff 'till you subscribe. Cedunt Armis Togae; and if it be false
Latin, Parson, you must pardon that too.


Jolly. By this hand, I must have my Tythe-night with thee; thou art such a
wag; say, when? when will thou give me leave? ha!


Want. Never.


Jolly. Never?


Want. No, never.


Jolly. D' ye hear, I am none of them that work for Charity; either resolve to
pay, or I kick down all my Milk again.


Want. What would you have?


Jolly. Give me leave to lie with you.


Want. No indeed.


Jolly. No?


Want. No; but rather then quarrel, as I said before, I will give you leave
to say you have lain with me.


Wild. I am of opinion she owes you nothing now, so Mistress Wanton, take your
Husband; and to remove all doubts, this night I Will be at the charge of a Wed
ding supper.


Pars. This is better then Newgate hole yet, Bridewell Hemp, brown bread and
whip-cord.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter the Widow and Mistress Pleasant, Master Sad, and Master Constant. Wid.
BY my troth, is was a good Play.


Pleas. And I am glad I am come home, for I am en'e as weary with this walking;
For Gods sake whereabouts does the pleasure of walking lie? I swear, I have
often sought it till I was weary, and yet I could never find it. A watch at the
Widows door.


Sadd. What do these Halberds at your door?


Wid. Halberds, where?


Sadd. There, at your Lodging.


Constable. Friend, what would those Watchmen have?


VVatchm. The house is shut up for the sickness this afternoon.


Pleas. The sickness?


VVatchm. Yes forsooth, there is a Coachman dead full of the Tokens.


Sadd. Where is the Officer?


VVatchm. He is gone to seek the Lady of the House, and some other Company that
dined here yesterday, to bring her in, or carry her to the Pesthouse.


Wid. Ha! What shall we do, Niece?


Sadd. If you please to command our Lodging.


Pleas. It will be too much trouble.


Wid. Let Us go to Love-all's.


Pleas. Not I, by my Faith; it is scarce for our Credits to let her come to us.


Wid. Why? is she naught?


Constable. Faith, Madam, her Reputation is not good.


Wid. But what shall we do then?


Constable. Dare you adventure to oblige us?


Wid. Thank you Sir, We'll go to my Nephews at Covent Garden; he may shift
among his acquaintance.


Pleas. It was well thought on, the Piazza is hard by too.


Wid. We'll borrow your Coach thither, and we'll send it you back again
strait.


Constable. We'll wait upon you, Madam.


Wid. This accident troubles me; I am heartily sorry for the poor Fellow.


Pleas. I am sorry too; but pray, Aunt, let us not forget our selves in our
grief; I am not ambitious of a Red-cross upon the door.


Constable. Mistress Pleasant is in the right; for if you stay the Officers will
put you in.


Wid. We shall trouble you, Sir, for your Coach.


[Exe. omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
Enter Parson, Captain, Wild, Wanton, Careless and Jolly. Pars. I Am
reconciled; and will no longer be an uncharitable Churchman; I think this sack
is a cooler.


Capt. What? does it make you to see your error?


Pars. Yes, and consider my man of war; nor will I again dispute his Letters of
Mart, nor call them Passes for Pirates; I am free.


Capt. And welcome, any thing but anger is sufferable, and all is jest when you
laugh; and I will hug thee for abusing me with thy eyes in their scabbards; but
when you rail with drawn eyes, red and naked, threatening a Levites second
revenge to all that touches your Concubine, then I betake me to a
dark-lanthorn, and a Constables-staff, and by help of these Fathers whom I cite
I prove my Text, women that are kind ought to be free.


Pars. But Captain, is it not lawful for us Shepherds to reclaim them?


Capt. A mere mistake; for sin like the Sea may be turned out, but will never
grow less; and though you should drain this Mistress Doll, yet the Whore will
find a place, and perhaps overflow some Maid, till then honest; and so you
prove the author of a new sin, and the defiler of a pure Temple; therefore I
say, while you live, let the Whore alone till she wears out; nor is it safe to
vamp them, as you shall find, read Ball the first and the second.


Wild. No more discourse. Strike up Fiddlers.


Capt. See, who is that knocks?


A Country-dance. When they are merry, singing Catches and drinking healths,
the Wid. Mrs. Pleas. and the two Lovers knock at the door. Serve. Sir, it is
Mistress Pleasant, and the two Gentlemen that dined there to day.


Wild. My Aunt, and Mistress Pleasant.


Joll. What a pox makes them abroad at this time of night?


Capt. It may be, they have been a wenching.


Serve. Sir, they were upon alighting out of the Coach when I came up.


Wild. Quickly, Mrs. Wanton, you and your husband to bed, there is the Key; Mr.
Parson, you know the way to the old Chamber, and to it quickly, all is friends
now.


Pars. Sweet heart, we will steal away.


Want. The Devil on them, they have spoyld our mirth.


[Exit Parson. Wild. Jack, get you and your company down the back-way into the
Kitchen, and stay there till we see what this Visit means.


[Exeunt Fiddlers. Capt. Means! What should it mean? it is nothing but the
mischievous Nature all honest Women are endu'd with, and naturally given to
spoil sport: I wonder what Fart blew them hither to night.


Wild. Nay, have a little patience, Captain; you and Mr. Jolly must sit quietly
a while within, till we know the cause.


Capt. It is but deferring our mirth for an hour, or so. Servant. Sir, here is
my Lady.


Wild. Quickly remove those things there: Captain, step in there. --


[Enter Widow, Pleasant, Sad and Constant. Wid. Nephew, do you not wonder to
see me here, at this time of night?


Wild. I know it is not ordinary, therefore I believe it is some design: what
is it, Mrs. Pleasant? Shall I make one?


Pleasant. As I live, Sir, pure necessity; neither mirth nor kindness has
begot this Visit.


Carless. What, is your Coach broke?


Widow. Faith, Nephew, the truth is, the Sickness is in my house, and my
Coachman died since Dinner.


Wild. The Sickness?


Pleasant. I, as I live, we have been walking since the Play; and when we came
home we found the Watch at the door, and the house shut up.


Sadd. And a Constable gone in search of all those that dined there to day,
with order to furnish us lodgings in the Pesthouse.


Wid. Are you not afraid to receive us?


Wild. As I live, the accident troubles me; and I am sorry such a misfortune
should beget me this favor; and I could wish my self free from the honor, if
the cause were removed too.


Pleas. As I live, Mr. Wild, I must have been forced to have lain with my
servant to night, if you had not received me.


Wild. If I thought so, I would carry you out in my arms, I am so much Mr.
Constant's friend.


Pleas. But are you more his friend then mine, Mr. Wild?


Wild. No, but I presume by this he has gained so much interest as he would not
be very displeasing to you.


Constable. Oh! your humble servant, Sir.


Pleas. If I had had a mind to that lodging, I had never come hither; for when
I have a mind to it, I Will marry without dispute; for I fear no body so much as
a husband; and when I can conquer that doubt, I Will marry at a minutes warning.


Wid. No dispute now, can you furnish us with a couple of Beds?


Wild. Yes, yes.


Wid. And have you er'e a woman in the house?


Wild. My Sisters Maid is here.


Carel. Madam, if you resolve to do us this honor, you shall find clean linen,
and your Beds quickly ready.


Wid. But where will my Nephew and you, Sir, lie to night?


Carel. Oh, Madam, we have acquaintance enough in the Town.


Wid. Well, Sir, we will accept this courtesy; and when you come into Suffolk you
shall command my house.


Wild. Prithee call Bess, and bid her bring sheets to make the Bed; I Will go and
fetch in a Pallet, it is as good a Bed as the other, and if you will stay the
removing, we will set up a Bed-stead.


Pleas. No, a Pallet, pray; but what shall we do for night clothes, Aunt?


Wild. Why, what are those you bought my Sisters?


Wid. Is not that Linen gone yet?


Carel. No faith, Madam, his man forgot it, till the Carriers were gone last
week.


Wild. Will that serve?


Pleas. Yes, yes, pray do us the favor to let us have it, it is but washing
often again.


Wild. Nay, if it will serve, discourse no more; I Will fetch the bundle; and
prithee fetch the Combs and Looking glasses I bought the other day; for other
necessaries that want a name the wench shall furnish you with.


Wid. Nay, but where is she, Nephew?


Wild. I Will call her, if she be not gone to Bed; it is an ignorant young thing,
I am to send her to my Sisters in the Country; I have had such ado to put her
in the Fashion.


Pleas. What Country is she? Prithee, Mr. Wild, let us see her.


Wild. I Will call her down.


[Exit Wild. Sadd. Madam, now we see you are safe we will kiss your hands, and wait
upon you to morrow.


Wid. It must be early then, Sir; for I shall borrow my Nephews Coach, and be
gone betimes into the Country to take a little fresh Air, and prevent the
search.


Constable. Pray, Madam, be pleased to command ours.


Wid. No, Sir, I humbly thank you; my Nephew's will hold our company.


Constable. Your humble servant, Mistress Pleasant.


Sadd. Your servant, Madam.


Pleas. Good night, Mr. Constant.


Wid. Sir, you will excuse us, we have no body here to light you down.


Carel. Madam, I am here your servant as much as those that wear your Livery;
and this house holds no other; we can be civil, Madam, as well as extravagant.


Wid. Your humble servant, Mr. Careless.


Carel. Gentlemen, if you will wait on my Lady to her Chamber, then I Will wait upon
you down.


Sadd. You oblige us, Sir.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. V.
Enter Wild, Captain, Wanton, Parson and Jolly. Capt. THe Plague?


Wild. The Plague; As I live, and all my relation is truth, every syllable;
But, Mrs. Wanton, now must you play your masterpiece; be sure to blush, and
appear but simple enough, and all is well; thou will pass for as arrant a
Chambermaid as any is in the Parish.


Pars. Hum! new Plots?


Capt. Let me put on a Petti-coat and a Muffler, and I Will so Chambermaid it,
and be so diligent with the clean Smock and the Chamber Pot: now would I give
all the Shoes in my Shop to lie with 'em both.


Want. Let me alone to fit them, I can make a scurvey Curt'sie naturally;
remember, I am an Essex woman, if they ask.


Wild. Come, come quickly, take those Sweetmeats; bring the great Cake and
Knife, and Napkins, for they have not supped; and Captain, make some Lemonade,
and send it by the Boy to my Chamber; and do you hear, Jolly, you must stay
till we come, for we must lie with you to night.


Joll. We Will stay, but make haste then.


Capt. And bring our Cloaks and Swords out with you.


Wild. I will, I will; but be quiet all.


Pars. Mr. Wild, I hope there is no Plot in this.


Capt. There Is no jealousy, Mr. Parson; it is all serious upon my life.


[Exeunt omnes, Come away with us. ACT. IV. SCEN. VI.
The Tyring-Room, Curtains drawn, and they discourse, his Chamber, two Beds,
two Tables, Looking-glasses, Night-cloathes, Waste-coats, Sweet-bags,
Sweetmeats and Wine, Wanton dressed like a Chambermaid; all above if the Scene
can be so ordered. Enter Widow and Mrs. Pleasant, Wild and Careless; the Widow
and Mrs. Pleasant Salute Wanton. Wild. FAith, Aunt, it is the first time I have
had the honor to see you in my house; and as a stranger I must salute you.


Wid. As I live, Nephew, I Am ashamed to put you to this trouble.


Wild. It is an obligation. -- Mrs. Pleasant, I know you have not supped; I
pray you be pleased to taste these Sweetmeats, they are of Salls doing; but I
understand not Sweetmeats, the wine I Will answer for; and, in a word, you are
welcome: You are Patrona, and we your slaves.


Carel. Good rest, and a pleasing dream, your humble servant wishes you.


Wid. Good night, Nephew; good night, Mr. Careless.


Pleas. Good night, Mr. Careless; your humble servant, Mr. Wild.


[Exeunt Wild and Careless. Wid. Why I, here are men have some wit; By this
good night, had we lain at my servants, we should have found the laced Cap and
Slippers that have been entailed upon the Family these five descents, advanced
upon the Cup-boards-head instead of Plate. They sit down to undress them.


Pleas. They are a couple of the readiest youths too; how they run and do all
things with a thought! I love him for sending his Sister, a pretty wench.


Wid. Pray, let us go to bed; I am weary.


Pleas. You will not go to bed with all those windows open; sweet heart,
prithee shut them, and bring me hither; -- Do understand me? As I live, it is
a great while since I went to the Play.


Wid. It has been one of the longest days; a year of them would be an Age.


Pleas. Oh, do you grow weary; you will break your Covenant ere the year go out.


Wid. Prithee, shut the windows, and come pin up my hair. The Curtaivs are
closed.


ACT. IV. SCEN. VII.
Enter Wild, Jolly, Careless, Captain and Parson, and Fiddlers, and one with a
Torch, with their Cloaks and their Swords, putting them on. Enter Wilds man.
Wild. SEE you wait diligently, and let them want nothing they call for; come
shall we go? it is very late.


Capt. But how does VVanton carry it?


Wild. They saluted her; and Mrs. Pleasant swore you might see the
Country-simplicity in her Face.


Pars. A pox upon her, crafty Gypsy.


Capt. Why, art not thou glad to see she can be honest when she will?


Pars. I Will show you all a Trick, for her, within these few days, or I Will miss
my aim.


Joll. Come, let us go. They all offer to go.


Capt. I have a mind to stay till Wanton comes.


Wild. Stay a little then, for 'twill not be long ere they be a Bed.


Capt. I hear VVanton's voice.


[Enter Wanton. VVild. Are they a Bed?


Want. Yes, and have so admired you, and Mr. Careless, and abused the Lovers;
well, Gentlemen, you are the wits of the time; but if I might counsel, well
they might lie alone this night; but it should go hard if I lay not with one of
them within a month.


Carel. Were they so taken with their lodging?


Want. All that can be said they said, you are the friendliest men, the
readi'st men, the handsom'st men that had wit; and could tell when to be civil,
and when to be wild; and Mrs. (what is her name) the Younger, asked why Mr.
VVild did not go a wooing to some rich Heir; upon her conscience, she said, you
would speed.


Carel. Well, well, there is a time for all things; come let us go.


Wild. Take a light. -- Good night, VVanton. They offer to depart.


Capt. Do You hear, do you hear; let me speak with you.


Wild. What Is the business? They all come back again.


Capt. I cannot get hence this night: but your good angels hang at my heels;
and if I can prevail, you shall stay.


Wild. What to do?


Capt. What to do? why I Will be hanged if all this Company do not guess.


Joll. Prithee, what should we stay for?


Capt. For the widow, and her Neice; are they worth the watching for a night?


VVild. Yes, certainly.


Capt. Then take my counsel, and let me give it out you are married, you have new
clothes come home this morning, and there is that you spoke of I Will fetch from
the Tailors, and here is a Parson shall rather give them his living, then stay
for a License; the Fiddlers too are ready to salute 'em.


Carel. But if they refuse?


Joll. Which, upon my conscience, they will.


Capt. As you hope, else you are laughed at for missing the widow: Ned, follow
my counsel, appear at her Chamber window in thy Shirt, and salute all that
passes by; let me alone to give it out, and invite Company and provide dinner;
then when the business is known, and I have presented all your friends at Court
with Ribbands, she must consent, or her honor is lost, if you have but the
grace to swear it, and keep your own counsel.


Carel. By this hand, he has reason; and I Will undertake the widow.


VVild. It will incense them, and precipitate the business which is in a fair
way now; and if they have wit, they must hate us for such a treachery.


Capt. If they have wit they will love you; beside, if it come to that, we two
will swear we saw you married, and the Parson shall be sworn he did it: --
Priest, will you not swear?


Pars. Yes, any thing; what is it, Captain?


VVild. If this jest could do it, yet it is base to gain a wife so poorly; she
came hither too for sanctuary; it would be an uncivil and an unhospitable
thing, and look as if I had not merit enough to get a wife without stealing her
from her self; then, it is in mine own house.


Capt. The better; nay, now I think on it, why came she hither? how do you know
the Plague is there? all was well at dinner; I Will be hanged if it be not a
Plot; the Lovers too whom you abused at dinner, are joined with them; a trick,
a mere trick of wit to abuse us; and to morrow when the Birds are flewn, they will
laugh at you, and say, Two Country Ladies put themselves naked into the hands
of three traveled City-wits, and they durst not lay hold on them.


Carel. A pox upon these Niceties.


Want. If they have not some design upon you hang me, why did they talk so
freely before me else?


Carel. Let Us but try, we are not now to begin to make the world talk; nor is
it a new thing to them to hear we are mad fellows.


Capt. If you get them, are they worth having?


Wild. Having? yes.


Capt. If you miss them the Jest is good; Prithee, Ned, let me prevail, it is
but a mad trick.


Wild. If we would, how shall we get into the Chamber?


Want. Let me alone for that; I Will put on my country simplicity, and carry in a
Chamber pot; then under Pretense of bolting the back door I Will open it, and yet
I grudge them the sport so honestly; for you wenchers make the best husbands;
after you are once married, one never see's you.


Capt. I warrant thee wench.


Want. No faith, I have observed it, they are still the doting'st husbands, and
then retreat and become Justices of the Peace, and none so violent upon the
Bench, as they, against us poor sinners; yet I Will do it, for upon my Conscience
the young Gentlewoman will fall upon her back, and thank me.


[Exit Wanton. Capt. Away, go then, and leave your fooling, and in the Morning,
Ned, get in, and plead naked with your hands in the bed.


Pars. And if they cry, put your lips in their mouths, and stop them.


Capt. Why look you, you have the Authority of the Church too.


Wild. Well, I am now resolved; go you about your part, and make the Report
strong.


Carel. And do you here? be sure you set the Cook at work, that if we miss we may
have a good Dinner, and good wine, to drink down our grief.


Capt. Miss? I warrant thee thrive.


[Exit Captain. Carel. Nay, if I knock not down the VVidow, geld me, and come
out to morrow complete Uncle, and salute the Company, with, you are well-come
Gentlemen, and good morrow Nephew Ned.


VVild. Uncle Tom, good morrow, Uncle Tom.


[Enter Wanton. Want. All Is done, the door is open, and they are as still as
Childrens thoughts; it is time you made you ready, which is, to put off your
breeches, for it is almost day; and take my Council, be sure to offer force
enough, the less reason will serve; Especially you, Master VVild, do not put a
may'd to the pain of saying, I.


VVild. I warrant thee, wench; let me alone.


Carel. We Will in, and undress us, and come again; for we must go in at the
back door.


VVild. I Will meet you, is the Captain gone?


[Exe. Wild and Carel. Want. Yes, yes, he is gone.


Joll. Come Master Parson, let us see the Cook in Readiness, where are the
Fiddlers? what will become of our Plot? for the Coachman; Master Sadd and his
friend will stink of their jest if this thrive.


Pars. They have slept all night, on purpose, to play all day.


Joll. When the Ribbands and Points come from the Exchange, pray see the
Fiddlers have some, the Rogues will play so out of tune all day else, they will
spoil the dancing if the plot do take.


Enter Wild, and Careless, in their Shirts, with drawers under; Night-gowns on,
and in Slippers. Want. Let Us see them in the Chamber first, and then I shall go
with some heart about the business; so, so, creep close and quietly; you know
the way, the widow lies in the high bed, and the Pallet is next the door.


Wild. Must we creep? They kneel at the door to go in.

She shakes her Coats over 'em.




Want. Yes, Yes, down upon your knees, always, till you get a woman, and then
stand up for the Cause; stay let me shake my smock over you for luck sake.


Joll. Why so, I warrant you thrive.


Pars. A pox take you, I Will pare your nails when I get you from this place once.


Want. Sweet heart, sweet heart, off with your shoe.


Pars. I, with all my heart, there is an old shoe after you; would I gave all
in my shop the rest were furnished with wives too.


Joll. Parson, the Sun is rising, go send in the Fiddlers, and set the Cook on
work, let him chap soundly.


Pars. I have a tithe Pig at home, I Will e'ne sacrifice it to the Wedding.


[Exit Parson. Want. They will find them in good Posture, they may take Privy
marks if they please; for they said it was so hot they could endure no
clothes, and my simplicity was so diligent to lay them naked, and with such
'twists and turns fastened them to the feet, I Will answer for it, they find not
the way into them in an hour.


[Enter a Servant and Parson. Joll. Why then they may pull up their Smocks, and
hide their faces?


Serve. Master Jolly, there was one without would speak with you.


Joll. Who was it?


Serve. It is the Lady that talks so well.


Joll. They say indeed she has an Excellent Tongue, I would she had changed it
for a face; it is she that has been handsome.


Pars. Who? not the Poetess we met at Master Sadds?


Joll. Yes, the same.


Pars. Sure she is mad.


Joll. Prithee tell her I am gone to bed.


Serve. I have done as well Sir; I told her Mistress Wanton was here, at which
discreetly, being touched with the guilt of her Face, she threw out a Curse or
two and retreated.


Want. Who is this you speak of, I will know who it is.


Pars. Why it is she that married the Genoway Merchant; they conzen'd one
another.


Want. Who? Pegg Driver, Bewgle Eyes?


Joll. The same, the same.


Want. Why she is ugly now?


Pars. Yes, but I have known her, by this hand, as fine a wench as ever sinned
in Town or Suburbs; when I knew her first, she was the Original of all the
wayn-Scote Chambermaids, with Brooms, and barefoot Madams, you see sold at
Temple Bar, and the Exchange.


Want. Ah! thou art a Devil; how could thou find in thy heart to abuse her so?
Thou love Antiquities too; The very memory that she had been handsome should
have pleaded something.


Joll. Was handsome signifies nothing to me.


Want. But she is a wit, and a wench of an Excellent Discourse.


Pars. And as good company as any's in the Town.


Joll. Company? for whom? Leather-Ears, his Majesty of Newgate watch? There her
story will do well, while they louse themselves.


Pars. Well, you are curious now, but the time was, when you have skipp'd for a
kiss.


Joll. Prithee, Parson, no more of wit, and was handsome, but He kisses Wanton.
let us keep to this Text -- and with joy think upon thy little Wanton here,
that is kind, soft, sweet and sound; These are Epithetes for a Mistress; Nor is
there any Elegancy in a woman like it; give me such a naked Scence, to study
Night and Day; I care not for her Tongue, so her face be good; A whore dres't
in verse, and set speeches, tempts me no more to that sweet sin, then the
Statute of whipping can keep me from it; This thing we talked on, which retains
nothing but the name of what she was, is not only Poetical in her discourse,
but her Tears and her Love, her health, nay her Pleasure, were all Fictions,
and had scarce any live-flesh about her till I administered.


Pars. Indeed it is time she sat out, and gave others leave to play; for a
Reveren'd whore is an unseemly sight; besides it makes the sin malicious, which
is but venial else.


Want. Sure, he will make a case of Conscience on it; you should do well (sweet
heart) to recommend her Case to your Brethren that attend the Committee of
Affection, that they may order her to be sound and young again, for the good of
the Commonwealth.


ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Fiddlers, Jolly and Wanton. Jolly. OH, are you ready? are you ready?


Fiddlers. Yes, and't like your worship.


Joll. And did you bid the Cook chop Lustily, and make a Noise?


Fiddlers. Yes, Sir, he is at it.


Want. I hear the Captain.


[Enter Captain. Joll. Have you brought Clothes and Ribbands?


Capt. Yes, yes, all is ready; did you hear them squeak yet?


Want. No, by this light; I think, it is an appointment, and we have been all
abused.


Capt. Give the Fiddlers their Ribbands, and carry the rest in; Mistress VVanton,
you must play my Ladys Woman to day, and Mince it to all that come, and hold up
your head finely when they kiss you, and take heed of swearing when you are
angry, and pledging whole cups when they drink to you.


Want. I Will warrant you, for my part.


Captain. Go get you in then, and let your husband dip the Rosemary.


Jolly. Is all ready?


Captain. All, all, some of the Company are below already, I have so blown it
about, one Porter is gone to the Exchange, to invite Master Wild's Merchant to
his Wedding, and, by the way to bid two or three Fruiterers to send in Fruit
for such a Wedding, another in my Ladies name to Sall's, for sweet meats; I
swore at Bradborn in his Shop my self, that I wondered he would disappoint
Master Wild for his Points, and having so long warning; He protested 'twas not
his fault, but they were ready, and he would send John with them presently; One
of the Watermen is gone to the Mellon Garden, the other to Cooks at the Bear,
for some Bottles of his best Wine, and thence to Gracious-street, to the
Poulterers, and all with directions to send in Provisions for Master Wild's
Wedding; and who should I meet at Door, but Apricock Tom, and Mary, waiting to
speak with her young Master; they came to beg that they might serve the Feast;
I promised them they should, if they would cry it up and down the Town, to
bring Company; for Master Wild was resolved to keep open house.


Joll. Why then here will be witnesses enough.


Capt. But who should I meet at the corner of the Piazza, but Joseph Tailor; he
tells me, there is a new Play at the Friars to day, and I have bespoke a Box for
Master Wild and his Bride.


Joll. And did not he wonder to hear he was married?


Capt. Yes; but I told him, 'twas a Match his Aunt made for him, when he was
abroad.


Joll. And I have spread it sufficiently at Court, by sending to borrow Plate
for such a Wedding.


[Enter a Servant. Serve. There Is half a dozen Coach fulls of Company lighted;
they call for the Bride-Laces and Points.


Capt. Let the Fiddlers play then, and bid God give them joy, by the name of my
Lady Careless and Mistress Wild.


Fid. Where shall we play, Sir?


Joll. Come with us, we will show you the window.


ACT. V. SCEN. II.
The Fiddlers play in the Tyring Room, and the Stage Curtains are Drawn, and
discover a Chamber, as it was, with two Beds and the Ladies asleep in them;
Master Wild being at Mistress Pleasant 's Bedside, and Master Careless at the
Widow's; The Music awakes the Widow. Wid. NIece, Niece, Niece Pleasant.


Pleas. Ha! I hear you, I hear you, what would you have? She opens the Curtain
and calls her, she is under a Canopy.


Wid. Do you not hear the Fiddlers?


Pleas. Yes, yes, but you have waked me from the finest dream.


Wid. A dream, what was it? some knavery.


Pleas. Why, I know not, but 'twas merry, e'ne as pleasing as some sins; well,
I Will lie no more in a man's bed, for fear I lose more then I get.


Wid. Hark, that is a new Tune.


Pleas. Yes, and they play it well; This is your Jaunty Nephew; I would he had
less of the Father in him, I Would venture to dream out my dream with him; In my
conscience he is worth a dozen of my dull Servant, that is such a troublesome
visitant, without any kind of convenience.


Wid. I, I, so are all of that kind; give me your Subject Lover; Those you call
Servants are but troubles, I confess.


Pleas. What is the Difference, pray, betwixt a Subject, and a Servant Lover?


Wid. Why, one I have absolute Power over, the other's at large; Your Servant
Lovers are those take Mistresses upon trial, scarce give them a Quarters
warning before they are gone.


Pleas. Why, what do your Subject Lovers do? I am so sleepy.


Wid. Do? All things for nothing; then they are the diligent'st and the
humblest things a Woman can employ; Nay, I have seen of them tame, and run loose
about a house; I had one once, by this light, he would fetch and Carry, go
back, seek out, he would do any thing; I think some Faulconer bred him.


Pleas. By my Troth, I am of your mind.


Wid. He would come over, for all my Friends; but it was the dogged'st thing to
my enemies, he would sit upon's tail before them, and frown, like John a Napes
when the Pope is named; he heard me once praise my little Spanniel Bitch Smut
for waiting, and hang me if I stirred for seven years after, but I found him
lying at my door.


Pleas. And what became of him?


Wid. Faith, when I married he forsook me; I was advised since, that if I would
ha'spit in's mouth sometimes he would have stayed.


Pleas. That was cheap, But it is no certain way; for it is a general opinion,
that marriage is one of the certain'st cures for Love that one can apply to a
man that is sick of the sighings; yet if you were to live about this Town
still, such a Fool would do you a world of service; I Am sure Secret will miss
him, and would always take such a care of her has saved her a hundred walks
for Hoods and Masks.


Wid. Yes, and I was certain of the earliest Fruits and Flowers that the
Spring afforded.


Pleas. By my troth, 'twas foolishly done to part with him; a few crumbs of your
affection would have satisfied him, poor thing.


Wid. Thou art in the right; in this Town there is no living without 'em; they
do more service in a house for nothing, then a pair of those, what d' ye call
'ems, those he waiting-women, Beasts, that Custom impose upon Ladies.


Pleas. Is there none of them to be had now, think you? I Would feign get a tame
one, to carry down into the Country.


Wid. Faith, I know but one breed of them about the Town that is right, and
that is at the Court; The Lady that has them brings 'em all up by hand; she
breeds some of them from very puppies; there is another wit too in the Town
that has of them; but hers will not do so many tricks; good sullen diligent
waiters those are which she breeds, but not half so serviceable.


Pleas. How does she do it? is there not a trick in it?


Wid. Only patience, but she has a heavy hand with 'em (they say) at first,
and many of them miscarry; she governes them with signs, and by the Eye, as
Bank's breeds his Horse; there are some too that arrive at writing, and those
are the right breed, for they commonly betake themselves to Poetry; and if you
could light on one of them, 'twere worth your money; for it is but using of him
ill, and praising his verses sometimes, and you are sure of him for ever.


Pleas. But do they never grow surly, Aunt?


Wid. Not, if you keep them from raw flesh, for they are a kind of
Lyon-lovers; and if they once taste the sweet of it, they will turn to their kind.


Pleas. Lord, Aunt, there will be no going without one this Summer into the
Country; pray let us enquire for one; either a he one to entertain us, or a she
one to tell us the story of her Love; it is excellent to bed-ward, and makes one
as drowsy as Prayers.


Wid. Faith, Niece, this Parliament has so destroyed 'em, and the Platonic
Humor, that it is uncertain whether we shall get one or no; your leading
Members in the lower House have so cowed the Ladies, that they have no leisure
to breed any of late; Their whole endeavouts are spent now in feasting, and
winning close Committee Men, a rugged kind of sullen Fellows, with implacable
stomachs and hard hearts, that make the gay things court and observe them, as
much as the foolish Lovers use to do; Yet I think I know one she-Lover, but she
is smitten in years o'th wrong side of forty; I am certain she is poor too; and
in this lean Age for Courtiers, she perhaps would be glad to run this Summer in
our Park*


Pleas. Dear Aunt, let us have her; has she been famous? has she good Tales,
think you, of Knights? such as have been false or true to Love, no matter which.


Wid. She cannot want cause to curse the Sex; handsome, witty, well born, and
poor in Court, cannot want the experience how false young men can be; Her
Beauty has had the highest fame; and those Eyes that weep now unpitied have had
their Envy, and a dazzling Power.


Pleas. And that Tongue, I warrant you, which now grows hoarse with flattering
the great Law-breakers, once gave Law to Princes; was it not so Aunt? Lord,
shall I die without begetting one story?


Wid. Penthesilea, nor all the cloven Knights the Poets treat of, yclad in
mightiest Petticoats, did her excel for gallant deeds; and, with her Honor,
still preserved her Freedom; My Brother loved her; and I have heard him swear,
Minerva might have owned her Language; An Eye like Pallas, Juno's wrists, a
Venus for shape, and a Mind chaste as Diana, but not so rough; never uncivilly
Cruel, nor faulty kind to any; no vanity, that sees more then Lovers pay, nor
blind to a gallant Passion; Her Maxim was, he that could Love, and tell her so
handsomely, was better Company, but not a better Lover then a silent Man; Thus,
all Passions found her Civility, and she a value from all her Lovers. But
alas, Niece, this was (which is a sad word) was handsome, and was beloved, are
abhorred sounds in Women's ears. The Fiddlers play again.


Pleas. Hark, the Fiddlers are merry still; will not Secret have the wit to find
us this morning, think you?


Fiddlers. God give you joy, Master Careless; God give your Ladyship joy, my
Lady VVild.


Wid. What did the Fellow say? God give me joy?


Pleas. As I live, I think so.


Fiddlers. God give you joy, Mistress Pleasant Wild.


Wid. This is my Nephew, I smell him in this knavery.


Pleas. Why did they give me joy by the name of Mistress VVild? I shall pay
dear for a nights lodging if that be so, especially lying All the company
confused without, and bid God give them joy. alone; By this light, there is
some knavery afoot.


Jolly. Rise, rise, for shame, the year's before you.


Capt. Why, Ned Wild, why Tom, will you not rise and let us in? what, is it not
enough to steal your wedding over night, but lock your selves up in the morning
too? All your Friends stay for points here, and kisses from the Brides.


Wild. A little Patience, you will give us leave to dress us? The Women squeeke
when they speak.


Carel. Why, what is a Clock, Captain?


Capt. It Is late.


Carel. Faith, so it was before we slept.


Wid. Why, Nephew, what means this rudeness? As I live, I Will fall out with you.
This is no jest.


Wild. No, as I live, Aunt. We are in earnest; but my part lies here, and
there is a Gentleman will do his best to satisfy you; They catch the Women in
their Arms. and sweet Mistress Pleasant, I know you have so much wit as to
perceive this business cannot be remedied by denials; here we are, as you see,
naked, and thus have saluted hundreds at the window that past by, and gave us
joy this morning.


Pleas. Joy, of what? what do you mean?


Carel. Madam, this is visible, and you may coy it, and refuse to call me
Husband; But I am resolved to call you Wise, and such Careless kisses the
Widow. proofs I Will bring as shall not be denied.


Wid. Promise your self that; see whether your fine wits can make it good; you
will not be uncivil?


Carel. Not a hair but what you give, and that was in the Contract before we
undertook it; for any Man may force a Woman's Body, but we have laid we will
force your Mind.


Wild. But that needs not, for we know by your discourse last night and this
morning, we are Men you have no aversion to; and I believe, if we had taken
time and wooed hard, this would have come a course; but we had rather win you
by wit, because you defied us.


Wid. It Is very well, if it succeed.


Carel. And, for my part, but for the jest of winning you, and this way, not
ten joynters should have made me marry?


Wid, This is a new way of wooing.


Carel. It Is so, Madam; but we have not laid our plot so weakly (though it were
sudden) to leave it in any bodies power but our own to hinder it.


Pleas. Do you think so?


Wild. We are secure enough, if we can be true to our selves.


Carel. Yet we submit in the midst of our strength, and beg you will not
wilfully spoil a good jest by refusing us. By this hand, we are both sound,
and we'll be strangely honest, and never in ill humors, but live as merry as
the Maids, and divide the year between the Town and the Country; What say you,
is it a Match? Your bed is big enough for two, and my meat will not cost you
much; I Will promise nothing but one heart, one purse betwixt us, and a whole
dozen of boys, is it a bargain?


Wid. Not, if I can hinder it, as I live.


Wild. Faith, Mistress Pleasant, he has spoken nothing but reason, and I Will do
my best to make it good; Come faith, teach my Aunt what to do, and let me
strike the bargain upon your Lips.


Pleas. No, Sir, not to be half a Queen; if we should yield now your wit would
dominere for ever; and still in all disputes (though never so much reason on
our side) this shall be urged as an Argument of your Master wit to confute us;
I am of your Aunts mind, Sir; and if I can hinder it, it shall be no match.


Wild. Why then know, it is not in your Powers to prevent it.


Wid. Why, we are not married yet.


Carel. No, it is true.


Wid. By this good light then I Will be dumb for ever hereafter, lest I light
upon the words of Marriage by chance.


Pleas. It Is hard, when our own Acts cannot be in our own power, Gentlemen.


Wild. The plot is only known to four, the Minister and two that stood for
Fathers, and a simple Country Maid that waited upon you last night, which
plays your Chamber-maids part.


Pleas. And what will all these do?


Wild. Why, the two friends will swear, they gave you; the Parson will swear,
he married you; and the wench will swear, she put us to bed.


Wid. Have you men to swear we are married?


Pleas. And a Parson to swear he did it?


Both. Yes.


Wid. And a wench that will swear, she put us to Bed?


Both. Yes, By this good light, and witness of reputation.


Pleas. Dare they or you look us in the face, and swear this?


Carel. Yes faith, and all but those four know no other but really it is so;
and you may deny it, but I Will make Mr. Constable put you to bed, with this
proof, at night.


Wid. Pray, let us see these witnesses.


VVild. Call in the four only.


[Exit Careless. Pleas. Well, this shall be a warning to me; I say nothing, but
if ever I lie from home again.


Wild. I Will lie with you.


Pleas. It Is well; I dare say, we are the first women (if this take) that ever
were stolen against their wills.


Wild. I Will go call the Gentlemen.


[Exit Wild. Wid. I that have refused a fellow that loved me these seven
years, and would have put off his hat, and thanked me to come to bed, to be
beaten with watch-mens staves into another; For by this good light, for ought
that I perceive, there is no keeping these out at night.


Pleas. And unless we consent to be their wives, to day, M. Justice will make
us their whores at night: oh, oh, what would not I give to come off! not that I
mislike them, but I hate they should get us thus.


Enter Wild, Jolly, Captain, Careless, Parson, Wanton, with Rose-mary in their
hands, and Points in their Hats. Carel. Follow. -- Will not you two swear we
were married last night?


Joll. Capt. Yes, By this light, will we.


VVild. Will not you swear you married us?


Pars. Yea, verily.


Carel. And come hither, pretty one, will not you swear you left us all a bed
last night, and pleased?


Want. Yes forsooth; I Will swear any thing your worship shall appoint me.


Wid. But, Gentlemen, have you no shame, no conscience; will you swear false,
for sport?


Joll. By this light, I Will swear, if it be but to vex you: Remember you refused
me, [That is contrary to Covenants though with my brace of Lovers; what will
they do with their Coach-mans Speaks these words, aside. plot? but it is no
matter, I have my ends; and so they are cozened I care not who does it.]


Capt. And, faith, Madam, I have sworn many times false, to no purpose; and I
should take it ill, if it were mine own case, to have a friend refuse me an
Oath upon such an occasion.


Pleas. And are you all of one mind?


Pars. Verily we will all swear.


Pleas. Will you verily? what shall we do, Aunt? Pleas. laughs.


Wid. Do you laugh? By this light, I am heartily angry.


Pleas. Why, As I live, let us marry them, Aunt, and be revenged.


Wid. Marry, where is the Parson?


Capt. Here, here, M. Parson, come and do your Office.


Pleas. That fellow? No, by my troth, let us be honestly joined, for lucks sake,
we know not how soon we may part.


Wild. What shall she do for a Parson? Captain, you must run and fetch one.


Capt. Yes, yes; but methinks this might serve turn; By this hand, he is a
Marshal, and a Case, by Sire and Dam; pray try him, By this light, he comes of
the best preaching kind in Essex.


Wid. Not I, As I live, that were a blessing in the Devils name.


Pars. A pox on your wedding; give me my wife and let me be gone.


Capt. Nay, nay, no choler, Parson; the Ladies do not like the color of your
Beard.


Pars. No, no, fetch another, and let them escape with that trick, then they will
jeer your beards blew, in faith.


Carel. By this hand, he is in the right; either this Parson, or take one
another words; to Bed now, and marry when we rise.


Pleas. As I live, you come not here till you are married; I have been no
body's whore yet, and I will not begin with my husband.


Wild. Will you kiss upon the bargain, and promise before these witnesses not
to spoil our jest, but rise and go to Church.


Pleas. And what will M. Constant and M. Sadd say?


Capt. Why, I Will run and invite them to the wedding; and you shall see them
expire in their own Garters.


Joll, No, no, never fear't, their jest is only spoiled.


Capt. Their jest, what jest?


Joll. Faith, now you shall know it, and the whole Plot: In the first place,
your Coachman is well, whose death, we, by the help of Secret, contrived,
thinking by that trick to prevent this danger, and carry you out of Town.


Capt. But had they this Plot?


Joll. Yes faith, and see how it thrives; they will fret like carted Bauds when
they hear this news.


Pleas. Why, Aunt; would you have thought M. Sadd a Plotter? well, it is some
comfort we have them to laugh at.


Wid. Nay faith, then, Gentlemen, give us leave to rise, and I Will take my
venture, if it be but for a revenge on them.


Carel. Gentlemen, bear witness.


Capt. Come, come away, I Will get the points; I Am glad the Coach-man's well,
the Rogue had like to have spoild our Comedy.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter the Lady Love-all, Master Sadd, and Constant, undressed and buttoning
themselves as they go. Sadd. MArried?


Constable. And to them?


Love. I, married, if you prevent it not; caught with a trick, an old stale
trick; I have seen a Ballad on it.


Sadd. We shall go near to prevent 'em. -- Boy, My Sword.


Enter Captain. Capt. Whither so fast?


Sadd. You guess.


Capt. If you mean the wedding, you come too late.


Constable. Why, are they married?


Capt. No, but lustily promised.


Sadd. We may come time enough to be revenged though. --


Capt. Upon whom? your selves, for you are only guilty: who carried them
thither last night? who laid the Plot for the Coachman?


Sadd. Why, do they know it?


Love. Well, you will find the Poet a Rogue, it is he that has betrayed you; and if
you will take my counsel, be revenged upon him.


Constable. Nay, we were told he did not love us.


Capt. By my life, you wrong him; upon my knowledge the Poet meant you should
have them.


Sadd. Why, who had the power to hinder then?


Capt. I know not where the fault lies directly; they say, the wits of the Town
would not consent to it, they claim a right in the Ladies, as Orphan-wits.


Constable. The wits! hang 'em in their strong lines.


Capt. Why I, such a clinch as that has undone you; and upon my knowledge
'twere enough to hinder your next match.


Sadd. Why, what have they to do with us?


Capt. I know not what you have done to disoblige them; but they crossed it;
there was amongst 'em too a pair of she-wits, something stricken in years; they
grew in fury at the mention of it, and concluded you both with an authority out
of a modern Author; besides it is said, you run naturally into the six-peny Room
and steal sayings, and a discourse more then your peny-worth of jests, every
Term; why, just now, you spit out one jest stolen from a poor Play, that has
but two more in five Acts; what conscience is there in it, knowing how dear we
pay Poets for our Plays?


Constable. 'Twas, Madam, with the ill face, one of those whom you refused to
salute the other day, at Chipps house; a Chees-cake had saved all this.


Love. Why do you not make haste about your business, but lose time with this
Babbler?


Sadd. Madam, will you give us leave to make use of your Coach?


Love. You may command it, Sir; when you have done, send him to the Exchange,
where I Will dispatch a little business, and be with you immediately.


[Exeunt all but the Captain. Capt. So, this fire's kindled; put it out that
can. What would not I give for a Peepers place at the meeting; I Will make haste,
and it shall go hard but I Will bear my part of the mirth too.


[Exit. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Widow, Pleasant, Careless, Wild, Parson, Jolly, Wanton and Secret: the
Fiddlers play as they come in. Pars. MAster Jolly, I find I am naturally
inclined to mirth this day, and methinks my Corns ache more then my Horns; and
to a man that has read Seneca a Cuckold ought to be no grief; especially in
this Parish where I see such droves of St. Lukes clothing; there is little
Secret too, th'allay of waiting woman, makes me hope, she may prove metal of
the Parsons standard. Find a way to rid me of Wanton, and I Will put in to be
Chaplain to this merry family; if I did not enveigle formal Secret, you should
hang me; I know the trick on it; it is but praying too, and preaching of the
waiting woman, then carefully seeing her cushion laid, with her book and leaf
turned down, does it, with a few Anagrams, Acrosticks, and her name in the
Register of my Bible: these charm the soft-soul'd sinner; then sometimes to
read a piece of my Sermon, and tell her, a Saturday, where my Text shall be,
spells that work more then Philtres.


Joll. If you can be serious, we will think of this at leisure. -- See how they
eye Wanton.


Carel. What? consulting Parson? let us be judges betwixt you; do you hear, Jack,
if he offers ready money, I counsel, as a friend, take it; for, By this light,
if you refuse it, your wife will not; do you see those gay Petti-coats?


Pars. Yes, if you mean my wifes.


Carel. You know they are his, and she only wears 'em for his pleasure; and it is
dangerous to have a wife under another man's Petticoats; what if you should find
his breeches upon hers?


Pars. Are not you married too? take care that yours does not wear the
Breeches, another kind of danger, but as troublesome as that, or sore-eyes; and
if she get but a trick of taking as readily as she is persuaded to give, you may
find a horn at home; I have seen a Cuckold of your complexion; if he had had as
much hoof as horn, you might have hunted the beast by his slat.


Pleas. How fine she is! and, By this light, a handsome wench, Mr. Jolly, I am
easier persuaded to be reconciled to your fault, then any man's; I have seen, of
this kind; her eyes have more Arguments in 'em then a thousand of those that
seduce the world; hang me if those Quivers be not full of Darts; I could kiss
that mouth, my self, is this she my Aunt quarreled with you for?


Joll. The same, self-same. And by this hand, I was barbarous to her, for your
Aunts sake; and had I not escaped that mischief of matrimony, By this light, I
had had never seen her again; but I was resolved not to quit her, till I was
sure of a wife, for fear of what has followed; had I been such an Ass as to
have left her upon the Aerie hopes of a widows Oaths; what a case had I been in
now? You see, your Aunt's provided of a man. Bless him, and send him patience,
'twould have been fine to have seen me walking, and sighing upon cold hunting,
seeking my whore again, or forced to make use of some common mercenary thing
that sells sin and diseases, crimes, penance and sad repentance together;
here is consolation and satisfaction, in Wanton, though a man lose his meal with
the widow. And, faith, be free, how do you like my Girl; rid thee of her; what
does she want now, pray, but a jointure, to satisfy any honest man? speak your
conscience; Ladies don't you think a little repentance, hereafter, will serve,
for all the small sins that good nature can act with such a sinner?


Pars. Pray, Sir, remember she is my wife; and be so civil to us both, as to
forget these things.


Joll. For that, Jack, we will understand hereafter, it is but a trick of youth,
man, and her jest ill make us both merry, I warrant thee.


Pars. Pray, Sir, no more of your jestes, nor your Jack; remember my Coat and
Calling. This familiarity both with my wife and my self, is not decent; your
Clergy with Christen names are scarce held good Christians.


[Enter Wid. Wid. I wonder at nothing so much as M. Jollies mirth, to day;
where lies his part of the jest? cozened or refused by all, not a fish that
stays in's Net. Joll. bugs Wanton.


Joll. No, what is this? show me a fairer in all your streams; nor is this my
single joy, who am pleased to find you may be cozened; rejoice to see you may
be brought to lie with a man for a jest; let me alone to fit you with a trick
too.


Carel. Faith, it must be some new trick; for thou art so beaten at the old
one, 'twill neither please thee nor her; besides, I mean to teach her that my
self.


Pleas. I shall never be perfectly quiet in my mind, till I see some body as
angry as my self; yet I have some consolation when I think on the wise plot
that killed the Coachman, how the Plague, Red-cross and Halberd has cut their
fingers that designed it, their anger will be perfect. Secret says they are
coming, and that the Lady Love-all has given 'em the Alarm.


[Enter Sadd and Constable. Wild. And see where the parties come, -- Storms and
tempests in their minds, their looks are Daggers.


Pleas. Servant, what? you are melancholy and full of wonder; I see you have met
the news.


Sadd. Yes Madam, we have heard a report that will concern both your judgment
and your honor.


Pleas. Alas, Sir, we are innocent; it is mere predestination.


Constable. All weddings, Mr. Sadd, you know go by chance, like hanging.


Pleas. And, I thank my Stars, I have escaped hanging; to have been his Bride had
been both.


Constable. This is not like the promise you made us yesterday.


Wid. Why truly, Servant, I scarce know what I do yet; the fright of the Plague
had so possessed my mind with fear that I could think and dream of nothing,
last night, but of a tall black man, that came and kissed me in my sleep, and
slap'd his whip in mine Ears, 'twas a saucy Ghost, (not unlike my Coachman
that is dead) and accused you of having a hand in his murder, and vowed to haunt
me till I was married, I told my niece the dream.


Pleas. Nay, the Ghost sighed, and accused Secret and Master Sadd; of making
him away confess, faith, had you a hand in that bloody jest?


Wid. Fie, Servant; could you be so cruel as to join with my woman against me?


Constable. It Is well, Ladys; why a Pox do you look at me, this was your subtle
plot; a Pox on your Clarks wit; you said the jest would beget a Comedy when
'twas known, and so I believe 'twill.


Sad. Madam, I find you have discovered our design, whose chief end was, to
prevent this mischief which I doubt not, but you will both live to repent your
share of, before you have done traveling to the Epsams, Burbons, and the
Spawes, to cure those traveled diseases these Knights errant have, with
Curiosity, sought out for you; It Is true, the are mischiefs that dwell in
pleasant Countries, yet those Roses have their thorns; and I doubt not, but
these gentlemen's wit may sting as well as please, sometime; and you may find it
harder to satisfy their travailed Experience, then to have suffered our
homebred ignorance.


Carel. Hark, if he be not fallen into a fit of his Cozen; These names of
Places he has stolen out of her Receipt-book; amongst all whose diseases, find
me any so dangerous, troublesome or incurable, as a fool, a lean, pale,
sighing, coughing fool, that is rich and poor both, being born to an estate,
without a mind or heart capable to use it, of a nature so miserable he grudges
himself meat; nay, they say, he eats his meals twice, a fellow whose breath
smells of yesterdays dinner, and stinks as if he had eat all our Suppers over
again; I would advise you Mr. Sadd to sleep with your mouth open, to air it, or
get the Brewer to Ton it; Faugh, an empty Justice, that stinks of the Lees and
Casks, and belches Littleton and Ploydens Cases; do thou think any woman that
has wit, or honor, would kiss that Bung-hole; by this light, his head and
belly look as blew and lank as French Rabbets, or stale Poultry; Alas, Sir, my
Lady would have a husband to rejoice with, no green-tail'd Lecturer, to stand
Centry at his beds side, while his nasty soul scoures through him, sneaking out
at the back door. -- These, Sir, are diseases which neither the Spaw, or Bath,
can cure your Garters and Willow are a more certain remedy.


Constant. Well, Sir, I find our plot's betrayed, and we have patience left;
It Is that damned Captain has informed.


Sadd. Yet it is one comfort, Madam, that you have missed that man of war, that
Knight of Finsbury; His Dowager, with Ale and Switches, would have bred a Ballad.


Pleas. Faith, Sir, you see what a difficulty it is, in this Age, for a woman
to live honest, though she have a proper man to her husband; therefore it
behooves us to consider, who we choose.


Joll. The Lady has Reason; for being allowed but one, who would choose such
weazel's as we see daily mary'd, that are all head and Tail, crooked, dirty,
sold Vermin, predestined for Cuckolds, painted Snails, with houses on their
backs, and horns as big as Dutch Cows; would any woman marry such? nay, can any
woman be honest, that lets such Hod-man-dods crawle over her Virgin breast, and
Belly, or suffer 'em to leave their slimy paths upon their bodies only for
Joyntures? Out, it is Mercenary and base; The generous heart has only the Laws
of Nature and kindness in her view; and when she will oblige, Friend is all the
ties that nature seeks, who can both bear and excuse those kind crimes; And I
believe, one as poor as the despised Captain, and neglected Courtier, may make
a woman as happy in a Friendship as Master Sadd, who has as many faults as we
have debts; one, whose Father had no more credit with Nature, then ours had
with Fortune; whose soul wears Rags as well as the Captains body.


Sadd. Nay then, I Will laugh; for I perceive, you are angryer then we; Alas, has
lost both ventures, Wanton, and the Widow.


Joll. Both, and neither so unlucky as to be thy wife; thy face is hanged with
blacks already, we may see the Bells toll in thy Eyes; A Bride and a Wedding
Shirt? a Sexton and a winding sheet? a Scrivener to draw up Joyntures? A Parson
to make thy will, man; by this light he is as Chap-fallen as if he had layen
under the Table all night.


Carel. Faith, Master Sadd, he is parlously in the right; never think of
marrying in this dull clime, wedlock's a trade you will never go through with;
wives draw-bills upon sight, and't will not be for your credit to protest 'em;
rather follow my counsel, and Marry la Venetiano for a night and away; a Pistol
Jointure does it; then it is but repenting in the morning, and leave your woman,
and the sin both, in the Bed; But if you play the fool, like your friends, and
Marry in serious earnest, you may repent it too, as they do; but where is the
remedy?


Wid. What was it you said, Sir, do you repent?


Carel. By this hand, Widow, I don't know; but we have pursued a jest a great
way. Parson, are you sure we are married.


Pars. Yes, I warrant you, for their escaping.


Carel. Their escaping? fool, thou mistak'st me, there is no fear of that; but I
would fain know, if there be no way for me to get out of this Nooze; No hole to
hide a man's head in from this Wedlock?


Pars. Not any, but what I presume she will show you anon.


Carel. Hum! Now do I feel all my fears flowing in upon me; Wanton and Mistress
Pleasant both grow dangerously handsome, a Thousand Graces in each, I never
observed before, now, just now, when I must not taste, I begin to long for some
of their Plums.


Wid. Is this serious, Sir?


Carel. Yes truly, Widow, sadly serious; Is there no way to get three or four
mouthfulls of Kisses from the Parsons wife?


Wid. This is sad, Sir, upon my Wedding day, to despise me, for such a Common
thing.


Sadd. As sad, as I could wish; This is a jest makes me laugh. -- Common? no
Madam, that is two bitter, she is forest only, where the Royal Chase is as free
as Fair.


Want. Were not you a Widow to day?


Sadd. Yes faith, Girl, and as foolish a one as ever Coach jumbled out of joint.


Want. Stay then till to morrow, and tell me the difference betwixt us.


Sadd. I hope, thou wilt prove a She-prophet; could I live to see thee turn
honest wife, and she the Wanton Widow.


Want. I cannot but laugh, to see how easy it is, to lose or win the opinion
of the world; a little custom heals all, or else what is the difference betwixt
a Married Widow and one of us? can any woman be pure, or worth the serious
sighing of a Generous heart, that has had above one hand laid upon her? is
there place to write above one Lovers name, with honor, in her heart; it is
indeed for one a Royal Palace; but if it admits of more, an Hospital, or an
Inn, at best, as well as ours; only off from the Road, and less frequented.


Pleas. Shrewdly urged.


Want. And though the sins of my Family threw me into want, and made me subject
to the treachery of that broken faith, to whose perjury I owe all my Crimes,
yet still I can distinguish betwixt that folly and this honor, which must tell
you; He or she that would be thought twice so, was never once a Lover.


Constable. Parson, thou art fitted; A whore, and Apothegms! what sport will she
make us under a Tree, with a Sallad, and sayings, in the Summer?


Wild. Come, Wanton, no fury; you see my Aunts angry.


Want. So am I, Sir, and yet can calmly reason this truth; Married Widows,
though chaste to the Law and Custom, yet their second Hymen's make that which
was but dying in the first husbands Bed, a stain in the second sheets, where
all their kindness and repeated embraces want their value, because they are
sullied and have lost their Luster.


Sadd. By this light, I Will go to School to Wanton, she has opened my Eyes, and
I begin to believe I have escaped miraculously; By this hand, wench, I was
within an inch of being married to this Danger; for what can we call these
second submissions, but a tolerated lawful Mercenaryness, which though it be a
rude and harsh expression, yet your Carriage deserves it.


Pleas. Fie, Master Sadd, pray leave being witty; I fear, it is a mortal sin, to
begin in the fifth Act of your Days upon an old subject too, abusing of Widows,
because they despise you.


Wid. Alas, Niece, let him alone, he may come in, for his share; the Parson,
that has so often received 'em, will not refuse him Tithes, there, in Charity.


Want. That, or Convenience, Interest, or Importunity, may, by your Example
prevail; But it is not fair play, Madam, to turn your Lover to the Common, as
you call it, now he is rid lean in your service; take heed, Mr. Careless, and
warning Mr. Sadd; you see how fit for the Scavengers team your Lady leaves her
Lovers.


Carel. Such a Lecture before I had Married would have made me have considered
of this matter. D'ost thou hear Wanton, let us forgive one another, being
Married, for that folly has made us guilty alike.


Want. And I would fain know the difference betwixt ours, and a wedding crime,
which is worst; to let love, youth and good humor betray us to a kindness, or
to be gravely seduced by some aunt or uncle, without consideration of the
disparity of Age, Birth, or Persons, to lie down before a Jointure; Ladies, you
may flatter your selves, but the ingenuous part of the world cannot deny, but
such minds, had they been born where our faults are not only tolerated but
protected, would have listened to the same things, Interest counsels thereto.


Carel. Parson, what Boot betwixt Our Wives? either come to a Price, or draw
off your Doxy.


Pars. Propose, propose, here will be mirth anon.


Sad. Yes, yes, propose, while I break it to your Lady; Madam, you see, here is
a proper man to be had, and money to boot -- what, dumb?


Want. No, she is only thinking; faith, Madam, try 'em both to Night, and
choose tomorrow.


Wild. Come, no more of this; Aunt, take my word for your husband, that have
had more experience of him then all these; it is true, he will long for these
Girls, as children do for plums; and when h'as done, make a meal upon cheese;
and you must not wonder, nor quarrel at what he says in his humor, but Judge
him by his Actions; and when he is in his fit, and raves most, put him into
your bed, and fold him close in your Arms, Aunt; if he does not rise as kind
and as good a husband as he that sings Psalms best, hang me; why, you're a
fool, aunt; a widow, and dislike a longing Bridegroom! I thought you had known
better; do you love a spurred horse, rather then a Duker, that neighs, and
scrapes? I would not say this, but that I know him; let him not go out of your
sight, for he is now in season, a Ripe mature husband; No delays; if you let
him hang longer upon hope his fruit will fall alone.


Wid. You are merry, Sir; But if I had known this humor. She kisses Carl. and
he kisses her twice


Wild. You Would have kissed him first; but being ignorant, let me make you blush;
come, a kiss, and all is Friends. -- how now, Sir, again, again, Aunt, look to
your self.


Carel. Um! By this light, sweet heart, and I thank thee; Nay widow, there is no
jesting with these things -- Nay, I am a Lion, in my Kisses her again. Love:
Aware, Puss, if you flatter me, for I shall deceive you.


Pars. Since all are cozened, why should I be troubled at my fortune; faith
Gentlemen, what will you two give me for a wife, betwixt you?


Constable. Faith, they 're mischiefs dear bought, though a man get 'em for
nothing.


Pars. I Am almost of his mind; and if other people find no more pleasure in a
married life then I, upon my wedding day, I Would pass my time in the Piazza, with
the Mountebank, and let him practice upon my Teeth, and draw'em too ere he
persuades the words of matrimony out of my mouth again. I, I, M. Constant, you
may laugh, you ha missed a wife; would I were in your case, the world should
see how cheerfully I should bear such an affliction.


Constable. Jack, I ha made my peace at home, and by seeing others ship-wrack'd
will avoid the danger, and here resolve, never to sigh again for any woman;
they are weeds grow in every hedge; and transplanting of them thus to our Beds
gives certain trouble, seldom pleasure, never profit.


[Enter Capt. Pars. See where the enemy comes; now if you be wise, arm, and
unite against him, as a common foe; he is come from his old Lady, designing a
reconciliation; the Rogue's provident, and would fain have a Nest for his Age
to rest in; Buff and Feathers do well in the youth and heat of thirty; but in
the winter of old age, Captain at threescore, lame and lean, may lie with the
Almanac out of date.


Capt. The Parson's grown witty, and prophesies upon the strength of
Bride-Cake; if I guess aright, thou wilt be hanged; for it is a truth, I have been
endeavoring to make it appear, her fears were mistaken in me: but I find the
witch more implacable then the Devil; the waiting woman is harder to forgive
her part, then my Lady. Faithful will not be reconciled, the merciless Baud is
all fire and sword, no quarter; Bless me from an old waiting-womans wrath;
she will never forgive me the disappointing her of a promise when I was drunk; her
Lady and she are coming, but in such a fury, I would not have the storm find
you in the street; therefore. I counsel you to avoid the boys, and take shelter
in the next house.


Wild. No, let us home, and with all diligence get our dinner, to defend us; and
let the Porter dispute it at the wicket, till she signs Articles of peace.


Omnes. Agreed. --


Careless is kind to the Widow; as he goes out, Wild and Pleasant go together,
Jolly and the Parsons wife go together. Wild. See how they pair now, it is not
threescore year will part 'em now he has tasted a kiss or two.


Joll. Parson, I Will be your Bride-man.


Pars. It Is well, Sir, I shall ha my time too.


Joll. I by this hand; nay, we will share fairly.


Capt. That Is but reason, Wanton; and since he grows tame, use him kindly for
my sake.


Pars. Can any of you digest Sponge and Arsenick?


Capt. Arsenick? what is that?


Pars. An Italian Sallad, which I Will dress for you, By Jove, er'e I Will walk in
my Canonical-coat lined with horn; Death, if I suffer this, we shall have that
damned Courtier pluck on his shoes with the Parsons Musons; fine in faith, none
but the small Levites brow to plant your shooing-horn-feed in? -- How now? As
he is going off the Capt. Stays him.


Capt. Prithee, Jack, stay, and say something to the Gentlemen, by way of
Epilogue. Thou art a piece of a scurvey Poet thy self, prithee oblige the
Author, and give us a line or two in praise of his Play.


Pars. I oblige him? hang him and all his friends, and hurt no body; yes, I Am
likely to speak for him; you see how I'ha been used to day betwixt you, I shall
find a time to be revenged, let go my cloak; I have a Province, within, of mine
own to govern, let me go.


Capt. Who, thy wife? faith stay, and give them an opportunity; thy pain will
be the sooner over: you see it is a thing resolved betwixt 'em, and now you are
satisfied in the matter, be wise and filent; who knows what good she may do
thee another time; I dare say, if she had as many souls in her as she had men,
she would bring thee a cure of her self.


Pars. Let me go, or I shall be as troublesome as you are injurious, for all
your Titles, Sir.


Capt. Lend me your cloak then, to appear more decent; you would not ha me present
Epilogue in Buff, whoreson Dunce, with a red nose.


Pars. Sir, my business is praying, not Epilogues.


Capt. With that face? By this light, it is a scandal to see it flaming so near
the altar; thou look as if thou would cry tope, in the face of the
Congregation, instead of Amen.


Pars. You Are an Ass, it is proper there, t'has zeal and servor in it, and burns
before the Altar like the primitive Lamps.


Capt. I cry thee mercy; By this light, he will make it sacrilege anon to steal
his nose; thou wilt entitle the Altar to that Coal; was it not kindled Ex voto?
nay, I will have your cloak.


Pars. Take it; would 'twere Nessus his shirt, for you and your Poets sake.


[Exit Parson. Capt. What, does the Rogue wish 'twere made of Nettles?


Captain puts on his Cloak, and addresses himself to speak the Epilogue, and is
interrupted by the Lady Love-all and Faithful her woman, who in haste and full
of anger pull him by the Cloak. Love. By your favor, Sir; did you see any
company pass this way? The Music plays.


Capt. None, but the three Brides, and they are gone just before you. -- Hark,
the Music will guide you.


Love. Is it certain then they re married?


Capt. Yes, Lady, I saw the Churches rights performed.


Faithf. Why does your Ladyship lose time in talking with this fellow; don't
you know him, Madam? it is the rascally Captain, hid in a black cloak; I know
you, Sirrah.


Love. She has reason; now I mark him better, I should know that false face
too; see Faithful, there are those treacherous eyes still.


Capt. Alas, you mistake me, Madam, I am Epilogue now; the Captain's within;
and as a friend I counsel you, not to incense the Gentlemen against the Poet,
for he knows all your story; and if you anger him he will put it in a Play; but if
you will do friendly offices, I Will undertake, instead of your Pearl you lost, to
help you to the Jewel, the Scotch Dictionary will tell you the value of it; let
them go alone, and fret not at their loss; stay, and take my counsel, it shall
be worth three revenges.


Love. Well, what is it, Sir?


Capt. They say, you have a great power over the Parson; if you can prevail
with him to express his anger in some Satyrick Comedy (for the knave has wit,
and they say his genius lies that way,) tell him, it is expected he should be
revenged upon the illiterate Courtier that made this Play; if you can bring
this business about, I may find a way, as Epilogue, to be thankful, though the
Captain abused you to day. Think on it, Stephen is as handsome, when the Play is
done, as Mr. Wild was in the Scene.


Love. There Is something of reason in what he says. -- But my friend, how shall
one believe you; you that were such a Rascal to day, in Buff, is it to be hoped
you can be honest only with putting on a black cloak? well, I Will venture once
again; and if I have any power, he shall sting the malicious Rascal; and I
think he is fit for such a business. I Am sure he has the worst tongue; and a
conscience that neither honor nor truth binds; and therefore it is to be
believed, if he will rail in public he may be even with your Poet; I will
cloth and feed him and his Muse this seven years, but I will plague him:
Secret tells me, 'twas your Poet too that pawned me, to day, in the Tavern.


Capt. By my faith, did he; nay 'twas he that told me of your friendship with
Jolly.


Love. I wonder the Parson has been so long silent; a man of his coat and
parts, to be beaten with a pen, by one that speaks sense by rote, like Parots;
one that knows not why sense is sense, but by the sound; one that can scarce
read, nay, not his own hand; well, remember your promise.


Capt. Leave it to me, he is yours; and if our Plot take, you shall all have
your shares in the mirth; but not the profit of the Play; and the Parson, more
then his Tithe, a second day.


Love. We will discourse of this some other time; and pray dispatch what it is
you have to say to this noble company, that I may be gone; for those Gentlemen
will be in such fury, if I stay; and think, because we are alone, God knows
what.


Capt. It Is no matter what they think, it is not them we are to study now; but
these guests, to whom pray address your self civilly, and beg that they would
please to become Fathers, and give those Brides within; what say you,
Gentlemen, will you lend your hands to join them; the Match you see is made; if
you refuse, Stephen misses the Wench, and then you cannot justly blame the
Poet. For you know, they say, that alone is enough to spoil the Play.


FINIS.
The Pilgrim. A TRAGEDY, The Scene MILLAIN.

Written in PARIS, BY THOMAS KILLIGREW. 1651.

DEDICATED TO THE COUNTESS OF CARNARVAN.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

The Names of the Actors.
Alphonso, Duke of Millain. Sforza, His Son in Love with Fidelia. Julia, Widow
to the deceased Duke of Pavia, now Duchess of Millain. Victoria, Daughter to
Alphonso, in Love with Cosmo. Cosmo, Son to Julia, in Love with Victoria.
Fidelia, Julia's Daughter, in Love with Sforza. Matthias, The deceased Duke of
Pavia only mentioned. Martino, A Lord of Pavia, Favorite to the deceased Duke
and Duchess, and now Favorite of Alphonso. Carlo, Governor of the Castle of
Millain, a Creature of Julia's, and Secretary. Baptista, A Lord of Pavia,
banished both States, in Love with Fidelia. Antonio, Friends to Cosmo All four
Honest Men. Giovanni, Richardo, Friends to Sforza Ferdinando, Phillipine, Page
to Victoria. Pietro, Nicolett, Banditoes. A Hermit. Trivallin, A Ferry-man over
the Poe. Bertolin, His Man. Argentin, His Wife. Moretta, His Maid. Attendants,
Such as the Scene requires. Angelica, Servants to the Princess. Maria,
The Pilgrim.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter Giovanni, Ferdinando, and two Officers of the Army. Giovanni. WEre I
worthy to counsel the Duke, he should know this removing of Generals breeds
ill blood, and disaffects the Soldiers; whose kindness at this time is of more
importance then his security will give faith to.


Ferdi. That Cosmo was made General, though it seemed strange at first; yet
those that know Julia's power with the old Duke, he being her Son, wonder not
at it. But how he comes now to be disgraced, and yet she and Martino hold their
Interest in Court, makes me suspect some foul play, some further, designs then
their Craft will let us discover.


Giov. He has won strangely upon the Soldiers by his Courage and Affability;
for those that are his Enemies will yet allow Prince Cosmo a gallant and stout
Soldier, else he would have found the hatred they bear his Mother would have
clouded all his parts; his first Reception was so cold, we thought he looked
dejected, as if he were ashamed to own his Mother.


Ferdi. Prithee talk no more of her; she is an evil the Nation ought to arm
against; The sword (and that speedily bent against her) can only prevent the
ruin she and Martino threaten this State with. Prayers find too slow Remedies
for such mischiefs as their power daily contrives.


Giov. Heaven had many Crimes to punish in Millain, when she and Martino were
sent our scourges; Her own Subjects despised and scorned her, and deriding her
victory, say, we fought for their diseases only.


Ferdi. I wonder how Prince Sforza brooks this Familiarity of hers with
Martino; for it is said, he passionately affects the Princess Fidelia, a Virgin
of unquestioned Virtue, and yet her Daughter.


Giov. She has indeed an unspotted Fame; and when I consider it, Iam amazed to
think Nature should send such Sovereign Fruit from so poisonous a Root; yet
they say Prince Sforza but ill digested his Fathers Marriage with the Mother,
for all his Passion for the Daughter.


Ferdi. Can you blame him? Is it not a hard Condition to find his Enemy and his
Captive become his Mother? Supplanting him in all the power and trust of his
Father? yet his Piety makes him obedient, even to her weakness; and civil, even
to his Fathers faults.


Giov. O it is a matchless Gallantry inhabits in him; his Princely breast is all
composed of Honor; whether Enemy or Friend, he conquers still; so faithful in
his Promise, mild in Command, and gentle in Dispute, Constant and Resolute in
dangers, never absent to himself, never transported when he overcomes, nor
losing himself in disorder, nor amazed when he is worsted; I have seen him win
and lose a battle, but with that evenness of Soul, as fair Gamesters use to
meet their fortunes with.


Ferdi. Yet I heard him say, he thought it had been better for Millain to have
lost the battle, then won Pavia; since his Fathers weakness had so far
betrayed him as to marry Julia.


Giov. See if we were not fallen into the discourse of her again, that Curse;
and our miseries are so large a Theme we cannot shun it, though we warn each
other.


Ferdi. To divert you from that discourse, pray let me know your intention; are
you for Millain, with the General, or will you stay here? I mean to wait upon
him, and, by that Title, till I see some worthier then himself receive his
Command, which they will scarce find in Millain.


Giov. Prithee, Ferdinando, think better of me, then to believe I will serve
under any Man that Clouds Prince Cosmo; let us go find him at his Lodging.


Ferdi. He is gone abroad, I saw him and Antonio upon the works; This way we
shall meet them, see where they come. --


Enter Cosmo, Antonio, and Carlo; Cosmo has a Letter open in his hand, which he
reads with a troubled look. Cosmo. They need not be so hasty in repeating their
Injuries from Millain; Cosmo has not so ill a Memory to forget the first, that
they need not prompt him with a second; -- These are to Command you to quit the
Army, and to attend us at Millain, to know our further He reads. pleasure.
Alphonso the Duke may command, and it is just that I obey; And it is as great a
truth, his Command ought to be just. What if I will not quit the Army? it is not
this paper can force me, Carlo?


Giov. Force! who dares think they can force hence the Lombard General, or,
atleast, publish that thought? Death! do not go, Sir; say to us, you are
wronged, and you will have justice ere you stir; we will send a Messenger shall
make Millain know she has her power from hence.


Cos. I thank you for your hearty affection; but I must not let you be faulty
to serve me; my Lord, you may return, and say, I shall obey; My innocence dares
go and meet the author of this injury, and then play Cosmo's part.


Carl. Sir, I am sorry 'twas my misfortune to bring this unwelcome news; and
'twas one part of their design that wrought this mischief, to have me employed;
that it might wither my hopes in your Highness favor; but this Letter, Sir, I
hope, will acquit me; it is from your Princely Mother. He delivers him a Letter,
which he opens.

Cosmo tears his Mothers Letter.




Ferd. Giovanni, that is one of Julia's familiars; would thou or I had the
opening of his heart; what a nest of Villains we should discover!


Cos. Women's counsels are like their actions; let her practice her patience
still; though she can digest affronts and scorns, they shall find Cosmo will
not; I must be patient and suffer an affront, because Prince Sforza is to
succeed in my Command.


Car. So it was reported, Sir; but 'twas the wonder of all, why he of late
should so labor your remove; nor could we learn who were the means he wrought
by, till the Duchess suspecting your Sister Fidelia intercepted some of her
Letters, by which she found the Prince and your Sister hold intelligence; and
'twas her command, and Count Martino counseled, that your Highness should not
build too much upon the seeming friendship of the Prince; who but ill brooks
the love and trust your Highness has in Millain; and those that will strike at
your honor thus, she says, would strike at Prince Cosmo, if they durst attempt
him.


Ferd. Did not I tell you, that is a Villain.


Cos. I find him, and her practice too, fond Girl.


Giov. Ha! it is Prince Sforza then that succeeds our General.


Cos. What if it be Prince Sforza? what is that to me; who has heard me
question his merits? or wish one glory from his growing greatness? why then
should he look with envious eyes on mine? are honors so scarce in the Court of
Millain, that they must rob a stranger, ere they can pay their Debts to their
Prince? let them build him Trophies of their Love, till his envied fame grows
great as his mind; I shall not repine at it, so I be not injured; who ever
heard Cosmo repeat the ruin he suffered in the war betwixt Millain and Pavia,
because I was then their enemy? and though I lost my Country, I kept my honor.
But when they will call me friend, and injure me; smile in my face, and stab
me; wish health to Cosmo, and put poison in his cup; the world must pardon me,
if then my passion grows untame; when I see they aim to make me the basis to
build another greatness on; which ere I will suffer, I Will raise a storm shall
shake the proudest in their proudest thoughts. Antonio, follow me.


Exit Cosmo and Antonio. Car. This I looked not for; I must find him.


[Exit. Ferd. This mischief I foresaw; it is easy to read Julia's craft; the
malice of a bloody and an ambitious woman is clearly to be discovered. Oh,
Giovanni, the ruin that threatens this State must have sudden, honest, and
bold remedies; and we must wear our swords ready for all occasions.


Gio. It Is apparent her design is to break the friendship between the two
Princes; and I am confident, Sforza has no hand in this injury done to our
General; therefore let us haste to Pavia, and acquaint Prince Sforza with what
has past, whither I believe Cosmo is gone; his nature is too fiery to sleep
upon such a conceived injury.


Ferd. Agreed: But let us pass by Millain, and observe what face the Court
wears toward the Soldiers; that will instruct us how to proceed; for my fears
apprehend some sudden mischief.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Martino and a Servant. Mart. The Duke speechless, no sign of life, but
warmth?


Serve. The Physician bad me tell you, that he apprehends this relapse will be
mortal.


[aside. Mart. If he should die, 'twould cross all our designs; Carlo is absent
too: this chance distracts me; saw you the Duchess?


Serve. No, Sir, but one was dispatched to call her.


[Exit Serve. Mart. Haste to the Physician, and the Guards; command them
strictly to admit no visits, till I come.


[Enter Julia. Jul. O Martino, we are lost, for ever lost, if suddenly we
attempt not some brave rescue; and the plot we have so gloried in (our breaking
the friendship betwixt my Son and Sforza) as 'twas then the way to compass our
ends, if the Duke dies, it will be our utter ruin.


Mart. What says your Messenger, how did he leave him?


Jul. The Impostume brake, and he was almost strangled ere they found it; and
he left him speechless, and void of reason; and he must find sudden ease, or
death.


Mart. But why this distraction, Madam? think you I have not thought of all the
remedies that either our power or craft can propose? thinks your Highness that
Martino is so dull, as to sleep in this storm where you and Cosmo are
threatened? No, Madam, I am too proud and kind to quit the Helm, which thus long
your favor has put in my hands.


Jul. What then does thy soul prompt thee to? is there a hope left we may gain
Sforza to our party?


Mart. No, no; that thought is vain and desperate; Sforza is not to be wrought
upon; were he a coward I would fright him from the Throne; or were he a fool, I
would flatter him till his heart were tame, and then rock him asleep, and
insensibly rob him of a Crown. But these charms have no power upon him, his
sullen nature's proof against them and lust: yet if Fidelia would join, that
bait might engage his soul,; for I know he loves her; and if she would be wise
enough to listen to her own good, I would not doubt our success. Did you move
it to her?


Jul. Yes, yes; But hell upon her, she is too cold, she was changed, sure, in
the Cradle; No child of mine could be so unseasonably virtuous; when I urged it
to her with all the kindness and interest of a Mother; Showed her that all her
past glories, present honors and safety depended upon her consent; she urged
conscience and the Gods, and a thousand strange examples of their judgments
upon such actions. In short, I fear she is honest; and therefore neither to be
trusted, nor tempted longer.


Mart. Hell take her and her froward conscience; let her live and dye a fool,
and slave to Sforza, since she prefers a Maidenhead before a Crown. Secret is
honesty enough for any woman; and since there is no other remedy, they both
must dye; I have ordered to admit no visits; and if he dye, we must conceal it
till Sforza be dead, which is the only counsel our extremity admits. She leans
upon him.


Jul. That was spoke like a friend to Julia; now I find my youth did not err
in her choice; nor do I grudge that bounty or love that purchased Martino's
friendship, -- Sforza must dye, was it not so thou said?


Mart. Yes, Madam, he must dye, it is the only remedy; if he get the Crown, we
are short lived.


Jul. Sforza get the Crown? has Jul. quitted all her peace, all her honor, and
her God, to make her Cosmo great; and after that, shall she see him stoop to
Sforza; I had rather those limbs were torn by a Hangman.


Mart. Put off your fears, and calm this passion; it is resolved, Sforza shall
dye, and your Highness laugh at his Tragedy, whose thoughts are big with hopes
of our misery.


Jul. These words have given life to my dying hopes; and could I hear thee say
Sforza was dead, Julia were then Mistress of all her wishes; and till I do hear
that music in thy voice, the fear that he should live master of Cosmo and
thee, makes my joy faint; for know, I have set up my rest; and we will stand
the greatest, or fall the wicked'st in Millain. O Martino, can thou call to
thy mind that sad day, when I kneeled a petitioner at great Matthia's feet (thy
dead Lord and mine) the private estate I then mourned, gathered from his first
looks ambitious hopes, which with such art I managed, that ere I had my story
told with tears and youth, so cunningly I pleaded, that he left to be Caesar,
and rather obeyed, then granted what I sought; but Love was my aid then, Love
moved in these eyes; and so powerful were those tears, his heart was struck
with the sad object; but these eyes had fire in them then, Martino, Fire, such
as that misery could not cloud, such as those tears could not quench; But to
his bed they lighted Julia, Pavia's Duke I ruled, and upon a cruel Brother
took a deep Revenge; High was the Fame of Julia's Beauty then, when all bowed
to Julia, and observed her rising, as if the day had broke from these Eyes to
whose power all stooped; Yet then, Martino, my Martino, in midst of all these
glories commanded Julia.


Mart. Why do you repeat this, Madam? Do you believe your Servant wants spurs?
Are not our Interests equal? Is there any thing can attempt me to be ungrateful?


Julia. No, Martino, not that I fear thy gratitude, but to call to thy Memory
thy dead friends; That I was handsome is but a weak Argument; and if thou
should prove forgetful, Julia would not frown upon thee, because she knows
it is vain and idle; frowns She points to her face. and anger from decayed
Beauty beget no terror in Men; it is like Caesar in his Marble, which to none
terror bears.


Mart. Take heed how you encourage me to be false; Men, when they fear no
punishment, are seldom faithful for Honors sake; and if I should be false,
what would you do? He embraces her.


Julia. Mourn, and conjure thee to thy faith again, by all those past
pleasures, by all those joys which I have brought thee, by our stolen sweetes,
and those envied embraces which we so often have expired in, and beg of thee
not to add to the miseries of time; They embrace Then would I show thee that
Heaven thou have so often sworn by; These stars too, which furnished thee with
new matter for thy vows; And at last, sighing, name Julia, as thou wast wont
to do; when thou would swear by what in Heaven and Earth thou lovd'st and
feard'st most, Julia would then fall from thy Tongue, and tears from thy Eyes;
And, if in those days my kindness obliged a gallant man, thou would again
return to thy friend.


Mart. No more, Fate and Martino shall change together; I am still your
Highnesses; command me and prove my faith, though it be to fix this Poniard in
Sforza's heart.


Julia. No, no, Martino, I will bear a part in all; I require no single danger
from you, but only to join with me: For thou art one my thoughts labor to
preserve rather then to hazard; and when we can gain our ends safely, then I
again conjure you to join with me to make our Cosmo great; for to me he is
dearer then all that the Earth shows, or the Sea hides; Because he is the fruit
of our Love; it is for my dear Cosmo, thy Cosmo, it is for him I plead; And by
thy part of that pleasing sin, by that beloved fault which Cosmo is; By that
dear crime, which I cannot, nay will not repent, because 'twas thine, let us
resolve to pursue our design: That we may leave our Cosmo great as our Loves,
lest envious lookers on, in these days, should scorn our past greatness, and
laughing say, Julia and Martino's glory was as mortal as her beauty, which is
the common Fate of Women.


Mart. No more, Julia, By this -- and this, my Julia is to me still all
Pleasure, all Beauty, all sweetness; O thou excellently They kiss. faithful to
a broken Faith, and diligent maintainer of thine own Laws.


Julia. Love and Ambition know no Laws; a Mistress and a Crown have no certain
way; Election, Birth, Sword, all are good. Nothing was ever called Treason,
when the Traitors stood; Laws are fit to bind the people, Princes are above
them, and the wisest make them their servants; The sacrifice was the peoples
expiation, and so sacred, they might not touch what they offered, yet what they
offered was to the Priest but food.


Mart. Thou have fired my Soul, and I long to see Sforza Earth. Baptista shall
suddenly put in execution the plot we resolved on; he will this Evening be at my
Lodging, and all things agree to make it hit; For Sforza is this day to set out
from Pavia, which will give an occasion fit for our design; our doubt was,
where to attempt him; 'twas my opinion in the wood, when he is past the River;
But Count Baptista believes 'twill be safer, when he passes the Ferry; I have
whetted him on with repeating of his Injuries; and Carlo has so confirmed him,
that his banishment was procured by Sforza (who is now his Rival in Fidelia's
Love) that he is ready for any mischief, so she may be his reward, which we
assured him, with a Restitution to all his Possessions when Cosmo reigned,
which must be performed.


Julia. Yes, if there be no way to remove him when the work is done; for he is
of too bold a Nature to be trusted with such a secret.


Mart. That is a danger not ill foreseen; for such men, if not rewarded as they
desire, still cry, They gave the Crown, and think they are never paid till they
have the gift again.


Julia. Sure I am greater then I was; this Faith in my Friend has renewed my
years; if not in me, yet it has in thee, faithful, kind Martino, who now
appear'st lovely, as Bacchus in his Wine; when the well-natur'd God looked
kindly on the faults of the false Theseus; and I could wish all the forsaken
Beauty of Ariadne, to add to what time has withered here, and thou that Gods
desire, blown by his own fire, that Julia might meet thee again, and again
overflow thy heart with Joy.


[Enter Carlo. Mart. What news begets this haste? where is Cosmo?


Carlo. He left the Camp enraged at the Letters, and threatens a Revenge
against Sforza; and if not prevented, I fear, in his own Person he will attempt
it; there is no body but Antonio with him.


Julia. Watch his coming to Court, and give me notice, that I may lay my
command upon him, not to venture himself in such a danger.


Mart. That thought is vain; Pray take no notice of his intention, nor seem to
intend his prevention, lest he suspect it and steal privately away; Leave the
care to me, I will have the guard ready; and as soon as he enters the Court, we
will seize him in the Dukes name, and make him a Prisoner at my Chamber, till
Sforza be gone his long Journey.


Carlo. You must lose no time in that design neither; for it is certain, Sforza
sets out this day; have you resolved where we shall set upon him?


Mart. Either in the Wood, or as he passes the Poe.


Carlo. You know, 'twas the Count Baptista's opinion, the River was best; for
the Act once done, 'twas but sinking the Boat, and the waters being high, they
may have time to escape to Pavia.


Mart. Prithee call him, he is now at my Chamber, and we will resolve.


Carlo. No, Sir, Pray let him not be seen in this public place; his disguise
is not proper for you to hold discourse with, it may beget suspicion; within he
shall attend you.


Julia. I will to the Duke, to keep all visits from him but death, who could
never have come unwelcome till now; had he waited on Sforza first, we might
then have lighted at his Funeral my Martino's Hymeneal Torch.


Carlo. Spoke like my great Mistress; and it is my glory that I serve such a
Soul: But lose no time; let Baptista be instructed, that is the hinge on which
all this glorious work must move, and Crown Prince Cosmo; which will make
Divine-formed Julia great in Story.


Mart. Away Carlo, call Baptista to the Duchess Cabinet, where we will expect
you.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Baptista alone, habited like a Beggar. Bapt. HAteful Habit! loathed
form! scorned fortune! wretched Baptista, disgraced, banished, and despised by
her I Love! O Heaven! Is there no way to conquest but through the miseries of
the Innocent? My crime to this State was my faith to my dead prince and
kinsman; which too well Martino and false Julia know; if they had any gratitude
for his memory, they might long since have dispersed this cloud, having
absolute power in Millain; But they are false as Cowards bred in blood and Lust
together; Yet now their dangers begin to approach they fawn upon Baptista; and
to gain their ends, promise more then Passengers in storms, or a prodigal to
his Whore, when Beauty and high rough Seas plead in their Lusts and fears. And
now I will dissemble too; and be as blind as the Scene requires; neither see
nor hear ought but what they show or tell; Not that I will believe thee
Martino; but I have my ends too in Sforza's death; 'Twas that proud Boy
eclipsed all my glories, and left me thus a naked shrub; 'twas he that like
untimely frosts killed all my forward hopes in dear Fidelia; for whose sake,
Fate spins no thread so fine but I dare cut it; and for her sake he shall die.
-- See where she comes; This is all the joy I have, this sight makes me endure
my misery.


Enter Fidelia and her Maid. Fidelia. This disgrace of Cosmo's amazes me;
Prince Sforza too, is called home; and the Duke fallen into a relapse; When I
consider these accidents, I am able to give my self so little satisfaction,
that I cannot but fear there is some foul play intended; for I know Martino
cannot but apprehend the Prince in both, Oh! this thought has fears which
Heaven protect the Prince from.


Bapt. All blessings of mind and Fortune fall upon the Excellent Fidelia, till
the abundance equal that Excess of beauty that strikes the world, for being so
charitable to her daily Beads-man.


Fidelia. I am not uncharitable -- yet my heart affects not that fellow; Heaven
pardon me, if I judge amiss; But methinks he deserves his Curse; nor did I
ever yet give him a willing Alms; Yet Maria, give him something. What said he?
She speaks aside.


[Exit Baptista. Mariae. I know not, Madam.


[Enter Victoria. Vict. O sister, send off thy Maid, till I relate my fears;
Martino is a Villain, a bloody and a subtle Traitor; and if not ptevented, will
ruin all that is virtuous in this Court.


Fidelia. Oh my divining soul! whence spring thy fears, Gentle Victoria?


Vict. Passing through the Privy Gallery to my Fathers Chamber, which you know
joins upon your Mothers Cabinet, I heard some laugh, which made me curious to
listen; where I heard such light airy things as suit not with these times, nor
our distracted fortunes; and one (I will not name) with wicked mirth made
mention of those dangers that now besiege my fathers life; At which my anger
made me look, to see who they were; more amazed at the sight, then at the sound
of those words: For the old beggar (we use to give our Alms to) was with them;
He stood upright, no age nor wrinkles in his Face, nor silver hair on head or
beard; he whispered something to the Duchess, at which she laughed; and I
could hear the Villain say, by to morrow Sunset she should see no air of
Sforza; and to his horrid wish bloody Martino said, Amen. But that which most
cuts my soul, was, to find the Duchess of this Council.


Fidelia. Oh! Madam: That Villain I have long trembled at, fearing his counsel
would at last tend to some horrid mischief; she is my mother, I shall therefore
neither Judge nor revile her; though my heart weeps for her; let heaven speak
to her, and tell her what Duty she owes to them, and give me piety enough to
pay mine to her.


(She weeps.) Vict. Dear sister, do not weep; I came not to afflict you, but to
Counsel, with you, how I might save the Innocent.


Fidelia. Oh Madam! to what misery was I reserved? when your noble Brother
saved us, and gave his Charity to those that armed against him; would I had
died with my Father, with that peace and Innocence I then enjoyed; I shall live
now till none will pity me; None will mourn when I die, nor shed a tear for
poor Fidelia; In that day Millain will burn fires of joy; no Funeral-torch
shall light the sad mourners from my Obsequies.


Vict. Your griefs are now unseasonable, pray defer them, and consider what is
to be done to save my brother from their Malice; Your commands are more
powerful far then mine, I will not doubt a sisters Interest; Let us write our
fears, and assure him that there is a Plot laid for his life, and acquaint him
with the relapse, and sudden danger that my father is fallen into; he will
then know how necessary his presence must be here; but counsel him to come
privately in some disguise, and we will expect him at your Chamber; while you
write this, I will call Phillipine, to whose care we will give it.


Fidelia. I shall; and it is one joy, I am not so lost in your Opinion but that
your highness dares trust me with your fears, though my Mother be part of them;
If I keep that value with the Prince too, I shall not be so miserable as my
fears would persuade me.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Cosmo, muffled in his Servants Cloak, observing his Sister, and the
Princess as they go out. Cosmo. 'TWas she, and the Princess Victoria; I will
observe till she goes to her own Chamber. I dare not see the Princess; my love
has too much folly and softness; When I behold her she calls to my mind, it is
her brother that has injured me; and that thought distracts me; Yet I must not
tamely bear this Injury, nor rudely dispute it with her I love; But for
Fidelia, a Sister that I have loved above my Eyes; that she should join in my
disgrace, is a Return I could not have feared from any thing that I have valued
like Fidelia -- She comes, I will not be seen.


[Enter Fidelia and Victoria. Vict. Till night, Madam, I will take my leave,
lest our being together beget suspicion.


Cosmo. Fidelia, Sister. As she goes out, Cosmo pulls Fidelia.


Fidelia. Brother? well-come, What Accident calls you to Millain?


Cosmo. My Injuries, which I hear you are no stranger to, Fidelia.


Fidelia. What was it you said, Sir?


Cosmo. I am told you are no stranger to the affront that brings me hither; for
it is said, you love Prince Sforza, sister.


Fidelia. I heard you, Sir, at first; But was loath to understand you; and it is
said, you hate Prince Sforza, brother.


Cosmo. Hate him? Nay I scorn to hate him; When I am angry I dare be revenged;
Nor will Cosmo think this anger away; That I hate him is false.


Fidelia. And why may not I be scandal'd too?


Cosmo. If 'twere false, why do you hold Correspondence with him has wronged
your brother?


Fidelia. I know he has not Injured you, and therefore I hold correspondence
with him.


Cosmo. I know, he has: poorly, and by Whispers, wrought my disgrace in my
absence; and by detraction robbed me of that Faith his Father gave me; It Is
Sforza has made me suspected: But I shall prove my self honester then he dares
be.


Fidelia. Honester then he? I would thou could.


Cosmo. Yes, then he, or any that dares avow this disgrace done to Cosmo, and
to their teeth tell them so; and they dare as soon beard a Lion, naked, as
maintain their Injury.


Fidelia. He is the gallanter man; Dare you maintain an Injury?


Cosmo. I dare, as much as he.


Fidelia. And more; for he dares not use a Sister thus; Go tell him what you
dare do; you will find him your equal in Honor, and in Arms.


Cosmo. He is not.


Fidelia. Come, he is. Remember Pavia, and the life he gave you; Remember me,
and my honor, which he saved, When neither your sword nor passion could
protect it.


Cosmo. You are angry, Sister.


Fidelia. No, Sir; I never yet met that man so rude, nor Injury so wild, could
raise my Anger; Yet I confess, I have so much share in Cosmo's faults, that
they wound me; Thou art abused, and when it is too late thou will find it; and
if my words had faith with Cosmo, I would tell thee thy Courage and all that is
Gallant and Honorable in thee (Those strengths given to defend thee) are by
the malice and Craft of those Traitors whom thou trustest, armed against thee;
And because they durst not attempt thee, they have raised Cosmo against
himself, and this Civil-war will ruin thee.


Cosmo. I understand not this complement; are you with me, or against me?


Fidelia. In the Princes cause against the world; for I know he is Innocent;
and if you were your self, I could clear all these doubts.


Cosm. My self? what disorders are there in my words or actions, that makes
your partial eyes find the Madman in a Brother?


Fidelia. Unmanly ones, such as in Prince Sforza I should hate, but in Cosmo I
pity them.


Cosmo. You are my Sister that says this.


Fidelia. Do thou not blush to say so, with that cloudy brow? would any
gallant man look upon a Sister so, with such a storm in his Forehead, and Eyes
full of Anger? Would any man show this Rage to a Sister, whose Sex can scarce
modestly be angry? But that, and all the Injuries thou can do me, I can
pardon; because I know there is a Tempest in thy Heart, craftily raised by
those that hate thee.


Cosmo. Oh Fidelia! I am wronged, disgraced, my Country lost, and all the
Credit I had with the Duke blasted; my Command is taken from me by Prince
Sforza and his Party.


Fidelia. Thou art deceived, Cosmo: Yet I know you are wronged, and my Heart
has bled for it; But why you should punish me S^e weeps. for it, why accuse
wretched Fidelia, that had no Joy left but in her Innocence, and Cosmo's Love;
Why pursue me, that never in thought wronged you or any man; Me, a Virgin and a
Sister, oppressed with miseries, and rudely thus throw your wild words at me;
And your self (a Brother) become the Author of a scandal that thy Honor should
have engaged thee to tear from a strangers Heart! But now since you have
defamed me, who shall fear to blot Fidelia's Name, when Cosmo a Brother shall
be known to revile her? They say, you are in Love with Prince Sforza. Oh Cosmo!
when thou said it, thy Eyes were red, and thy Heart called me Whore; And had
not you expressed a want of value for your Sister, who durst have ventured the
defaming of Fidelia so: The man was never born durst venture to tell me Cosmo
was a Coward; And had mine honor been as precious to thee, thou would have
killed that poysoner of my fame; yet, I here declare, the only glory of my
heart, is, the friendship she has gained from Prince Sforza.


Cos. Oh, Fidelia, Fidelia! pardon thy unfortunate Brother, and let my
distracted mind plead my peace with thee; though the injuries I have received
would force an Anchorite from his Cell, and with broken vows break all Laws of
Gods or Men, rather then not find a revenge: Read that Letter, and be your self
the Judge. He walks, and she reads.


Fid. If this Letter find your faith, We are lost; it is Martino's falsehood. Oh,
that Serpent, which but now begins to throw his venom out! the Prince sue for
your Command? (did you desire the Government of Pavia?)


Cos. Fidelia, I ask your counsel; I am not now fit for your mirth.


Fid. Do you know this hand? pray read it. She gives him Prince Sforza 's
Letter, and walks.


Cos. I work underhand, to gain the Government of Pavia, as I did the Army of
Millain? it is false, false as Hell, both; and through the earth I will hunt him
with my sword, till I have taken revenge of him that dares accuse me of one
treacherous thought.


Fid. Do you now perceive the mischief they aim at, that have made this remove
in your Commands? Martino and Carlo cannot gain their ends, while the Prince
and you are friends. You have both too much honor, while you love each other,
to listen to their mischiefs: but being once blinded with anger, their false
pretenses may find a faith, which you and all may live to repent. The Prince is
as great a stranger to his being General, as you are to the Government of
Pavia; yet when 'twas labored to make him believe you were the cause of his
remove; his friendship would neither believe, nor suffer such a scandal to be
laid on Cosmo.


Cos. Is this truth, Fidelia? or feigned, only to keep me from taking my
revenge where you have a friendship?


Fid. No, Cosmo; I will call no man friend that dares do a treacherous act, or
fears to justify his own innocence; and if you think otherwise, Go to Pavia,
find the Prince, and satisfy your doubts; only thus much I beg; for my sake be
not hasty, nor injurious in your words, but clearly tell your griefs; Courage
and Reason should tread the same paths; else you may lose your way, though
justice guide you.


Cos. I shall obey your counsel; for I know him valiant, and full of honor;
and though we both love him, if he wrong me, I must not bear it, Fidelia.


Fid. Alas, Sir, I am none of that fond kind of women, that would save a
Brother ingloriously; nor have I said this, to bid thee not fight with any man
that wrongs thee. For I know my Brother fortunate in fight; nor do I fear, or
doubt his sword against any single enemy; and though I would bet upon his arm
against the world; yet I would counsel him to let honor guide him, and never
to detract from any enemy: For it lessens thy triumph when thou art victor; but
if overcome, then a scorn follows the loss. -- See who comes here; can that
softness calm your heart, or will it swell against her too?


[Enter Victoria. Cos. She staggers all my resolution; I must not stay: I hope
your Highness does not believe me guilty of the injuries I stand accused of to
Prince Sforza.


Vict. I am so far, Sir, from believing, I am to blush for those my Brother is
taxed for; but I hope you see from whence that malice takes its root; Martino
is a villain.


Cos. It Is visible I am injured; and when I thought Prince Sforza did it, my
anger then was just. But Fidelia has made me lay by that anger, till I have
spoken with his Highness: And I know the Prince is so gallant, he will not love
me the less for seeing me sensible of an affront; For nothing can confirm him
better that I will do no injuries, then to see that I will take none; for to
appear worthy of such a friendship, is, to let him know I am not afraid to be
his enemy.


Fid. Why was he so harsh to me? --


[aside. Vict. Sir, this is but civil anger; and I must not go till you promise
me, not to be an enemy to my Brother.


Cos. By your self, I swear (to Cosmo of all Oaths that binds most powerful)
never to be an enemy to Prince Sforza till he injures me; and then to be
patient is neither the way to honor nor safety.


Vict. I am satisfied, so you will let some other, and not your own passion, be
judge of those injuries.


Cos. Be your Highness always judge of them and me.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Trevallin. Treval. I Fear Argentin is not so full of honor as my wife
should be: A drunken Thedes-key, one of those wandering Tramontanes, whose
business in the world is Wine Whores and Horseflesh; one of these, at first
sight, called her by her name, and talked of old stories, such as would make a
jealous man smell of the horn; if she be one of those that cannot say no, what
a Trade shall I drive, that have the carrying over mine own horns, by
Boatloads; but if I find her trading, By St. John, I Will spade her;


[Enter to him Bertolin and Argentin. That Is a sly Rogue too; I durst not go to
gather boughs for my Bert. and she play together while he talks. Boats, for
fear he should be plucking her forbidden fruit at home.


Argen. I, now you cog; but I have not forgot that you gave Moretta the shirt
the Dutchman left behind him.


Bertol. Will this jealous humor never wear out? Come, and if you be true
steel, Mistress, let us in, and strike fire; and I They fool together, and
Trevallin sees them. will promise you a bundle of Dutch-mens shirts, the next
that pass.


Treval. So, so; this will come to somewhat, shortly; I shall prefer you,
Bertolin, the French-way; I shall; which is, fleay you, and send you to serve
the Grand Duke, Sirrah; I shall, if I catch you in this saucy fit again, of
playing with my wife.


Bert. Alas, Sir, we were but talking of the Dutchmen, that knew my Mistress
when she was a brave Girl; he that drank a pound of Candles to her health.


Treval. And whither is she gone now? to find that fine Dutchman.


Bert. No, Sir, she is gone to the wood,


Treval. I know her mind now; and if I would consent to her Roguery, I might
gain my own ends the better; 'twere but giving her an occasion, and taking an
opportunity my self, for Moretta is as willing as I am, and see where she
comes, -- Dispatch, and get the boughs ready.


[Enter Moretta. Bert. I shall, Sir, and it shall go hard but I will make a Rod
for your Tail, out of them.


[Exit. Moret. My Mistress is so jealous of her Bauble, and so covetous of
another, that poor Moretta starves for a little of either; yet the Master or
the Man are willing to relieve my hunger; she is a woman would fain change, and
keep her own too. Yonder is my Master, how handsome he appears, now there is
none but he! (thus brown bread is good when one has a stomach) she is vanished,
and Bertolin gone; now for a charm to try him.


Treval. Moretta.


Moret. Sir.


Treval. Quickly, and softly, a kiss, Wench.


Moret. O dear, Master, take ten, and ask them afterward, every word would
make a dozen.


Treval. Let us look where the old spy is.


Moret. She is gone to gather boughs.


Treval. Come Wench, a kiss, and in, lest we lose this minute.


[Exeunt both. ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Bertolin. Bert. WE are the strangest unlucky, every body is willing, and
yet none can meet; we know each others minds too well; now for a minute, I have
a jobbe of work here, a minute would do it, and a design in my pate to cure all
their jealousies, by giving them full satisfaction of their doubts. Here comes
my Mistress, I must be kind to her; and she comes on as easy as my old
slippers.


[Enter Argentin. Argen. There he stands, and we are alone; if he should offer,
how shall I do for a where withal to deny him?


Bert. Mistress, there is an old suit depending; I am poor Bertolin still, but
a most sufficient able Lover, that has --


Argen. You staid for me here now. -- I, I, dissemble, 'dissemble; where is
your Master? He plays the Rogue with her.


Bert. He is gone home.


Argen. And what do you hanker for? I saw the boughs at the door; Prince Sforza
will be past before you have trimmed or made clean the Boat.


Bert. I would that you would but step in with me, and help to set up the
boughs; I have a trick, if you would but join, Mistress, would tickle you till
you laugh again. He kisses her.


Argen. I thought 'twas such trick; why so, is this a time to fool away in
tricks and kissing?


Bert. Say you so? I would we were but on the other side the water; if you will
go, we will put the Boat a drift; and when the work is done we will call for help.


Argen. I am willing to do thee a kindness, but I dare not be long absent; for
I fear my husband should come home in the mean time, and fall aboard Moretta.


Bertol. That is a Whore in her heart; let me alone to watch her; we will be
back before them.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. V.
Enter Trevallin and Moretta. Moret. THere is no safety here, it is my Mistress
that watches us.


Treval. Whither shall we go then, to be private?


Moret. Send my Mistress to the wood, for boughs; and when Bertolin comes home,
make him stay for his breakfast; step you to the Boat, and lie privately, I
will come to you.


Treval. Thou will not fail.


Moret. This in earnest. Farewell, make haste, and send home Bertolin; see where
he comes with his boughs.


Enter Bertolin with his boughs at his back. Treval. Whither are you going?


Bertol. To the Boat with these boughs.


Treval. Where is your Mistress?


Bertol. In the wood, gathering more boughs.


Treval. More boughs, what to do? unless you were certain the Prince would come.


Bertol. A Gallant told me so, that knew my Mistress before you.


Treval. A pox of his knowledge, and memory too; there is neither of them
honest.


Bertol. Pray, let me go; and if you were as well laden as I am, you'de have
little lust to talk under such a burden; I have more upon my back then you are
aware of.


Treval. Lay them down, and go break your fast, and then call home your
Mistress; there is boughs enough, one would think.


Bertol. Boughs enough? why, it is none of your pains, to gather them; cannot you
let one make the Boat handsome when the Prince is to pass?


Trev. You are always thus troublesome.


Bertol. Let me carry these aboard, and then I will call home my Mistress.


Trev. Leave your prating, and lay down your Boughs, and go now and call her
home; for if I lace your Coat 'twill be less easier then your plain one.


Bertol. I will not go alone, where she is; you will be in your old jealous
humor, and mistrust something, as you did the other night.


Trev. Away, you are a fool; give me the Boughs, and make haste.


Bertol. I will not quit my Boughs; you do things so by halfes still.


[Enter Moretta. Moret. Your Breakfast is ready; why do you dispute thus with
him, you know it is a wilful fool, let him go, you lose time.


Trev. Well, Sirrah, make haste, and come down to Breakfast.


Exeunt Trevallin and Moretta. Bertol. Mistress, Mistress, don't you stink for
fear? I assure you I do.


Argent. Bertolin, dear Bertolin, quick, quick, quick, unbind, unbind, dispatch
that I may run home, I would not endure such another fright for all the wealth
in Pavia.


Bertol. Yes, and then you will be gone and laugh at Bertolin; no faith, you
must even be patient, Mistress; I will not lose my labor and my longing too;
it is an opportunity has cost me too dear to be thrown away.


Argent. Dear Bertolin, I can do nothing now; for the truth is, I am loose in
my belly with the fright.


Bertol. Are you gilt, Mistress?


Argent. Dear Bertolin, another time command me.


Bertol. Courage, Mistress, it is a sign of good luck you know.


Argent. No, no, Bertolin, as thou love me let me go; unbind me or I will cry
out.


Bertol. Do, and proclaim it, one loud syllable more and I am gone; and here I
will leave you like a Bird in a bush, 'twill be a credit for you, I need only
swear I have not touched you, and vehemently swear we were honest; That is the
new fashion way of telling, which the Gallants use of late.


Argent. I am undone, I am undone for ever.


Bertol. Not, if you will be quiet; for I am as secret as any boathook.


[Exit Bertolin, and draws off his Boughs and Mistress. Enter Moretta. Moret.
He is gone aboard, and when he comes back to Breakfast, my Master and I will be
merry in the Arbor.


[Exit Moretta. Argent. If ever I trust you again, Bertolin.


Enter Bertolin, and brings his Mistress in again in the Boughs. Bertol. You
hope I will deceive you thus; why now you I am your faithful Bertolin, for
being a gracious Mistress endears me; He begins ^^ unbind the Cord. we have
nicked the jealous Rogue.


Argent. You had best tell him so; Prithee unbind, that I may get home; so, so,
look out and see whether the coast be clear, for I am afraid Moretta and he
should meet, for she is a Jade -- Was not that her voice? Moretta within calls
Bertolin.


Bertol. Yes, by this hand.


Argent. Look out, quick.


Bertol. It Is she coming this way, quickly, let me tie the cord and lie still
till she be gone.


Argent. A pox upon her for a crafty Whore, she suspects something.


Bertol. Be quiet, and all will be well, I warrant you.


Moret. Why do you not come to Breakfast? my Master stays for you, what are
you studying?


Bertol. It Is resolved I will do it, and then they are both at my devotion;
they will fear me, and not dare accuse me, nor tell of each other.


Moret. Now I am alone with him, methinks, he is lovelier then my Master; Lord,
how handsome any Man is, when a Woman is in my Case. Bertolin takes her in his
Arms, and points to the Boughs.


Bertol. Moretta, you understand me, else this occasion may prompt you; Prithee
lay thy hand upon these Boughs.


Moret. Why should I be coy? Here is an opportunity, and it is good to be sure
of one; and in this case to take the Man is Wisdom, when the Master is
uncertain.


Bertol. You are dumb now, there may be more Dutchmen, and more shirts;
however, there are Trees and Ropes enough in Pavia to ease a Lovers Heart.


Moret. You do well to complain first, and judge by your self; Alas, I do not
see my Mistress, I am blind.


Bertol. Mistress? where?


Moret. Where? you know where, in your Heart, dissembler.


Bertol. By this day, I had thought she had seen her. By this kiss, I am all
thine, only I was angry and vexed to see thee cast Eyes upon my Master; But we
will forgive each other, grow wise, from past follies take occasion by the
lock, and laugh at the old Woman.


Moret. Till you are next alone, and then this Story shall entertain her.


Bertol. Do thou take me for a Devil, false to my Love?


Moret. Hark, I hear my Masters voice.


[Exeunt. Enter Trevallin at the other Door. Trev. Bertolin, Bertolin, she
stays long; If the Rogue should mow her to my hand, I have carried my
business finely, to make my self his Baud; I have no patience, I will to the
Door and call him.


[Exit. Enter Bertolin and Moretta. Moret. So, you had best brag, and tell
leather face, my Mistress, with her spiders breath, what I have done. --


Bertol. Hark, I heard my Masters voice.


Moret. Be gone, I will follow you.


Bertolin. Farewell, little Rogue, till another time, but I will watch your
water; how my Mistress storms: Now if my Master will take an opportunity, and
employ Moretta upon the Boughs, what a Comfort 'twill be to my Mistress, 'till
cure both their Jealousies -- he comes, and I am gone.


[Enter Trevallin. Trev. Where is this idle Villain?


Moret. I know not, I found him talking in's sleep here to himself, laid all
along upon the Boughs; But he is gone I think to call home my Mistress.


Trev. But is he gone? Peep Wench, be sure, lest the Enemy surprise us.


Moret. But look you keep your promise now; You shall not have my Maidenhead
till you swear not to suffer my Mistress to beat me any more, nor dominere over
me though she be jealous.


Trev. Beat thee? By this light, I will sew up her tail like young Kites for
spoil, if she but lift her Tongue against thee.


Moret. Will she not come, think you?


Trev. No, no, hang her old Trot; Come Wench, whither shall we go?


Moret. Help me pull in the Boughs, and then I will talk with you; but you
must be very civil.


[Exeunt. Enter Bertolin. Bertol. It Is done; lucky mischief as I could wish; O
the knavery and the sport of this Jest, besides, my Revenge on all three: Now
Bertolin is Master, and can have which he will. O for a fine familiar Devil to
tell my Mistress thoughts; would I had so much money as she would give to be
revenged, or as I would refuse, rather then hold my tongue; I will steal off,
and give them the Alarm. Cry only, my Mistress comes.


[Exit Bertolin. Enter Trevallin and Moretta. Treval. A Boy, or Girl, Wench,
for a pair of Gloves.


Moret. Neither, for two pair, a pox on it; it is no marvel my Mistress is so
jealous; By this light, he would press twenty women to death, ere he made one
Quick.


Treval. What say thou, am not I a young man still? and a bountiful Lover,
for a man of my hair.


Moret. By my troth, Sir, if you took no more then you laid out I think there
had been little spent to day.


Treval. A wag, a wag; But I shall see thy belly swell; if it prove a Boy, we
will call him Trevallin the second.


Moret. These old men think the best of themselves, and they have reason; for
if their faith were no stronger then their works they were damned.


Treval. A kiss, a kiss, Wench. -- I am betrayed, undone, undone.


While they are kind, Enter Bertolin and discovers himself. Bertolin. My Act,
for my freedom, quickly, your Seal-Ring, and Reversion of the Ferry, all the
ready money in the house, and Moretta for my wife; Or all goes to the
Inquisitor, and my Mistress, he cannot cuckold me; I have both their words for
it.


Treval. I am undone.


Bertol. Is it a Bargain? or I am gone.


Moret. Be ruled, Sir, all is undone, I will consent rather then be
dishonored; But if I be not revenged on him when I am married.


Treval. But will you be faithful, and secret, when this is done? and not tell
my wife!


Bertol. Hah! what house do you take me to be of? Is Bertolin of so little
reputation in the world, as to proclaim my own horns my self? Hang her, Trot,
she shall know nothing unless you tell her.


Treval. I tell her? the Devil I will.


Bertol. Sure, it is as probable you may have the vanity to say, you made my
wife a whore, as I to tell it.


Treval. Be but secret, and all is agreed.


Bortel. Is it a match, Moretta?


Moret. Yes, by this kiss.


Treval. Make haste, and let us part before she comes, she will be so jealous
else.


Bertol. No, no, stay you two here, and stick up the Boughs; I told her you
were making ready the Boat; fetch out the boughs Moretta, and dispatch, I will
return strait.


[Exit Bertolin. Treval. This slave will tell her yet.


Moret. What will he tell? am not I his wife? Both of them pull in the Boughs.


Treval. But shall not I be well-come still, when we can delude the old Woman.


Moret. Yes, but we must be secret, for he is a sullen Rogue, I cannot these
boughs out, he has bound them so fast together, pray lend me your knife to cut
the string.


Treval. There, let me help thee. They set up some Boughs.


(Bertolin peeps.) Moret. Fetch me some more boughs.


Treval. Ha! what is here? my wife? Trevallin goes to pluck the Boughs, and
finds his wife.


Argent. Yes, impudence; Oh, that I were loose?


[Enter Bertol. Bertol. Did you call, Sir? my Mistress will be here presently.


Treval. I am abused, but I shall be revenged; This is your Villainy, Sirrah.


Moret. Ha! my Mistress in the boughs! she can tell fine stories then.


Argen. Yes, you double Whore; oh, for a Rat to gnaw this Cord.


Enter Baptista and the Banditoes. Bapt. Sieze them, and bind them; so, strip
those Fellows, and bring their Clothes.


Bertol. Alas, Sir; my skin will never hold dressing; if your worship has use
of a skin, pray take my Masters; he is a notable thick-skin'd knave, and so
tough with the yellow, it is almost tanned The Banditti hold them. to your hand,
Sir.


Bapt. Hah! What have we here, a bird in a bush? Away, gagg them; and lay them
in the hole, behind the Hermitage, and follow me.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Sforza and Richardo. Sforza. NO more, Richardo.


Rich. Sir, it is my Love and Duty that makes me urge it.


Sforza. I believe it; but no more, I know you are abused.


Rich. Sir, I have letters here second yours, and from your best Friends, such
whose affection, Faith, nor duty, ought to be suspected; They are full of Amaze
and Wonder, to find your Highness will so tamely consent to lose a Country
that cost so much blood to purchase; Was not Cosmo born Prince of Pavia? how
think you, Sir, a man of his Spirit, and Title to the Place, should consent to
hold his birthright for another? You are deceived, Sir; Nor were Cosmo fit for
your Friendship, if his Spirit could grow so tame and degenerate, as to set a
Slave upon his Fathers Throne; Come, Sir, it is Flattery and dissimulation, and
they are all false; this is the opinion of your best Friends.


Sforza. Take heed, Richardo; yet your love pleads in this indiscretion; but do
not presume; You know, I dare be angry, though it be long before a friend can
find it; your faith shall privilege you to as much freedom as any Subject can
pretend with his Prince; but impertinency and rudeness no discreet man will
Commit. Had thou said, Julia, Carlo, and Martino had been false, thou had
found my faith; for I know they have wrought my disgrace, and it is their
business to break the Friendship betwixt Prince Cosmo and my self; and against
those Traitors thy words would have raised a Tempest in my heart; For against
that Villain Martino, (till my Revenge finds him) even my soul makes War; for I
know him ungrateful, bloody, and all the several ills that make a Villain are
met in that inhumane Wretch, and my very dreams arm against him; But when thou
say all are false, including the Princess Fidelia; That Scandal questions
the truth of that guilt which the rest are condemned for; No, Richardo, she has
no share in that Treachery, she is all softness; piety and virtue are so
natural to her that, for her sake, I can scarce be angry with the rest; For
when her name but crosses my thought's, I can do nothing with Passion, save
love Fidelia; Oh, Friend, thou dos't not know that Noble mind; and when thou
shall be acquainted with her thou will confess; The Princess Fidelia's virtues
were given her, as Cordials, to defend us against the Poison of her Family; and
if thou love Sforza, Honor and serve the Princess.


Richard. Since your Highness is sure of her faith I shall not fail to pay that
respect and honor that is due to her; for my displeasure was only grounded
upon the thought she was ungrateful to your Highness; yet I see not how you can
acquit Cosmo.


Sforza. Prithee, peace, he is her Brother; and I know he has Courage and
honor, and such are only guilty by chance; But suppose him as false as you
believe him, I shall be more troubled that he can do an ill Action, (because I
love him) then for any injury he dares do me; For I wear a sword, Richardo,
which will heal all those injuries; and therefore let us not trouble our selves
with much those lesser thoughts at Millain; we shall have time to inform our
selves.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Baptista, Pietro, Nicolet, and another Soldier, in the Ferrymans habit,
but not quite dres't. Bapt. SO, dispatch; and some one look out, lest some call
to pass; how the old whore beat the fellow?


Pietro. She had reason; for the slave made her husband lie with the Maid upon
her back.


Nicol. Nay, he lay with her himself upon her back, after he had layen with his
Mistress.


Pietro. 'Twas his trick, to get his Mistress into the boughs; and then the
ill-natured Rogue left her, for her husband to find her.


Bapt. What a dog 'twas? But she has punished him.


Nicol. He Will be dead ere night, for I have bound them together, and left her
hands loose.


Bapt. She will kill him then.


Pietro. No matter, hang him Rogue; tell when his Mistress does him a Courtesy?
I would all that do so were so served.


Nicol. That folly makes us pay dear; for, by this light, the fear of telling
keeps more women honest, then fear of Purgatory; But it is time to be gone, I
hear some body call.


Enter Phillipine. Phillip. Ferryman, is the Boat on this side?


Nicol. Yes, Sir.


Bapt. Ha! Phillipin? e Victoria's Page, what business has he at Pavia? I must
know; Some intelligence upon my life. Sir, if you will walk to the Boat; we
will follow you.


Phillip. Make haste then; Is Prince Sforza past to day.


[Ex. Phil. Bapt. Not yet, but we Expect him. What, ho, where are these
fellows; Do you here. -- seize that youth, and blind him, make Aside. as if you
would rob him, search his Pockets and his Clothes well, for Papers; if you
find any give them me.


Pietro. I warrant you, Sir, we will search him.


[Exit Pietro. Bapt. What can his business be? The Duke perhaps is dead; it
must be that, or the discovery of our design; Why should they be so impatient
else? for they Expect him within these two hours.


Enter the Banditoes, and bring in Phillipine blinded. Pietro. Nay, resist not,
we must have money, Sir; we know the Courtiers want none.


Phillip. And you will find so little 'twill scarce be worth your They search
him and find a Letter. pains.


Nicol. What Is that?


Pietro. A Letter, directed to no body.


Nicol. Open it, and see if there be never a token in it.


Pietro. A pox on it, here is nothing but black and white.


Nicol. What says it?


Pietro. For that you must execuse me, for I scorn to read, or write; search,
search his Doublet, let his papers be hanged.


Baptista reads the Letter, throws it down, and goes out. When Baptista is
gone, they unblin'd him. Nicol. A Pox upon you, you would be cudgeld, Sirrah,
for offering to wear such Clothes and carry no money in your Purse, only to
cousen good fellows; here are three of us put fairly for the Gallows, for a
Pistol.


Pietro. Let us geld the slave, for hanging out such a bush, when he has no
Wine in the Cellar.


Phillip. Alas, Sir, I must wear what is given me; I am but a Servant.


Pietro. We shall have you a prating too, when you are on to'ther side.


Phillip. No truly; give me but my paper, and I will go about my business, and
do you no injury at all, O here it is, I am glad the He finds the Letter and
takes it up. Rogues could not read; This chance had like to have spoiled all.


Nicol. Come, will you be gone, we will give you a Cast-ashoar, for your money;
but we are no Ferry-men, my friend; only we farmed it, for an hour; and we
shall leave you to take the possession, if you please, for our work is done.


Piet. If we had lighted upon nothing but your lean purse, what a purchase we
had had?


[Enter Baptista. Bapt. Dispatch, and away, the Prince is for certain coming;
and if he find us here, we shall pay dear for this reckoning.


Phillip. I must trust them, till I am over.


[Exit Phillip. Bapt. What miraculous accident was this! all our plot is
discovered; but I have handled it so, that the mischief shall fall upon their
own heads; 'twas Fidelia's hand, it is certain she loves Sforza, she could not
else discover her mother and Family to him. No Baptista, it is visible Sforza
had ruined thee; But if he obey thy counsel, Fidelia, I shall quickly have an
Opportunity to take a full Revenge.


[Exeunt. Enter Carlo with a Letter. Carlo. There is the Hermits Cell; now to
find Baptista; hereabout is a path that leads to the Ferry, where I am to
expect him.


[Exit Carlo. Enter Baptista and Pietro. Bapt. So, lie close till they call;
that Letter will bring him were death in the way.


[Enter Carlo. Carlo. That must be he. Baptista?


Bapt. Carlo, what news?


Carlo. Read that letter, and 'twill instruct you.


[Carlo gives him a Letter. Baptista reads the Letter. Bapt. It Is enough; but
can you give me no directions how to know him, or guess when he will come, for
we cannot long possess this place; The people that pass will miss the
Ferry-man; But, for the other part of the Letter, there needs no Conjuration.


Carlo. If they should meet, you know it must be fatal; They have both too
much Courage to part without revenge; and if Cosmo should fall all our hopes
must perish.


Bapt. If he come, I shall not fail of my part, either to persuade or force
him to stay; But Carlo, I tell thee, there has happened such a chance to day that
makes me believe fortune will be kind to us; In short, all Our Resolutions and
Designs are known.


Carlo. It Is not possible.


Bapt. Deceive not your self, it is known; and yet shall not be prevented:
Phillipine past this Instant with a Letter from Fidelia to Sforza; wherein she
assures him of all our intentions, and by all that is dear to him conjures him
to come privately, in some disguise, this night, to her chamber; where she and
his sister will expect him, and give him a full Relation.


Carlo. And where is the Villain and his Letter?


Bapt. Gone.


Carlo. Gone?


Bapt. Yes gone, and upon good grounds; for knowing Phillipine I made them blind
him, and under the pretense of robbing him, Searched for Letters, and found
that; which having read they pretended Ignorance, I threw it upon the ground;
he not suspecting the secret was discovered took it, and is gone in haste to
Sforza. By which means we shall be sure to act our parts with more Convenience;
for I am confident he will come, and alone.


Carlo. 'Twas done like one that knows how to take revenge; Wicked and foolish
Girl! unnatural Fidelia! Betray thy Mother? This news will confirm thy hopes
in her; for now the Duchess will give her you, were it but to vex her, and
cross her hopes in Sforza: Remember Julia, and as soon as you have dispatched;
pray, give notice to the Count Martino, by some trusty He gives Bapt. a Ring.
messenger, with this Ring.


Bapt. I am instructed, farewell.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Cosmo in his Pilgrims Habit, and Antonio with him. Cos. I Confess,
Antonio, this is the greatest straight that ever cross Fate threw me upon; for
I must now lose my value with Sforza, and the world, or else break with the
Princess Victoria, whom I love above the world; and heaven and she know my soul
has no other ambition but to deserve her favor: But that love must not make
thy friend bear an injury that the world talks of, because she commands me to
be silent; if I do, her reason will hate; and my honor will not suffer the
world to wisper, Cosmo is a coward.


Ant. Sir, I find many Lovers complain of Love, and the heavy burdens he lays
upon them; yet few or none make haste to discharge themselves, but rather
patiently lie down under their loads; your Highness now complains of two hard
Masters, Love and Honor, and you make a difficulty of obeying either; Reason
counsels you to prefer one, your Passion the other; and to me nothing appears
easier then your part in both; for your Idle thought of coward, Cosmon is know
above it; and if the Princess be all your aim, if her favor be your ambitious
hope, as you say, What need you thus hunt your own dangers, and pursue her
Brother, and your Prince, upon a most unreasonable jealousy; unless you will
give satisfaction to others, by disobliging her that you profess to love and
value above the world.


Cos. Thou mistakest, Antonio; it is Cosmo loves the Princess, it is not Victoria
loves Cosmo; and obeying her now is but serving my self only; if she loved me,
then for her sake would I put up this injury, because I would not hazard what
she loves; but it is not so; no Antonio, it is Cosmo only that is a Lover; and
Love in a Lover is no obligation nor tie on a Mistress; that is the great
mistake which has so long misled the world; every Lover pretending a reward
from his Mistress, because he loves her; which is most unreasonable; unless he
can say, I will love such a woman, which is impossible and false; for know,
Antonio, that Prince of the mind will not come when he is called, nor go when
he is sent; Love is a blind and stubborn Boy, and his will is his Law;
therefore no woman is obliged to any man for loving her. We owe the root no
thanks, while it lies sleeping in the ground; but when by the spring awakened,
it sends forth its Clusters, then we cherish and admire the Vine, hoping to
taste the rich Elixar. Love is that Root, and Love may bear such Fruit as may
oblige a Mistress, by being diligent, finding and taking all occasions to serve
her; yet then the Lover but obeys his Master; and to a Lover such an Act both
makes and pays the debt; And this Consideration, Antonio, makes me pursue my
first resolution; for since I can pretend nothing from the Princess but what is
due to a person of honor, I must be careful to preserve that honor which is
current through the world; and till the Princess loves Cosmo, I must not let
her kindness to a Brother make me unfit for the friendship or value of that
Brother, by tamely suffering injuries.


Ant. Sir, I submit; but why should you go thus alone, more now then at other
times? you have heretofor thought me worthy to take a part in your dangers; but
'twas when your Highness did not grudge me a part in the honor.


Cos. It Is true, the honor I shall gain from Sforza I will share with none;
yet let me tell thee, it is not that which makes me leave Antonio now; for you
must stay here, and always keep in readiness those Soldiers I spoke with last
night, to execute any design my revenge requires; for I am resolved to hunt the
Authors of this disgrace, though I find them priviledg'd by a Sister, or a
Mother.


Ant. Sir, I am not curious to know more, and so I may serve you, I am
indifferent in the kind or place.


Cos. Farewell, Antonio; prithee keep a watch about the Princess, and observe
what she and my Sister do; and though you see me through my disguise, at any
time, yet take no notice of me publicly.


Ant. I shall observe, Sir.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Sforza, Phillipine, and Richardo, (Sforza is reading a Letter.) Sfor.
REad there, Richardo, and blush for the ill opinion thou had of the most
excellent Fidelia. Richardo reads.


Richard. Horrid villain! Sure the Duchess has a hand in this; but who it
should be that dares undertake this black deed, I cannot guess; the Duke being
dangerously sick is the cause that makes them thus sudden in their mischief.


Sfor. There is no dispute now; haste, and provide those habits I use to make
the Round in; we will away this night, as she desires, only you and I; Oh
Richardo, thou art yet a stranger to that excellent Maid, whose faith is sent
by heaven to guard us from those wounds that her Mother threatens this State
with.


Richard. Pray, Sir, let Phillipine stay here, as if he expected your Highness
answer to his Letters, 'twill keep them at a Bay still, and make them uncertain
what to resolve; and if any of your own family be their spy or traitor, his
stay will deceive them.


Phil. And early to morrow I will take my time to follow your Highness.


Sfor. What were those that robbed you? are they at the Ferry still?


Phil. I believe not, Sir, they seem to be poor Rogues, some straggling
Soldiers of the next Garrison.


Sfor. Come, Richardo, let us away.


[Exeunt. Enter Cosmo in his Pilgrims habit alone. Cos. Sure I have lost my
way; it is late, I will knock at this Hermits Cell, and inform my self. He
knocks at the Hermits.


[The Hermit within says who is there. Cos. A friend; pr^y, which is the way to
the Ferry?


Hermit within. Pray, come in, and afford your Charity; and then I will guide
you to the Ferry.


Enter Cosmo, and brings forth the Hermit, and unbinds him. Cos. What Impious
villains were those that could so rudely bind those holy hands?


Hermit. Speak softly, Son, they were Thieves, that have all this day robbed at
the Ferry; pray, come in, and let me shut the door, lest they espy us; it is
late, and they cannot stay long, the people are already alarmed.


Cos. But that I have other vows to pay, I would know who they are that thus
boldly justify their villainy.


Herm. For heavens sake, think not of going out, Son, it is late and dangerous.


Cos. It Is late, and, I confess, I am hungry and weary.


Herm. Within I have some of yesterdays Charity left still, which I shall
freely give you; Come, Son, and put off those weeds, and rest upon my poor bed,
it knows no care of earthly things; and if you bring no troubles in your mind,
you will find none there; I will watch, and call you early if the danger be
removed; I am stiff with lying all day upon one side.


Cos. Let me help you in; Villains, to use an old Religious man thus!


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter Sforza and Richardo, in their disguise. Sfor. It Is late; the Sun is upon
the hill already, we shall scarce reach Millain to night.


Richard. We must ride the faster, Sir; But once over the Ferry, the way is
short.


Sfor. Call the Ferry-man.


Richard. The Boat is upon this side, I saw it from the hill.


Baptista and his Company peeps and listen after'em; Baptista speaks to his
Company, and then Enters. Bapt. It Is he, I know his voice, as soon as the Boat
is upon the other shore, draw upon him, and speed him any way.


Richard. See, here is the Ferry-man. Honest friend, is the Boat on this side?


Bapt. Yes, Sir.


Sfor. What hour is it?


Bapt. Late, Sir; does not the Prince pass? we looked for him to day.


Sfor. Not till to morrow.


Bapt. Our boughs will be withered by that time.


[Exeunt. A noise of Weapons and fighting within; they set upon the Prince.
Enter Hermit. Herm. Ha! what noise is that? sure those villains have set upon
some passengers.


Enter to him the Pilgrim without his Coat, with his Staff in his hand Cos. How
now Father, what noise is that?


Herm. 'Twas the noise of swords, good Son, come in; those Banditoes I told you
of, I fear they are now robbing some body; For heavens sake, come in, and let
them not see you.


Cos. Heaven forbid it should ever be said, I stood and listened to the danger
that threatens innocence, and hid my self for fear.


Herm. Hark, they come; and they are so many you can but lose your self in
that attempt, and bring no safety to them.


Cos. Who knows, since they are able to dispute it, but that my aid may save
them?


Herm. See, it is they.


Cos. No matter, -- Hold, villains, what do you mean?


Bapt. Upon them, kill them both.


Enter Baptista and his party, four in all; Cosmo runs to them, and beats down
Baptista 's sword pursuing Sforza and Richardo; who after two or three passes,
Richardo and one of the Soldiers fall, with their wounds; Cosmo pulls off the
head, and discovers a sword-blade in his Staff; they fight and are all wounded:
Baptista falls under Sforza, and the Soldiers are killed by Cosmo. Bapt. I am
lost for ever; Hold your hand, till I tell you a story may save you from the
malice of others, since heaven has preserved you thus miraculously against my
designs.


Sfor. Speak quickly. -- Sir, I hope your charity has found no He turns to Cos.
and embraces him. sad accident, to make you repent this action; have you any
wound that you apprehend dangerous?


Cos. No, Sir, they are but scratches; pray, let us know what he would say.


Sfor. First, let me see my friend dressed that lies bleeding here, He goes
toward Richardo. is there no Surgeon near?


Cos. The Hermit is famous for his skill, and fortunate in what he undertakes;
and see where he comes.


[Enter Hermit. Herm. How fares my Son? is there any use of my skill, or is all
desperate?


Cos. No, Father, heaven has been kind; and we must implore your aid, for their
mischief is fallen upon their own heads; this is he on whom you must practice
your skill and charity.


Herm. Help me to bear him to my Cell, and then return. --


[Exit with Richard. Enter Cosmo again. Bapt. Defer not to hear what I would
say, it concerns your safety; and I shall discover a treachery your honest heart
will scarce give credit to.


Sfor. What made thee attempt my life? thou see I am poor, no hope of gain
cold tempt thee.


Bapt. Hide not your self, Prince Sforza, from him that knows you, and the
cause why you are thus disguised.


Cosmo aside. Ha! Prince Sforza?


Sfor. Suppose I am Sforza, how came you by this knowledge?


Bapt. From Phillipine, whom we pretended this day to rob; and in his Pocket
found the Princess Fidelia's Letter, which gave you notice that your life was
laid for; and this is one of those designs which heaven has prevented: In short
(for I find I am going to my grave) your life, Sir, is sold to me and others;
Julia and false Martino sold it; and Fidelia should have been my reward, for
killing you.


Cosmo aside. Ye powers, what do I hear? -- Sir, does he speak truth, in part,
are you Prince Sforza?


Sfor. From you I will not hide my self; for since you durst protect me, as a
private man; I am confident, you will not quit me when you know I am your
Prince.


Bapt. To confirm you in the belief of what I say, turn this way, and look upon
this Face. -- Baptista pulls off his disguise, of a Beard and Perriwig.


Sfor. Baptista?


Cosmo aside. O heavens! it is he.


Bapt. Yes, Baptista, whom you so many ways have ruined: -- All which I could
have forgot, all but my loss in the hopes of my divine Fidelia.


Cos. Knew she of this Plot?


Bapt. She know of it? No, nor could any but a fool or a devil ask that
question; would I had fought with thee, thou could never have overcome me
that art master of so base a doubt.


Cos. Was Prince Cosmo at Court when you came thence, has he any knowledge of
this design?


Bapt. No, upon my soul, they are a pair of matchless virtues.


Sfor. Then I am happy; for I confess, I could not but with pain of mind think
Prince Cosmo less then I esteemed him. It Is a gallant and a faithful Prince;
and when you know him you will admire him; there is nothing in him an enemy can
accuse, or a friend wish a way, unless his choler may sometimes prevail: But
that laid aside, he is Brother to Fidelia, which is all that can besaid of
excellent.


Cos. I know the Prince, and was a Soldier under him; and I am glad to hear
your Highness has this opinion of him; for we had a rumor in the Army, that
your Highness wrought him out of his Command; believe me, Sir, he left the
Camp, as we were told, upon it, highly unsatisfied with your Highness about it.


Sfor. The Prince, when he shall know the better, will not be persuaded I could
be guilty of so low or meama crime; and when I believe him not fit for such a
charge or trust, I shall not fear to tell him so; for I yet never flattered a
friend, nor injured my enemy; why then should I be so unreasonable as to wrong
Prince Cosmo? yet their malice had like to have been prosperous in their design
of breaking our friendship; for till this minute I suspected the Prince had (by
his Mothers interest) procured my being called from my Government, here in
Pavia; but I have now found their design; and their malice has but given a
growth to that friendship they meant to have withered, -- How do you, Sir?


Cosmo. Not well, I find I have lost more blood then I can spare.


Sforza. Father, pray lend us your help here. -- Hermit, and Cosmo lean upon
Sforza.


Cosmo. I would fain know upon what ground this Baptista accused Count Martino
and the Duchess.


Baptista. Read that Letter, and 'twill satisfy your doubts.


Sforza. It Is Martino's hand.


Baptista. It Is so, and Carlo brought it this Evening.


Sforza. Heaven! thy hand is visible. Read, Sir, for I dare trust you with the
secret of my Life; What course shall I take to prevent their malice?


Baptista. Haste, Sir, to Court, before the Fame of this attempt come to their
knowledge, show this Letter to your Father, and seize Martino; But spare to
name Julia, 'twill break the Prince's and Fidelia's Heart; for whose sake, if
you love her, and her Noble Brother, you will hide her part of this fault: And
Martino once removed, 'twill be easy to reclaim her Heart; for it is his
ambitious Mind has wrought her easy Nature to this bloody design. Oh! I faint,
and yet ere I die, as you have Charity, forgive Baptista; Then live and love at
the rate I have adored the excellent Fidelia, and you will then deserve her
Heart; Fidelia is all Angel, and Baptista too earthly to think so. -- Oh
Father, your Charity, pray; that I may confess a sad Soul to you, and end
better then I lived.


Sforza. Can you read that Letter?


Cosmo, Yes, Sir; but it is so sad a scene it makes my blood run backwards in my
veins; lose no time, Sir, your Life is at stake; I will but dress these
slight wounds and follow you.


Sforza. I will leave a Horse for you.


Cosmo. Pray, Sir, quit not your disguise; it is better then a guard till you
know whom you may trust.


Sforza. You have reason, and 'twas my own design. Farewell, Sir; at my Lodging
I will expect you.


[Exeunt Hermit, Sfor. and Bapt. Cosmo. That Villain, Martino, has ruined all
our Family; but I will find him when his thoughts expects no such visit: I will
in, and discover my self to Baptista, and make him write a Letter to my Mother
and Martino, wherein he shall only mention the Prince is escaped, and conceal
his own Condition; He shall write to them that they should trust me with any
design, as one he knows faithful and fit for their purpose. This
recommendation will admit me to their Counsels; he shall tell them too, that
he has seized me according to their Order, and that I shall be private and safe
in his custody till their Order require me; 'twill keep off the suspicion of
who I am, or fear of my coming till they send for me. Thus I am resolved to
return to Millain, in this Periwigg and a Pilgrims Weed; and if that disguise
can conceal me, I am resolved to undertake all their designs; by which means I
may prevent their malice; But when the plot is ripe, if then I fall not with a
sad Fate upon the wretch, till this fiery prompter has called to his despairing
thoughts all those bloody designs his barbarous Soul has plotted, and with
fatal wounds laid the Traitor at my feet a sacrifice to our injured Family,
Heaven curse me strangely. But for thee, O Julia, my unfortunate Mother, though
I will not lift a hand against thee; yet I have words in store that shall wound
thee deeper then a sword.


[Exeunt omnes ACT. III. SCEN. VI.
Enter Victoria and Fidelia. Fide. O Cosmo, Cosmo, cruel Brother! why have thou
robbed me of the Joy I had in thee? He has broke his Faith, Madam, and is gone
to be calmely wicked upon second thoughts, in cold blood: cruel! What will thou
do, unworthy youth? Good Gods, would I have given Faith to him that should have
told me Cosmo would have dissembled with Fidelia, and wept to a Sister when
blood and revenge were in his Heart; water in his Eyes, and Murder in his Mind?


Victo. Do not say so.


Fide. Do not defend him, Madam; he is not worth your Anger nor Pity, that
could lie to you, you that he loved: And he that dares look his Mistress in the
face, and tell a lie, neither Religion, Honor nor Virtue, can have any ties
upon him.


Victo. For my sake, do not revile him; he has some new reason, (I know he has)
else I am certain he would have stayed; for his Heart is full of Truth and
Honor, and blessed with all that is glorious in a Man; and though his Rage,
sometimes, like a storm throws those Virtues into disorder, yet when he is
collected, his calm Mind is all divine.


Fide. This Opinion makes me hate him, that he can be so faulty to you that are
thus noble. Pray hate him, pray do, that I may learn to do it by your example;
For Heaven knows, it is hard for me to leave loving him, though I chide till
the day sets, for Cosmo is next to Sforza in my Heart. But this falsehood has
staggered all my hopes, for his Love was that I built upon; The Ambitious,
Jealous, Angry, nay, the Lustful Man can Love, but the false dissembler can
never be just to himself or others; and till I found him so, my patience bore
the present miseries; my Heart still hoping Cosmo's Virtue would one day redeem
our Family.


Victo. So he will, my Soul prophesies he will. But oh, the War I have within
me, when I think my Brother and Cosmo are Enemies! Should they meet, 'twould
kill Victoria ere she can resolve who should be victor.


Fide. Unhappy Cosmol what would I have given to have saved thee Innocent, that
it might not have been said, thy passion betrayed such a sweetness, whose Love
is so far from being Angry, that she chides my Justice!


Victo. Pray be not thus passionate; when there is reason, I can be as angry as
you.


Fide. Had you chid him I would not; and if you would have me defend him, let
me see you angry; that may awaken the Sister in me, whose partial Mind may
plead something for him; but now it is impossible while you are kind; had he been
one that the world knew not, had he never given assurance of what he durst do;
that bubble-vanity, and men's idol, honor, might have pleaded his excuse; but
for him that has to sundry battles given a name, and won in War a glorious
Fame, on whom the Sun yet never set ungloriously, for him to break his Faith
and Friendship to quarrel with his Friend? That Friend that gave him his
greatest Honor, by having once been his Enemy. Who but a vain Man would aspire
higher in Honor and Arms, then to have been, first, Enemy, then Friend to
Sforza; and after all, not unwelcome to the divine Victoria?


Victo. Nay, then I conjure you by what is dearest to you, leave this
discourse; and unless you despise the secrets we so late blushed for, you will
cease to revile him.


Enter her Maid. Angelica. Madam, there is a Soldier without who desires to
speak with you, his business speaks haste.


Fidelia. Admit him, my Heart fore-tells some sad accident.


Enter Sforza disguised. Sforza. My business is with the Princess Fidelia, yet
your Highness may partake of it; but I shall beg some place more private to
deliver it in, for it is of consequence.


Fidelia. In my Chamber, if you please, Madam, we may be private; follow us,
Friend.


Victoria. Heaven avert what my fears would prompt me to believe.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. VII.
Enter the Hermit and Cosmo in his Pilgrims habit. Cosmo. I Must be gone, my
business calls me hence; but to your care, Father, I must leave my Friend; you
must be private in what has past to day; you know what persons are concerned,
Farewell. Your blessing, and be pleased to take this Charity to adorn your
Altar.


Hermit. I am counseled, Heaven bless the Prince, and guide my Son; My prayers
shall wait upon you; and when your Friend is able to travel, he shall come to
Court; In the mean time, I will carry him to the Ferry-mans house, who, in
return of your bounty to them, shall carefully attend him.


Cosmo. Pray let the Count Baptista be privately buried; for though he be of a
Noble Family, it must not yet be known he is dead. -- I could have wished he
had lived; yet this Letter and this Ring will (I hope) be sufficient to compass
my designs. [Aside.]


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Fidelia, Victoria, and Sforza. Fide. WHat have I heard! My Mother
accused of a Murder, and by Prince Sforza? Heaven sure has changed its course,
he would not else have told me this. Fidelia, be thy self, and let not thy fond
Affection tame thy Soul so, as to sit calmely down and bear this Injury.


Sforza. 'Twas my fear, Madam, that this truth would grieve your Heart; and had
my Life been only at stake, I should have died in silence: But when yours, my
Fathers, and all our Families are thrown into the scale, Piety and Honor bid
me warn the Innocent, that they may fly the slaughter; while a wilful
silence might make me not only lament the misery, but guilty of that crime
too. Yet, witness Heaven, it is a secret to all the world besides; And you can
witness, when her Malice was most active and most prosperous, that she was
Fidelia's Mother was all satisfaction; for whose sake I have still had a
Patience as great as her Injuries.


Fide. Thinks Prince Sforza I will justify her follies? why else does he stab
me with a repetition of them? Does your Highness think to heal my wounded Mind
by telling me you have forgiven my Mother? Does that take away her faults? No,
but shows her guilt, and his vanity greater, and urged but to upbraid me, and
civilly tell me how much better he deserves then I. Yet, if I had not been
mistaken, you would not have forgot, that I, to keep a spotless Friendship with
Prince Sforza, have erred even against Nature, abandoning a Mothers and a
Brothers Interest, in quitting all the world to justify the value I had of him
above it; and had he loved Fidelia with half that kindness, he would have hid
this fault from me, as if it had been his own Crime; But all the world (Prince
Sforza too) joins to make Fidelia miserable.


Sforza. O ye Gods, then I am miserable. Come, Martino, I will now call thee
Friend, if thou will finish what Baptista but begun, since my Friend can thus
mistake her servant.


Victo. Gentle, Sister, why this passion? what is there more in his words then
you your self have feared? had you rather we should all perish, then hear your
danger from a Friend? Had a third person told you, would not you have broke the
glass that brought you poison? Good Heaven, I, without blushing, dare profess
my self a Lover too, yet will not assume such a partial Dominion over his mind,
as to prohibit him speaking what is just and honest; and if it be a truth, what
he has said, methinks you are much to blame.


Fidelia. If it be not, By all my hopes, I vow my self a Widowed Virgin, in
some Holy-house, and bid farewell to Sforza and his Friendship, that could thus
rashly accuse my Mother; and if it be a truth, I am then unworthy of his
thought or Love.


Vict. Why are you silent, Sir; Why do you not acquit your self?


Sforza. Treason, war, or sickness, bring no wounds but I can bear; But the
wounds of a friends unkindness strike the soul, it grows dumb, and the heart
pale. But I have finished. Believe her Innocent, Madam; so that Error wounds
none but me, you shall never find me busy to prevent a danger; nor had I spoke
now, but for your sake, and to preserve the Princess Fidelia. Read that Letter.
-- Nay, then I have lived too long; That frown this Evening He offers her a
Letter and she refuses it. He pulls his Playsters from his wounds. had saved
Baptista, and malice had been prosperous, O for those wounds I gave him; those
would have cured this misery; for when Fidelia frowns, why should Sforza live?
but I talk, and prevent what these would do -- Bleed, and weep, Fidelia's lost.


Vict. Sforza, brother, hold; for Heavens sake, hold; Fidelia bids you hold,
Sforza; O stay, what misery do you fly to? your friend calls, and bids you stay.


[Exit Sforsa. Fidelia. You wrong me, Madam; Those that can and will go, I
scorn to hold.


Victoria. But those that obey you ought not to tread upon; why did you refuse
to read the Letter, which might have quitted him?


Fidelia. Because I have miseries enough, and will not hunt that knowledge
which will but distract my mind. I am now ready for my Grave, and will not go a
step out of my way to avoid it, but here stand and well-come fate; for since I
have lived to see Prince Sforza angry with me, for a word, when passion and
misery had distracted me, why should I desire to live? it is folly, it is
madness, since I cannot hope a remedy for my sick mind; when he, who forgave
his Enemies a murder would not forgive Fidelia a passionate word? O Madam, this
Cruelty in your brother makes me invite malice and Murder. Come, both Baptista
and Martino, come, come all that hate Fidelia, and see your selves revenged
upon her, and behold her withered by her friend, see all she gloried in; Her
friendship, and her Faith in Sforza, like early blossoms, by untimely storms,
struck and blasted; but why do I hold this Infection -- She throws the Letter
away. Yet it is well-come, since it brings news of Fidelia's death; and lest
nature should grow weak, and tempt me to save my self, thus to the fire I offer
all my means of safety.


The Scene must present a Chimney, in which she throws the Letter and goes out.
(Victoria snatches up the Letter.) [Exit Fidelia. Victoria. Their passions must
have way; It Is time, not Reason must prevail; Love, whose glory is built upon
our misery, and our griefs his Triumph still, and our fears his food! Tyrant!
whom none serves but slaves; Force, not affection, fills thy Train; who cares
not to have his Servants splendid or great; The Pale, Lean, and desperate fill
thy Court, which makes me fear, Reason, nor the gods come not there; But this
is no time to dispute thy power. I will read this dangerous Letter.

The Superscription.
For my Friend, Count Baptista.
KNow, the Duke was this day dangerous sick of his Imposthume, and he is yet
without hopes of life; Sforza has notice of our design; and if you strike not
in time, all our hopes are desperate; if he outlive this day, and the Duke die,
your hopes in Fidelia are lost; for we are certain, she and the prince hold
Intelligence; The Duchess salutes you; Cosmo is past in a Disguise, to fight
with Sforsa; if you meet him secure him, till you hear from us; for the
Duchess will not venture him in such a Danger as a Duel against the Prince;
upon whose success all our designs and Hopes depend. Farewell, and burn this
Letter: C. is the Messenger, to whom you may impart how business stands.

Yours, Martino.



Victoria. The other name is blotted out, O heavens! what a plot was here, to
ruin all our hopes? This Letter I will show my Father, whose recovery is
miraculous; Heaven sure has lent him some few days, to preserve his name and
family; which if he had died must, in this mischief, have shrunk to nothing;
sure, when he shall see this paper he will cease to give faith to cursed
Martino.


[Ex. Vict. Enter Sforza alone. Sforza. This is his Chamber: Thus disguised he
cannot know me, or if he do, nothing shall save him; nor is there such a thing
as danger, when men are resolved to die, or Execute; Oh Fidelia, thus I will
revenge thee on Sforza, and preserve thee against Martino, I must not think of
her, she puts womanish thoughts in my mind, I will knock.


(He knocks.) One within. Who is there?


Sforza. One in haste that should speak with the Count Martino.


[Enter Martino and two Servants. Martino. How now? your news.


Sforza. Pray, my Lord, retire to some private place; I have something to say
from Baptista.


Martino. Thou art wounded, is the party dead?


Sforza. Yes, my Lord; but we had a hard bout on it.


Martino. Speak softly, and follow me.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
The Scene discovers the old Duke in his Chamber sleeping; his Guard and
Physicians about him, and Carlo. [Enter Victoria. Victoria. WHere is the Duke?


Physician. He sleeps, Madam.


Victoria. I must awake him.


Physician. By no means, if you love his health.


Victoria. I must, His own, and the health of Millain depends upon my news;
Sir, Father, Sir.


Duke. Who calls?


Victoria. It Is I, Sir? your Victoria.


(She kneels.) Duke. Rise my dear Child, thou were with me in my dream too.


Victoria. Oh, Sir!


Duke. Why weep'st thou?


(She gives him the Letter.) Victoria. Read that paper, Sir, and save your Son,
and speedily, or all our hopes are lost; for Murder and Treason, if not
prevented, will sweep your Family from the Earth, and Millain no more obey the
name of Sforza.


(He reads the Letter.) Duke. Heaven forbid the Execution of this wicked Design.


Victoria It Is not the heavens, Sir, must do it; their part is here in the
discourse; you must act now, as their Minister here where Justice and Nature
call for your Defense; and if you do not suddenly Seize Martino, who thus long
has abused your trust, you will see this last Seen of your life set in the
blood of your self, and family.


Duke. It Is so horrid it scarce finds my faith.


Victoria. If your goodness defer preventing this mischief till the guilt be
visible, here, in few hours, you will see your Son, and my dear Brother,
bleeding his own Testimony; and then your Justice can only punish, and not
prevent the Traitor.


Duke. Good Heaven, it is certain; This is his hand, I know the Character; and
her modest and Innocent nature confirms it; She durst not else thus
confidently, without pregnant proofs, accuse him: Who is there? Carlo, command
a guard to attend my daughter; Go, Victoria, and seize the body of the Count;
If he resist, force him hither, if he yield, be civil; Carlo, where is Julia?


Victoria. Wher'ever she be, she dares not appear in this cause.


[Exeunt all but Carlo. Duke. Carlo, tell the Duchess I would speak with her.


Carlo. I shall, Sir; -- There is wonder and mystery in this discovery; how the
Devil came she by that Letter? It Is the same I gave Baptista; This day will be
full of mischief; something bold and sudden, or all is lost; I will to the
Duchess with this News; The difficulty will be, how to save Martino, they have
his hand to witness against him.


[Enter Cosmo in his Pilgrims habit. Cosmo. By your favor, Sir; I would gladly
speak with the Duchess.


Carlo. Some begging Pilgrim; I am in haste friend.


Cosmo. If not with her, Sir, the Count Martino, or Seigniour Carlo.


Carlo. What is your business with him?


Cosmo. From a friend; and of importance.


Carlo. I am the man, Sir?


Cosmo. Then you know this hand?


Carlo. Yes, it is the Count Baptista's.


Cosmo. It Is so, and he salutes you.


Carlo. What news!


Cosmo. This Letter will speak.


(He gives him the Letter, he reads it and goes in.) Carlo. Stay here, till I
call the Duchess.


[Exit Carlo. Cosmo. She is guilty; Lust and Murder have stayn'd her soul;
Martino and this Villain have betrayed her.


[Enter Julia and Carlo. Julia. Escaped? Is Sforza escaped? Where is the
Soldier that said he was dead? and my letter in the Dukes hand?


Carlo. Yes, Madam; and the Princess Victoria is gone with a guard, to seize
the Count Martino, with order to bring him, alive, or dead.


Cosmo. aside, That is good news.


Carlo. This Pilgrim will give you a more Exact Account.


Julia. I am full of distraction. Come you from Baptista, friend?


Cosmo. What says my Letter, Madam!


Julia. Oh, Carlo, we are lost; there is no safety for us, nor hopes of any,
since Sforza is escaped; This is Fidelia's Act, 'twas she betrayed us; but I Will
be revenged on her ere I die; where is the poison I prepared? this night shall
her be last.


Cosmo. aside, O horrid wickedness.


Carlo. It Is no time, Madam, to think of such poor Revenge; Let us provide for
our own safety.


Cosmo. aside, Villain, thou shall fall with the earliest, or I will miss of my
Aim.


Carlo. What says Baptista's Letter?


Julia. Cosmo is his Prisoner; and he will detain him, tell we dismiss him.


Carlo. Something may be built upon that yet.


Julia. Baptista himself sore wounded, Sforsa escaped, and I must live to see
my Cosmo stoop to him, and be a subject to the Branch of that Cedar, which my
frowns have shaken, and my dear Martino too, is lost for ever.


Cosmo aside. What said she? her dear Martino; O, that I had been born deaf,
rather then have heard that fatal sound.


Car. Madam, dare you trust me in this danger, when all is desperate; no matter
who guides the Helm, if you will consent; I can from this Letter propose
something like safety, but 'twill look desperate; this Pilgrim too must join,
under which habit, Baptista says, you will find a Soldier stout and faithful;
Cosmo is in prison, this is the ground I will build on; haste presently to the
Duke, fall on your knees before him, pretend your Son Cosmo is murdered; let
this Pilgrim second you, and affirm he saw him dead; and, friend, you shall
urge you received those wounds in his defense; be but faithful, and bold in
this desperate occasion, and thou shall find a reward beyond thy hopes, or thy
wishes; and when he has confirmed it, then call for revenge and justice against
the Count Martino, for the murder of your Son; say that he is fallen by his
plot; and that you know Prince Sforza is marked for slaughter too; seem to know
nothing of his escape, or any thing that is past concerning the Princess
Victoria's complaint, nor hear what they would say, to inform you; but put on
all your craft, and plead with passion; no matter how unreasonable, nor how
excessive it appears; the more violent, the more Mother; the more unnatural
your griefs appear, your sorrows will be the more taking and infectious; and
seem to be distracted with the loss, call for justice, call for present and
exemplary justice upon that traitor, Count Martino, traitor to the Gods, and
his friends.


Jul. Hold, villain, leave to spit thy venom and thy malice; is this thy
gratitude to him that raised thee? and can thy narrow soul hope I should be
brought to betray my Martino?


Car. Come, Madam, you must lay by this womanish humor; it is no time to
express a fondness when Crowns and Lives are at stake; if you will save him you
must take my counsel; If you now appear his friend, it is his certain ruin, and
your own; to defend him will blot all your credit with the Duke, for the Count
is forfeit in his opinion, beyond redemption; and will be lost before you can
speak for him.


Jul. Let all perish, ere I have a hand in the ruin of my friend.


Car. Hell of this foolish Love; that blind Boy misleads us more then Fortune
or Ambition; is it better to have it said, you loved, or saved Martino? Be
ruled, and I will save him, at least defer the mischief: thus we may redeem him
from this certain ruin which threatens him, by discovery of that Letter; and
by this means you may clear all doubts (which are not a few) that you had a
share in this plot; and by this way you will move their pity, and turn their
hate and fears into love of Julia; and thence will grow your power and our
safety; in which cloud of tears and sadness Martino vanishes; for being once a
prisoner in the Citadel, which I command, we can through a private way release
him when we have resolved together what to do; and while they are secure in
their minds, believing him a prisoner, we can with the less suspicion pursue
our first designs; for Sforza once dead, we shall quickly find life in our plot
again. Friend, your Letter admits you to this trust, and you must again join in
the business; and if you prove faithful you will find a grateful Patron.


Cos. When you have tried me, Sir, speak as you find.


Jul. Be private, and ready till occasion calls; and Carlo, see him rewarded
for his former service: O Carlo, you must excuse my passion, for being
unwilling to accuse my friend; but now I confess, it is reason that you urged,
and the rest we will leave to Fortune.


Car. Pray, lose no time; he is by this a prisoner.


Jul. This Lemon in mine eye, that I may weep, and down with my hair; so: now
Fortune if ever thou were kind to Lovers, assist in this my last great action,
that I may revenge and save a friend.


Car. Go, and be prosperous; let Julia's fortune still attend you, whose tears
have still been more powerful then the sword; away Soldier, follow, and
observe your -- Q.


Cos. To your grief, I shall; O heaven! what have I seen and heard?


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Martino and a Servant. Mart. SEnd in that Soldier, then haste and find
Carlo, tell him I have business of consequence with him; this news has given
some life to our design; The Duke desperately sick, and Sforza living, had been
a black day to Martino. Now the Duke recovers, and Sforza's death will Crown
the work; -- Oh, you are welcome; so, shut the door, and tell me, how died
Sforza, and how Enter Sfor. fares Baptasta?


Sfor. At the Ferry, Sir, we set upon him, where it cost us many a wound; for
he had notice of our design.


Mart. For thy wounds, thou shall not repent them; where is the Present thou
spokest of, from Baptista?


Sfor. Here villain, do you know this face? do you stare? is it Sforza draws
his sword, and discovers himself.

Mart. draws his sword.

so horrid that it frights thy guilty soul? What will this sword do then, when
justice draws it against a Traitor and a Murderer?


Mart. Nay, then Fortune is a Whore still; but, for thy sword it brings no
terror; nor did I set Baptista on, because I doubted I could not kill thee my
self; but to have it done, and the world not know how.


Sfor. I am in haste; this is not all the work I have to do; -- So They fight
Sfor. wounds him. wary -- There I was with you.


Mart. And you are mortal too, or that blood lies.


They close, and Sforza throws him, and is upon him when Victoria and the guard
break in, and seize Martino. Enter Victoria, Giovanni, Ferdinando, and a Guard.
Mart. Then I am lost; Martino and all his hopes are withered; it is late, I find
my shadow grows long, and night comes on apace.


Ferd. How do you, Sir?


Sfor. Too well, Ferdinando.


Vict. Call a Surgeon quickly; Dear Sforza, retire to your Chamber.


Sfor. O dear Victoria, there is no end of Sforza's miseries; Heaven wars
against him, and Fidelia frowns.


Vict. Why do you say so? alas, she weeps, and will know no comfort, since
Sforza is angry for a word when grief and passion had almost distracted her;
pray, go to your Chamber.


Sfor. To my grave, Victoria; death is welcomer far then this life; till
Fidelia smiles my heart can know no peace.


Vict. I would our fortunes knew no other difficulties; how easy and how
certain would our joys be then?


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Cosmo and Antonio. Cos. ANd did he hurt the Prince?


Ant. Yes, Sir, and they are both wounded.


Cos. Generous and noble Sforza; well, we must lose no time; Antonio away;
remember my directions, get those Soldiers in readiness, and stay about the
Princesses Chamber; you know my call, when you hear my whistle, be ready; this
night must finish all our miseries: and Cosmo's love the innocent shall save,
or missing find a grave.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
The Scene discovers the sick Duke in his Chamber: Enter Victoria, Giovanni,
Ferdinando, and a Guard leading Martino bound. Vict. SEE here, behold the
Monster; ask these Lords if we did not surprise him in the act? executing his
Treason upon my Brother, who now lies bleeding of those wounds this Traitor
this minute gave him.


Duke. Villain, what moved thee to this bloody purpose?


Mart. Will you hear me with patience, Sir; if I be not innocent punish me; be
pleased to produce the Soldier, which now is Prince Sforza; by what reason
urged, I know not, unless it be envy of your favor; who this morning, in
disguise, pretended business, and being alone drew upon me; nature and honor
bad me defend my self, these wounds he gave me, and some I gave him; and when
he could not himself destroy me, then he cries out, it is Sforza the Prince; at
which, Heaven (that only saw the action) witnesses how it struck my heart, till
fear and amazement disarmed me, and at his feet I threw my self; in which
posture his party found me; Come, Madam, it is neither honor nor virtue in your
soft sex, to design or pursue this bloody purpose.


Enter Julia, and Cosmo holding her; she falls upon her knees to him. Jul.
Where is the Duke?


Duke. What means this distraction?


Jul. O, Sir, if ever Julia were dear to Alphonso, now let her find his justice
in all its horror fall in execution upon that bloody monster: O, let sad fates
close those eyes that have smiled upon the blood and ruin of my child.


Duke. What means this? sure she has not heard Sforza is escaped.


Victoria aside. Some new plot, I know; it is a subtle devil.


Jul. My Son Cosmo, all my joy, my deat Cosmo!


Duke. What of him?


Jul. He is dead, he is dead, fallen by murder.


Duke. Dead!


Jul. Oh! dead; and by that cursed monster, Martino; Hell upon thy black soul
for it; O, Sir, let not the Traitor live to repent it; why should he find such
charity that showed no mercy to my Son? the ungrateful villain gave my dear
Cosmo no warning of his grave which Martino dug; but sent him in haste to
answer all his sins: Oh, let me see the villain struck into the earth with as
little mercy as he showed his Prince; and if not suddenly prevented, Prince
Sforza will meet the same fate; for the villain has writ his name too in the
black book of death.


Cosmo aside. O strange daring! Heaven, do thou see and suffer this?


Vict. Cosmo dead? Oh heaven! --


She faints and falls, they run to the Princess. [Ex. Vict. Martino aside.
There is more in this fury of hers then any man yet can judge of, unless all
women-kind are damned.


Jul. O, Sir, I beg you will let them hale the villain to a Dungeon.


Duke. Where heard you this sad news?


Jul. By this Pilgrim, who past by chance, and took Cosmo's part, in which he
received these wounds.


Duke. Away to the Castle with the villain; come hither, friend; saw you Prince
Cosmo fall?


Cos. I saw him they call Baptista fall; and he confessed a young man that was
then wounded, and now they say is dead, was Prince Cosmo; and he then affirmed,
in my hearing, a Hermit being by, who lives at the Ferry, that there came order
from Count Martino to kill Prince Sforza too.


Giov. Villain, does not thy soul grow pale at this?


Mart. It Is not all your plots or malice shall make me quit my own innocence;
and when you have murdered me by a formal process, let Alphonso look to his
own life, he will find Martino was his guard; for me, I scorn to beg my life
till it be forfeited; and when ever Martino dies, you shall see him do it with
less fear then those live with that struck him.


Duke. Hale that bloody dog hence. --


[Exeunt all, but Cosino and Antonio. Cos. O Antonio, the Princess Victoria's
tears had so much kindness in them; the Balsam has cured all my wounds, and
this storm once over, I shall be the happiest of men; away, remember my
directions.


Ant. I confess, Sir, such a silence as the Princess showed when she heard you
were dead, speaks love more then all that whining passion Poets would express.


Cos. Dear Antonio, I cannot be so cruel as to let her heart be afflicted when
kindness to Cosmo wounds it; and therefore find her and Fidelia, and assure
them that I live; but conjure them to secrecy, and tell them my life depends
upon the thought that I am dead.


Ant. I shall obey you.


[Exit. Enter Carlo. Car. Soldier, come away; the Duchess stays to speak with
you. -- This you must wear, it is the earnest of her bounty. He gives him a
Jewel.


Cos. It Is an honor, Sir.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. V.
Enter Victoria, Fidelia, and Antonio. Ant. UPon my life and honor, Madam, he
lives; but this secret must not pass your breast, for some few days, if you
love his life.


Vict. O, Madam, what a change is here? Antonio was ever honest, and his
friend; and my heart in despite of all that grief and fear which then possessed
it, believes and hopes in Cosmo.


Fid. My love to both of you divides my mind; I fear for Cosmo, and hope for
Victoria, yet Antonio's word must not be doubted; dear Antonio, once again
speak the truth; do not fear, because we are women, to tell the worst of Fates;
for know, to deceive us, is twice to wound thy friends.


Ant. Madam, it has not been Antonio's practice, nor his trade to lie; and
again, if Cosmo be not living some strange curse strike me; more I must not
say, not can I longer stay, my business calls me hence; which, with your
Highness pardon, I must obey.


[Exit Antonio. Vict. Since has changed this Scene, gentle Fidelia, let me beg
you will make it a perfect Jubilee; and since your Brother lives, why should
mine dye? you saw I mourned yours, and will Fidelia kill mine? remember what he
has been, and let not one mistake blot all his story.


Fide. No more, Madam; you shall find my Heart both kind and just to Sforza,
though he were harsh to me; you have not seen him since he was hurt?


Victo. No, but I shall now go find him out; and if you will go with me, be
certain of a welcome.


Fide. I shall not refuse to go, where Victoria and Honor lead.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. VI.
Enter Sforza, Giovanni, and a Surgeon. Giov. THis Surgeon has a
sovereign remedy to stop blood, 'twas his hand saved the Life of Ferdinando,
when the rest gave him lost; and I doubt not but 'twill have a good effect upon
your Highness.


Cosmo. Come, we must away; my Father stays, he has called a Council at his
Chamber concerning Martino; The Villain shall now pay for all his Treachery;
tell Victoria she must be there; bid Richardo and Ferdinando make haste, and
let us meet there.


[Exeunt ACT. IV. SCEN. VII.
Enter Alphonso, Julia, Carlo; to them, Sforza, Victoria, Ferdinando, Antonio,
Giovanni, and Richardo. A Table and stools, where they set the Council.
Alphon. WEighing the sad cause of this Assembly, the Persons too concerned so
near in blood and trust; I shall not need to urge you to a serious
Consideration, how we may secure our Peace and Person, punishing the past
crimes by taking a just Revenge on the Murderer of my ever dear Cosmo.


Julia. I owe the world and your Highness many debts, but none that has greater
ties upon me then this your kindness; which has still esteemed and used my
Cosmo as your Son, whose loss now comes so near my Soul; I cannot mourn his
Murder, nor rest in peace, till I know what your Justice will decree for my
Revenge. Nor should I appear thus undecently without a mourning garment, but
that I hope, my impatiency will find a kind interpretation from these impartial
Judges; Amongst whom, though Cosmo was born an Enemy, yet such was his Nature,
that I dare say he has not left one behind him, but that ungrateful,
ambitious, and treacherous Martino, whose Malice though it only struck my
Cosmo, yet it appears by his Letters 'twas levelled at the root of the Family,
my ever Honored, and your dear Sforza; who, though he found the Gods more kind
then Cosmo, yet I will not doubt his voice to the Revenge of my Son; though
some malicious people would have me believe (what my Heart abhors) that Sforza
hated Cosmo. But I have done, because my Interest in this cause might be
thought to sway me against the Justice of what may be pleaded in the defense of
this villain; I will now be silent, and leave the Gods and this Assembly to
decree their pleasures, in mine and my Sons Revenge.


Sforza. Though I might urge his sword drawn upon me, when he knew me to be his
Prince, and produce these wounds, yet I scorn to name them; and shall only
desire that Letter I sent your The Duke ^ives the Letter to Ferdinando.
Highness, by my Sister, may be produced and read, and what that confesses under
his hand, (whose Character is well known to all this Assembly) may, according
to the Law in that case be judged; 'Twill be observable too, how crafty his
Malice has been in making use of our Honored Mothers Name, so to blind the
world from having any design upon Prince Cosmo. But Heaven (juster then he
hoped) sent that poor Pilgrim, whose honest Heart engaged him by chance, by
which means, he is fallen in his own practice; And though I will not pursue him
upon my own Interest, yet as a Traitor, and Murderer of my Brother, I think
speedy Justice ought to offer his blood a sacrifice to Cosmo.


Anto. And to me there is nothing more visible then his guilt, nor any thing so
easy as to give sentence upon him; and he has my voice to die some lingering
infamous death, to expiate the ingratitude He reads the Letter. he has showed
his Prince and Friend; And since he could forget the favors and envied honors
he has received from both Crowns, and thus, by a bloody Treachery cut from the
Earth that hopeful Prince, let him fall despised and unpitied; for, sure, no
honest Man can defend or intercede for him.


Ferdi. I am not satisfied with this name that is blotted out, it is some one
that ought not to be concealed, I hate Treason both in the Root and Branch; no
honest Man ought to have mercy on any that wishes it well; and I not only
consent to this present sentence upon Count Martino, but to all that had a hand
in it; that they may share in the punishment as well as in the guilt, without
exception of persons.


Carlo. He that can be ungrateful will upon occasion be all that is ill; To
avoid which opinion, I shall now endeavor to justify my self Loyal to my
Prince, just to those Laws that must preserve this State, and yet not forget
to be grateful to my Friend. The many Obligations I owe to the Count Martino
are well known both to your Highness and this Assembly. And that, I hope, will
excuse me, notwithstanding the past vote, if I shall (as far as Honor and
Justice shall authorize me) in this Assembly, defend the Honor of my Patron.
First, I would gladly see a legal Conviction of the Count; let the Crime
appear, and then the Judgment; Let the dead body of Prince Cosmo be produced,
upon which all this business depends: For who knows he is killed? who saw the
Body? There appears to me only a report made by her Highness, who received the
relation from a Pilgrim. It Is granted, her condition and authority ought to
find faith and pity. Yet when Life and Honor are at stake, Justice cannot
appear too circumspect; And though I will not deny he is dead, yet I will hope
he lives, till I see some proof more visible; here is only a passenger reports
it; her Highness (like a kind Mother) believes her fears; and I, like the
faithful Servant of the unfortunate Count, will hope it is but her fears. And
notwithstanding Count Ferdinando's Passion, I shall believe this Action in me
has much more Humanity then his sentence; I am sure, it is Charity, at least, to
wish all men innocent; I know, Sir, the Count has many Enemies; your Highness
trust and favor has made him fit for Malice; and who knows but this is an
Arrow of her shooting? Nay, I know he has been threatened, and when there is
occasion will produce to whom. But to the business; here is a Letter produced,
and they say the Counts hand is to it, and another that subscribed put out: why
may not those that put out one name, put in another? Baptista is the Counts
Accuser, you all know he was his Enemy, and I know he had reason to be so; yet
'twas your Highness service that gave him that reason: For the Count being
certain he had ambitious designs, not fit for a Subject to arrive at, (rather
then disgust him, by telling him he was not worthy of what he aimed at) in
Policy, to keep the State quiet, kept him banished. Never smile, my Lord, for
this is truth, though the Camp knew it not; And Prince Sforza knows, Fidelia
was their quarrel; for whom the Count Baptista has always born an ambitious
Passion.


Sforza. You know so much, Carlo, and are so ingenious, I shall hope, you will
confess your knowledge of this Letter too.


Carlo. Your Highness has too much Honor, to fear to speak what ever you know;
and if Carlo be guilty, pray, Sir, accuse him; Carlo speaks aside. if not,
(though my Prince) I shall beg you will not throw a Doubt upon Me. -- (I know
he dares not speak, Fidelia is too much concerned.)


Sforza. There will be a time when that may be fit too.


Carlo. Till then, Sir, confident of the Justice before whom we plead, and
strengthened by my own Innocence, I am still desirous there may be some
testimony produced against the Count: God forbid Accusations should make Men
guilty; if that were so, few were safe that Princes call to their Councils or
their trusts.


Ferdi. To the point, Sir; what can you say, why this Traitor should not die a
public example, to give a terror and warning to others?


Carlo. When you, that have twice called him Traitor, can once prove him so,
then let him die.


Ferdi. The proofs are evident; here is a gallant Prince murdered, and another
sold to slaughter; here is his hand to the bloody contract.


Carlo. If your Highness thinks me fit to speak, if there be reason in what I
have said, I shall proceed; if not, I have done.


Julia. Monster, with what impudence have thou thus long dared to tempt the
patience of thy Prince; And thus, in the Ears and Eyes of his Mother and his
friends, excused the Murderer? Clear thy self from being one in the plot, thou
Idolater of that Monster; Martino, or both of you shall find a hangman to
attend your funerals. Traitors! thus to forget the kindness which I have
showed you! Is this the return your bloody minds have made me, for keeping up
your Interest with this generous prince? O Sir, let me now beg your Justice may
make them as public Examples of your Justice as they once stood of your
favor.


Alphons. Be patient, Give him leave to speak; Reason and Justice dwell near
together; and when they either call, or point, you shall find I both hear and
see. Proceed, Carlo.


Carlo. If 'twere for a private obscure person, Sir, one fled from the Law or
Justice; If 'twere for a stranger I pleaded, I should not wonder at this
immoderate haste, and impatience to do Justice, or if I were now to inform this
Assembly who the Count Martino is; There might be something said against the
impertinency of such a discourse; But when I only desire to know why, ere I
consent to the death or dishonor of my Patron, one that two hours since all
men honored, one that this morning was trusted and reverenced by all, having
had the faith of two Princes, and power of two Principalities reposed in him;
Why should it then seem strange, that I, his Creature, wish and believe him
Innocent, That has the Evidence of so many Ages, and so many Princes favors,
to plead for him? In whose name I only desire Justice; Prove his Crime,
produce his Treason; show the Body, proceed Legally, and if Carlo be not as
ready to pronounce his sentence, as any, then accuse me; But since no one here
saw the Prince dead, or wounded, Give me leave, again, to say I hope he is
living; and that hope is more kind to the prince, and has more Charity in it,
my Lord, then all that furious desire of Revenge which your malice shows; And
if you loved Prince Cosmo, or virtue, as you pretend, you had rather he were
living, and the Count Martino Innocent, then to have a prince murdered, that
your hate might then see your Enemy destroyed.


Ferd. Proceed, I shall answer anon, and make it appear, I scorned, and not
envied your Idol.


Carlo. The Count, my Lord, had honor and parts would rather deserve your
envy, then your scorn; And by that time you have Commanded as many Armies, and
governed as many Provinces, as he has done, with honor, I shall then Envy your
Lordship; prevail with your prince, and the world, to give you that esteem and
trust he had two hours ago; show the wounds you have received for your
Country, produce those Arguments, for a Prince to trust you; 'twill be nobler
far, then to sit and bark at one, in his Age, whose youth you bowed to; and you
will find, my Lord, the Count has virtue, even to bear this scandal; it is not
the first misery he has suffered, his fortune has been used to storms; and yet I
dare say, the unkindness of some friends (turned Enemies this day,) has made
his Imprisonment heavier then his first chains, at the loss of Pavia; Yet when
malice has done her worst, he has the word of two Princes, that he is honest;
which when your Lordship can produce, then you may laugh, as he and I do, at
the malice of the world, which still pursues the favorite till he is fit for
Pity.


Julia. Did no body see his dead body; where is the Soldier that brought the
news?


Alphons. Let him be called, some one, that knows where he is, fetch him
immediately; none stir? who saw him? whence came the Report? are you all
silent? all accuse, and none know why?


Carlo. Sir, my Lord Ferdinando knows, sure; His violent and earnest calling
for Justice has some ground. My Lord, his Highness would see your Evidence.


Ferd. It Is visible enough in thy impudence; will your Highness be pleased to
read your Letter, and behold those wounds upon your own flesh; the rest was a
Fame I only met; here is the Traitors hand set to this blood, is that too
little to convince a Traitor? Good God? how black and partial is this Court
grown; when a few gilded words, (from a party in this mischief) should be able
to divert Justice from her Course? and my honest heart must humbly beg pardon,
if I take liberty at full to answer this Impudence in his Creature; The first
part of my wonder is, to find, even the best men are grown tame by Custom;
slaved so by a favorite, that their minds are scarce left free; Even their
thoughts are led in Chains, and either dare not, or will not see, blinded
either by fear, or Interest, through the mist his greatness throws before their
eyes, else We might have grown wise, by our Neighbors miseries, rather then
have cherished a Frozen Viper; And whereas he boasts of his dead Masters
Trust, Ask the deceased soul of Great Matthias, whether Martino be not a false
and a bloody Villain? Nay, ask this Assembly, whether he was not a Traitor to
that Master? And since I am urged, I must say, I know Martino sold the Battle
of Pavia; And he that would then sell his old Master, and his Country, will
not stick to betray the new one, when he finds a Chapman; But he has now no
need of these low Arts to rise by. Here he finds his way prepared, and, by
easy steps now gains his designs; Lust, Covetousness, and flattery, in others,
make his way; Who finding he grows powerful in your Highness mind, there rests
only, darkly to tell what he designs; And then let Signior Carlo, and his
Emissaries, with all Arts and Diligence, strive who should first understand or
serve his will, and procure that his ambitious desires may be offered ere he
please to ask them; Nay, to such a height of Impudence his faction is grown,
that here, even in the presence of your highness, where the Assembly is made up
of the Royal Blood; One of them, and That, our Prince, calling for Justice; for
those wounds which yet bleed in our Eyes, instead of punishing the Traitor,
Behold, with what impudence one of his Parasites dares defend him, urging his
honors, and his Trusts, so many Armies raised. Fool, those are so many Crimes
only, so many stains, so many why's he should be torn in pieces, being lost,
or sold; I speak my own knowledge, this is a secret of the camps, Sir, that
holp to buy one of them; since which my soul has abhorred the Traitors more for
selling that gallant Prince, then him he has murd'red now.


Julia. aside, How came he by this knowledge?


Ferd. Here we find the Count confesled Debtor to the State, even by his
favorite; and instead of paying it, he would have Credit, to Cozen his Prince
again; you confess, he has had his Evidence of both Crowns; show, where he has
done his duty; else you will find those Armies, those Provinces, those trusts
you boast of, (if ill discharged) stand so many Evidences against him; and he
so far from meriting the least grace or favor, for these, it is impudence to
name them. And I dare say, (in the days of liberty and freedom, ere his power
awed this Table so, That both Princes and Council stooped to the Frowns of a
Favorite and a Woman) Martino had died upon a Scaffold ere he had found a place
above his Fellows.


Alphons. Ferdinando, you are honest; But yet know the respect you owe this
place; else you will find I can be angry.


Ferd. Sir, I shall not dispute against your Highness; yet being called this
day where my Honor and Conscience are both at stake, I shall claim the
liberty of an honest man, that I may discharge my duty both to my Prince and
Country. What I have said, Sir, is truth; and if I make it not appear, let me
answer it with my life; And the day has been, when your Highness would not have
checked me for speaking truth; Nor this Table have let any one man grow so
great, by his guilt, that we durst not accuse him; It Is an ill President thus
to encourage Traitors. Had Martino fallen under your Justice when he sold his
first Master, 'twould not have been a crime, in me, to have accused him now.
What makes Carlo defend him, but he finds he is grown so powerful? non dare
speak their fears; And your Highness bounty has so changed his condition, and
set such a stamp upon him, that he appears the greater part of your self; Nay,
the honest part of the world sticks not to say you have forgot what he was.
Take heed, Sir, his wickedness be not called yours too; for his Crimes are
such, even the Women (you see) have lost their pity for him, and I pray Heaven,
it be not too late for your Highness, or Justice it self, to take notice of
him; So powerful he is, that the Law dares not speak to him; and he is now so
guilty, that he is become Innocent; for who is beyond the Laws reach, He is
more guilty; And, if not prevented, we shall see him begin to give Laws both to
your self and people; to prevent which, again, I beg your Highness would but
read that letter; Behold these wounds, do they speak less then destruction to
the name of Sforza? Grant Cosmo living, Is he Innocent? Behold these wounds
given your own Bowels; Do Justice for these, and Justice is easy to all but
the wicked; Mercy is first due to the Innocent, and from them, let the guilty
beg, and find it; it is safer far, then to leave the Innocent to the mercy of a
Traitor.


Alphon. What can you say against Ferdinando's reason? His honest heart will
excuse his passion; and grant Cosmo living; yet behold his Prince wounded and
designed for his grave, if this be Martino's Letter.


Car. For the Princes wounds, I can say nothing, but mourn the unhappy
accident; The Count made his own answer to that particular; and for the Letter,
it ought to be punished with exquisite torture and death, if (as your Highness
says) it be proved his; I know his hand, but cannot say, upon life and death,
this is his, since the Count denies it; the Soldier would give some light in
the business, could your Highness prevail to have him produced; it is not well
to conceal or dismiss him at this time, in a business thus important; for his
evidence would sway much, either to the clearing or convicting of the Count;
Treason has that curse with her, she is never quite rooted out; nor justice
cannot cut so even, but even truth and innocence it self may suffer.


Alphon. Who brought this Letter?


Vict. 'Twas I, Sir, gave it your Highness.


Alphon. Where had you it?


Jul. That I would gladly know.


Sfor. I gave it her.


Car. O, then 'twas your Highness brought the first news of this to Court; then
I have done, else --


Sfor. What else, impudence? speak thy heart, without these abrupt and dark
sayings, without your scandalous -- else: Or, by my life, there is no place
shall privilege you from being nailed at my foot, you Traitor.


Alphon. Hold, and give good reason for this anger; lest I doubt the justice of
your cause.


Car. If your Highness fears had no more cause to put on your disguise to day,
then you have to be angry now, I shall hope the Count innocent in the one
cause, as I am in the other.


Sfor. It Is enough, Sir, you know there is a cause; and time shall tell it, in
the mean time I will take my leave.


Jul. O stay, for heavens sake, stay; for honor and all our peace, stay; and
if you know any thing can clear this business, speak it freely; and let not our
souls be afflicted with the doubt; speak, Sir, and let the Traitors find the
vengeance due to them only; now you afflict the innocent with your doubts and
dark speeches.


Sfor. Pray, Madam, let me go before murder has its will.


Jul. Why this answer? is this the return for all my kindness and love to
Sforza?


Sfor. O impudence!


Car. Sir, it is but justice she and all the world desires; the Duke, Sir, would
know where you had this Letter?


Sfor. Villain, Traitor, Murderer, whose impudence has broke my resolution;
dare thou call for justice that wertt he Messenger of death? thou Traitor,
impudent wretch, 'twas thou that gave this Letter to Baptista, and this Ring;
let who dare own it, He lays the Ring down upon the Table. and with it, a
Murderer. --


[Exit Sforza Car. It Is sad to have my Prince my accuser; else the Law of
Honor would do me justice, and the world find I wear a sword; it is hard, Sir,
to be thus accused, and no witness dares appear.


Alphon. Give me the Ring, and all leave the place but you Victoria, and
Ferdinando and; Giovanni bid Sforza come hither; and He looks upon the Ring,
and is full of trouble. you Ferdinando command the Guard to watch this night
upon my Chamber, and be you in person with them; this Ring I gave Julia; if she
be false.


Ferd. If?


Alphon, If? Ferdinando, can you accuse her?


Ferd. Will you have patience, Sir, till I prove what I say? if not you will
yet see your whole name destroyed.


Alphon. Speak, but remember I love Julia; yet if she can be guilty of this,
the earth shall not redeem her; can Julia be false to me?


Ferd. False as hell; it is her name is blotted out of the Letter; the Prince in
pity of Fidelia did it, because he would not have her grieved with the infamy
of her Mother.


Alphon. But what could she hope by killing Cosmo?


Vict. O, Sir, that is a mischief which is yet a Riddle to the world; and
secret to all but my self and Fidelia; Cosmo lives.


Alphonso and Ferd. Live! Cosmo living!


Vict. I must not, cannot, dare not speak my knowledge, much less my fears;
only, for certain, Cosmo lives, and Martino dishonours you, and Julia's false;
and now the villain is in hold we will make ready our proofs; and, for heavens
sake, trust none of them till we have made it appear that they, or we, are
faulty; this accusing Martino, and railing against Carlo in public, is too
gross to blind any eye that has observed them as Victoria has done; Cosmo went
hence in a disguise, to question my Brother about the Command of the Army,
which is the true cause why Sforza came in disguise to Millain.


Ferd. This is a knowledge your highness should have had sooner, but that we are
resolved to accuse none till their treachery is visible; and pray be pleased to
keep your old kindness to the Duchess, and continue your coldness in believing
the Princesses accusation, for a day or two, till all things are ready; this
night we will meet at your Highness Chamber, and there resolve in order to our
business; and, pray, let the Dutchesses part be concealed, for the Princess
Fidelia's sake.


Vict. 'T will break her heart; the first news of her Brothers death had almost
distracted her.


Alphon. They are a pair of virtuous minds, and I am glad to find Victoria so
kind to them; and since he^ven has preserved him from this storm, My Cosmo
shall find I loved and valued him.


Ferd. Let us retire, Madam, that we may get the Guard in arms; and then I will
wait upon you in the Princes lodging; our stay may beget their jealousy, for
guilt is still upon the Alarm.


Alphon. The Gods bless my child; and, pray, tell Sforza, I want not any of
that kindness a Father owes to a good Son, though I cry not my love in the
streets; which he shall now find, in cutting from my breast what has long been
dearest to me, even Julia, since she is false.


Vict. God forbid, though the tree be guilty, let the fruit plead; Fidelia has
goodness enough to expiate any crime she can commit with wishes, which is all
the ill she is yet arrived to.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Julia and Martino, she in man's apparel, with a Darklanthorn. Jul. YOu
are sad, Martino.


Mart. No, Madam; but my heart's awaked with this storm; and I am glad to find
our mischief was so unsuccessful, since Julia could accuse me.


Jul. And could thou be so faulty as to think Julia false? Oh, my soul! had
not I my masterpiece to act; and though we have bravely gone through with it,
'twas a troubled sea we wrought through to gain this Harbor; and here shall
still be Martino's safety, My Cosmo is safe; and while the Duke rests in doubt,
we must dispatch Sforza, let me alone to settle all the rest; this was Carlo's
plot; the honest Soldier (that is without) too did his part; whom they are now
busy inquiring after; therefore, sor a day or two, till Sforza be dead, let
him lie concealed here.


Mart. Sforza's death is a counsel I could wish you would abandon; for though
it may serve in this our desperate disease, yet what the success must be those
that know there are Gods may easily divine; to murder three such innocents,
one of them your own too, it is black and terrible; and I fear will be so far
from confirming Cosmo in the Throne you design him, 'twill rather make him
odious to both Nations.


Jul. I know the price of those Jewels; but since the storm would not be
resisted, rather then let our Barque sink we must throw over our richest goods.


Mart. Be patient till I am gone, and observe what effect that change will
have; Cosmo has virtues enough, and needs none of those dark paths to lead him
to a Crown; and though he be innocent, yet I fear the Gods should punish our
faults upon him; and we but make our selves monsters, and him miserable, only
showing him that Crown which will be snatched from him, and given to some third
pretender.


Jul. No matter; if Cosmo cannot keep a Crown when we have given it him, let
him that wins it wear it; he is Julia's heir that can succeed her; the generous
Conqueror is my child; and I shall hate my self for designing Cosmo so much
honor, if he want courage to keep it; I am none of that sort of foolish women
that love. their own fruit best though it be sower; it is thy interest, and the
memory of those happy hours that makes Cosmo dear to me; I know not why dull
custom should make us love a fool or coward, because got in Wedlock; a natural
accident in Marriage, and the cold effect of a dull thoughtless Act, which
every Beast and Bird does as well as we; and before it should be said I love
Cosmo for those Reasons, he should this night fill a grave, with those foolish
souls we have condemned, while the brave, the daring and the fortunate were
adopted; and I will still believe the Conqueror is our Son, who ere he be; and
Cosmo changed in the Cradle, though the false Nurse deny it. No, Martino, thou
have taught me to know we are our own Gods; those thrive here that dare
Fortune, she knows neither conscience nor prayer, she is a woman, young, naked
and blind; they say, Youth and Courage binds her; and if Cosmo cannot force a
naked woman, let him rest despised for Julia. -- See where Carlo comes. Carlo,
what news?


Enter Carlo at a hole in the Vault. Car. You have no time to spare; the Duke
has all this while been in counsel with his Daughter and Ferdinando; and you
may find by Victoria's briskness, she knows Prince Cosmo is safe; the Guard is
in arms too, commanded by Ferdinando; and we must expect nothing but ruin.


[Enter Cosmo. Mart. And where is the Prince and Princess?


Carlo. They are all safe, at the Princes Chamber, upon a visit; we have laid
our design, I am now come for the Soldier: Come, friend, when we have played
this part all is our own; when they are in the grave we will return, and call
you; till then, pray be private here.


[Exeunt Carlo and Cosmo, by the Vault. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Sforza, Victoria, Ferdinando, and Fidelia. Ferd. IF it be possible I
will find the Pilgrim, his testimony will confirm all; and then I will return
with a guard to prevent the worst of malice.


Sfor. Kind and faithful Ferdinando still; all good success attend thee.


Fid. Pray, Sir, retire to your lodging; small wounds neglected may bring a
dangerous consequence; you know, Sir, there be many lives depend on Prince
Sforza.


Sfor. Fear not, Madam, since I have cured those wounds that grief and
distraction gave by your displeasure, my heart can know no danger; when Fidelia
smiles, Sforza is all joy and peace.


Fid. Heaven protect the Prince; and when I lose not his value, I care not who
frowns; I had wounds too, and they bled as long as Sforza was angry; but we are
now perfectly happy.


Vict. The Gods were kind to Victoria, that spared Sforza, and preserved Cosmo;
Julia too is innocent, in spite of Treason, which false Martino would have
betrayed her into; and time will heal all these wonnds that Love and Fortune
have dealt among us.


Sfor. What noise is that?


Enter Antonio and Soldiers, and seize them all. Ant. Resist not, Sir; these
dye, if you resist.


Sfor. Is Antonio false too? Heaven! is there nothing but treachery among men?
this I foresaw in that feigned death of Cosmo.


Vict. Antonio false! perhaps Cosmo is dead too; if he be, let thy words stab
Victoria to the heart.


Sfor. If there be any honest thought left in thy mind, Antonio, lead me to the
Princess Fidelia, that I may dye (what I could not live) her Sforza.


Fidelia. O, Sir, these men have added cruelty even to death! had I died
yesterday when Sforza was angry, 'twould not have been half the grief; but to
be reconciled to Sforza, and then snatched from his friendship, is beyond
Murder, cruel. O, Sir, it is now too late to say that truth which my modest
heart could never find yet strength enough to utter; yet, witness heaven, it is
a truth my heart will break with; Prince Sforza was all the business of my
mind, how I loved him I shall not live to tell; yet here upon his breast, with
my last breath, I vow my first and most unspotted faith.


Sfor. This cold kiss on your fair hand shall be both our Epithalamium and our
Epitaph; O, gentle Fidelia! we were one in friendship, and one in misery.


Vict. That the Gods should give to Beasts venom in their eyes, and death in
their teeth, to destroy the innocent, and not afford us that power in an hour
of misery, for a guard against Murder and Treason.


Ant. Away, where I appointed, and observe your Order.


[Exe. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Martino and Julia, in the same disguise. Mart. THey have been long, but
now I believe he comes; for now I hear a noise in the Vault.


Jul. It Is they.


[Ent. Car. and Cos. at the Vault. Mart. Carlo, is all ready?


Car. Yes, they are seized and bound, and in the Cyprus Grove expect us, your
horses too are ready, we shall have the sport to pass that way; and see them
whine and dye, and then away.


Mart. But whither shall I go? that I may hold a correspondence, and advise you
of my resolutions, as occasion presents.


Jul. You must find out my Son and Count Baptista; but you must not let the
foolish Boy know of what is past; his passion makes him deaf to all our reasons.


Car. Come, come dispatch, Sir, the time is precious.


Mart. Madam, this shadow goes, you see, forced hence by cruel stars; other joy
I never knew then Julia's friendship, with whom I must leave this parting kiss.
Farewell to all that is dear to Martino; witness my Soul, I have no joys but in
those Eyes, and till we meet again my sad heart will know no peace.


Julia. Farewell, Martino; Julia can yet say she found a friend that was
faithful, and it is not in Fate to divide our hearts; How unwillingly shall I
let my Eyes lose this object, witness all the kindness that my life has showed
thee; I should hate my self, if I thought I had words to express how much I
have loved Martino. Farewell, I have too much Woman in my Eyes, I cannot suffer
this separation without tears; Separation is death of Friendship, my Soul and I
now part. This kiss to my dear Cosmo.


Cosmo. Ye Gods, what do I see and hear? O Villain, Villain.


Carlo. Go before with the Lanthorn. --


Cosmo goes before, with the light down the hole, Carlo and Martino follow him.
Mart. Carlo, give me your hand. --


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Sforza, Fidelia, Victoria: Antonio and the Soldiers bind them to the
Tree. Sforza. WHy do thou delay thy bloody purpose? If it be Repentance holds
thy hand, make it good; I will purchase it at any rate to save those Innocents;
and I will die too, that thou may have thy reward from those that hire thee.


Fidel. Victo. O Sir, we hear them coming; now it is the time, farewell for ever.


Anto. Are they bound?


Sold. Yes, Sir.


Anto. It Is they, wear your swords in readiness.


Enter Cosmo with a light, Carlo and Martino following him. Mart. Where are
they?


Cosmo. In the Arbor.


Mart. Let us dispatch them, Carlo, and away.


Cosmo whistles, Antonio and the Soldiers seize Martino and Carlo. Mart. Hah!
O Carlo we are betrayed.


Sforza. What noise is that?


Cosmo. This way, Antonio. -- Do you see this sight, Sir?


They lead them after the light to the place where the Princesses and the
Prince were bound. Mart. Yes, what is thy meaning? art thou false, or no? Why
do thou fright our hopes?


Carlo. Upon them, and dispatch; you will find this no jesting matter.


Sforza. Ha, Martino at liberty?


Fide. Martino loose? nay then we are lost for ever.


Mart. Why do thou not kill them?


Carlo. Or let me do it.


Victoria. That is the Soldier brought news of my Brothers death.


Sforza. And that face I have seen before.


Cosmo. I thought you had forgot it.


Sforza. No, 'twas thou that savd'st me, when Baptista would have murdered me.


Carlo. What says he?


Mart. Enough to satisfy me, we are all betrayed.


Cosmo. Sir, I saved you once.


Sforza. And why should thou not again be honest? Threats are lost where they
meet Minds resolved like ours; yet if thou dare save these, they will pray so
faithfully for thee, that thou may kill me and be forgiven; All the horror
thou can put into thy look I can despise; for the valiant man, in his first
thought, digests the necessity of death; And since we cannot avoid that sight,
I have long since Philosophyed upon my grave, as the second womb, and the
certain way to the other world, as my Mothers led to this; and he that is
honest only sees those dangers. The guilty trembling Coward, it is he that
tastes the bitter cup, while his pale Soul labors and feels the throws of
every apprehended Dart, whose anguish (Gentle Fidelia) is in leaving thee, and
kind Victoria; Those that fear him suffer in every thought, and languish in
expectation; For, dying, not death is the wound; and when death will appear,
though in a Fever, Martino, Carlo, Treason and the Sword, are there.


Fide. O Sforza, talk of death, but not of parting; when we can die without
that, these threatened wounds are welcome; Fever, Sword, nor Treason, I fear
not, they are our slaves, and would be tame things if death and malice (Enemies
to Nature and Fidelia) did not set them on to destroy Noble Sforza. O be still
that good man, and let not these Villains prevail with thee to murder the
Prince; Hell and curses are on their side, Innocence and Virtue on the Princes;
if thou kil'st him, thou art damned; save him, and become an Angel.


Carlo. Strike, fool, or she will talk thee to the Gallows; Dos't thou not know
the intent in Treason, is as guilty and as mortal as the blow?


Mart. Thou art a fool, we are all betrayed; and now I see him through all his
cloud; it is Cosmo, Carlo.


[Cosmo discovers himself. Cosmo. It Is so, horrid Villain; what can thy Soul
tell thee now, but death and misery attend thee?


Carlo. Cosmo?


Victo. Cosmo?


Fide. It Is my Brother.


Cosmo. Villain, can thou look upon this spectacle? Does not thy Soul melt
with horror? Dog, I will kill every limb of thee apart. Kill that Villain.


[The Soldiers kill Carlo. Carlo. Oh! oh!


[He dies. Cosmo. Sir, I beg your pardon for this fright, there was no safety
without it; I could not else have betrayed these Monsters from their security,
but with the hope of such a bait; But now I will offer their hated limbs a
sacrifice to all our fears.


Fide. O my Cosmo, joy of my life, unbind the Prince.


Cosmo. I have another business to dispatch first; I must be grateful as well
as just; The sword, Antonio. --


[Ant. gives him a sword. Cosmo. Do you know it, Sir?


Mart. Yes, and what of it?


Cosmo. When I was down in the battle of Pavia, then thou bestridst me, and
gave me this with a wish I might never lose when I drew it against my Enemy;
Here, take this other, while I prove thy wish upon thee. Antonio, if I fall,
let the Law proceed to Justice against this Villain, and secure the lives of
these Princes.


Sforza. Why do you arm the Traitor?


Cosmo. There is no danger in a known Traitor: it is the Trust that makes them
dangerous; and Traitors in the field are but upon their way to Execution.


Mart. I will not hope to escape; yet I have known the day when I would have
forced my safety through more stops then your Arm threatens; But I was innocent
then, and yet the greatest of [Aside.] my Crimes is Cosmo; and Heaven is just
in making him my scourge.


Cosmo. I will hear no more. -- That for Fideli^. Theyfight and are both
wounded.

Martino falls.




Mart. For Martino, that.


Cosmo. For Sforza, that, and that, and that for Julia; let that name sink thee
and thy Soul. --


Mart. I faint, O Cosmo! I have yet kindness enough in all this blood, to fear
and pity what Fate attends thee that have killed thy Father; a secret yet to
Cosmo.


Sforza. What said he?


Cosmo. No matter what.


Sforza. How do you, Sir? has he hurt you?


Cosmo. Yes, but not much; Take up their Bodies, Antonio, and carry them to my
Mothers Lodging; Madam, to prevent this danger, I was fain to break my word
with your Highness; and that necessity, I hope, will plead your pardon.


Fide. I am glad, you had a reason for that fault.


Cosmo. The Story of this accident, how laid and how prevented, will ask an
ages time to relate; but till the danger is past we must defer it; and I must
beg, for an hour or two, you let me lie concealed, and in this disguise, till I
have finished my work; I must now find my Mother; O Sister, she must be
reclaimed with Tears, not Wounds; And I must beg your Highness company, to make
her shame the greater. The horror of her designs I will present unto her as
things executed; and when I have brought her to a repentance, and a despair of
Peace, then, as a Mercy beyond her hopes or merit, she shall know how Heaven
has miraculously preserved her innocence from all this blood; This way I hope
to reclaim that unfortunate Woman, now the authors of her sins are gone.


Sforza. Pray lead the way.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Julia alone, in Man's Clothes. Julia. THis night is full of change;
within this hour nothing but despair, yet now my heart has Joy again; and
Sforza once dead, Victoria shall marry Cosmo; The fright Carlo will put her in,
when she sees Fidelia die, will make her proud heart stoop to Cosmo, I know she
loves him; This day her Passion appeared, at the report of his death; and
though she pretends that she has vowed her self to a Monastery when her Father
dies, yet I doubt not but she may be won to forsake that cold pretense for a
warm Palace; Those Nuptials will crown all my thoughts; and then 'twas a happy
loss of Pavia, if we gain Millain; both which will be the reward of my long
travel. The Duke must die ere they can Wed; for since we are stepped in, we must
now go thorough with the work: Lust and ambition know no bounds; and rather
then we will see my Cosmo less then we design him, we will raise new diseases,
scourges of the time, and Act what Age and sickness could not do. What noise is
that?


[Enter Cosmo. Cosmo. Madam, the Count, and Carlo, kiss your hands.


Julia. Are they gone?


Cosmo. Yes, Madam.


Julia. And the rest? how? how?


Cosmo. Dead, all Dead.


Julia. And was not Sforza sad to depart with Fidelia, and the World?


Cosmo. They made a great Ceremony of it; and by my troth, it was sad; I did
what I was not wont to do, I pityed him; for 'twas a gallant and a stout
Gentleman; the Women too lamented so, it almost staggered my resolution; and I
think, though your soul hates them, 'twould have grieved your heart to have
seen them part; She that died, (Fidelia I think you called her) fell, ere we
struck, upon the sight of Sforza's death.


Julia. aside, Are you so pityful? he will tell, if not prevented.


Cosmo. Madam, the Count bid me tell your Highness, he thinks it fit Carlo dies
too; for he knows too much, and grows too sawey, upon the Trust you have given
him.


Julia. We will think on it; let us talk no more at this time, it is late; is any
body stirring in the Gallery?


Cosmo. No, Madam, all is whist.


Julia. Take this purse, and conceal thy self for a day or two, and then find
Martino; for I would have thee always near him; thou have a bold heart, and a
ready hand; here, give him this Ring from me; you wear a privy Coat?


Cosmo. No, Madam.


Julia. The more fool you, in these dangerous Occasions; I will try.


(She stabs him.) Cosmo. Oh! hold, wretched Woman.


(She stabs him again.) Julia. Thou art too pityful a fool to trust a Crown to.


Cosmo. Hold, hold, it is Cosmo that thou have murdered.


Julia. What said he? Cosmo?


(She runs to him.) Enter Sforza, Victoria, Fidelia, Antonio and Soldiers,
with the dead Bodies of Carlo and Martino. Fidelia. O my Brother! poor Cosmo!
unfortunate youth!


Victo. Cursed Woman, shame of thy Sex, what have thou done?


Sforza. Inhumane Act, O Julia, thy soul will ache for this; lift him up
Antonio, and send for a Surgeon quickly, some one raise the Court; Try if there
be any hope of life.


Julia. Sforza alive? and Fidelia too? Cosmo dead? and Martino Dead! O wretch,
it is too sad a Truth; it is he, my dear Cosmo? Thou were my beloved sin, all my
crimes were loves to Cosmo, and now my greatest sin is thy blood; all that I
loved dead? And all She Looks about her. those I hated living? Hence foolish
Woman, quickly be gone; what business have thou now upon the Earth? despair,
and die; I cannot talk, my grief is too great for words, and yet I could be
angry with fate; But it is too late; Make room, Cosmo, for thy mother: I struck
not thee with half so good a will; Thus I shall be Julia still, my story is of
one piece now.


(She stabs her self, and falls.) Vict. O! hold her desperate hand --


(They run, to take the Dagger. Julia. No, it is too late, Antonio; Julia was
Julia's Fate; yet ere I die, you that live, forgive, and bring Fidelia hither.
Fidelia, whom my life hated, but my death loves, forgive thy mother; and live
still the thing she hated, the Religious, Chaste, and faithful Fidelia; and let
thy name redeem the Honor I have lost, in story; does any know how Martino
came by his death?


Sforza. Yes, Madam; Cosmo, in Duel, killed him.


Julia. Cosmo kill Martino? Nay, then 'twas fate, not Julia, struck Cosmo;
Unfortunate youth! wicked and guilty by chance; What fate guided him to Cosmo's
sword? Heavens! None but a Son to spill a Fathers blood, and a Mother to
revenge it!


(She dies.) Sforza. What does she say?


Antonio. Sir, I am loath to be the Author of such a scandal; yet I heard
Martino, when he fell under Cosmo's sword, tell him he had killed his Father;
your Highness knows their Friendship has been scandalous, though the world
durst not speak of it.


Enter the Duke, Ferdinando, Giovanni, and a Guard. Duke. Dead? heaven forbid.


Sforza. Pray, Sir, retire the Scene is too sad; for a Fathers Eyes; The Story,
Sir, will be fitter to be mourned then spoken of; the Gods have taken a severe
vengeance upon those people, and we may lament, but not redeem, their faults;
Come, Madam, when you can digest this grief you shall find Sforza is ready to
pay all his vows to Love and Friendship.


Victoria. No, Brother, Sister, Father, all that were guilty, in making me
break my vows with Heaven, here I beg the dead Body of my Cosmo may be interred
in our Chapel, where again I vow to waste my days in Holy Orders, and with
the Penance of my life redeem my past faults, and lament poor Cosmo.


Fidelia. Oh, Sir, let me retire too; Let not such a poisonous fruit be
cherished in your breast, lest the displeased Gods take some farther vengeance
on Our Family; and so distract my soul, to find Prince Sforza punished for
Fidelia's sins.


Sforza. This misery is so strange, and so infectious, that even my heart grows
sick of Love, and fear; Heaven, if thou have decreed more affliction for this
gentle maid, let them not fall till I am earth. O Fidelia, nothing but death
shall divide me from thee.


Alphonso. Take up their Bodies, and let all Funeral Rites be given to these
unfortunate people: and since they have born the punishment of their Crimes,
let their faults have no more memory, but, with them, lie buried in their
Grave; And let their Example teach us; Impious men may play with Heaven, but
they can hope no better fate to Win. Dry thy Eyes, Fidelia, Heaven forbid, thy
Innocence should suffer for the Crimes of others; To whom there is a reward
due, as a punishment to these; And if Sforza do not pay his Debts to Fidelia,
he will neither have Heavens nor my blessing; and when Our griefs have given
place, I shall only wish, that my last Scene in this world may wait on thy
Hymen's; for I am quite tired with the Affliction of this World, and will only
refresh my soul with seeing Fidelia and Sforza happy; And then I care not how
soon Nature and Death decide their dispute; That I might make an Exit from this
Theater where misfortune has made me Act a Part in so sad a Tragedy.


[Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
THE FIRST PART OF Cicilia and Clorinda, OR, Love in Arms. A TRAGI-COMEDY, The
Scene LOMBARDY.

Written in TURIN BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady ANNE VILLIERS COUNTESS OF MORTON.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

The Names of the Actors.
Marius, The Roman Praetor, Lieutenant of Lombardy. Otho, His Son, and General
under him. Cicilia, His Daughter. Calis, Her Friend. Dyon, A Gentleman of Rome.
Orante, The Lombard Prince. Clyandre, A Lombard. Turnus, A banished Lombard.
Lucius and Manlius Brothers General of the Horse. Lieutenant General of the
Army. Cleon Two Romans. Memnon Amadeo, Prince of Savoy. Clorinda, His Sister.
Lysander, A Lord of Savoy. Stella, Cicilia's Woman. Two Hermits. Banditoes.
Soldiers and Servants, Such as the Scene requires.
THE FIRST PART OF Cicilia and Clorinda, OR, Love in Arms.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter Orante and Turnus, Orante is clothed in black, with black Feathers,
black Perriwig, his person is crooked and ugly, with a Dagger by his side; His
habit must be good: Turnus disguised like a common Soldier. Oran. HAve you
heard the news, Turnus?


Turn. No, Sir, only a buzzing of something from the Army, and that diversely
reported, has the Praetor Letters?


Oran. Yes, and Otho writes of a Victory gained that day against Amadeo, and
that they are still in chase of those Mountainers.


Turn. And is Amadeo become an enemy worth Romes joy when she overcomes him?


Oran. It Is not the Soldier, but the Hunts-man that is showed in this Victory,
they have at last caught the Boar, his Sister is in the toil too; the Virago
that has so long made Otho a Soldier, for it is certain he loves Clorinda; but
why, unless it be for loving him, I know not; the great reason why most men
love their dogs; they say they will treat at Susa.


Turn. Then there is more then we see in it; remember, Sir, Amadeo was your
Rival, and believed by most that know the Court, the chief cause of Cicilia's
aversion to your Highness; therefore I wish he may rather fall by the disease
of his Family, (a Roman sword) then come to dispute his Title here, for though
he fled the Court when he was a prisoner upon the death of his Brother, which
was slain in the Battle of Susa; yet most believe Cicilia knew of his departure.


Oran. Hah, and this may be worth our thoughts; for I am certain Lucius, who is
now my Rival, is said to have made war against Amadeo, not Savoy. -- (See the
Praetor) now we shall know the news, for his vanity cannot conceal it.


Enter Marius, Cicilia, Calis, Dyon and Cleon; Marius has a Letter in his hand.
Mari. Mine are from the place, and mention a victory complete, and that they
are still in chase; the Princess Clorinda too is with her Brother; and Otho
writes that he believes this will be the last stroke they will be able to
strike for their Country; it is now seven years since that handful of men have
stopped the Roman fortune, at the price of five generous Princes, whose blood
has been dearly sold to the Roman swords.


Cicil. Otho writes, that he never saw more beauty, nor more courage then the
excellent Clorinda showed in the Battle, still fighting by her Brothers side;
and he hopes to gain them without blood* for they are now shut into the
streights of Susa, and the Cattle possessed by the Roman party; and I confess my
soul longs to see her whose fame and virtue, though an enemy, has at this
distance won my Brothers heart.


Oran. Amadeo will then be fit for a second liberty, Madam; which I believe
your Highness will again consent that he may have.


Cicil. Prince Amadeo will be a Prince in chains, his heart is made of royal
metal; and gold will be gold still, what poor mean use soever employed in; and
Lead will be Lead though in a Crown.


Oran. Yet he brake his word, and ran away (even with Cicilia he brake his
word) and ran from what he loved; nay, some say, from what loved him.


Cicil. But he fought afterward, and by this loss has got more honor then
some men win by victories: To the Roman fate a gallant man may lose, and yet
keep more honor then some are born to; her Stars have set her so far above the
world, that she stamps even virtues; and they bear a price as she bids them be
current; and I doubt not, but Prince Amadeo will find that Rome honors him
more for being a brave enemy, then if he had proved a tame temporizing friend,
which has neither virtue enough to dispute, nor love enough to revere her
power; and I confess, of all the services the Prince did to win esteem from me,
I loved him more for running from me when his honor called him, then if he had
staid, and pined at my feet; Prince Amadeo went then to make himself fit for
any gallant woman's love; and Prince Orante staid till he was fit for none.


Oran. You have reason, Madam; he that will not be revenged ought not to be
esteemed; he that will suffer injuries deserves them; a Doctrine Orante may
learn in time, could he leave to love; and these remedies may work that miracle.


[Exeunt Orante, and Turnus. Marius. You are too harsh; his mind, we know, is
full of envy and pride; and when those meet with courage and despised love, it
may beget a danger your power nor mine cannot resist; let him vent his malice,
his words hurt no body.


Cicil. it is my honor and duty that he strikes at, and he has a thousand times
accused me of contriving the Prince Amadeo's escape; I confess he told me he
would go, and would have taken his leave of me; but I thought my self obliged
neither to betray a Father, or a Friend; and therefore I would not hinder him,
by betraying his trust; nor be so guilty as to countenance the fact by giving
him leave to visit me; and for his discourse, I told him it should pass as a
thing I neither believed nor counseled (and Amadeo had honor enough to know
how to choose with honor) this said, I left him, and he fled; for which I value
him, 'twas done like a Prince, whose first business is honor.


Marius. I confess I ever loved him, and though I took it unkindly that he went
away; yet being a prisoner of war, and no word engaged, we ought to have kept
him better; and I believe, now, that if his love had not been more his guard,
then his guards were, he had been gone sooner.


Dyon. Manlius gives great honor to the Prince, and he is full of pity and
admiration of his Sister; he says, they fought beyond the belief of men, only
to avoid the being led in triumph; but his Letter mentions no such certainty of
a victory; he rather apprehends Prince Amadeo has some design in his retiring
to those streights; for their flight was rather a retreat then a flight; and
that he was against the pursuing of them into the streights; and your Highness
knows Manlius is a Soldier of so much practice that his fears may find faith;
he had the Van in the Battle, and lies now next the enemy.


Cleon. His Letters to me speak doubtfully of this days business, they being
desperate men forced beyond a hope of safety; and such as experience has taught
us to know, they will sell themselves at as dear a rate as any enemy the Roman
yet ever purchased with their swords; and where they now lie, our horse can do
no service.


Marius. There is no disputing of this business; but diligently see those
provisions sent which Otho desires; and lest Manlius his fears be true, Cleon,
command the second and third Legion be this night ready to march; and when they
are at the Tower upon the Poe, there let them expect Orders from Otho; by which
means we may secure our friends, if there be any danger; which must be so much
the more desperate as it is unlooked for; within we will resolve further.


[Exeunt Mar. Cicil. Call. Cicil. What strange trouble's this? is not Manlius
Brother to Lucius? am I displeased that the world believes him a gallant and a
knowing Soldier, young in years, old in experience, and high in fame; one whom
his generous brother dotes upon, one that all the world esteems a person of
honor, stained only with craft and a little sullen roughness in his nature,
having still been bred in Camps, and nursed in war; but he is Lucius his
Brother, and that heals all.


Call. How ill a character has the gentle Cicilia received of the best of men,
except his Brother! then Manlius there is nothing more gallant, nothing softer
nor humbler then his nature; famous for war and peace; and though his rough
mind want love to polish it, that the world may see how clear a virtue rules
his heart; yet I am confident when your Highness shall see him, Manlius will
produce some excellencies that will be new and strange, though in the Brother
of Lucius.


Cicil. At last, Calis, I have found thy heart, blush not, it is Manlius which
so often in a third person thou have accused, praised and lamented; O Calis,
could thou hide from me thy love, that still told thee all the secrets of my
heart; have I lived with Calis as if I would condemn her for loving Manlius? is
that a crime in her, and virtue in me to love his Brother? is Manlius unworthy?
why else does Calis blush to own her friendship?


Call. No, Madam; neither of these was the cause of my silence, which I shall
now no further observe, though a curiosity to know my fate made me conceal it
till now; for they are sad stars that wait upon my love, blood and death
threatening all the friendships that I make.


Cicil. Fie, Calis, shall dreams fright thee from loving virtue, or fear of
ills make thee act ills? Manlius is a man my heart is so well acquainted with
by public fame that though yet I never saw him, I could at first sight,
methinks, desire all fair and reasonable things from him, for he is friend to
Otho, Brother to Lucius, and loved by Calis; and if I live to see him, I will
so chide his frozen heart, shame shall make him kind and civil, though not a
Lover.


Call. If your Highness will become concerned in my fortune, I should no longer
doubt my fate; those eyes have ever been successful; and when your Highness
will plead for me, who can deny that has honor? since we see the worst men,
and worst natures have stooped to your power. See, Madam, where comes a
miraculous Enter Orante sullen. effect of it in that wretched Prince, Orante.
See if he be not returned; retire, Madam, and avoid the visit.


Cicil. No, I have yet the justice on my side; and let Orante do as many
unhandsome things as his ill nature can prompt him to, I shall do nothing
unworthy my self; it is his guilt must make my ill usage justice; else to punish
him and use him ill, is not fair; while he is faulty I can with honor despise
him; and while I use him like a Prince (which I will do, and not encourage his
love neither) if he then fail in what a Prince should return, the world will
condemn him, and excuse me. His person is not his crime, he made it not; and if
his mind had been good, I could with honor enough have listened to his passion;
but his soul is as crooked as his body, and that is an imperfection that honor
cannot be reconciled to; I confess, Custom has made his importunities less
troublesome then they were before; Especially when I consider, how much more
affliction his Love must be to himself, in being the Lover, while despised,
then to me that am beloved; for while I endure the hearing of it he has the
Torment of suffering those pains he would describe, whose cure is desperate;
for he knows my heart is vowed to Lucius, whose return he dreads; And I am
confident he would kill him, if he durst Anger me; for, amongst all his crimes,
Coward is none.


Calis. Speak softly, Madam.


Orante. Madam, such is Orantes Fate, that even Injuries from your Highness
cannot divert his Love, nor all the Harshness in your words, this morning, make
me omit the seeing my Enemy, when any pretense can give me the Occasion; There
are second Letters arrived, Madam, from the Army; Does your Highness know the
contents? their news has dul'd the Court.


Cicilia. No, my Lord, not any thing: what is the report?


Orante. They say, the Praetor frowned; and it is reported, the Army, and all the
Officers, are engaged within the streights of Susa, and their condition most
desperate; They have writ for present aid; The third and fourth Legion are
marched, and the Praetor follows with the rest of the Army.


Cicilia. This Manlius feared, the gods guide my Brother; Calis, we have other
deities then Love to sacrifice too, though I hope that God will be propitious.


[Exit Cicilia and Calis. Orante. Amen to that; But Love will still be as blind
as Fortune; yet were it not for Love, I could force Lucius his fortune, though
I cannot flatter my own; for though my Stars have designed my Person the Scorn
of all the world, yet kinder Nature has given me a heart that dares be revenged
on all the World; And although I cannot be as happy as I designed, yet I will
make others as miserable as I please; and when Love will not let me be a guest
in Cicilia's heart, Revenge shall be in Orantes; My rest is up, I will either
have her Friendship, or her Honor; Who fears not his own may laugh at the
Tragedies of others. Divine-form'd Lucius, with sounds of Flattery, may pierce
her heart, by the Eye and Ear; But if despised and despairing Orante, thus
branded by Nature, stab not as near her heart with his Dagger, as any smooth
Courtier of them all, let me die despised in Story too; that, for a little
Beauty, sold my Honor, and my Peace. When Lucius returns, I must dissemble my
hatred to him; which is as hard for me to do, as for him to believe it; yet I
do not hate Lucius; I could love the man, if Cicilia did not; Strange Madness!
to hate him because she Loves him; And because she loves him, not dare to
strike him; Love, blind love, why have thou chosen me for a scorned subject of
thy power? Unreasonably imposing on my Reason a Love for her that hates me,
joining still with fortune, both which have decreed neither Crown nor Love for
Orante; Depose my soul to some greater power, by taking my reason from it, and
then I may be happy amongst Beasts, though most miserable amongst men.


[Exit Orante. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
An Alarm within. Then Enter Soldiers of both parties, and Manlius wounded,
and retires, pursued by Amadeo, and Clorinda. Amad. STand, stand.


[Enter Lysander. Lysand. Give the word; stand, stand.


[The Sold. En. and then stand. Amad. A little Patience, and then they are all
our own. -- Why The Soldiers make a shout. this shout? Why this cruelty, in
chase? Do you fear the Roman? Is a Conquest such a new thing, you are surpised
thus with, a victory? have we won, or cheated them of the Day? if not, Why this
childish noise? Does the skilful Artist make fires of Triumph, when he arrives
at any thing in his Trade? It Is Womanish, it is Cowardice, it is like fearful
Girls left in the Dark; you shout and tremble, as if you could fright your own
fears; And all this Joy speaks your minds now, as your hopes were before, poor,
and low; Nor did you believe me yesterday, when I prevailed with you to retire,
having no hope left, unless their Pride could be seduced to pursue us to these
streights; Did I not tell you then, 'twas the number, not the name, nor virtue
of the Romans, that beat Amadeo; And now, if you will follow me with minds
prepared for all Fortunes, they shall, at last, find us an Enemy not to be
despised; and either we will become their Triumph, or they Ours.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Manlius and his Party. Manlius. YEt stand, As you are Romans, follow
Manlius; See where Old Marius his Silver Eagle lies; Born in seven Consulates
before him; If there be never a Roman dares second me to fetch it off, Let
Amadeo bear it to Susa, while you submit your necks under the Savoyard yoke;
Are you all dead, all stabbed with one Calamity? Why did you shake your spears
in the morning, and call for a Signal to the Battle? Now you see, how low and
foolish it is at any time to despise an Enemy; Yesterday you were all noise,
and full of revilings; Now a Pannick fear possesses you: If you had Conquered
yesterday, you had robbed your selves of Triumph, for your vanity left nothing
fit to be rewarded; and now you are overcome, how your wounds will blush with
shame; What dishonor must your General sustain, when he sees himself a
Prisoner to the enemy! he despised -- See the General of the Horse too, shall
he see you deliver the Roman Eagles Enter Lucius. to a handful of beaten
Enemies?


Lucius. No more, Manlius; I see a Roman anger in their looks, and this Affront
has given an Edge to their Swords; Let us go, and make good this pass, and we
may regain the day; for Otho, and the second Legion are drawn to the mouth of
the Streights to meet with Cleon and the fourth Legion; The Praetor too is upon
the March himself.


Manlius. I can bear any thing but this dejection upon a Loss; yet I know not
why we should at any time despise this Enemy; Remember my Opinion yesterday,
when you were all bent to pursue them to this place; Let us call to mind what
they have done with a handful of men; how, in Ten pitched Battle, they have
stopped the Roman Eagle in height of Conquest, and checked her power more then
whole Nations; Five Gallant Princes have defended their Freedom with their
blood; and this, the last of that Great Race, whose virtue we have proved in
Peace and War; And I confess, but in kindness to Lucius, whose Rival I know he
is, nothing should have engaged me to have drawn my sword against such virtue
which even accuses the Gods for arming against him.


Lucius. Dear Manlius, Brother in my mind as well as Nature, how I admire thee
for this honest plainness? But we are now engaged, and the Roman Honor is at
stake; it is Rome, and her Battles, we bleed in; and who draws a sword against
her must be Our Enemy; Else, by my Honor, though it be my Rival, I would
hazard my life to save him, the Princess has given so noble a Character of him.


Manlius. Let us find the General, and join with me in proposing a Treaty,
while there are some to show mercy to.


Lucius. Yesterday your words would have come as well-come as Victory to him,
for I know his heart loves Clorinda; But now, it is neither Honorable nor safe
to propose it; you know they are a Resolute Enemy, and must not be sought for
till they are beaten; if we treat, They will believe we feared they might
overcome us; And Otho must not treat with the Roman Enemies in Arms; When they
acknowledge her Power, then it is time to show a Roman clemency; till then, all
Acts of War are Roman too. -- See Enter Otho. the General; I would your
Highness had been here a witness to our Discourse.


Otho. All Discourse is tedious, and unseasonable now.


Lucius. Sir, We were proposing of a Treaty.


Otho. It Is out of time; We must not give Our Honors for He whispers. Our
Safety. Your Ear, Lucius. -- The Legions will not be here, as we expected;
'twill be night ere they can arrive, and We must be resolved, with such Cards
as fate has dealt us, to play this Game; Manlius, you must give the Charge, if
they advance.


Man. I shall obey your Order, Sir; for my kindness as well as duty obliges me
to your opinion; yet it is strange, that nice Ceremonies should make Prince Otho
thus design how to punish that Courage in an Enemy which all the gods have so
often rewarded in himself. This generous Prince has no crime but valor that
pleades against him; and shall Courage be a sin in him, and virtue in a Roman?
Come, Sir, I know you have too much Honor to dispute this with me; witness all
the wounds that I have felt; I look upon them as the copy of our first Rome;
Rome in her cradle, such a despicable handful of Men were we, such a contemned
virtue was Aeneas, so despised, so pressed by an insolent Monarch, such proud
Neighbors found Rome in her Infancy, and what had we then but this virtue to
defend us, what right to Rome? What force to defend or redeem us but such a
Courage? Nay, by what Title now do we hold an Empire over the world? But by
these swords, and minds resolved, such an Imperious Enemy wakned then our
sleeping virtues, and by forcing us often to dispute for her, at last won
Fortune to our side; with our swords we overcame the greatest difficulties; And
from a Colony of a few sea-beaten Fugitives, we are become Lords of the Earth;
and who knows the Fates of these Men? We have tried their virtues in ten years
War, to which now is added their despaires; Nor has our supplies and numerous
Armies, during this War, been oftener recruited then they have renewed their
virtue, still showing equal Courage to our best of Fortune.


Lucius. When I shall speak in favor of a Treaty, sure none that know my
Interest will doubt the Reason of it; And your Highness knows with what zeal I
have pursued this War; Yet I confess, Manlius his words have made me ashamed
of that cause that bred my hatred to him, whose Gallantry I shall always love
next to Honor: And I know the generous Otho could not be deaf to the reasons
he has given, but that he is angry with the affront which they have this
morning thrown upon his Fortune. I know his Heart is too noble else, to hate
this little great Enemy, amongst whom Clorinda fights; It Is true, 'twould vex a
winner to find one, and the last stake stoop his fortune.


Man. Come, Sir, win this Prince any way; his virtues in friendship will do
more Honor to Otho then a Conquest; Were I the General, I should be prouder to
fold such an Enemy in mine Arms, then to have led Syphax in chains.


Lucius. Now after a day won and lost, in which they have showed both Active
and Passive Valor, not dejected by the loss of yesterday, nor blown up with
the success of this day; They fell under our wounds, yet no groans filled our
Ears; at our feet their wounded truncks lay, and frowning breathed their great
Souls out.


Man. We call them barbarous; but what will the next age say, when they shall
read this story, but that the Romans feared Amadeo, and destroyed that eminent
virtue, because he might have become their Rival? But this is but discourse,
let us consider the place and our condition; If they know and take the
advantage, it may be our turns ere the Sun sets, to fill the Graves we talk of;
The place will serve for a Moral; have we not this day stumbled at the bodies
we slew yesterday, making those Triumphs then our dangers now? Your silence,
Sir, confesses the Reason we speak.


Otho. O Lucius; Manlius. Friends, dear as my Eyes; why should you two; whom my
Soul loves, thus gall your friend? and now when he is beaten and dishonored,
tell him what a Conqueror should have done? Yesterday who mentioned a Peace?
was not victory then in all men's mouths? And now, when we are exposed to their
swords, and no way left to show we are Romans but by dying bravely, you would
have me treat; It Is poor and low for Otho, a grave is handsomer far; and they
will understand it Fear, not Clemency, should we propose it; Let us redeem this
fatal day, and then command me; but till we can give Laws, I am resolved to try
Fate to the last sword, and here. Let us part and embrace; whether we meet
again or no, we are Romans still; Manlius, our Honor and our Lives lie in thy
hands; And I am pleased to think the Roman Eagle has such a Protector; If they
force the pass, Lucius and my self will be ready to receive them.


Man. Come, Sir, he is a gallant Enemy, and to lose to such is no dishonor;
It Is their turn to day, 'twas ours yesterday, and may be again to morrow;
Gamesters that play fair must expect to lose sometimes, especially those that
will adventure at a Game so full of Fortune as a Soldiers trade; Be therefore,
Sir, resolved to make a safe retreat, and save our Honors; so to play this
aftergame will show a Soldier no less then a victory have would done.


Enter a Soldier. Sold. Sir, the Enemy advance apace, they have gained the
the Hills; and Tullius says, unless he be supplied he must quit the pass; Nor
does the Enemy move disorderly, as upon a success, but whole and in Bodies, as
to execute something long since designed. The Alarm increases.


Man. Let your Forces second mine; for if we lose this pass, you must not think
of a retreat to Susa.


Otho. Away then, each Man to his charge.


[A charge soundes. [Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Lysander, and after him, Amadeo and Clorinda. Soldiers bring in Manlius
bound. Amadeo. AWay, Lysander; follow where Fortune and Victory leads thee,
and let these Romans see we can be angry though not revenged; this is more then
ever the Romans could boast from us; It Is true, your swords have dug our
Princes Graves, yet they could never show one of Amadeos line or Family led in
chains; see, Clorinda, a Roman General in chains.


Man. It Is a noble sense of Honor, and Amadeo chides me handsomely; but if I
had any scruple in my Heart that tells me, Manlius, for fear of death, or want
of Courage became thy Prisoner, I would now beg thy sword to fall upon me, to
let thee see, how a Roman ought to free himself from such calamity; But I will
live and tell the world how much I honor that greatness of Mind, though in an
Enemy. For Manlius is a name, thy Father, Brothers, and thy self have often
proved in Battle; and I am sad to think, how fatal my sword has been to thy
Noble Family.


Clorin. Manlius is Brother to Lucius, Friend to Otho: O Amadeo, that I durst
speak my thoughts now, or that my Brother had but kindness enough to hear me
speak, before he chides my Passion.


Ama. What would thou say? speak any thing but in praise of bloody Otho.


Clorin. Bloody Otho?


Ama. Yes, bloody Otho; so bloody that his Love cannot tame his Heart; what
else can he hope from us? Why should Rome, which is the Mistress of all the
world, hunt poor Amadeo, and war against him, to make his people more
miserable then Nature has designed them; Here we live contented with our own,
though the place be so poor that curious Travelers are scarce tempted to pass
through it, to enjoy the fruitful vales of Lombardy; What can ye hope by
making us your slaves? Rich Mines we have none, Odours, Spices, and the
Silkworm are strangers here. These streams no shells with Orient Pearl afford,
our sands breed no strife-full Gold; These Rocks have veins, but far from the
blew Saphyr; The Ruby, Emrauld, nor the Diamond, grow not here. Innocence and
Peace of Mind is all the wealth we boast of: And our Freedom the only Jewel we
defend, which we will keep to the last Man; and the Romans shall always find
us strong enough to kill our selves, though we cannot destroy our Enemies.


Clorin. If my Love or Faith has any Credit with my Brother, let him take my
Council; Let a Virgins divining Soul prevail once, though my words seem now
most unreasonable to common sense. Now when he has power to kill, now when
Conquest is in his hand, when flight, dishonor, and certain death hangs over
his Enemy, it is, like Amadeo, now to sound a retreat; Now offer Peace, offer
all but our Honors and Freedom for it; This my Soul prompts me to say. Amadeo
after a little thought.


Ama. Call Lysander back, sound a Retreat, let Clorinda's Fate guide Amadeo, my
gentle Sister has refused no Fortune to follow me; and Heaven forbid I should
refuse to venture upon thy hand this last stake; only swear upon this sword,
by thy Fathers Soul, and by the chaste ashes of thy honored Mother, never to
be led in Triumph; swear this, and let what Fate displeased Heaven has decreed
She swears and he embraces her, she kisses the sword. come, I scorn to fear it.


Clorin. I swear, and Heaven curse me if I break my vow. Sir, by the Power my
Brother has given me I release you; give him his sword, and conduct him through
the Army safe; Let all Prisoners be armed and released, and give command, that
no Man strike a blow more, nor hinder any Roman in his Retreat. Sir, you are a
Friend to Otho, and may find Faith when you speak; Pray tell him, a Virgin that
loves as much as he can hate, sent you to him, one that loves him next to her
Honor, equal to her Brother, and far above her self, would fain speak with
him; to try, if it be possible, to save one Root of a Royal Family, and die
without Infamy; that is all we ask, and here we shall expect your Answer.


Enter Lysander. Manl. I accept the benefit, Madam, with a heart as pleased as
if Fortune had given me power to have played your part to day; And if I live,
I Will serve you; or being denied here I promose to return my self your prisoner;
till when, live most excellent among men, and noblest among women.


Amadeo, aside. It Is high Reason that she speaks; for if we overcome them, it is
but exasperating an enemy we cannot conquer; and this little victory can but
prolong our misery; we might if we pursued this advantage have killed some few
enemies; but in sparing of them we have gained many friends; for they are a
generous Nation, and have often been won, but were never conquered.


Clor. To have killed them all would have tired us, though they had sat still;
and when we had done we had but showed our teeth [Aside.] to them, and have
taught them to imitate us, by destroying all that fall into their power; for
why, after such an action, should we expect ought but the fortune of the war?
hitherto we have defended our selves with honor, and enough disputed, as
enemies, to make them value us, if we become their friends.


Lysand. If Fate have designed the Romans masters of the world, we in vain
dispute what the earth has granted; and 'twill be honor enough for us to have
it said we thus long durst be their enemies; and if your Highness can thus
compass a peace with honor, it is my opinion, to embrace this opportunity
'twill give us some reputation with them, to see we have taken this handsome
way to offer a friendship when we not only can defend our selves, but destroy
them.


Amad. Let us stand upon our defense only, till I give the word.


Lysand. Your Highness Order shall be obeyed.


Amad. So shall my ever dear Sister, the virtuous Clorinda.


Clor. And when I am swayed by any interest, to propose ought against my
Brothers honor, let him and heaven scorn me.


Amad. Sir, when I was prisoner to the Romans, I found civility from Manlius;
and though he be Brother to my Rival, he has too much honor to hate an enemy;
Clorinda says you are free, and she commands here; and now I owe the noble
Marius nothing, for young Amadeo was not worth a limb of gallant Manlius, great
in arms; and it is the greatest joy my life has seen, to be able this day to pay
that debt; and when you shall bless your eyes with a sight of the divine
Cicilia, throw at her feet the life and service of the unfortunate Amadeo.


Clor. Lucius is Brother to Manlius; and you cannot be ignorant that love more
then hate, or Empire, has made him thus long an enemy to his Rival; the General
Lucius had odds enough in being Lucius, and needs not the advantage of an Army,
to dispute his fortune; the gentle Cicilia is a perfect Judge of Love and
honor; and would not be seduced to choose the least noble, and where Orante is
only Rival, it is no honor to overcome; therefore, for Lucius his honor make a
peace, and give Amadeo leave to try his fortune.


Man. I shall not only deliver this, but find some other Arguments, which
Clorinda's modesty will not let her name; and thus much I dare say, Lucius his
hate, if he be so poor as to hate a Rival, will not hinder this peace so much
as Prince Otho's love will advance it; and although my sullen nature was never
yet a Lover, yet he that can hate may love; and I that can see others love,
though I cannot love like them, yet I can tell what disease reigns; and I shall
either find the Prince of my mind, or return Manlius a prisoner, bound by the
Reason and Gallantry of Clorinda.


Clor. All kind fates wait on Manlius; here we shall expect our dooms, with
minds prepared for all that peace or war can threaten.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Otho, Lucius and Soldiers. Otho. WHat means the enemy, they make a
stand; and have sounded a retreat; haste Lucius to the Pass, perhaps they see
not their advantage; if we can gain the Valley, we may defend our selves this
night, and join with those Legions which now are upon the march; poor Manlius,
thy fate is sadder then all the rest.


Lucius. Pray, Sir, give me leave to charge again; if it be possible; let me
fetch off my Brother, his faith ought not to be abandoned, shall we see a Roman
General thus; forsaken in the hands of a barbarous Mountainer, and his body,
for ought we know, want his funeral Rites?


Enter diverse of the Roman Soldiers Armed, and that had been Prisoners,
released by Clorinda. Otho. How now, whence comes this rudeness? where are your
Officers, under whose command are you?


Sold. Manlius's, and thus set free by warlike Clorinda, unspoil'd either of
Arms or Ensigns.


[Enter Manlius. Lucius. Is Manlius safe too, what means this? my soul is full
of wonder; see, Sir, my dear Brother is returned. They both run to him and
embrace him.


Otho. The ever noble, always welcome Manlius; but how thus armed and safe,
with freedom inform us, dear Manlius.


Manl. Sir, here I stand, the bounty of Clorinda; not only my self, but all of
us owe to that generous Maid our present safety; be pleased to know, we fell
not into their power by chance; 'twas long designed; nor are they ignorant of
the least advantage, and had pursued it but for the divine Clorinda, who
prevailed with Prince Amadeo, and stopped his fury in the heat of chase, and
conjured him ere he took the advantage of this day, to hear her speak; Now is a
time, says she, for Amadeo to show his virtue; now it is time to treat with
honor; now when you cannot only defend your self, but destroy the Foe; if ever
you hope to make a peace with this great enemy, neither rob nor disarm them; if
they fight for honor, and to command the world, they will not forgive a
dishonor, nor forget a benefit; what we have done this day, and all the wounds
we have given to this place, was for our honor and safety; but what we shall
act further, if you pursue them, will look like a desire of revenge or hatred;
and make the world believe if we could have conquered we would never have
treated; then she turned to me, and having received absolute power from her
Brother; Manlius, says she, is Brother to the noble Lucius, and friend to the
most excellent of men, Princely Otho; and Manlius has virtues which will weigh
down the scale of Amadeo. Thus when she had made me blush with praise of my
self; with our Arms and Honor she commanded we should in safety pass to pay
the debt her Brother owes Prince Otho; and when you see the General offer our
friendship to him, offer these few lives and swords we have left to serve him
and the Roman Eagles; offer all, but our honors, for a peace; and let it be
such a one as we may not blush to receive, nor the Romans despise us for
accepting; and if we cannot gain his friendship upon these terms, here you
shall find us ready to defend, with our ancient virtue, both our Fame and
Country, with minds resolved for what fates soever the Gods appoint us.


Lucius. Did I not tell you 'twas a gallant enemy? what is there to consider?
why should not your heart fly into the arms of this gallant Prince?


Otho. Dear Lucius, draw up the Army, and stand upon your Guard, till we
return; and during the cessation be only ready to defend your selves; Come,
Manlius, we will find this gallant enemy; and if we can with honor grant what
he desires, thou shall find how welcome Manlius and his opinion is to his
friend; send Cleon with a Guard to attend us, during the Treaty.


Lucius. I shall.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Amadeo, Clorinda and Lysander; Clorinda was wounded, and her Arm in a
Scarf. Amad. THe Officer says, Manlius was received with much joy; and upon
the arrival of the Soldiers the General gave immediately Orders for a
Cessation of Arms; and it is Manlius desire that we expect him here, where
Clorinda shall, at last, see this fate of Savoy; how does her Arm, Lysander?


Lysand. Sir, the wound had taken cold before 'twas dressed.


Clon. This wound will heal, as we succeed; if I can cure them of my Country,
these are but slight; but if it must be war still, sadness will add one more
to my heart, that foresees I must part with my dear Brother.


Amad. I hope, Clorinda, we are not now to set up our Rests; they have been
long at stake, we were born Princes, we have lived so, and must resolve to dye
so; we must all dye once, and Princes have no sepulcher more noble then a
Battle, nor Epitaph so honorable as a wound when it is received in his Countries
cause. There is no disease so Princely as to fall by the sword when he must
dye; sickness and old age take away from that Majesty that Reverence men pay
us: who can adore us as Gods on earth, when they see the Gout Cramp us, or a
saucy ague shake a Princes soul out? No, Clorinda, when Fate will call me to my
Doom, let me meet it in a pitched Battle, against a gallant enemy; then we fall
like our selves, and our Funerals are waited on with thousands of loyal
Soldiers; those that live to wither here till old age waste their souls, dye
common deaths; and go to heaven like private men, and pass unregarded like some
melancholy Ghost.


Lysand. Sir, the Roman General appears.


Enter Otho, Manlius, and some of his Guard. Manl. How they gaze on each other?


Lysand. There is greatness and gallantry in his looks. Good Gods, why should
these men be enemies!


Manl. It Is proper for me to break this silence, and to show Clorinda my heart
is not ungrateful for the benefit I received; the General is here ready to
receive your propositions.


Otho. What excellencies, what virtues must fill the minds of these Princes,
when their very looks speak great things? I never saw her steadily before, but
passing and charging; she robs her gallant Brother of my wonder, she lessens
his glory, which should be my admiration (were she away) she is chaste and
stout, courage of both sexes flows there; such a fellow in Arms who durst war
against? her eyes have gained a perfect victory over my heart; my youth and
fortunes first kindness shines in those divine lights.


Amad. Sir, by Manlius we sent a message to great Otho; Clorinda's Prophetic
soul proposed it, our desires were few and short, being the sense of those
minds which never yet were false; we only ask to be used like friends to the
Romans; that we once dared to be enemies ought not to prejudice us, but rather
show us worthy the honor of a peace, which, with honor, is all we ask, and
then command us.


Clor. Why should the Roman General be twice moved to accept us for friends?
Rome has enemies enough besides; she has many Tributaries, and many Slaves;
Nations of poor minds, worth no better fates; such as Rome got no honor
amongst, for they had none to lose, scarce worth a Triumph; methinks they
should for variety desire one friend, my Brother begs the place; you may love
him too, and not be jealous of his greatness; and well he may become their
friend, and other men's envy, whilst Rome takes a pride to make him so. Alas,
Sir, we are no Carthage; no Antiochus, no Philip treats now, that may be
emulous with the Roman Greatness. We only beg to possess, with honor, the
Sepulchers of our Fathers, in this little Province, and to hold, as friends to
Rome, what is even lost in the Map; and for your Friendship, take Our Faith,
and Love; Other tribute Amadeo cannot give you, he receives no other from his
Subjects; It Is all his wealth, that we love him, and he asks no more of us, and
that We will pay to you, Leave us our Honor, that We may be worth your
Friendship, and then our Swords are yours; But if you dishonor us you will
despise us too, and we shall hate you; This is all we have to say.


Manli. Why are you silent, Sir? Is there room for thoughts in your great mind?
Can you be in doubt, whether you should receive those for friends, or no? They
are so few, it is a shame for us to War against them; they are so few, they are
only fit to be Friends; But when you consider their Gallantry, and Numerous
Excellencies their Courage too, how Infinite, 'twill be wisdom to gather this
rich seed into your Bosom; Romes Dominions are large, and lie fallow for want
of such virtues; Plant these brave minds amongst them, and bless the Empire.
There is a Virgin too, worth your highest thoughts; try to conquer her with
Love, and softness; such a Pallas in your lawful Bed would Steel your soul
against the world; and under her virtue, and your fortune, what Soldiers could
miscarry?


Otho. Prithee peace, and learn to love, and then thou will cease to wonder at
my silence; Do thou think the first sight of the objects we love can so
little possess our souls, that there should be room for words; what has Manlius
seen in Otho, till this Minute, that could call him dull or vain; if not, sure
Clorinda's Eyes and Reason must beget both Amazement and wonder, and let not
the Excellent Clorinda, because I am silent, doubt her Power; for know, my
bus^e soul was full of surprising Joys, and unexpressible wonder; and my
narrow heart blushes still to think, how short my love and Fancy fell; when
they thought by Imagination to present the divine form and great mind of the
Excellent Clorinda; to express whose Excellence where shall we find Epithetes,
when a Lovers fancy could not comprehend it? O my Fate! can ye wonder, Madam,
at this dumbness and amazement in me, when I see my barbarous heart upbraided
by that scarf? that wound has shame belonging to it, which will stain my soul
for ever; and I could curse this profane and Sacrilegious hand for violating
that Temple where Honor, Love, and Beauty, with a perfect virtue, were
enshrined in those chaste Veins; till the profane Otho warred against Heaven
and Clorinda; at whose Feet behold the guilty ready to He kneels to her. weep
out his last blood a Sacrifice, to appease the incensed Clorinda.


Clorinda. Do not despise me, Sir; for though Clorinda may lose her hopes, yet
she will keep her Honor; and then, though she be not worth your Friendship,
yet she ought to be above your scorn.


Otho. Frown heaven, if I despise, or dissemble with the best of Women; and
some Curse, new and beyond Example, as his sin, strike Otho at your Feet, if my
soul have not a clear faith and Adoration for Clorinda; nor will I rise from
this place, till she believes and pardons me this crime, which thus, in shame
and Repentance, I have confessed.


Clorinda. No more, Sir; 'Twas the first favor I ever received from Prince
Otho; it is an honor I shall ever be proud of; from this wound I gathered
Courage, and began to hope your Highness had some value for me; Whilst Prince
Otho turned away in Battle, whilst he received my Blows, and would not deign to
strike again; he called me Woman, and despised Clorinda, which made me both
with Love and danger hunt him till I had gained this Wound; then I began to
hope, since he thought me worthy of his Sword, when we were Enemies, if we live
to see a Peace, I might be worthy of his Friendship too; and if this Wound can
make Prince Otho kind, I am happy to have bled for the health and safety of my
Country; and if your Highness have kindness enough to wish it whole, Embrace
my Brother; Then you shall see, with what Pride I will kiss and wear this Scar.


(Otho runs to Amadeo.) Otho. I embrace him, as I would my peace of mind, or
Clorinda's Friendship, and at her Feet throw my self and power; Here, Sir, ends
all Acts of War betwixt us; And if We dispute again, it shall be to overcome in
kindness; Sir, I am here my Fathers Lieutenant; Till he and Rome Sign and
Confirm my Acts, They are only kind intentions, which have a readiness to show
how much my heart is vowed Clorinda's; Though I believe the Senate will not
dispute my Act; However, Sir, your are safe from this War; Manlius, let all the
Garrisons be drawn off, while this Prince and People be received as Friends to
the Senate; and see there be no injury shown to the meanest person; but let all
be treated like part of those whom thy friend Loves and Honors; at Millain we
shall expect you, whither if your Highness please, we will repair, to stay my
Fathers march; whose kindness is, now, upon the way, to prevent that Danger our
Alarm gave him last Night.


Amadeo. I shall wait upon you, Sir, and not despair, by your intercession, to
obtain the Pretors pardon for my uncivil departure last.


Otho. Marius is too much a Roman to be displeased with a generous Act, though
his Enemy perform it to his prejudice; Your Highness needs not fear your
well-come where Marius commands.


Clorin. May your wishes find the Gods as propitious to you as you have been to
us, while we love and Sacrifice to Otho, the Noblest of the Romans.


Otho. Otho is, in all things, Clorinda's Servant, and Prince Amadeo's Friend;
Manlius, you are sad.


Clorin. Not displeased with our happiness, I hope.


Manl. Heaven forbid; No, Gentle Clorinda, though I have been bred in Arms,
unacquainted with the Peace and softness of the Court, nor ever tasted this
Love you so greedily drink down, having never known nor sought other Honor
then the Sword gave; yet I find, it is not impossible for Manlius to learn to
love, if he had such a Lesson as Clorinda before him to imitate.


Amad. War, Sir, has been your Mistress, and your Business still; and it is a
Trade that Princes learn with Honor; Swords are the Instruments, and with His
the Noble Manlius has Writ high things; There is no Beauty like an Army, in a
Soldiers Eyes; Victory is his Mistress; And passionately gallant Manlius has,
all his life, pursued her.


Clorin. Manlius has not yet seen any thing he thought beautiful, perhaps; but
love will have a share in his heart: Honor and Courage are but Forerunners of
that god, to prepare the Heart, when it shall bid Beauty and Virtue Well-come,
which makes me prophecy, I shall live to see Manlius, for all his roughness, a
passionate and a handsome lover.


Manli. She is a Witch, by this light; It Is the Devil, or love, vexes me
already.


Otho. If your Highness please We will retire, and give Manlius Opportunity to
see the Army march.


Clorinda. We are here to receive and obey your Highness Orders.


[Exeunt. Manet Manlius solus. Manli. The Noblest of Romans! I am not envious,
nor proud, yet the Noblest, methinks, is a Title should be bought at a higher
rate then Otho has paid for it. Ambition is a Soldiers Beauty, Honor his
Mistress; and I will not give place to any man when that is in dispute; What, a
Pox, makes me thus Quarrelsome; Thus on the sudden concerned in her Opinion;
There is something seems new and strange to my mind; it is troublesome, and yet
it is pleasing, it is a vexation I never felt before; Her words raise a storm,
and her Eyes allay it again; I never was concerned in a Woman's thoughts before;
Methinks I could now be strangely pleased to act something, that might please
her; If this should be love What would become of me? A peace and Love both
together, You must get a dark house for Manlius; They will make me fit for
Hellebore; I will find Calis, and tell her my pain, she has talked of Love, and
loving me; I will find by her, whether I am bewitched or no; My heart will not
be idle, I perceive; We no sooner are proposing of peace, but he is busying
himself with Love. All brave men I loved before; But never saw a Woman that
could possess my thoughts; But this has so much of the Soldier in her, I begin
to fear; I would I could see her spin; This storm has so disordered my mind,
all things lie on heaps in my heart; Love and Hate, Reason and Honor, lie
shuffled together; 'twill cost an Age, in thoughts, to Collect them, and place
them as they were before this fatal day, so full of care. O! That I could see
what fruit this bitter root can bear.


ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Lucius, in a Disguise, with Calis. Lucius. O Calis, all my fears are
ripe, and the doubts my soul labored with are now delivered to the world, thou
know my heart has tried Love, in all his Passions, but never felt a Torment
like a jealous mind.


Calis. Whence this disorder? Why this fear? Is the Army Defeated?


Lucius. No, no, Victory and Peace attends it; And with that Peace, All my
miseries flow in'; In short, Otho loves Clorinda's beauty, and Amadeos
Gallantry; all these several virtues make but a poison for Lucius.


Calis. Be plain; Or else Expect no help in my Counsel.


Lucius. Know then, 'twas all our opinions, That Otho should make a Peace with
Amadeo; which being done he now avowes his Love to Clorinda, whose heart has
always admired Prince Otho, and hither they are coming with speedy Marches, to
renew the Ancient kindness betwixt Cicilia and Amadeo; which sprung first, when
he was a Prisoner, more to Cicilia's Eyes then Marius his Guards; you know the
story: O Calis! had the Princess less virtue, or Beauty; Were fame silent in
her praise, or had the noble Amadeo been only born great, like wretched
Orante; had not heaven given him Honor equal to his Birth, I could then have
slept with a secure mind, seeing him love while she had despised; But his
virtues, Calis, make me fear a second spring will grow, whose Harvest cannot
but be fatal to Lucius. I conjure thee therefore, let my passion prevail above
thy Reason, that I may receive the Honor of speaking with the Princess, this
Evening, that my troubled soul may find some peace from her, to calm my Jealous
heart, whose doubts, and fears of my own worth, make me still Jealous I may
lose the Jewel of my Heart; Dear Calis knows, I never pretended to purchase
Cicilia; No such guilty vanity has stayn'd my Love; but, like an humble Beggar,
still offered all my Heart for Love; And if her gentle mind can forgive this
fear, which I can never lose, till she be mine, though a smile from her may
allay She discovers her self first.

Enter Cicilia

the Tempest that now distracts my mind. -- Ha! The princess. Madam, if you
have heard me, Behold, at your feet, the blushing and the guilty Lucius.


Cicil. Rise, Sir, Lucius is welcome as mine own wishes; Lucius, to me, in his
faults, even in this fear is well-come; and though I will not chide him,
because his Fear is Love, yet I will counsel his Jealousy, which, to this
hour, I confess, is not only pardonable, but ought to be rewarded; Which thus
I do. Know Lucius, Though Amadeo has Excellencies enough if 'twere possible to
justify a broken Faith; Yet it must not be where my friend is his Rival, Who
has all that is required to make a happy Friendship, if not stained with
Jealousy. Be therefore confident that I have Honor; And here must cease all
the unhandsome fears that tell your heart ought, but Lucius shall enjoy my
Love; And now I have said this, if Lucius shall again stain me with his
Jealousy, I fear my heart will not bear such an Injury; For none but a faulty
heart can doubt the Honor of his Mistress, when she has given her faith.


Lucius. Alas, Madam, would you have me hate Jealousy, whilst you Excuse it,
and reward it thus? 'twere Ingratitude; I ought rather to Sacrifice to that
weakness, since it has been so fortunate as to make me happier then all the
endeavors of my life besides.


Cicilia. Justice, Sir, shall ever prevail, and that makes me confess your
jealousy to this hour was Innocent; for it tells me, Lucius was afraid to lose
me; But if, after this declaration, he shall doubt again, that doubt calls me
false, and tells all the world I am not worth his Friendship; Therefore, if you
love me, here you must begin to hate jealousy or I shall find as severe a
Revenge to punish that Injury, as I did a kindness, to reward this Alarm which
Love gave to Lucius his heart.


Calis. Pray, Madam, spin this Thread no finer, lest it break.


Cicilia. I have done, the Praetor expects you, whither now I am going, and long
to hear the truth of this Business, which has so much surpised the Court.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Marius, Otho, Orante, and Dyon. Marius. WHen we have paid our sacrifices
to the Gods for this deliverance, not only from a danger but from a war too,
'twill then become Otho to provide for the entertainment of these Princes, like
Friends and Allies to the people of Rome; whose Honor is no less at stake now
when they are Friends, then when they declared themselves Enemies.


Otho. I shall most gladly, Sir, receive this Commission; and I am so partial
to mine own Heart, that I am apt to believe Rome never got more Honor from the
Triumph over any Prince, then she will in the Friendship of those whose Virtues
and Persons call the gallant part of Mankind to protect them.


Marius. Amadeo has more years in his face, else the same Man he was when he
fled unkindly from us; I confess, I never saw any stranger I had so much kind
value for before. There is something too so Enter Cicilia and Calis new in the
Princess Clorinda, which I cannot but admire and pity; and I would not, for my
old Honors, this war had ended in the sword; 'twould have upbraided the Roman
clemency; Cicilia, I observed, you were disordered at the sight of them; you
see Beauty nor Virtue are not confined to the Roman Empire.


Cicilia. Far from me be the vanity or guilt, to wish the Gods should confine
their Blessings; it is well if the Romans can preserve their own Honors, and
nobler far then to seek the ruin or destruction of it in others; I confess, I
never saw nor read of any persons more to be admired then these two Princes:
And Rome joins with me in their praise, since in all her pride of Empire she
has thought these worthy both of War and Peace; and now, after seven years
dispute she embraces them.


Marius. Did your Highness never see them before? has there never been any
League betwixt your selves or Nations?


Orante. Not any, Sir.


Marius. Always Enemies! What esteem had you of them?


Orante. Nor Friends nor Enemies; unthought of, they lived by us. Good
Heards-men, sullen, stout, hardy fellows, such as this his race have always
been; who because they know no better, seem to despise the valleys wealth,
bravery and luxury they are unacquainted with; For what should they be drunk
with? Milk? How exercise their gluttony? upon black bread and scorched flesh?
For Clothes, you see, they have as little variety as invention; a Sun-tan'd
skin, with the Fur inwards turned, with the season, is the Wardrobe of their
great Shepherd.


Marius. I find Orante has no great kindness for the Prince nor People; yet he
cannot deny the Princess Clorinda is a strange example of Virtue and Courage;
she fears no wounds not dangers.


Orante. She will play at football, thresh, and hew woods, as well as her
Brother; Alas, Sir, it is not there as in Rome, and the Eastern World, where
the Women are soft, bred nice, and full of tender thoughts; Here is no
difference betwixt the Sexes, but that they esteem them less then Men: Their
Cowes plow too, and their Mares bear burdens, and their Women fight. No beast
of that Country has any privilege; and I wonder at nothing so much as the
Roman Curiosity, that has made War thus long against this waspes nest in a
Rock. By all our Gods, we never thought their Country worth asking for, we
only banished Malefactors thither; and they have chosen rather to return and
die here, then live and wither out their days in that nest of Winter. Cold,
Poverty, and Ignorance, are the only commodities, I know, their Country
affords.


Otho. Yes, they have something else; they have a breed of stout and handsome
Princes; Their Nation too have Loyalty, and Amadeo looks like a Prince among
his People, his Mind too is Princely; and though he live in a Cottage himself,
yet his Soul resides in a Palace; which is nobler far then to see Fortune
blindly give a Crown to a wretched Prince, who fills a Palace himself, while
his Soul lies in straw.


Orante. You are Otho that say this, else you should know Orante understands it.


Otho. And it is to Orante I say it; who, I am certain, has guilt enough to know
I mean him; whose Envy cannot suffer the Virtues of a gallant Prince, and
faithful People, should be praised; Because he knows it is upbraiding of him,
who has neither Merit to win, nor Power to keep a Crown. Where were the Battles
fought that wonn those fruitful Valleys? What have we to triumph over in
Orante?


Marius. No more, I say; the Prince is in our protection.


Orante. Let him talk on, Sir; he has Reason on his side; For Orante is both in
Person and Fortune fit for Otho's scorn: But if Cicilia's eyes had not more
Magic in them then his sword, I should ere this have found a way to be
revenged.


[Exit Orante. Cicilia. Otho raises storms, and I must allay them; All this
will fall upon my head; and, in serious earnest it is not well done to upbraid
him with his Person or Fortune; you will rub that tender part till he grow
desperate; A thousand times I have heard him say, it is yet in his power to kill
a Prince, though he cannot restore one; which dark saying he will never explain
with other answer, then, Am not I a Prince, may I not kill my self?


Otho. Let him be just to others, I will be just to him; Why should his ill
Nature find excuse, and my truth be troublesome? Why should he lessen my Honor
in this War, by despising my Enemy, undervaluing, and detracting from the
nobleness of those Minds with whom we have made a Friendship?


Cicilia. I confess you have reason to be angry, if the subject were worthy of
it; but being branded with the marks of a Malicious Nature and an ill Tongue,
you ought to despise his words; for how can you be handsomely angry with one
you have overcome already? To whom you may give Honor, but can hope none; And
I know Otho scorns such an easy secure War.


Otho. Yet I am then like my Sister, who, whilst she condemns it, fights that
battle, and has again overcome a Brother, whose Heart and Reason has by a
thousand victories confessed her Power, and still shall remain the loving,
though the conquered Otho.


Marius. When you see Lucius, let him know I would speak with him, and let us
have no more of this dispute; You know, he is a thing we cannot fear, let him
pass by; and since he has not Honor enough to kill himself, let him live.


Cicilia. How now, Calis! sad!


Calis. So will Cicilia be, when she knows what I see.


Cicilia. Prithee what can there be of new that should make me sad?


Calis. Did you observe Lucius, when Amadeo spoke to you?


Cicilia. Not particularly.


Calis. I have so much Friendship for Lucius, as to fear there may be some
trouble in his Mind; some fears worth the remedy of his friends to cure betimes.


Cicilia. His fears? it is not possible, sure, that Lucius should have fears
now; if he has, they will be more dangerous then any thing he apprehends; for
if he fears me after this mornings satisfaction, he has lost my Heart; for I
shall despise him that call me false. Love has but one path, but one safe way;
he that would walk in two may lose himself; and I have told Lucius he is that
way; and nothing but his Jealousy and Injustice can make Cicilia stray.


Enter to them Orante. Calis. See, Madam, a visit not to be avoided; would
Amadeo were no more to be suspected for Lucius sake.


Cicilia. While Orante is civil, I must bear his visit; and his Love is less
injurious then Lucius his fears will be.


Orante. If my return be troublesome, as my fears still tell me, unfortunate
Orante is even in his Love to Cicilia, who has no guilt but what she and Love
are to answer for; Behold I am come once again to offer, with humble thoughts,
all the service of my life at Cicilia's feet; Dot no despise me because your
Brother throws his Injuries upon me; it is your Highness protects him from
Orante, who fears nor loves any thing but Cicilia; for whose dear sake I have
still born the burden of my Miseries.


Cicilia. Sir, I am not now to tell you why your Propositions come too late;
Orante is not ignorant of that Obligation Lucius has upon me; and to pursue me
after that knowledge is such an Injury, as if Orante does not repent and desist
from, I shall be bound in Honor to punish.


Orante. To punish you have reason, Madam; your Brother teaches all the world
how to treat tame Orante.


Calis. Your Highness is only sensible of those Injuries which are done to
you, and never consider how you force Men into Passion; would you have heard a
third person despise the Princes? I am confident you would not; why then should
your Highness in a full Court speak disdainfully and slightly of Clorinda,
knowing what Passion the Prince and she have for each other?


Orante. I despise her not, nor ever consider her or her Brother so much as to
beget my Envy; I cannot admire them for lying in snow, and eating of black
bread; they live and eat as they were bred; better food would set their teeth
on edge.


Cicilia. Yet it is great Virtue to bear those difficulties, and suffer them
rather then lose their Honor; and will be admired by all generous Minds that
shall read their story.


Orante. Not at all; no more then we admire our Horses for eating grass, it is
their Nature; nor is there more wonder nor pity due to what Clorinda acts or
suffers, then to a Tree for standing in the rain; and I would call one as soon
into my house as the other; they are all bred to it, it is their Countries Nature
and Custom; their Fathers did it before them, and their Children must do it
after them; it is Nature not Virtue you admire.


Cicilia. If this be not Virtue, what will plead for an Admiration in your
sense? What do you believe worth Honor and Admiration?


Orante. Their contrary; to have been born great, heir to the pride of Nature,
Prince of a Country the envious world, nay Rome her self, has looked upon with
covetous eyes to have possessed; That without trouble, fear, or danger, to have
had all the blessings that the Gods could send a Man; To give these, nay be
robbed of these, and not feel the theft, but willingly suffer to be thus
deposed from all his joys for Cicilia's sake. This if it be not worth her
admiration, it deserves her pity at least, since she is the cause of all this
misery; For her Beauty is the chain that binds me from taking Revenge for this
theft, for whose dear sake I have digested all these scorns and injuries; Nay,
I have brooked a Rival, a happy Rival too, because she loves him; but be not
too obstinate in this cruelty, urge not a heart too far that is full of love
and duty; your scorn may bow him till he breaks all bounds of Love and Honor,
as you have done of Charity; My form, I know, is despicable; but Love is beauty
still; Love can make me lovely, and scorn, gentle Maid, is as deformed as I am;
and such a poison it will even infect Cicilia's heart, and make her ugly, even
in Orante's eyes; Scorn will do more then Reason, Love, or Honor; 'twill beget
anger, in whose dark shades, in whose storms Love and Beauty will be blasted;
and then what succeeds, hate, dangerous hate, whose effect will be as full of
misery to Cicilia, as Love has been to me; who cannot hope will be angry, and
revenge still waits a despairing Lover; and who ever he be that is despised,
till he despise himself for loving so unfortunately, may when he will be
revenged, though not pleased; your Father conquered my Country, betrayed by
those I trusted; all, but Orante, Treason gave you; but I was reserved to give
a victory to Cicilia's eyes; but if she still delight to frown, know, I can and
will be free; but I have yet so much love, as to fear, for your Highness, what
issue your scorn and my revenge may have. When I have the honor to see you
next, and your Highness has considered what I have said, I shall hope my love
may beget an answer to bind me ever to your feet; your pardon, Madam, I will
retire.


[Exit Orante. Call. What do you study, Madam? is there any thing in this to be
considered? haste to the Praetor, let him and your Brother be acquainted with
the dangers that he threatens; he is no more to be trusted loose, my heart
prophesies he will act some desperate villainy, if you permit him to walk and
converse among us.


Cicil. I have my fears too, but not for my self; Lucius and Otho are the
objects of his hate and envy, which makes me apprehend, for them; else for what
concerns me I despise him.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Amadeo, Otho and Clorinda. Otho. WE will dispute this no more, Sir; pray
give me leave that my faith and love to the fair Clorinda take all ways it can
to express it self; I held it a duty in friendship, when I knew your noble
heart had still retained his love to my Sister, not to expect your
solicitation to express my readiness to serve you; and since we have gained my
Fathers consent, doubt not the rest; for I know she is too much a Daughter, and
Sister, to refuse to meet our desires in Prince Amadeo's love.


Clor. 'T was the opinion of many when my Brother was prisoner here, the
Princess was not displeased with his addresses; but absence and such a diligent
Rival as noble Lucius makes us fear a greater opposition then your kindness
will apprehend.


Otho. That Lucius loves I doubt not, for Cicilia has beauty and virtue enough
to win an esteem from the severest minds; but certainly I am so much a friend
to both, they will take no resolution without my consent.


Amad. Alas, Sir, how blind is kindness; and how unlike to a Lovers passion is
that which Nature owes, and pays betwixt Brother and Sister; had your Highness
my heart and my eyes, how visible would those Lovers appear? how many kind
jealous doubts would their looks, this day, have raised in your heart? know,
Sir, I am certain he pursued this late war more as my Rival, then your General;
and how much against his heart this peace was made, time will show; but when I
consider his fears told him the Princes Cicilia was at stake, I love and
forgive him for that hate; for she is cause enough to put the world in Arms,
and worth the trial of their fortune, till she declare whose she is; and then
it is equal sin and treason to oppose her desires, as it is now virtue and true
honor to aspire her friendship.


Clor. And if Amadeo be the man designed for this blessing, The gods have
largely paid all our sufferings, in the friendship of two such Princes.


Amad. I confess, my fears make me wish the Princess had first been moved on my
behalf; then the Pretors consent had completed all my wishes; the honor I
have had heretofore to practice her excellent mind makes me fear she should
believe me faulty in this Proposition; for though it be kindness in your
Highness, as a Brother, to move it to her Father; yet I that am a Lover know
the first sacrifice of Duty and Prayer are to be paid to the Mistrisse; else
she may believe I desire her friendship, but am loath to take the pains to win
her.


Otho. Come, Sir, no more fears; shall we in peace know that pain we felt not
in war? or doubt a conquest over a Sister when honor pleads against her, will
she deny to follow this president; and by the example of Clorinda that has
blessed me with her friendship, refuse to make Amadeo happy? she cannot sure,
unless she resove to make me blush to death when I shall find how much I have
loved, and how little reason I had to value her kindness.


Clor. If your Highness then will discover to her how far you are advanced (as
unknown to us) 'twill be a way to inform your self, and prepare her for the
love and service my Brother is ready to present.


Otho. This morning I have designed to speak with her, that she may not have
any ground for her displeasure; I will only acquaint her with it, as my desire,
which before I would proceed in it, I took my Fathers opinion; according to her
answer, we will resolve; till when, your Highuess pardon.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Cicilia, and Calis. Call. YOur Highness is sad. -- Pray heaven Lucius's
fears be vain. --


[Aside. Cicil. I confess, my mind never had more business then at this hour;
then now my heart had never more use, nor ever was less capable, of counsel;
diverse interests plead within me, but honor shall still be my guide, and
Lucius may (if he be wise) still keep his power over this heart; yet his second
fear has made me so angry, that I begin my self to fear Amadeo.


Call. And what does that fear prompt you to?


Cicil. To believe that Lucius and my self had kind stars that removed him
hence, lest such a gallant Rival might have disturbed our peace; for it is not
easy, without partiality, to decide such a dispute as their love must have
bred in a mind of honor.


Call. I do not wonder at Lucius his fears, since I find you doubt your own
strength.


Cicil. I do not say this from any guilty thoughts of mine, which should give
Lucius reason to be jealous; but as I apprehend the world may condemn me of my
injustice to Amadeo; for certainly, without partiality to himself, Lucius could
not pretend to that injustice which my kindness gave him; for my love to Lucius
cannot blind me so but that I shall always confess I ow Amadeo what I can never
pay; and though he nor the world shall ever know how much this debt troubles
me; yet he shall have all the satisfaction I can in honor give him.


Call. I confess, Madam, the character that Manlius gives this Prince is enough
to inflame the world.


Cicil. Manlius has his clouds too; and methinks, Calis should have remembered
his praise of Clorinda; had I been she, 'twould have concerned me more, Manlius
is one I never saw before; and though my mind were too busy, then, to make an
exact observation of him; yet, methought, there appeared none of that gayness
in his humor, none of that voluble tongue men speak of; By this sight of him,
Manlius is changed, or else the character I have heard of him was made by a
very ill observation.


Call. I shall hide my fears no longer from your Highness, but confess his
coldness since he returned; and that strict friendship he has made with Prince
Amadeo makes me believe he has some design on the fair Clorinda, which vain
hope; when I consider, her mind and his Rival, I cannot fear he should be
master of his wishes; yet the attempt will be enough to let me see I am past
hopes of mine; for I know him of a nature most violent in his passion, either
of love or hate, bred always a Soldier, and taught by success to know no
opposition but what a Soldier ought to remove; yet when your Highness sees him
you may, by some Questions, as by chance, inform your self of what I dare not
mention.


Cicil. He is Brother to Lucius, and friend to Calis, which are obligations
enough to make me concerned in his fortune, and to justify such a curiosity;
and if I can deserve from him, Calis shall find a diligent friend; and he shall
be very crafty if he hide his passion from me; and if I perceive any name but
Calis in his heart, I will so chide him, so shame him to himself, he shall not
dare to pursue so injurious an act.


Calis. But how will he brook this freedom, Madam, being so newly acquainted; I
would not for the world he should believe I set you on; for we have still made
it our business to hide our friendship, so much, that it is yet a secret to
Lucius.


Cicil. That shows Manlius has not so open a nature as his Brother; for I am
confident Lucius has not a secret but Manlius knows it.


[Enter Stella. Stella. Madam, the General and the Lord Cleon are within to
wait on your Highness.


Cicil. We will follow you; come Calis, a little patience will reconcile all;
and remember these thorns will grow where there are Roses; it is as natural as
his beauty, or his sweetness; and kind nature that gave us the Elixar of the
Be, gave him a sting to defend his Hive against Drones, but not to wound thee
or me.


Call. Nay, Madam, I am so perfect a Lover; I find little things make me fear,
and less reason hope; yet it is as pleasant as strange, to observe in Loves war
how many fear, and how few despair.


ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Orante, and his Banditoe. Bandit. It Is most certain, Sir, I heard your
Bando proclaimed; the people said 'twas published upon a complaint the Princess
made of a violence that you threatened; three days you are limited to present
your self.


Orante. Then there is three days to be revenged in.


Band. I was told too, from a good hand, that Prince Otho had gained the
Pretors consent for Amadeo to marry the Princess Cicilia, so to tie by a cross
match an alliance betwixt the two Families.


Orante. And all this stir only to complete a curse for Orante; yet I have
three days, and this Dagger left; and if this hand hold his humor, and this
Dagger keep his point, I may spoil the Plot; my Lord, we must keep our friends
and our selves still in readiness, and in this disguise walk amongst them, for
a day or two; but this cursed person of mine that will lie hid in no disguise:
how in the Devils name shall we contrive to obscure it? this hill upon my back
calls all eyes to my vexation and my scorn.


Band. Like an old woman, stooping upon your staff, you may creep amongst them;
and in that disguise frequent the temples, where you are sure to find an
opportunity; and in these woods here you may abide amongst the old Hermits, and
mingle with those beggars that haunt Juno's Temple, while I prepare our design
in the City; and when it is time then be resolute; and let us strike home,
better dye at one blow then wither thus.


Orante. How comes it they defer thus long the hunting of the Boar? Otho and
Amadeo were wont to delight in that chase; methinks Otho should long to see
his Virago, that cloven knight, come pricking over the Plains, clad in mighty
Petti-coats, Clorinda hight; that hateful issue of a fruitful enemy, how comes
she to change her savage mind for love?


Band. Love has made her change her tragic Buskin, and now she delights in the
soft steps of Comic love.


Orante. Sure all the world changes its nature only to vex me.


Band. Well, Sir, we must now leave to wonder or talk; and resolve speedily to
take our revenge upon them; your disguise shall this morning be with you; and
if I can learn any news you shall immediately have it.


[Exit Banditoe. Orante. To what a straight am I forced by Love and Fortune!
how have I armed all the world against me! but Nature, unkind Nature was my
original enemy, who has not only set the world, but my self against my self;
mine own eyes despise this object, what wonder then if Cicilia hates it; yet I
love Cicilia, and her mercy is as due to my love as her scorn is to my person;
but it is not my deformity makes me despair, but Cicilia's love of another; that
is it makes my blots so visible, and my despair so high, that of all the
passions man's heart is capable to feel, revenge is only in my power; and that,
if fate deny not, Orante will command.


[Exit Orante. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Otho and Cicilia. Otho. YOur anger, Sister, is more unreasonable then
your desires; and the worst way you can take to satisfy a friend.


Cicil. When my heart tells me I have injured you, like a Sister that honors
and loves her Brother I shall humbly beg your pardon; but you must give me
leave to say, I am injured now, which I will not dispute with Otho; whose heart
is so busy about his own love, he has no leisure to consider his Sister; else
I am confident he would have spoken to me before he had engaged himself, or my
Father; and it is not the least of my troubles to find a Brother that I have
loved, so slightly to part with me to please another, without a thought of
Cicilia, or her future happiness; I must therefore tell you, Sir, I am engaged
to Lucius, who has honor and love for me; and humbly he has vowed it, and I
have kindness enough to see it. This I know is no secret to Otho.


Otho. Engaged! how can you engage, or how dares Lucius receive it? have not
you a Father and a Brother? have they no share in Cicilia? sure you will make
but an unhandsome present, if you give their part without the consent of such
friends.


Cicil. At least my own part is free for me to give, and that is Lucius his,
the rest you may give to Amadeo; and if Lucius keep his value, all the interest
I have in Cicilia is his, and nothing but Lucius shall make me forsake him.


Otho. You are now in passion, yet that shall not make me lose my kindness, nor
my respect; nor can you wonder to find me surpised with this answer, since
it is the first time I heard Lucius his pretense had gained your heart; and what
I did in moving for Prince Amadeo, was in kindness; believing his love would be
welcome to you, without making you blush at the saying so; nor was this my
single opinion. But I have done; and since Lucius has forgot the respect he
owes to me and my Father, I shall find other ways to resent his injuries; he is
no Brother, yet, though Cicilia be a Sister.


Cicil. Nor Otho a Brother longer then he is just to Lucius; it is not threats
nor anger can prevail with me; I have too much of Otho's nature in me to be
beaten into any man's opinion; if your kindness and Reason cannot overcome me,
your anger shall not.


Otho. Something I shall do.


[Exit Otho. Cicilia. This rash act of Otho has forced me to discover our
Resolutions, which I meant should have lain hid till Lucius could have made his
way to my Fathers consent, who has long since been acquainted with our
frindship; and knows how much I have been concerned in the honor and fortune
of Lucius; I cannot therefore but wonder he should give his consent to Amadeo,
without speaking with me; it is not of yesterday that we have been friends, and
he has known it; nay, I know he has not been displeased with Lucius his
pretense; I will be better satisfied, for I believe 'twill prove only the
importunity of Otho; but I must mind the present business; passionate men when
they do injuries they are loath to see them; and Otho is as much displeased as
Lucius ought to be, and his threats are fit for my fears; for I know Lucius
will no more endure a threat then Otho will fear to give it; something I must
do in time to prevent what the pursuit of such a passion may breed betwixt 'em:
They are too much Lovers, for Reason or Friendship to secure them; Clorinda is
at stake in Otho's anger, concerned in her Brothers love, equal with her own;
and I am at stake with Lucius, who I am vain enough to believe will not, for
fear of any man's anger, quit his pretention. These thoughts distract me. -- See
Calis, she is come as if sent from heaven; she shall know all, Enter Calis. and
acquaint my Father with it, as her own observation; so to secure them from
deciding by the sword what Otho pretends to; and she shall intimate to my
Father how unkindly I took Otho's motion; and how to the heart it struck me;
that after all the love and duty I had shown him, a Father could part so
slightly with me; and consent to rob Lucius of the reward of all his faithful
service, and give his friend to a stranger, unasked. --


[Enter Calis. Calis. Madam.


Cicilia. O Calis, there is an accident happened this morning, which will require
both thy kindness, friendship, and discretion, to manage our part of it; within
my friend shall know all.


Enter Lucius. Lucius, I met the Prince, and he would not speak with me: --
There is the Princess too, I will speak my griefs to her before my fears take
root, and try if her friendship has kindness enough to weed them out. Hah! gone
without speaking to me!


[Exeunt Cicilia and Calis. Stella. See, Madam, there he is,


[Enter Stella, Cicilia, and Calis. Cicilia. It Is enough, away Calis; make
haste, I will entertain him here while you return.


Calis. Leave the rest to me.


[Exit Calis. Cicilia. Otho's Injuries have made me forget those of Lucius; and
my kindness has now spent that stock of anger I had for him, that should have
armed my Justice against him.


Lucius. She is troubled too; I fear, Madam, my visits are unseasonable.


Cicilia. If there were nothing more unseasonable in Lucius his Heart then this
visit, he would not think so.


Lucius. Love, Madam, is a fruit always in season in a Lovers Heart; and other
fruit then Love Lucius his Heart never bare for the fair Cicilia.


Cicilia. Why then, after all my kindness, does he fear his Harvest?


Lucius. That storms, Thieves, or the wild Boar may destroy it.


Cicilia. But he is a Madman that will for fear of these possible ills afflict
himself as if they were come; or cut his Corn green to prevent the Lightning
that might blast it when it is ripe; And a jealous man is this Madman, and
Jealousy will be that storm, that Boar, that Thief you speak of; And if Lucius
will not leave conversing with that Enemy to Honor, which will break all bands
and Laws of Friendship, he will find too late the danger of such an Injury as
pursues with doubts and fears a Heart that loves him.


Lucius. This Remedy, Madam, will not cure the wounds that afflict my Mind,
they are too near of kin to my fears. Your anger was the greatest danger I
apprehended; and since that is fallen upon me for loving, what would not my
Heart doubt hereafter? Why should Cicilia be angry with Lucius for loving, if
it did not hinder her from receiving the Love of another?


Cicilia. Yet I have kindness enough, notwithstanding this Answer, to tell
Lucius when ever I shall dare to be false, I shall not fear his displeasure;
and a few hours will show him, though Jealousy be at all times as unreasonable
as the fears of Cowards, (which makes them ridiculous when there is no danger,
and disarmes them when there is;) Yet, at this time it is most injurious; and if
Lucius be a Lover, he has no way but that to destroy his Enter Calis and
whispers to Cicilia, hopes. --


(Speaks softly.) Calis. It Is done, the Praetor was much troubled at the
accident, he has sent to command them both to their Chambers. The Prince was
seized while I was there; and Dyon is now coming with a Guard for Lucius.


Enter Dyon and a Guard. Lucius. Hah! Dyon and a Guard, what will this be?


Dyon. This Ring, Madam, will make my excuse; By virtue of which, and the
Pretors command, I beg your Highness leave to deliver his pleasure to the
General.


Cicilia. There is nothing, Sir, but Duty in this place.


Dyon. My Lord, it is the Pretors pleasure you retire to your Chamber; where I
shall wait upon you till I receive further Orders.


Lucius. To my Chamber!


Cicilia. If I have any power, I shall beg of Lucius to submit to this command.


Lucius. It Is enough, Madam; when your Highness says die, though I do notlove
enough to please, yet I shall obey you, though it be to become a sacrifice to
my Rival; Sir, you may execute your command, I am ready to obey.


Dyon. The Praetor commanded me, in his name, to prohibit your Lordship from
sending a Challenge to, or receiving any from, the Prince or any Man.


Lucius. What Riddle's this?


Cicilia. In the evening, at your Chamber, I will inform you of all: till when,
let no troubles afflict you.


Lucius. Madam, I can obey; and that is the true obedience, when we do it only
to show what power they have who command; without requiring any reason for them.


[Exeunt Lucius and Dyon. Calis. Why did you not tell him the cause of the
imprisonment?


Cicilia. Because I am loath to declare so absolutely against a Brother, as to
join with his Enemy against him; Therefore, dear Calis, go from me to Lucius,
whom thou will find fuller of distraction then ever; tell him all that is past
betwixt my Father, Otho, and my self, concerning Amadeo, and his desires; Tell
him of the consent they have gained; but withal assure him, it is in the power
of nothing but Lucius to alter my Resolution; Tell him, I have confessed our
Loves to Otho, which bred his Anger, whose threats begot this Imprisonment; But
then conjure him to remember, Otho is my Brother, and not to think of a Revenge
upon him, if he loves Cicilia.


Calis. I shall not fail to observe your directions.


[Exit Calis. Cicilia. Love is so short-lived, and subject to so many diseases,
that few Lovers live long enough to know their names or remedies; Nay, some die
with Receipts by them ere they know which to use; I am now to cure Lucius of
his fears, and yet observe the duty and kindness due to a Father and a Brother,
though Otho (unkind) to show his Love to Amadeo, forget a Friend in Lucius, and
a sister in Cicilia; And now how shall we remedy these ills? though We know how
to cure them, yet we are to seek the Ingredience; for though the Receipt be
common, yet where are the Drugs? Justice will cure all, but partial Love, in
Otho, conceals the remedy.


[Exit Cicilia. ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Lucius (in Prison) Memnon, Cleon, and Soldiers. Cleon. PRince Otho,
Sir, is a Prisoner too.


Lucius. Do you know the Reason?


Cleon. Not certain, there are diverse Reports.


Memn. Some say, that the Prince and Amadeo have from the Praetor obtained the
princess Cicilia, which bred a dispute betwixt him and the Princess.


Lucius. Ha! Prince Amadeo? has the Praetor given him his consent? Otho would
not speak to me this morning; foul! foul! that I am dull, cold, negligent
Lucius.


Memn. Prince Orante too is fled to Rome, disguised, as they say, with the
news, and some Injurious words that Otho gave him lately; In short, the Praetor
and prince are full of disorder, your Brother too is missing; observed to be
dull and melancholy of late, and does look much upon Clorinda.


Cleon. Orante is this day banished, at the Complaint of the Princess, to whom
he threatened violence, and has but three days to appear.


Lucius. It Is Amadeo, and Lucius must dispute this; and if thy fate give thee
Cicilia, I will wish thee all Honor and happiness; But know, neither her
Father nor Brother shall make me quit my Interest, though Cicilia her self
join; the Sword only shall decide our doubts. It Is visible now why she made me
stay till Calis returned, with whom she whispered when Dyon ent'red with the
Guards; The plot is visible, 'twas contrived betwixt her and Otho, this
morning; to bind my hands till they had past the Ceremonies of a wicked and a
perjured Hymen; She conjured me too I should remember Otho was her Brother,
whose Interest has prevailed; and, to please Clorinda, Lucius is to be sold,
and condemned to misery for ever; her stay too confirms my fear; for her
promise was, her self to come and clear my doubts; and Otho is made a Prisoner
too, for fear of my Revenge; it is clear as the Heavens she is foresworn by.


Memn. He is strangely netled with this news; it makes me believe, there are
some grounds for these discourses concerning him and the Princess.


Lucius. Amadeo is yet at Liberty; I will find him before he has Aside. time to
triumph over my misery; This Window is not high, When they are gone, I will
leap it; But how to be rid of the Importunity of these people! I will forbid
them to let any body speak with me, and, under a pretense of a privacy when I
write this Evening, make my escape; Cleon pray give Order for a Pen, Ink and
paper, I will write to the Praetor.


[Exit a Soldier. Memn. You are sad, Sir; which the Noble Lucius cannot be,
but all that love him must be curious to know the cause; you wrong us too, if
you conceal it; He is not born, Sir, shall injure you; Pray tell us only the
public part of the cause; and if We can serve you, command us.


Lucius. I thank thee, Memnon; and if I thought both the Court and Camp had not
been full of it, I should my self have told you. Know then, Amadeo has broke my
Friendship with Otho, and his Sister; We have long been Rivals in Love and
Honor; But Amadeo has the odds; Clorinda is a powerfuller Argument, then all
my Services; she pleads with Otho; to please whom Lucius must be sacrificed to
Amadeos Love.


Memn. I am glad to hear it is no worse.


Lucius. No worse? do thou understand what I have said?


Memn. Yes, Prince Amadeo is your Rival. Will you kill all that love the
Princess? 'twill be a great task, though Lucius undertake it; and when he has
done, he must fall upon his own sword too.


Lucius. What has he said?


Cleon. By my faith, Sir, much reason methinks; and if you hate the Prince for
loving your Mistress, what would you do to him that should hate her?


Lucius. Kill him.


Memn. So you would do this that loves her, if you had your will; how
ridiculous would this be, in one of us, that should dispute the rewarding Love
and hate alike? Well, Sir, I am glad you have no other cause of trouble; By
this light, I thought the Prince had raised some scandal upon her, struck her,
or ravished her; these Injuries, I confess, had been fit for your rage and our
Revenge; But to be angry with a prince, and sad, because he loves an Excellent,
virtuous, beautiful maid!


Lucius. This is thy sense, Memnon; But love has his own reason; and though he
gives Laws, he will take none; and Love has said, he cannot Love his Rival; and
if Love be against you, what will your Reason avail?


Memn. But the General had wont to give Reason place; even in his Anger, and
his wounds, he would not be averse to Reason; else I should not venture thus
rudely to give him my opinion. Pray, Sir, tell me, is it a Crime to love, or a
sin to be loved? for in one of these two lies the guilt; if it be a sin in
either, why are you so partial to believe your self Innocent for doing that
which is a Crime in the prince? whose Love is Honor, rather then prejudice to
you, and but justifies to the world that you have placed your Affection upon a
deserving person; and this Injurious jealousy of yours, but shakes her
Resolution; and, by disgusting of her heart, gives more ground to your Rival
then ever his Addresses could have won. Were I the General, who would should
love my Mistress better then I, so she loved me better then him; And then my
Rival should break my neck as soon as my sleep, upon that score. Rivals are so
many Witnesses and Arguments, so many Affidavites, that she has honor, so many
Bucklers to defend her against the Envy and malice of the world; and when you
fold her in your Arms, they become so many Trophies of your Victory; Rivals
are, in Loves war, as Prisoners, Colors, and the Cannon; Win the Battle, and
lead them all in Triumph.


Lucius. I confess, this is wild reason, yet such as I cannot deny; but what
can you say to hinder me from hating and seeking to be Revenged on both, when
you shall know the Prince tempted her, and she has broke her faith? and as I
loved the virtuous Cicilia, so I hate this; for she is false, though she prove
true to Amadeo.


Memn. Faith, Sir, if this be so, (which few will believe) my Counsel is, that
you should be silent; for she has such a stock of Reputation in the world, as
no single Opinion, nor any one Action, can waste; and 'twill not be for your
Honor, while the world esteems her, to say, I am that Lucius that the Princess
Cicilia loved once, but she is now unconstant; it is the same thing, as to say,
you had like have cozened her, but she found her Error: Hide this misfortune,
rather, as some imperfection; it is a story better forgot; for either, you were
deceived in her, or she in you; it is clear, one of you wanted your value; Come,
Sir, let no man think to get any advantage over his Mistress, or, to add to his
own Esteem, by saying she is false; for no worthy man ever let a Gallant Woman
be false; it is not possible to destroy a perfect Friendship, you may destroy
nature as soon.


Cleon. This plain speech has posed him; and if not cured his jealousy, yet he
has so vexed him, I hope the Nobler Passion, anger, will possess him; This
damned jealous sickness is as ill in a lover, as a Coward in a Soldier.


Lucius. Cleon, you have heard all this, and your silence makes me curious to
know your sense of my suffering; you have studied and traveled in your time,
and are now a Soldier; how would you have born my part in these three several
Conditions; When you were a Courtier, how would you have born it, had you found
your Mistress false?


Cleon. Faith, Sir, in those youthful days I dwelt in the Garden where they
grew; and when I found my self injured, as a withered Flower I forgot her, and
still gathered some new Rose unblown with the praise or flattery of any; in
whom I fancied still more pleasing Graces far then the former had.


Lucius. This was, when you were a young Courtier, Cleon; But now you are a
Soldier, whose Passions, both of Love and Anger, are not only Excusable, but
laudable.


Cleon. Why, I would have given her love the lie, and in her new lovers face
spit the vows and faith she gave me, and, to vex her, Cut his throat.


Lucius. Ha! it is but just a Soldiers anger should be revenged, not reasoned,
nor argued into Peace; no Quarter to his Rival, nor violence to his Mistress; I
love thee, Cleon, and thou and I will talk further on this business.


Memn. Pray, Sir, ask him how his Philosophy would have born it; hear all, and
then choose.


Cleon. I would, as near as I could, have imitated History, which delivers many
stories to us, by which are preserved the honored memories of chaste and
virtuous Lovers, of both Sexes, whose Friendship stands high in Story; Many too
are the blots that stain even the sheets they are writ in, whose black Actions
and names are left as Terrors and whips, to deter mankind from becoming like
them, the hated subjects of succeeding ages; Yet nothing has met my wonder
more, nor bred my amazement so often, as to find that excellentest of
Creatures, Women, whose body and Nature, when virtuous, are so tender that we
pity them if the wind blow sharp upon them; Yet when lust has prevailed, and
armed them, you would start to read where they have taken the sullen Murderer
by the hand, and undaunted led him through difficulties even those men shrink
at; Nay the murderers heart has become soft; Poison has lost her force, and
the Dagger his point, to save what they have doomed to death.


Lucius. No more Cleon; heaven keep Cicilia from breaking with the gods, if she
should be false to men.


Cleon. Your patience, Sir, that I may Vindicate History, and my own memory, in
being Just to that Sex whose very Nature is softness, and these but the
Monsters and depraved part of that Excellent Creature, lest the world believe I
only such the Poison out of History; Where I find more Excellency in that Sex
then you once fancied in the divine Cicilia; where the Crimes of the wicked
have not arrived to the sufferings of the good. Their constancy in Love, their
often and patient becoming Martyrs to Friendship and Honor, as far beyond the
merits, as faith of men, scarce one of them trusting that has not been betrayed
by our perjured Sex; Mercy being their Nature, and oftentimes their Enemy,
having rendered them miserable; For could they see us sad, they might laugh; But
their pity of false men makes many of their Scenes set in tears and blood; and
it is as rare to find a Constant man, as a faulty Woman; Yet I find History
condemns revenge in either, Mercy in the last Act being as becoming a gallant
Lover, as Love in the First, so to strive to win from the world a handsome
Character, by forgetting and forgiving each others crimes; and those who seek
by Revenge to vindicate themselves; The guilty has from that found pity, and
their Rage stood condemned by gods and men; Yet, in this latter Age, we have
delivered our selves up to a mistake of Honor; and Custom has made it so
binding, that it is not to be disputed against, it is by Duel; which vain and
Choleric men embrace with Joy, as a quick way for the one to be known to the
World, and the other to be revenged of the World; Nay, wise men submit to it
now, as a necessity; and though, in your case, some would fight, Yet there are
diverse would not; Much is to be said for them both, and against them, and the
wild Justice of a Duel; but he that disputes it must be some one that is known
to plead against his own practice; for whoever will be heard to declaim against
Duels must fight many first; and when his valor is undoubted, his Reason may
prevail; but where to find such an Orator as will use his Rhetorique to
persuade the people to Lucius frowns, gives no answer, but walks out. pull down
the fame he built at such a rate, I know not.


Mem. I am glad to find there is so much of the old Lucius left, as will give
over rather then be beaten.


Cleon. Have not I fitted him for a grave speech?


Mem. Yes, I dare say, if he had thought thou could have remembered so much
of Books, he would have broke thy head rather then opened thy memory with a
Question; he looked for a Satyr, or some Ralliry.


Cleon. I guest as much, but thought this the shorter way; A pox on it, they
know we are Soldiers, and have other business then to observe him while he
besieges one woman, and defends another all his days; if he had staid, I was
coming into mine own element; he knows we are Soldiers and Travelers; fit
people to decide Questions in Platonic Love, that have been bred in the
liberty of other Nations, whose kindness has engaged me to defend that sweet
sin he speaks against; if he had asked me what I would have ventured to enjoy
another man's Mistress, it is a case I have been versed in, and he might have
been resolved; but for the revengeful part, By my troth, I am to seek; for I
never had any Mistress of mine own yet, upon which I ever cared to shut the
door when I went out; that and Marrying I defy; my experience has taught me
it is so much cheaper and easier to get another man's Woman, then keep mine own;
and now he is gone, prithee be free; do thou think the Princess a Rogue,
Sirrah? By this light, if she be.


Mem. And what if she be?


Cleon. If she be, I am sure I am one; and I cannot choose but hope; and if she
be one of us, let Cleon alone to tell his tale; come, come, let us away.


Mem. And if Cleon does not, let me alone to tell it to the Princess.


Cleon. Well, well: when you dare tell, it will be a jest for Cleon to laugh at
as well as Memnon.


ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Manlius, alone. Manl. SUre, Love makes me his scorn; and I that could
not love any now dote upon all; Clorinda wiped Calis from my mind; the one
sighs too much, and the other has too much anger in her eyes; and now all her
graces fall too, since I saw Cicilia; in whom there is not more virtues, then
difficulties; it is hard to say whether my Lover despair be greatest; why did my
Brother and Amadeo praise her so to me or having praised her not hid her from
mine eyes? either vanity or madness made them send me to her, for my
destruction; my way was prepared too, by a friendly character; That I heard
nothing but praises of Manlius from her, even then admiring Manlius for
friendship and honor when his heart was busy how to destroy a Brother and a
Friend: yes, those are the ties, those are the impossibilities that I must
labor against; yet their Love, Birth nor Merit, I fear not; for though they
started before me, they shall not make more haste then I to gain the prize,
could I reconcile the action to my self; but it is a breach of trust and faith
to both, both have told me their several passions, and sent me as an
indifferent friend to solicit their hopes; Lucius, though he believed I loved
Clorinda, yet that knowledge could not make him doubt an unjust action from me;
and Amadeo, though I was his Rivals Brother, such a stock I had amongst them
that the ties of Nature, nor interest of affection, could not make these men
fear Manlius, who till he saw Cicilia was as honest as they were just; and
could till then have defied the world to accuse me of one wry step, or one
stumble in the whole practice of my life, where honor was concerned; but now
by what curse I know not, friendship, honor and virtue seem slight; her
smiles are preferred before gods or men; yet how many crimes must both of us act
ere I can enjoy her friendship: I love my Brother, his nature and sweetness of
humor, so stout and kind it wins even upon his enemies; Amadeo too, how shall
I look him in the face when I have betrayed his trust? their angers will be too
just for the boldest man to meet; but that danger is the least, there is but
sword to sword, and fortune may be as well on my side, as justice on theirs;
and could I answer it to honor and friendship, I should not then make this
dispute; but it is the friend, not the enemy threatens, and that will wound my
soul ere I can be an enemy too; for my anger though it has been as fatal as any
man's, yet it is most unreasonable here; and therefore I must take some quiet
secure way to gain my ends; how unwilling I am to be a villain! ye gods that
see excuse, or divert the crime; but what if she will not receive my love, what
rests for me? 'twill be too late to put back when I have discovered the
villain; she will hate, and they despise me; and I shall sell all my past
honors for a shadow; what rests then? Force. Ha! good gods! what may not man
be if he will once break the bounds of honor? see if I have not already
swallowed the great difficulties of Friend and Brother, and given up that
honor I have preserved through a thousand hazards; and lust, finding it self
master, would not only reign, but bring in murder too; sure I was never honest,
never stout, all my fighting was but cowardice, nothing but fear to dye made me
defend my self; If I had either honor or courage in my heart, they would now
defend me against my self, and make me ashamed to yield my sword to lust and
treachery; sure if it were ever lawful to kill, it is now; for a greater villain
then my self no man can strike. -- See this Dagger prompts me to it; the act
will be noble, He draws his Dagger. having first in two short li^es writ the
cause; then to stab and dye, she could not choose but love me when she shall
know I fell in this strife, her martyr; I will do it; since I cannot live
worthy her love, it is resolved I will dye to find her pity. -- Ha! see, see, ye
gods, she comes, her eyes shake my resolution. Ent. Cicilia.


Cicil. Calis stays long, Lucius will be impatient to know the cause of his
imprisonment; see his Brother, he is sad; I will take this opportunity to try
if I can find who it is he loves; and while Calis is busy to serve my friend,
I will try if I can advance her desires, though my mind a^ this time be not
bent to mirth. -- What makes the gallant Manlius so sad? thoughts are such
strangers to his humor, that it is a civil curiosity to inquire the cause; sure
something new and excellent must be happened that is able to disorder his mind
whose happy Stars have made him all he can, in honor, wish; is it your
Brothers imprisonment, Sir, that troubles you? if it be, let me assure you,
there is neither dishonor nor danger in it. -- Ha! he minds me not, or at least
will not trust me He stands lost in his thoughts. with his secret; yet Manlius
knows that I at first sight gave him all the secrets my heart ever swelled
with; and if he refuse me his friendship, I shall belleve he thinks me not
worthy of his Brothers love, or else grudges me his kindness.


Manl. Heaven and earth witness; and I guilty? who knows his fate till he
proves it? how beautiful, even in her hatred, will the Aside. fair Cicilia
appear; but thus adorned with friendship, and her words thus clothed in
kindness, how divine, how charming every grace! there is Magic in every sound,
her words whisper my soul to be happy, and something bids me be a villain; if
the loves, I shall be happy enough, in her embraces, to weigh down the opinion
of the whole world besides.


Cicil. What strange accident is befallen him that can make him thus silent;
there is distraction, fear and wonder in his looks, and all I say passes
without regard.


Manlius, aside. I will speak to her, she is alone. -- Does not your Highness
find a new kind of character here? is not Manlius his misery visible in his
forehead?


Cicil. Yes, and 'twas my wonder.


Manl. My distracted heart and troubled mind, are they not writ so plain in my
face that your fair eyes may find and read my fortune there?


Cicil. It Is true, and one whose eyes are less concerned then mine may find a
new kind of humor in every look; every motion tells something strange is
happened in Manlius his fortune; and my heart has so much gratitude and kindness
for him, that if it lay in my power, I would serve him faithfully; but finding
him un willing to impart them to so idle a subject as Cicilia, I shall leave
you; lest my company be as troublesome as my Question.


Manlius, aside. Why this, if not more? why should she tempt me thus, if her
heart had not love she never showed, nor I durst hope before? I will tell her I
love her, she is a woman; and what if she once had honor, so had I; yet she
had power to blow that bubble hence, and who knows but that I am designed her
fate, as she was mine.


[He sighs and weeps. Cicil. Ha! he sighs and weeps; why these tears, Manlius?
why these sighs? what can thy heart wish or desire within the bounds of honor
that Manlius should despair of? pray tell me your griefs, I may be a friend
where you least believe it; for I know something; and, perhaps, have seen what
you would fain have hid. -- Sure he loves Clorinda, and is ashamed to think of
his faults to Calis. Aside.


Manl. Know, Madam, your kindness has ripp'd open my heart; and now take a
secret, the first and last of my life; too great for my heart, though too
little for her I would present it to; a fatal one, I fear, and yet it is love;
doubting, humble, and faithful love.


Cicil. Then the gods have heard the wishes of his friends, if Manlius be a
Lover.


Manl. Ha! what does my surpised heart hear? does your Highness rejoice to
find Manlius a Lover? that glad sound has struck confused joy to my heart; nor
do I know how to understand that joy of yours.


Cicil. O Manlius, thy noble Brother and my self have often wished thee a
Lover, to refine thy mind, and weed some harshness, and those wild thoughts
from it, which like weeds infest the noble flowers that nature had planted, and
honor watered in thy Soldiers heart; love in Manlius is all he ought to wish
for, or his friends rejoice in; love will make him envied by those that hate
him, and adored by those that love him; of which number none is a more real
admirer then Cicilia; and happy she, who ever she be, that is born to reign in
thy heart; for Manlius has courage, and all that is required to make a happy
friendship; and now I beg to know who it is, that after a curious and a long
search Manlius has found worthy of his faith.


Manl. O Madam, when you know that you will hate me, and say I have reason to
be sad, and curse those Stars that have cursed you and me; can the noble
Cicilia see a Lover in my eyes, and not find who it is by my actions? is
Manlius so general a Lover that his passion cannot be discerned? Is he such a
dumb distracted thing in all companies, that his disorder cannot speak her name
he bows to? must my trembling tongue tell her name ere your Highness discern it?


Cicil. Alas, Sir, my busy heart has been so intent upon her own business, I
never observed it diligently till now; but rather then be troublesome to
Manlius, I shall wait his leisure, and not rudely press into his secret
thoughts, unless I can serve him; and then he wrongs me if he conceal his love,
who will to the world avow the friendship and value my heart has for him.


Manlius, aside. Why shall I be silent longer? I will tell her I love the
gentle Cicilia. -- Stay, Madam, and take the secret of my soul, -- 'Twill not
out; I have yet so much honor as to guard the door She is going out. against
that guilt that would fain tell you, I love; and the divine Cicilia is the
object; and if you be curious to know how much; to death, by all. --


Cicil. Hold, no more; my busy innocence, and folly, you have in two words
sufficiently punished; yet you will find we are both deceived; I in a vain
false opinion that Manlius had honor, and was worth my friendship; I should
not else thus have betrayed my self within his power, where he shall find his
part too, for having so low a thought as durst doubt my honor; but since I
have found him false, I shall live to repent my error, as he will do this mean
opinion of me; Go hide thy self, false man, till thou can repent the injury
thou have done thy Brother; and if there be any spark of that honor left in
thy heart which the world took fire at, let shame kindle that flame again; Go
repent, sleep, and forget this treacherous act, and wake again worthy of thy
Brother and thy friend; I have yet so much kindness as to be sorry for thee;
and if thy fault dies here, for thy Brothers sake, it passes as a dream, and
we will awake, to morrow, friends again, else thy love shall not exceed my hate
and scorn; No reply; I have an Argument in mine own heart pleads for thee, more
then all thy words can do.


[Exit Cicilia. Manl. What a fool was I to put my self into the power of
fortune, whose blind partial hands have still opposed me? vain deity, by me no
more valued when thou fawnest, then when thou frownest; but more despised for
thy false flattery when thou smiledst in the beginning of our discourse, then
thou art hated now, when thou have declared thy self and her mine enemy; thou
found'st me, this morning, relying upon honor and virtue, whose faithful
protection had I not abandoned to lean upon thy rouling-wheel, I had still kept
the honor of Manlius; who striving to become one of thy Minions is now left
fit for Chains and Greaves; which of thy hated great ones attain to honor, but
they are at last hurried to fates more violent then their fortunes? I am now
embarked, and engaged beyond my own knowledge; and dare not find safety from
the counsel of my friends; now the blackness of this act appears when I dare
not tell my friends how miserable I am; this shame is only left me for a sting
to my soul; and all the Reason and Honor I have left is only to make me
ashamed of what I have done; Calis too, my last counsel; her kindness is barred
at this time; yet something I must do to lose the old Manlius, or to find the
new.


[Exit. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Amadeo, and Lucius in a Disguise, following him. Amad. THough I am not
guilty of Otho's fault to the Princess, yet I am afraid to appear before her;
and methinks, there is a kind of guilt in being unlucky where we love; and
Otho's kindness too hastily employed, has, I fear, gained me her displeasure
yet her justice makes me hope when my innocence shall appear, 'twill find her
pardon; for if I find her heart given to my Rival, Heaven forbid I should
oppose her desires, but rather with sacrifice of my own give her back the
promise and engagement of a Father and a Brother; for Amadeo shall never
receive his Mistress but from her own hands.


Lucius. Sir, this paper is directd to your Highness; does it require no
answer? Amadeo receives the paper, and walks away.


Amad. Follow me to the Princess Cicilia's lodging, and you shall have your
answer.


[Exit Amadeo. Lucius. He is grown vain and insolent already; Death! is the
Princesses Chamber become your place of audience already? Hell upon him, he
will date it from their bed, if I prevent not their speedy Hymen's, I am mad
with rage; Cicilia came not neither, nor Calis, as she promised; Manlius is
sullen too, and out of the way when I should use his counsel; the whole frame
of friendship is fallen in pieces, as if the world conspired to make Lucius
miserable, without the remedy or protection of one friend to advise him; yet
kind fate has left this to protect me. -- But while I talk, and forget my Lays
hold on his sword. self, I may be missed and prevented; and to live without
Cicilia, or a revenge for her, were to exceed all sick men, or chained slaves
in scorn and misery.


[Exit Lucius. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Calis, and the Guard, as from Lucius Chamber. Calis. SPeak with no body!


Guard. 'Twas his command.


Calis. Come, I will make your excuse, for disobeying him this time.


Guard. Pray, Madam, pardon us; till he calls we dare not open the door.


Call. Do you fear I should bring him a challenge? well, Sir, I will retire; and
when you see him, pray, tell him that I was here to have spoken with him from
the Princess Cicilia; and I believe he will not thank you for refusing me the
door. -- This passionate man will suck poison out of every flower; and I know
his jealous Aside. humor and choleric heart is now gnawing it self; and
concludes all the world false to him, and has not patience to imagine one truth
of his business; it is the greatest misery in the world to have a friendship
with such a jealous nature to whom all things appear as his fears present them;
and what is meant with most kindness, their jealous nature corrupts into
injuries, so that it is impossible but friendship wanting the nourishment of
faith must wither and dye; and were I so miserable as to love such an humorist,
I would set my heart before him, and let him carve himself; for it is impossible
to please him, give him what bit he will: Now in the evening when he shall hear
I was at the door, how he will storm that I came not in! and if he had not been
obeyed, his rage would have been as great; there could be no reconciliation
with a jealous man; but that we know, jealousy commits and punishes her own
crimes; for none of those doubts but has his own sting, which carries Revenge
as well as Injury for the Lover. I am now to find the Princess, and when she
shall know he refused to speak with me, it is ten to one but she grows as angry
as he is jealous. They have indeed both their diseases, though from different
causes; which I fear will never be cured till they are bound in a pair of
sheets together; Hymen and a Bed some Physicians hold a certain cure for Love;
would Manlius and I had honestly tried the Receipt.


[Exit Calis. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Amadeo alone. Amadeo. SHe is all a perfect Mine of Virtue; no one
thought but has a guard, such as Modesty and perfect Honor set over the Hearts
of Princes; Her words werefull of Justice, and though she conceived her self
injured and neglected in her Brothers Treaty, yet her Answers were calm and
full of civil sense; still mentioning me and my passion with respect and
sadness, which has so divided my thoughts I know not how to proceed; If I
pursue her against her will, there is nothing but hatred to be expected. I will
observe her, and make Clorinda break my way either to her Love or Friendship;
and if my Fortune will not make me hers, yet I will have the pleasure of
contributing my own peace to the making her as happy as she desires. -- This
paper I had forgot: Ha! from Lucius!

Lucius his Challenge to Amadeo.
SIR,
I Have this Evening broke Prison, and so I shall all Laws and Civility too,
rather then outlive the Injury your Highness has done me. The Princess Cicilia
is a Jewel nothing but your Sword can win from me; though her Ambition has made
her break her Faith. And since I can promise my self no longer the being
beloved, I am resolved to be revenged, or fall in the attempt. This Morning I
shall expect your Highness under the wood side by Juno 's Temple, where I shall
attend you alone with my Sword only. The Honor I have had to know your
Highness makes me not doubt the receiving this satisfaction, that I may at
least preserve my Honor, though the rash Cicilia has falsely profaned hers.
--

Lucius.


Fond Lucius, do thou need more Enemies then thy self? Thy wild injurious
Heart has wronged a Princess, whose least thoughts thou art unworthy of; and,
for her sake I will meet thee; and if my Innocence be any guard, I shall punish
thy low thoughts of the most excellent of Women. Cicilia break her Faith? Vain
and and false? He would have me believe she has given it him. Fool! She knows
too well the value of that Jewel to give it thy savage Heart. Rash Cicilia!
Rash Lucius rather, whose madness has now made room for my hopes, and given an
occasion I could not have hoped for; And I shall take it, to show how much I
loved the Princess, and how little thou deservest to be preferred before me.
Sure no Man of Honor could ever have thought he should have occasion to draw
his Sword in the defense of the Princess Cicilia's Honor against one that knew
her. And who knows but Fortune has appointed this Injury to give me the
advantage of the Sword against Lucius, who thus long took Romes Sword, not to
fight his Countries quarrel, but his private interest; and pursued me as his
Rival, not Romes Enemy. I will instantly find him. -- Hah, Clorinda?


[Enter Clorinda. Clorinda. Brother, saw you the Prince since his confinement?


Amadeo. Yes, and he is as much to seek for the cause as they will be for
satisfaction that caused it; We hear Lucius is a Prisoner too.


Clorinda. I believe the cause is easily guessed; you know the Prince and his
Sister have this Morning disputed with some heat and Choler concerning our
affairs; Lucius too is informed that the Praetor has given his consent at the
desire of Otho; and the displeasure the Princess showed her Brother is but a
spark of that Fire you are to expect from Lucius, whose nature can never
endure, nor dissemble his troubles; whence came you now?


Amadeo. From making my excuse to the Princess, where I received so civil a
resentment of my proceedings, that her dislike was but one degree of less
Obligation then the acceptance of my Love would have been. For I must confess,
my Reason Honors the Princess when she acts great things; and to be faithful
is most Princely. It Is like her self, to avow her Friendship; yet her words
were full of civility, and, in all her expressions as just to me, as kind to
Lucius; And that Civil Justice shall bind me as much as her Love can my Rival.
And though his pretense may be more fortunate then mine, yet who ever shall
give a true Character hereafter of Amadeo's Love, the world shall say, he owes
nothing to Honor nor Cicilia's Friendship.


Clorinda. Be yet so kind to me as to visit the Prince, who is now our
Prisoner; to whom pray say all that a Maid is fit to justify, all that
Amadeo's Sister should say when such a Lover wooes, and such a Brother
counsels, while I find the Princess, and take the first occasion I can
handsomely to present your Resolutions.


Amadeo. Farewell, dear Clorinda; I shall not fail to visit the Prince as soon
as I have dispatched a business which concerns me to give audience in this
Morning. Live and Love, thy Brother, dear Clorinda.


Clorinda. Love my Brother!


[Exeunt. [He lets fall the paper Lucius gave him, unseen of either. ACT. V.
SCEN. V.
Enter Lucius alone. Lucius. THis is the place, within this wood I will expect
him; I wonder he is thus late; guilt has his sting, though in the Courage of
Amadeo; when he is to justify an ill action he is even slow in coming.


[Exit. Enter Manlius in his Retreat. Manlius. Revenged? upon whom? foul
Revenge is due to thee, not from thee; Thou have injured a Friend, a Brother,
and a Mistress; and thou talkst of being revenged, of which of these? good
Heaven! whither am I fallen? Reason and Honor are dead within my Heart, and
the Coward is crept into this breast, else I could save all yet; Thus: this
Sword bent against the Traitor here would do it yet; But Honor has lost his
power, Lust and Revenge reign Tyrants over my Heart, Revenge: whose pleasure is
of so short a reign, it scarce out-lasts a thought longer then the storms that
Injuries and Anger raise; and who enjoyes it most is most Beast, and shows more
wicked nature then all the several vices that Man was born subject to; Nay,
it is hard to say, who repents a revengefull Mind most, the Revenger or the sad
subject of his Revenge; That I, who this Morning was a Lover, should before
night degenerate into such contraries as Hate, and desire to destroy the thing
I loved, it starts my Soul. I that would have dyed this Morning to have served
or pleased Cicilia, am now bent at the rate of all that is precious to Man,
Honor, Health, and Peace of Mind, to seek her despite, and, with hazard of
mine own life, strike Lucius, though a Brother, which she nor Nature can longer
protect; For though my Heart tells me he is my Brother, yet she has said he is
my Rival; which very thought has more mystery in it; then I shall live to
understand. That I should have reason to know this, and not have power to
master that impious Passion! They have too much reason who affirm there is a
Fate in all things, which commands above our Reason; and it is vanity in Man to
think or resolve he will be virtuous: His Stars laugh at him; and what is writ
in Heaven we must act, for we but play our parts here; how would the world
wonder else, when they shall read this part of my story? Manlius, that in his
youth did something like Honor, and aspired at nothing but a fair Fame, proud
of the worlds esteem; Now, when he has found the highest Object Honor and
Virtue can work upon, which is to Love handsomely, without any design or hope
of Reward more then such a virtuous action brings; To know this, and to despise
all the rewards that the Gods and Cicilia must owe to such an action, and
sacrifice to Revenge all that a Brother, a Friend, and a Mistress claim, must
beget miseries which already beget my despair. Love, if thou be a God, as
thy blindness has led me to this precipice, thou have wings though no Eyes; and
'twill be Justice to lend me them to save me; else this new kind of madness
will find too late a pity. My Hate levels at all, Brother and Friend are not
out of distance. What she loves I must hate, my Rival cannot be my friend; nor
can I with patience think she should be any others, though I know she will
never be mine; But woe to the happy Lover who ever he be, it is not Brother nor
Friend shall protect him. Calis too, though I never said I loved, yet I have
listened to what she has said of modest and kind; so that this crime of mine
cannot stab less then four; for each base act that I commit, she will bleed
though innocent. -- Ha, what noise is that? it is Horsemen; sure I am pursued,
I will take the covert of A noise withut. this wood to observe the motion.


[Exit Manlius. Enter Amadeo. Amadeo. This by the description should be the
place, yonder are the Hermits Houses, and there is the Temple.


[Exit Ama. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Clorinda, Cicilia, and Stella. Clorinda. I Come not, Madam, to justify
the mistaken kindness of Prince Otho, whose Friendship to me out-ran the
respect was due to your Highness; when I desired him to speak for my Brother,
his Love mistook the Object, and without either of our knowledge moved it to
the Praetor. This we both started at when he told us the success, and feared
what your just disdain would do, when you should find we had not paid the duty
and civility a Lover owes to such a Mind, whom we first ought to have prepared,
being the chief concerned in Love and Hymen. This Truth, Madam, has faults
enough, and therefore we may hope to find belief; and this Error which a
Brother committed, we hope for a Brothers sake may be pardoned.


Cicilia. Your Highness had need make no more excuse; though, I confess I was
something troubled at the first; But since I received a visit from the Prince,
I am so far from accusing him when I perceived his Innocence; I think he will
confess, I said more to let him see I was not angry, then I should have done to
have pleased another; For give me leave to tell you, Clorinda, in all her
kindness, has not more value for Prince Amadeo, then I have. But love him I
must not. Cicilia is not worth her esteem when she is false to her vows, which
(I confess,) I have given Lucius; and nothing but Lucius can absolve that vow.
Death, or Lucius his faults, can only set Cicilia free; This I would have told
the Prince, but that I was loath to add to his griefs a knowledge that might
make him hate my friend or me.


Clorinda. I know my Brothers Heart so well, I am confident he will worship
this Virtue in your Highness, equal to all the blessings of the world beside;
and when he shall know your Heart has pity for him, Honor will change his Love
to Friendship and Adoration; and he will still worship the fair Cicilia,
without Stella finds the paper Amadeo let fall.

She gives Cicilia the paper.

She offers the paper to Clorinda.

one earthly wish or stain of mortal thoughts.


Cicilia. What paper is that?


Stella. I know not, Madam.


Cicilia. It Is directed to Prince Amadeo. I shall not be so curious to know the
secret.


Clorinda. Not I, Madam, till you read it; I am certain my Brother has no
secrets he would hide from Cicilia, since she knows he loves.


Cicilia. I should know this hand, it is Lucius his Character, my Heart fails
me; This paper bodes some mischief.


Clorinda. She is troubled, pray, Madam, read it without any scruple.


Cicilia. I confess, I would fain be satisfied, for I have as much Interest in
the Character as Clorinda has in the direction, it is Lucius his hand.


Clorinda. Heaven forbid my fears, pray give it me, -- it is a challenge from
Lucius. She reads till she comes to Lucius injurious words, and then stops.


Cicilia. This I feared; Calis, a word; Your Pardon, Madam.


[Exeunt Cicilia and Calis. Clorinda. Something I must do to prevent this
mischief; who that had read this paper would hereafter trust the Love of any,
since Lucius can be thus faulty to such a person; My Heart begins to doubt,
Otho may have his faults too, but this is no time to talk.


Enter Marius, Dyon, Lysander, and a Guard. Marius. Gone?


Dyon. Gone Sir; he leaped his window that looked into the Garden.


Lysander. Prince Amadeo is from his Lodging too, and was seen to ride out
alone this Morning.


Marius. Take the Guards and follow them with all dilgence; disperse your
selves, and if it be possible prevent them.


Clorinda. Stay, my Lord; Sir, if you please to read this paper, 'twill direct
you where you may certainly find them; I found it in the Gallery this Morning.
He ^eads the challenge to himself.


Marius. Insolent and false, thou shall find what it is to despise my Orders,
and violate the Roman Protection given a Prince; beside what my Justice shall
inflict upon thee, that durst without my leave, treat this saucy Friendship
with my Daughter; and not only rob me of the Duty of a Child, but
dishonourably seek to take her fair Name from her. Lysander, and Dyon, haste to
the Grove, where Juno's Temple stands, there is the place of appointment; Alive
or dead bring him to our Justice. Dyon, you know me, look I be not disobeyed;
Some of you call Cicilia hither, and set a strong Guard upon Otho. Your pardon,
Madam; this trouble has made me thus long forget my respect to you; This
Insolence showed to the Prince, and despising of the Roman Discipline, has
robbed me of my patience; But I shall give his Highness full satisfaction, and
with his blood make him an example.


Clorinda. Heaven forbid, Sir; I know Amadeo will sooner die for him, then
bring any such sad Calamity to his friends, and there is much to be said on
both sides. You have high Reason, and ought to have the first place, as his and
Romes General, doubly injured in your blood and power; Yet Love and heat of
youth have their Friends that plead for Lucius. And we cannot expect, Sir, a
Soldier and a Lover enraged should find place for Reason. Honor and Opinion
slave the world too much; Lucius is a Roman; and from Romes example where he
finds difficulties he draws his Sword to remove them; See the Princess.


Enter Cicilia and Calis. Calis. His displeasure is high, for his Orders were
to kill him if he resisted, or else to bring him alive to Justice; You know how
strict the Roman Discipline is, upon such a breach as this, to which is added
Personal Injuries; and if your Highness do not interpose, 'twill be sad; there
is no safety for him if you show a displeasure.


Cicilia. Though he has injured me, I will not be so unjust to condemn him,
before I hear him speak; fear not, Calis, it is not the anger of others shall
make me forget what I owe to Lucius; and though he has done a rash act in
disobeying my Father and my self, yet I will look upon that disobedience as
Love to me; and Heaven forbid I should join to punish him for faults committed
upon that score.


Marius. I sent to speak with you; did you know any thing of this business?


Cicilia. Nothing but what my fears prompted me to, and that I gave you an
Account of by Calis.


Marius. If he hold his appointment, I shall at last have my Revenge upon him.


Cicilia. I am sorry to find your Highness thus bent against a Person whose
Friendship to me has been thus long known to my Father; It Is true, this act is
not to be defended, but I am consident I need neither blush the becoming his
Mediator, nor my Father be ashamed to let my importunity prevail against the
severity of that Law that condemns my Friend. -- Which thus I do upon my knees,
interposing my Tears to save from your displeasure She kneels. a forfeit Friend.


Marius. Rise; you must not plead for such an insolent offender; Innocence
comes in question when it appears so partial in the intercession for the
Guilty. She (...).


Cicilia. Sir, my Interest in all his sufferings plead for him, Lucius his
guilt is my pride; Lucius his crimes is love of me, and here again I profess
him my Friend; I love the Man, and if you punish him you make his crimes mine
in the Affliction; and though I had no hand in his guilt, yet I shall feel all
his punishment, such is the mystery of Friendship; You cannot execute him
alone, and I am as innocent as the Law you would revenge; and your Justice upon
Lucius is unjust upon me; so that to satisfy an Injury, you will murder a
Daughter. This beloved Guilt, this affected Malefactor has won my Heart; even
this Crime is an Obligation. My Friendship shared in all his good, and shall I
abandon him in his misery? Heaven forbid. You know, Sir, in his healthy hours,
in his days of Triumph, Lucius left not me out. Can I then with Honor share
with him in his glories, and abandon him in this sad afflicted Fortune, where I
am the cause too? It cannot, it must not be. You may deny me his life, but know
then, you cannot persuade me to outlive him. Nothing shall say, Lucius was so
much gallanter then Cicilia, as to die for her that would not in his Funeral
bear him company.


Marius. While Lucius knew how to be a Soldier, I loved and preferred him; But
grown Insolent, and perverted in his Nature; as his virtues found my
Friendship, so his crime shall feel my Justice, till he stands in story an
example of both.


Cicilia. When Lucius was in health he needed none of your Physic; and now he
is sick, you will not afford him a remedy; Innocent Lucius feared not your
power, even that power which his sword has confirmed, though now you threaten
his noble life with it. Nor will the world wonder why I plead for him: Is
guilty Lucius such a common Theme? Were he not guilty, why should I bow my
knees? A Daughter to one, and a Friend to the other? Are her tears no tie? Are
her knees bowed, and her hands held up, of no force with a Father for a Friend?
Is there nothing due to these? Common Miseries find common Remedies; And my
Father may by a thousand ways show his Justice, though how for my sake he show
Lucius Mercy.


Marius. Fond Girl, Thy kindness but heaps coals upon his head, and speaks him
a black Villain to injure a person so far above him both in Love and Honor.


Cicilia. My Reason, Sir, loved him once, and my Love makes me pity him now;
his Virtues overcame me then, and I but imitated the world in loving him.
Thousands were Lucius his Virtues, thousands were his glories, and ten thousand
were the ties he has laid upon the world; Single is this hatred, Sir, single
his Crime, single your Justice too, and in that, Cruel. Lucius was ever
glorious, and but once guilty. Ye Gods! who would through such narrow ways and
crooked paths, with difficulties, hunt for flying Honor, if her wealth prove
such a burden unto Men, that even with Friends an Age of Virtue cannot weigh
down one rash Act? Lucius for one Crime dies, for whom a thousand generous
actions past could not prevail; and Cicilia, from a cruel parent must return
denied. But I have yet anger enough left to laugh at those that believe this
Cuelty can make way for any low design.


Marius. See fond Wretch, blush and hate thy Folly. Read She offers to go out.
this, and be* thy own Judge. Behold what a Friendship thou have built thy Peace
upon, scorned and suspected; In that read thy Lucius, and see to what a
miserable Fate thou art arrived, after thy having given thy Honor, Duty, and
Brothers kindness to purchase a Friendship with a Jealous, Choleric, Insolent
Youth. Go, haste to the Temple, make him your Lord, that he may choose some
other Beauty to pay his broken vows to.


He gives her Lucius Challenge to read; she reads the paper, strikes her
breast, and throws it away, and goes in. [Exeunt omnes. Partis primae Finis:
THE SECOND PART OF Cicilia and Clorinda, OR, Love in Arms. A TRAGI-COMEDY, The
Scene LOMBARDY.

Written in FLORENCE BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady DOROTHY SIDNEY COUNTESS OF SUNDERLAND.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

The Names of the Actors.
Marius, The Roman Praetor, Lieutenant of Lombardy. Otho, His Son, and General
under him. Cicilia, His Daughter. Calis, Her Friend. Dyon, A Gentleman of Rome.
Orante, The Lombard Prince. Clyandre, A Lombard. Turnus, A banished Lombard.
Lucius and Manlius Brothers General of the Horse. Lieutenant General of the
Army. Cleon Two Romans. Memnon Amadeo, Prince of Savoy. Clorinda, His Sister.
Lysander, A Lord of Savoy. Stella, Cicilia's Woman. Two Hermits. Banditoes.
Soldiers and Servants, Such as the Scene requires.
THE SECOND PART OF Cicilia and Clorinda, OR, Love in Arms.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter Amadeo, and Lucius, they strip and Make ready to Fight. Amadeo. SEe,
Sir, I am here, according to your desire; But know, till I had read your Paper,
I had nothing of Quarrel to you; But that had so little of Lucius, I cannot but
hate my Fortune, when I consider my self out-rival'd by one that has so low a
thought of the Princess; In whose name and revenge I draw my Sword.


Luci. It Is better well-come then your words; For the wounds They fight, and
the noise of their swords makes Manlius come out. Both are wounded. He draws,
and runs to part them. that you have given both my Love and Honor are past
their Remedy: and thus I must be healed, or receive more.


Enter Manlius. Manlius. 'Twas the noise of Swords, -- ha! 'Two fighting. -- Ye
gods! Lucius and Amadeo, my Rivals: why does heaven thus tempt me? -- Prince
Amadeo, as you have honor, hold; Why Lucius, Amadeo, Lucius, Brother, pray
hold.


Amadeo. Ha, Manlius! Lucius, if I would injure you, I could say, this is not
well to have your Brother here; But I am so confident of his Honor, that I
cannot fear an Injury from him.


Manlius. How comes this? Did you not promise, you calmly would Expect your
Fortunes, and not lose a Mistress, and a Friend both? have I, for this,
labored both your Interests with the like faith and reality, neither swayed by
the Partiality of a Brother, nor the kindness of a Friend, to find you two
destroying all my hopes, and your own? What ridiculous thought is that which
tells you, your Swords should decide who shall have the Princess? Does your
Highness think that she, or her friends, will be won with a Murder? Or can
Lucius, after all his practice, and knowledge of Cicilia, so mistake her, as to
believe she will be set the Reward of the successfullest Sword? Now she will
despise you both for this bold claim you lay to her; It Is not now, who she will
shall be happy; A duel, Not her kindness must dispose of it; As if Cicilia were
a thing any may have that can catch her: I am ashamed to find you have lost
your Reasons; How must the Praetor and the Prince understand this, when they
find themselves so far neglected? when they find a Sister and a Daughter cut
from their Power by a Duel? Lucius, this Jealous anger will destroy all your
hopes; Pray, Sir, let me know the cause of this sudden change.


Amad. Your brother can best inform you, who, this morning called me out; But,
why, I am yet Ignorant.


Lucius. Your Highness is not so ignorant of the cause as you pretend, though
my brother be; To whom I now confess what your Highness already knows; Know
then, After the Princess, in the presence of Calis and the gods, gave to thy
brother her hand, in faith of Friendship, and her vows were writ in Heaven;
yet, after this, Building on his greatness, The Prince, and his party, have
seduced her heart, and, by the Interest of a Brother, they have made Cicilia
false, and Lucius miserable.


Manl. Ha! What says he?


Lucius. Otho, too, ungrateful Otho, All my services thrown by, has Interessed
himself in my Ruin, and has chid, and threatened his Sister to her dishonor;
Otho, Manlius, Otho, for whom I so often have shed my blood, has gained the
Pretors consent for Prince Amadeo, and Cicilia must be his; And thy brother,
(after her faith given) Rejected; Now if these Injuries be fit for Lucius to
bear, then chide him; if not, retire, and let me finish my Revenge, and do not
thou Join in my dishonor too.


Manlius. Is this Truth, or do you both conspire to make me mad?


Lucius. Truth, by Heaven, after she had given her faith to thy Brother.


Manlius. Put up your Sword then, and take a secret from a desperate heart;
Know, I hate you both, and Cicilia is the Cause; Cicilia has begot that hate;
Hell on all your Trust, would you had been struck blind, and dumb both, when
you saw her first, then your praise had never betrayed me to my ruin. Why did
you send me to her when you found such Magic in her Eyes, as neither of you
could resist? Why should you believe me such a fool, or so blind, as not to
love, or Court such a Blessing? Why should you believe Manlius so cold or Dull,
when he saw such a prize, such a reward for Honor, calmly to sit still while
you possessed her? What claim has either, more then Manlius, But that you saw her
first?


Lucius. Sure, he raves.


Manl. No, Lucius, I love: and, despair of what I love makes me hate the
fortunate Lover; And who ever he be, let him be sure I am in my grave before he
dare possess her; For by Heaven, I will kill him; And since Amadeo is like to
be the man, let him defend himself; she knows, I love; and I know she hates me
for having said so.


(He offers to fight with Amadeo, Lucius beats down his sword.) Lucius. Hold,
by all thy past Honors, or I will strike thee at my Feet; it is no tie of blood
shall make me spare thee; Though I have lost Cicilia, I will preserve my self
fit for her in all her virtues.


Manlius. Why should not I be revenged, as well as Lucius?


Lucius. Take your time; If he out live me, The man will fight; you know he
will, you have tried him; What would the world say, if he should die now? would
they not call us Treacherous and Cowards, that betrayed a Gallant stranger, and
called him forth, under pretense of Honor, to Murder him?


Manlius. Who dares say so, while we live?


Lucius. All dare say, and believe it too.


Amadeo. You had best resolve, Sir, We lose time; for thee (Manlius) I scorn to
claim a friendship with thee; Yet my wonder would fain know, why you are so
furious? Sure it is no news to Manlius, that I love the Princess.


Manlius. You, and all the world may love her, so she loves me; But Cicilia
loves Lucius, and Amadeo shall enjoy her if I prevent it not; This is the cause
of all my Anger: I profess my self an Enemy to any thing more fortunate then I
am in my Love; And if you have her Fathers Consent, and he hers, what rests
then but despair for me? Resolve therefore which will be first; for by degrees,
I will either fall, or destroy you both; Think not upon any other Enemy, while
I am upon the Earth.


Amadeo. His love is not more new, then Extravagant; But if Lucius will look
on, I am ready to punish thy falsehood to a friend, and a brother.


Manlius. And I, to kill a happy Rival, that must, I know, despise me, because
my Mistress does so; All the world will see Rascal writ in my face, if I
outlive story, that have lost a Friend, a Brother, and mine Honor too, for
nothing; Baubles, such as Children play with, will be more precious then the
name of Manlius; 'Twill become a by-name for Treachery and Folly: Despised and
false as Manlius, I will not live to see the Day, -- Defend your self. --
Lucius strikes down his sword. He speaks to Lucius. Be thou the man then, that
has won and lost her; Poor spirited Lucius, to let her go when her faith was
thine? 'Twas Lucius made her hate and despise me. When I was faulty she loved
thee, jealous mad man, for which defend thy poor heart.


Amad. Manlius, Lucius! What Planet has struck these men? Are Amadeo strikes
down his sword. you not ashamed, Brothers, to bend your Swords against each
other? have you neither Honor, nor Reason left?


Manlius. Tell me not of reason, Honor, Friend, nor Brother, They are all Idle
sounds, without love; Without her love I am an Enemy to all the world;
therefore spare your tongue, and use your sword; This Oracle shall tell you who
is designed for Cicilia's love; Do not despise my words, for you shall not be
so diligent to gain her Love, but this shall be as sollicitous in the
destruction of what she loves.


Lucius. Perfidious, Degenerate Wretch, Coward, Bastard, no Brother of Lucius;
hence thou barbarous Dog, be gone; or, by all the gods, that thou have
profaned, under my feet I will tread thy hated flesh.


(Manlius laughs.) Manlius. How often have you seen Manlius thus treated, Sir?
you strike me at your foot! Begin when you dare, you will find this Dog bite
as sharp as Lucius; defend thee.


(They fight, Amadeo parts them, they hear a noise.) Lucius. That Is Dyon's
voice, Hell upon this Beast; We are pursued, I must take some other time; Sir,
I know the Pretors Rage is not to be met now, I shall therefore retreat, till I
can find a fitter time to receive the satisfactio nthis Madman has hindered.


[Exit Luc. Enter Lysander, Dyon, and a Guard. Dyon. Pursue Lucius, while we
secure these; is your Highness wounded?


Amadeo. It seems so, in parting those Madmen; Pray have an Eye to Manlius, for
his designs are false and mischievous.


Lysan. Pray, Sir, retire, your wounds bleed apace.


[Exe. omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Marius, Otho, Clorinda, and Attendants. Marius. NOw you know why we
committed you to your Chamber, and conjured you neither to send, nor receive a
Challenge from those Brothers; And I believe by this time Cicilia is reasonably
mortified with the Paper I gave her; Come, Madam, let us give the Prince a
visit, I hear his wounds are slight; and I doubt not but that I shall give his
Highness full satisfaction, if Dyon Execute my Orders.


[Exit Marius. Otho. Manlius, they say, prevented them.


Clorinda. I am sorry the Praetor was so severe with the Princess, lest she may
believe I am sollicitous, to the prejudice of Lucius, in this business, which
(as well as I love Amadeo) I would not do for all the world.


Otho. Come, Madam, time will heal all these wounds; Love has his Morning and
his Evening fair; and though he threatens storms at Noon, yet he gives us time
to dispatch our business in.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Dyon and Calis. Call. MY Lord, if you have any friendship for Lucius,
immediately find him, and let him know what has past here this morning; tell
him there is no time to delay his fortune; and if he has a hope to continue his
friendship with the Princess, let him this night come to the Garden-house in
some disguise: Amadeo and Clorinda have prevailed, and his Bando will this day
be revoked; by this means there may be some hopes to reconcile himself to the
Princess; when he is there give me notice, and I will contrive it so, that he
shall speak with her; you may tell him how unhandsome and how injurious an
action his jealous madness has made him commit against the Princess; while you
do this, I will go find the miserable Manlius, whose treachery is now
discovered by himself; the noble Cicilia concealed his crime, in kindness to
his Brother; what to say to him, I know not, when I see him. When his heart was
at leisure and innocent, he would not be just to me; and now I know his crimes
lie too heavy on his mind to listen to what I shall say of Love or Reason; yet
I will find him.


Dyon. Pray do so, and till I return have a care that he and the Prince meet
not, for 'twill not pass without some unlucky accident; they are both incensed,
the one with his guilt, and the other with injuries.


Call. I shall use all diligence to prevent their meeting.


[Exe. ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Orante in disguise, like an old Beggar-woman, Bravoes and Banditoes with
him. Band. It Is most certain, Sir, they fought this morning under the wood
side; Lucius is banished too, and the Praetor highly incensed; if I meet him,
have at his head, there is liberty, revenge, and reward, and your Rival gone;
the princess is daily pressed to the marriage with Amadeo, whose wounds are
slight though he keeps his Chamber.


Orante. There is no Star favorable to Orante, else I might have been by this
morning, and with a seasonable thrust or two decided this business; but I am
resolved, thus disguised I will to Court; and ere Lucius can return I will
spoil their mirth. Who is that? observe, A noise within. quick, get your alms
ready for the old woman, and then be gone.


Enter to them Dyon and two Soldiers. Dyon. Who are those? inquire of them the
way to the Temple.


Sold. Good woman, which way must we take to find the old Temple of Juno?


Oran. The first broad Path on your left hand will lead you to the ruin of an
old Altar, from which a Path will conduct you through the Grove to the Temple
of the great Goddess, which stands upon the hill; in whose sacred name bestow
some charity upon a poor wretch, despised and abandoned by gods and men.


Dyon. There; is it far thither? He gives her an Alms.


Orante. A little half hours walk for my aged feet; but you that have youth and
strength will in a thought arrive.


Dyon. There it is, we are to meet him.


[Exe. Dyon and Soldiers. Orante. It Is Dyon and his Soldiers in search of
Lucius.


Band. Dyon is his friend.


Orante. The better, and we shall the sooner find him, by tracing them; you are
certain, if they were enemies he should never have known where he was; observe
their motion, quick, follow them, if we find him we will make a sad sacrifice
to Juno; be all ready and diligent, I will dog them, as if to beg; and when I
stab him, be ready to second me.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. V.
Enter Calis, and Manlius (He would kill himself) she holds his hand (he is
full of distraction.) Manl. NO more; I am not worth thy care, nor kindness; thy
goodness upbraids me, and thy friendship makes me haste to finish what I have
resolved.


Call. By all that ever was precious to Manlius I conjure him to hold that
desperate hand; why should Manlius think the world so wicked as not to pardon
him one folly, a fault only in the intention? Alas, thou art so far from being
wicked, that thou mistak'st thy own good actions; this cruelty thou show thy
self to prevent a sin, is more innocent then never to have been tempted.


Manl. Thy kindness mistakes me, and do not see the wickedness that is in my
mind bent to the destruction and dishonor of what I love, if not prevented;
and when it is done, Remember I must dye; consider that, and then thy kindness
will kill me, while I am worth dying; here take this Dagger, strike, and save
Manlius; if thou let'st me live to commit this violence, all the earth will
stab me with their curses, and I shall fall unpitied and unmourned; be kind
therefore, and kill me, or I shall kill my self, An act abhorred by all the
gods; and thus only thou can save Manlius.


Call. He is distracted sure; Heaven! do you offer me your Dagger? would you
have me that love Manlius become his murderer? unkind, is this the return of
all my love and service? though thy insensible heart would never be brought to
return my love; yet, methinks, thou might be contented that I was miserable
all the days of my life, without seeking to draw murder upon me, to rob my
soul of her peace too.


Manl. How much thou mistak'st the justice of this act, in executing me; thou
but savest the lives of two innocent persons, which thus, by chance, the gods
have given to thy protection; and if thou now refusest to prevent my sins, it is
Calis, not Manlius is guilty hereafter; it is Calis murders Lucius; it is Calis
that ravishes Cicilia; it is Calis that stabs Manlius to the soul, by resusing,
now he is innocent, to prevent what she knows he is bent to act; Kill me then,
and save thy friend, Kill me and save a family, Kill me now, and all good men
shall mourn for me; for to have been tempted is no sin, thou say, it is
yielding to temptation makes the crime, thus to resist would be an honor; and
thus would thou show thy virtue and mine, that choose rather to dye then to
be wicked; and kind Calis durst kill what she loved, rather then see him
outlive his honor.


Call. This Reason bids her love, and save thee; and Manlius ought to glory in,
not punish, this nobleness in his mind, whose heart is so full of honor he
will rather dye then think a sin; be still so severe, be still an enemy to that
design, it is like your self; he or she that never was tempted ought not to
glory in their innocence, but to praise their good luck; and now my friend
hates himself most I love him best; now when he would destroy himself he is fit
to be protected by all good things.


Manl. You will not kill me then?


Call. Heaven forbid. --


[She offers to go away. Manl. For pity, for charities sake, do not leave me;
or if you He offers her his Dagger. will, do but kill me ere you go; you will
not? Live then to curse me, fall all my sins on thee, and this cruel kindness.
--


[He goes out, and she follows him.] [Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Lucius, Dyon and Soldiers. Dyon. DId you ever love her?


Lucius. Love Cicilia? yes, with my soul, and she deserved it then; for she had
honor, beauty, and a thousand graces; such excellencies too, as are strangers
to all the minds and faces I ever saw, or practiced; this even my hate and fear
must confess; but her mind, of late, has stooped, if not to sin and dishonor,
yet guilty vanity has stained it; she cannot love enough to oblige any man, and
yet she loves so much as has disobliged a Nation; to be born in her own Country
is a crime, and cause enough to be despised; why else were Valerius, Polydor,
Thersis, or Turnus, neglected? Men that through the whole world have had
public Honor, famous The names of her friends. for Wit, Person, Fortune,
Courage; and if those virtues could have prevaild', why were they disgusted?
her reason was, she knew them not, but I rather believe they knew her, and
retired betimes, before she had power to sacrifice their peace, as she has done
mine, to this stranger; Amadeo only is mentioned with honor, at his danger she
starts, and grows pale at the sight of his wounds; a wanton wanderer only in
his way to Rome must make her break her faith to Lucius; and in scorn of the
Roman Nation, this Mountainer must have that presented him which we in tears
and wounds have begged; how often have we exposed our selves to certain dangers
to deserve from her a smile, while the emulous World grew Rivals for her
favors? how many great souls have unwillingly entered the Elizian shades,
because they were to leave the conversation of Cicilia here? but now that she
is false, who would live, or love?


Dyon. If this be so, why this rage? if her beauty has lost her power, and you
your love, let it rest like Tales ill told, unregarded and forgotten; but if
they have their power still, which your anger confesses, let me have leave to
defend them.


Lucius. Here needs no Argument; all that have eyes must confess Cicilia had
all that was beauty; but since she has broke her faith, it is become a Chaos
all; for perjured beauty is like flying Armies, and blasted Fields that have no
grace, no terror left, nor longer bear any mark or character of the Deities
that moved in them, but the wounds of those Rods that in vengeance have fallen
upon them.


Dyon. You only can accuse the Princess of this fault, for your addresses are
to the world yet a secret; and Prince Amadeo's love, public as his person,
even when he was prisoner here; but that the Princess paid him more then
civility; your fears are the first that accuse her, and I believe, deceive even
your self.


Lucius. Deceived! no Dyon, her love is as visible as her beauty, durst he,
else, move the Praetor for a consent, who you know dotes upon her, and her words
like Laws or Oracles have still been powerful with him? nor was he ignorant of
our friendship, no nor displeased; Come Dyon, you know she must consent before
this be acted, and then to entertain me in discourse in her own Chamber till
you came with a guard to make me a prisoner; her Brother too confined by a
trick, while her Favorite is left free, to conclude their Hymen's; and for the
more security, my injured hands were bound from revenging their treachery; what
is visible, if this be dark? the day is not more clear then her falsehood, and I
have traced him in his love; his steps are as visible as when in snow we chased
him; she is a Roman, Dyon, and will have her vanity satisfied; we that are her
slaves, Prince Orante and my self, and (the falsest of men) my Brother Manlius,
she is proud of all; Nay, Manlius has confessed his making love, ere she
detected the Traitor; proud of all, she can in triumph lead, but how she is
changed, witness gods and men! when I first received this fire which now
afflicts me, with what fear and silence I made my way to her! with what
reverence I approached her breast! till then unacquainted with love, as she
professed, kindly still interpreting every sigh; and fearing my fears only, she
could then read an humble motion; and every sad look had her pity and pleased,
when any handsome accident presented an occasion to please me; thus in silent
secretness we in friendship past our days undiscerned, or envied; the fish that
glides in the silent stream, the Parthian Arrow, nor Birds that gently cut the
air, make not less noise, nor leave less paths nor stains behind, then our
love; the most jealous eye, Dyon, could not perceive we thought of each other
when we had but one thought.


Dyon. How came you to fall from this height, thus to suspect her virtue? that
her eyes have the same majesty, appears by Amadeo's love, who deserves more
then Lucius, or she less then Lucius, else she would still hold her power,
which once with a look commanded him.


Lucius. Alas, Dyon, what signifies the fire in those eyes, to Lucius, since
it is exposed like those of the sacrifice, where every cold pretense may warm it
self? Cicilia's breast is now a shrine for every lame and blind passion, to
offer up their impotent loves to, and there they drop their sickly false tears;
this is it that puts a cloud before those stars; for eyes that with pleasure on
all faces roll, can no longer Lucius heart control.


Dyon. See the difference of men's opinions; you ground your displeasure upon
that which to me would be joy and satisfaction; for you complain because all
the world loves your Mistress; do you think Apollo would make the worse
household god for having had a Temple and an Oracle at Delphos? does not the
fame of many Oracles give us faith that there is truth in his answers, or is he
lessened in his Deity by having received a sacrifice, and given an answer?
'tisyour case, nor has your jealousy any ground; for all those rivals you so
apprehend come but like pilgrims to the princess, they approach no nearer then
her Temple doors, her eyes, her ears, there they their offering pay, Cicilia is
within; and while Lucius keeps his virtue, they may knock at her heart, but he
only will be let in; for it is a truth, (that honor has in all ages proved)
never any woman that had honor lost it by being handsomely beloved; for while
she is pursued with honor, she can lose none; nor gain any when she pursues
any man; therefore leave this sullen retreat and jealous humor, and know if
the Princess be faulty it is when she seeks Lucius, not when Amadeo or Manlius
Court her; for it is certain, wooing women, if they do not want before, yet then
they lose something of their value; and I do here confidently pronounce the
virtuous Princess so innocent from all that you accuse her of, that she must
commit a fault ere she can pardon Lucius.


Lucius. Dyon judges by the eye, so did I once, and purchased her friendship at
the rate of my heart, because the prospect pleased me; but how sad and how
unhealthy the seat has proved the world can witness; but thou, Dyon, and the
rest that admire her now are but passengers, and such are by their eyes
deceived as I was; but stay and inhabit in her mind, and then tell me how vain,
how unconstant, and how ambitious Cicilia is of all friendships, which makes
her unworthy of any; her vows have no roots, and such trees every passion
shakes, and every cross withers.


Dyon. I have no patience to hear you give such a character of a heart you know
too great for such low thoughts to possess; and were you not my friend I should
not suffer it.


Lucius. Who knows better then I? she had a great and gallant heart, the Empire
too her own, till vanity betrayed it; but now it is torn and divided into
several states; Orante, Manlius, and Amadeo have their several Provinces there;
so might I, if I would be contented with a Colony; but I scorn a part, or
corner of a heart; and till Cicilia be again reduced to Monarchy, I am free.


Dyon. If you have reason, return; and with your presence prevent this danger;
and with your friendship defend her from such a destruction; this scandalous
and sullen retreat betrays her to the enemy; had you heard her plead this day
to the Praetor in your behalf, your soul would blush, and abhor this mean
character.


Lucius. Have I denied my protection? did I not stay till she betrayed me to
prison? have I not like the kind Shepherd stood all storms, to guard her Flock;
which be it never so full or fair, if the Nymph that owns them subject be to
stray as they, by our gods, I would not her Shepherd be, to become Pan. A
Mistress that must be watched and folded every night, or else she will be gone,
before I would her Lover be, I would change conditions with that Tree. What
do thou gaze at? this Bracelet? it is hers; When Lucius points to the Tree,
Dyon^ looks at his hand. and I confess it bound me more once then her arms can
now; for since I find I have fellows in these chains, and that her Auborn
Tresses grow as free as fair, and every Lover reaps her hair, Dyon must
confess, it is not Jasons Fleece that I have won, though she Medea prove.


Dyon, aside. I must not cross him now, his jealousy is too high wrought;
besides, I know his nature is easier led then drove; in this particular Lucius
has some reason; nor can I justify a Maid in such actions; for women that will
give and take, for fancy, are not safe; because custom may bring them to like
some things so well as to purchase them they may be persuaded to buy and sell;
then the man that can soonest flatter them into a bargain has the undoing of
them.


Lucius. So he may; but whoever he be that will betray the Princess so, be sure
Lucius be first in his grave, else all my rage thrown by, I shall find love
enough to revenge, with sad fates, such a treason; for if I cannot suffer
others to love her, Dogs gnaw me when I outlive him that hates her, though it
be my self.


Dyon. There is much more reason in this passion then in your other Arguments;
for if the Princess could have learned the guilt of other women, it is probable
she might have learned their craft too, and dissembled; which I am certain her
fervent kindness (pleading in tears upon her knees, vowing friendship and love
for Lucius, receiving no denial, making all his crimes so many loves to her,
and so many Arguments for her love and protection) will acquit her from; till
that fatal Paper, which you sent the Prince, was by her Father given her, which
when she had read she was struck with the unkindness, and the displeasure of
that thought that told Lucius falls on Dyon's neck. her Lucius had injured her.


Lucius. O Dyon, Dyon, thou have perfect Honor: a Faithful friend dwells in
Dyon, one whom misery nor passion has divided from his Friend; when all the
World armed against Lucius, he took my part; how I love thee for chiding me,
and defending what I love! But alas, my Friend, my heart is grown sick of Love
and fear: You must not believe all I say, I scarce do it my self; It Is my fear,
not my faith, that speaks in this passion; yet she was too cruel, because she
might be mistaken; Manlius mistook it you saw, for Love; how then can you blame
me for thinking I am robbed, when the Thief confesses the theft; guilty Manlius
confessed his Crime, which she hid, and cherished; But I hope, my Friend (when he
has told her of my fears) will present them too as the effects of a distracted
Lover, which I would fain beg her pardon for;


Dyon. Most gladly; It Is Calis her counsel too, that you should come in some
disguise to the Gardiners house this evening, where she will give you an
opportunity of speaking with the Princess.


Lucius. All my Rage, if she believe I love, will find her Excuse; for who is
he that loves and will not fear to lose the thing he loves? Dear Dyon, she had
wont to praise particularity and Constancy, and to admire it as the greatest
virtue either Sex could arrive at; and call them the minds Chastity* without
which what that woman will do with a Lover that Lusts so for a Lover, is easier
feared then prevented.


Dyon. This I shall say; only promise me to be quiet, till I come, and let
your mind be in repose.


Lueius. I obey.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Orante and Bandito. Orante. It Is Lucius, and Dyon, let them pass; This
Evening, we must dispatch our business: Amadeo has her Fathers; But this
Cicilia's heart, and both my hate; and they shall both feel my rage as high as
their hopes, or my despair; And while they dispute which in her affection
Highest stood; Despised Orante shall fill the Scene with rage and Blood.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Otho, Clorinda, and Amadeo. Clorinda. HAs your Highness seen your Sister
since this misfortune?


Otho. No, Madam; her griefs are yet too fresh; it is better to give her passion
some time to recover; This Night I mean to visit her, though I know her heart
is struck deep with the injury Lucius did her; which is the more unsupportable,
because we know his fault, which she cannot now hide from us, and therefore she
will punish; And who knows but that it may take off that obstinate kindness she
has set upon him?


Amadeo. When you mention me, Sir, to her, pray only present my Service, and
be pleased to ask her, whether I shall have the honor of her Commands to Rome,
whither, within few days, I shall depart, that my absence may give her leave to
pursue her Friendship with Lucius, if it be his Fortune; and time, I hope, will
reconcile to her mind the Name of Amadeo; But ere I go I shall beg the Honor
to speak with her, and take a sad Farewell.


Otho. Your Highness is Melancholy, and I hope a day or two will remove it,
and this resolution; To morrow, the Praetor has ordered to chase the Boar, a
sport your Highness has not often seen in the valleys.


Clorinda. The open Country will sure make the Chase much more pleasant; for
our hills keep us from being in at the fall, which is the heat, and pleasure of
the Chase.


Amadeo. This is for to morrow; But I must know where to wait upon your
Highness when Lysander returns, for I hear he has met with Lucius; I confess I
would gladly, this Night, undeceive him, and if it were possible, embrace him
as a friend; And then I may hope to see to morrow rise with Joy; For my heart
witnesses I have no rancour against him, since I perceived all his Injuries to
me proceeded from his Love to Cicilia; And since his Stars have preferred him
before me; I shall be so Civil to her choice, as to believe Lucius much more
fortunate and gallant then Amadeo.


Otho. Trust me, Sir, this is a kind of Complement I understand not; and I here
profess, were I Rival with any Diety in the Love of fair Clorinda, I would make
no Complement at this rate, till Hymen had decided whose the Reward should be.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Dyon and Cicilia. Cicilia. THis from Lucius? sure he is mad to urge me
thus.


Dyon. Alas, Madam, it was love in Excess corrupted into Jealousy, (not he)
that said it, and his distraction is fitter for your pity, then your Anger. --
'Twas ill done of me, to tell her what he Aside. said in this passion!


Cicilia. Jealous? of whom? His own merit? that was only fit to be suspected;
This Paper is enough; he needed not to have She shows the challenge. blown the
fire again; it is enough Dyon, and too late, he will find it; Cruel and sudden,
may false winds blow in all thy thoughts false as those, thou told'st the Story
of thy love in to me, too, too Credulous Fool, may storms of doubts and fears
still afflict him, and distract his soul, as he has done mine, by a low mean
Jealousy, which has rendered me Justly despised, for having so partially
preferred Lucius before the world; Amadeo, Orante, all that were displeased,
turn back and see me revenge you on my self, while I confess my punishment
just, though nothing be more unjust, then Lucius to become my punisher.


Dyon. When your Passion, Madam, will give me leave to speak, I am confident, I
shall make it appear Lucius has no Crime to answer, but what has his Root in
Love; for even Jealousy has been held Loves fruit, and such as even hatred has
relished.


Cicilia. Jealousy! Who, that has Honor, can defend him, or his Injuries?
Does not the first word, Jealousy, whispered in a Lovers ear, call his
Mistress whore; And since false Lucius has thus incensed my heart, and forced
me to play Ariadne's part, exposed and left on that barbarous Rock, his Breast,
Dyon, shall see me, with this hair and Eyes, crown some Rival, and shine in
another Sphere; for though it break my heart, I will be revenged to the
height; and Lucius shall see a desparing despised Rival fold this breast in
his surpised Arms, and then his jealous heart will split with rage, and
destroy the monster.


Dyon. Well, Madam, I shall take my leave, and hope to find an hour more
seasonable, to deliver my Opinion in; I shall only beg now, that your Highness
will not, in this Passion, take any sudden Resolution, lest your Repentance
come too late.


[Exit Dyon. Enter Calis. Cicilia. O Calis, had thou come sooner thou
might have been a Witness, and a Judge of the Cause, as well as a Partaker
of the Rage I am in. Lucius has, by Dyon, sent me such a remedy for Love:
Would thou believe his poor heart should avow a Jealousy for the Prince, and
accuse me, as if my heart were a Common Inn, for every wandering Lover to bait
at.


Calis. 'Twas my fear his old disease had seized him; But what can he say?


Cicilia. All that his malice and his anger prompts him to; But how false,
Heaven and Calis can witness; Ambition, Covetousness, Vanity; All that is ill
his Injurious soul has thrown upon me; If ambition could have tempted me with
her false light, How came Valerius to go single hence, whose birth and Fortunes
were swelled with the favor of two Kings, and in his power the disposing of
all Honors, and all preferments of three rich Nations flowing with peace;
himself too a man made up of all the Gods: yet these and him I looked upon with
Indifference.


Calis. Your Highness was not born to woo.


Cicilia. No, Calis; and therefore Valerius had only a Courtesy for a leg;
and this false man knows, 'twas neither Ambition, Beauty or Fortune, I loved,
But Love; If valor could have conquered, why did Polydor sigh? If Courage
would have forced my heart, it had been his, for there was a quiet Courage, and
conquest without noise, an humble meek valor waited on Polydor; why Jealous
then? Fool, Fool; If Beauty could have charmed me, thou might have feared
Thersis; for sure he would have been the business of my mind, before the world,
Thersis must have been preferred, where beauty can take place, for there was
beauty in all her choicest dress; Manly negligence, unthought of graces,
sweetness and softness in every look, no Art, all careless, natural and
unaffected sweetness, yet graceful and pleasant in every motion; a harmony in
his whole form, with a kind languishing modesty in his eyes, that could he
have loved, he promised such a nature as must have won; if Thersis would have
played these Cards he could not lose; but 'twas no reason lookers on should win
the stake they durst not venture for; and if not of Thersis, why jealous? Fool,
fool.


Call. Alas, Madam, nor these, nor Turnus with his Voice nor Harp that charmed
the world, could fetter your great mind. This I have heard him say, with
vanity, in his joy.


Cicil. No Calis, his heart knows 'twas not these in all their glories could
prevail; nor one made up of all these could make me stoop; all these without
love, though I value them, I will not sacrifice my freedom to; why then
jealous? Fool, fool. O Calis, if Lucius had not pretended other title to my
heart, I had not now been miserable; 'twas love, Calis, well dissembled love,
which in a bleeding passion armed Lucius; in silent tears he has assailed my
heart, Lucius, that durst fight, kneeled, weeping at my feet; Lucius that had
wit and honor, stood dumb, not able to speak sense, but stammer'd out his
story, while his breast swelled with love and fear; as if his kind heart were
grown too big for his breast, and too little for his love; when I saw that, I
had no power to resist the storm; but striking all my sails submitted my
Resolution and my Reason to his grief; and to cure his despair have made my
self thus desperate; for then, me thought love had raised that storm; me
thoughts I saw his painted wings wet with his tears, and scorched with his
sighs, and love sure was moving in that storm; nay, that storm was Love it
self. O Calis, that shaking, that dumbness, those tears, his Quiver, Bow and
Arrows are not more his characters, then they (when they are true) but these
were dissembled all; and my revenge shall be as curious now, as my love was
then, which I will take at height; follow Calis, and be a witness of that as
thou have been of my love and injuries; no words; By thy friendship, I conjure
thee, no dispute; for I am resolved.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. V.
Enter Manlius and Calis, Dogged by Orante and Banditoes. Manl. VIctory has
undone us, and now our slaves lead us in triumph, and every passion commands
Manlius, to whom this fatal peace has proved far more fierce then war, while
lust fired by beauty burnt at every eye, and made slaves of virtue, honor, and
all that is precious, till thy kindness, gentle Calis, restored to my heart her
peace again; without thy friendship, my despair had run to his old remedy,
wounds; for know, this breast is so used to them, it is scarce well but when
it is wounded; 'twas foul blood that made this war in my heart; dear, let me
ease it of that dangerous guest, lest it put me upon some new horrid crime.


Call. Manlius is so severe against himself for one fault, which I know he
cannot so soon repent as the Princess can forgive; for she yet loves Manlius as
part of Lucius; whose guilt is so unpardonable, as if not suddenly redeemed, I
fear a danger not to be resisted; but I am now in haste, and cannot stay to
tell you my fears (though it shall be my business to provide against it)
because the Princess stays for me; but to morrow I will not fail to bring her
hither, as soon as the chase is up; till when lie quiet, and leave the rest to
me.


Manl. With what brow shall I see her, having confessed my sin to the Prince
and my Brother? which she had concealed; her goodness still exceeds our guilt,
which makes my crime more monstrous, and I that am to leave soliciting my
love, find hourly greatness of mind, and new virtues to build upon; and what at
first was passion and lust she has digested into Reason, Love and Adoration;
what then rests for me to pay that debt I owe my friend?


Call. Let me see Manlius reconciled to himself, and honor once possess his
place again, and I shall find a thousand ways to be happy in my friendship; nor
is the Princess so poor in virtue, but she can pay her debts to Lucius, and yet
reserve an Alms for Manlius; I heard her once confess your speech had such a
wild boldness in it she took it rather for madness then love; and it bred her
pity, rather then anger, your friends too plead with her; and though she will
not chide for that sudden fact committed by chance, yet take heed of falling
into the fit again; 'twill then be looked upon as a disease in Manlius; and
what is mercy now, to pass by, then her honor and justice will both be engaged
to punish.


Manl. I am resolved, for now I dare dye again; 'twill be always in my choice
to dye fit for her pity when I cannot live fit for her friendship; and having
such a guide as Calis my heart will find the path it lost, and stray no more at
this sad rate; Good gods, how do they do that are villains always! I have been
one but some few days, but would not continue so; I would live a Dog first.


Call. Farewell, all peace rest with my friend; this resistance, this return
shows his virtues never to have been tempted; never to have fallen speaks only
happy stars, no tried virtue; to resist the temptation is worth the name of
Manlius, to have brought back such a servant as Manlius, gone astray from
honor, whose peace of mind is my reward.


Manl. I will not promise, till my heart be purged by confession of her faults,
and beautified by the Princesses Pardon; but then, if the ever noble Calis
would accept of such a present as Manlius friend, Death only shall make him
leave to serve her.


Call. No more; when Manlius is least himself he was then a blessing Calis
prayed for; and 'twas happy for me that he fell from that height of honor,
since this fall has made him mine; if he had not lost some of his pride and
value, I fear he would have joined with the world in opinion that he was too
great a blessing for Calis; yet I kept my friendship perfect, and kinder stars
have blessed my love, whose humble wings never durst, till he was faulty, hope to
reach his heart, and this fiery trial has but purified, not stained my friend,
whom all the gods protect.


Manl. If your leisure could stay to hear me, I would chide Calis for
descending so low as to value such a wretch as Manlius before her own virtue;
but I shall look upon all these kind thoughts, as so many links to the chain
she has laid upon my heart, which by a faithful, grateful, and eternal
friendship, shall make me esteem my self her slave whose honor and kindness
has redeemed me.


Call. No more, no more; -- Calis is too happy here; tomorrow, if heaven say
Amen, I will find you, and bring the Princess with They embrace. me.


[Exeunt ambo. Enter Orante, and a Banditoe, Turnus, and look after them (as
they go out.) Orante. Ha! Manlius a Rival too, and the foolish Calis believes
he can forsake Cicilia for her, when honor and a Brothers interest could not
bind him; does she think her foolish Chains and Bracelets can bind his rough
mind when lust and rage has blown his blood to such a height that the reverence
and beauty of the Princess could not hold him in the bounds of his respects?
but why do I trouble my self with this, since it is a chance has done more for
me then all I could have designed; the Princess will be here alone, to morrow.


Band. And shall she go again? if she do, I would Orante were in his grave;
Death, Sir, do something, to vex that cursed brood; since she will not have
your love, take her honor, and please her in spite of her teeth, and then you
shall see all her Lovers stare upon each other, and pass by her as if she were
stinking fish, and I dye laughing to see that proud fool of fortune vexed to
death; 'twould be a full revenge on Amadeo, and Otho too, that insolent Roman;
then Lucius, how he would storm! God's Death, do it, or let me do it, and do you
look on; we can escape in this disguise, the act once done, by flying to our
own shapes again.


Orante. I love her yet enough to be pleased in the act; and I have hate enough
to take pleasure in vexing her, the revenge will be high too.


Band. She will come alone too; God's Death, it is such an occasion; if we had
designed a revenge we could not have hoped it; and if you let it pass when your
pleasure and your anger both prompt you, I shall never blame Otho for despising
you, for I shall do it my self; the thought affects me, 'twill so vex her soul
to have the crooked, ugly, despised, lame Orante enjoy her, without making an
excuse, and pluck that fruit her pride has let Princes sue for upon their
knees; I would do it too, in this old woman's habit, while we persuade her 'twas
the Devil in a Witches shape; you shall not be seen till we have bound her; why
do you study? Is there any thing in our fortune or danger worth Orante's
thoughts? is not death after this revenge better then to live deposed and
despised?


Orante. It is decreed; hence Love, all thy charms thus I blow away; and a
thousand thanks, kind Turnus, for awaking my heart from that sleepy coldness
that has slaved it thus long, the mischief will be more then the pleasure
pleasing; and to enjoy her, and despise her, full revenge for her past scorn,
and satisfaction for my despised love; in her Rape both my blood and mind will
taste their several sweets; love in lawful bed might have found one pleasure;
but now my revenge will have her share too; this stroke strikes all at once,
Father, Brother, Rivals; the whole Nation are wounded in it, who in their women
are more concerned then in their gods.


Band. And, which adds more to the pleasure, she that would have satisfied any
Lover rather then Orante shall taste no other man.


Orante. No, Turnus, nor live (if this Dagger hold his temper) to distinguish
betwixt Orante's kisses and Lucius's.


Band. If she be of the true Roman breed you may spare your pains; for Cicilia
will find a Dagger of her own, while Tarquin Orante, in the old woman's habit,
laughs unseen.


Orante. First we must kill Manlius, lest he play some pranks, and hinder our
design.


Band. That shall be my business, as soon as it is dark, I know his Quarter; let
us lose no time, but call our friends together, for tomorrow will be quickly
here.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Cicilia, and Clorinda, and Amadeo follows them. Clor. YOur pardon,
Madam, for this intrusion, which, but upon this occasion, I should not have
committed; my Brother being to take his leave, if not troublesome, would say:
something of his own griefs; whose sad story I fear I may spoil in the delivery.


Amad. It Is little, Madam, I have to say; your pardon for having said I loved,
and leave to love you still; your pity and your justice, for a passion most
reasonable, because 'twas of an object most divine, is what I now shall beg;
nor can you with justice punish me for what has honor to justify it self
with, when it shall be a crime to love the Princess Cicilia as Amadeo does,
without desiring her to be unjust to her self, without taking one favor from
him that has so highly deserved above me: for I shall not be so partial to my
self, as to question the judgment of your choice; yet thus much I may say, my
heart has never lost one grain of that honor 'twas born to, nor one spark of
that fire it first took at Cicilia's eyes; Absence, time, nor War, no, not
Cicilia's love to another, could change my heart; though rigid honor made me
once fly from her, yet that love and honor both now have called me back; and
again send me from this Paradise to eternal misery. This Riddle, Madam, those
Tyrants will read best to your mind.


Cicil. That you could know my fate, Sir, and I not tell it you! you will find me
so miserable, I can neither be happy, nor make you so; yet time will justify
me to the Prince, by giving him un-imagined reasons of my misfortunes. I know
your Highness will when you are gone, at least, inquire after Cicilia, if then;
I do not let you see Lucius had only my passion, and Prince Amadeo my reason,
then let him condemn me; and at such a rate I will punish my rash heart for
giving it self away upon so little trial, as even your self shall pity me; and
when I lose that esteem for your Highness virtue that a gallant man can pretend
to, and not lose his value of me, then let all the world despise me, more I
cannot say; all that I can give with honor, take.


Amad. He that desires more must not have such an object as your Highness, nor
such a subject as Amadeo's heart to work upon; who now without envy looks upon
Lucius and his fortune. For heaven witness, I have all the ends my heart
desires in the friendship of the fair Cicilia.


Enter Calis, and Lucius as from the Garden-house. Call. Stay here, till I find
the Princess; Remember you observe my counsel, let her passion pass; answer
little, defend nothing, for your fault is not to be justified; besides, I know
when you are silent her anger will want what to say; but from your answer she
will still gather substance to express her displeasure, which is such as I fear
you will scarce excuse, especially since your last madness; what made you send
Dyon to her with that ridiculous Message which has almost distracted her?


Lucius. What is past is not to be remedied; 'twas Lysander told me she gave
the Prince a visit since we fought; and that Amadeo and Clorinda are never from
her, which being my enemies, and she knowing their design upon her, and my
relation to her, methinks, till my return it would not have been unreasonable
to have expected she should have kept a distance with my Rival, and my Enemies.
-- Hah! see where they are, and Amadeo on his knees Amad. kisses Cicil. hand.
kisses her hand, Hell strike him; ha! she weeps too: O Calis, Calis, she is
false, she is false, she is perjured; trust the Wind, or Sea as, soon as any
woman; what can she say now, let it be chance or design in both, she is false,
Cicilia's false.


[Exit Lucius. Call. Stay, you are mad; what should this mean? his rage is
beyond counsel; this accident is beyond my guess.


Cicil. Ha! what voice was that?


Amad. A lying one, and a Traitors 'twas, whoever he be that spoke it; and if
he escape me, Fortune shall do more for him then justice dares do for me.


Call. Stay, Sir, give me leave to speak before your anger take its course.


Cicil. Hold, Sir; whoever he be, he is not worth your sword; He dra^s his
(...) and fill ^^ Amadeo meets Calis at the ^^^. My innocence none can better
justify then your self; and none that has honor will question mine; and I beg
this favor from the Prince, to look on some few days, and see me take mine own
revenge for this scandal; till tomorrow, Madam, I must desire your pardon for
parting thus abruptly. -- Calis, a word.


[Exeunt Cicilia and Calis. Clor. 'Twas Lucius's voice.


Amad. I knew that, but was loath to grieve her heart with telling her so.


Clor. You must expect his fury should discharge it self upon you; therefore be
so just to the Princess, as calmly to tell him his error; and upon how
unreasonable grounds he builds his jealousy, this will confirm what you have
said to her; for every fault Lucius commits her kindness makes heavy to her;
and what ere you may believe, let him be never so guilty, she will not love his
punisher; for to make his faults public by Amadeo, is to upbraid her; and if
you would destroy a Rival more gracious then your self, wisely see, and seem to
hide his faults; then all your gallantry is his poison, and obligations upon
her; I would not now fight with him till he struck me; and that patience shall
win more from a generous heart, like hers, then thou can possibly reap with
thy sword; for she and all the world knows, it is not fear of Lucius but love to
Cicilia makes Amadeo spare even his enemy, because she loves him.


Amad. Dear Clorinda, from love and thee I have learned two hard lessons; it is
to stoop to Love and Anger; and I shall only expect what he will do, and
resolve in order to thy counsel; I confess, I now begin to pity him, even my
self that was this morning his enemy; sure Fortune begins to frown upon him,
there was strange malice in this chance, to bring him to see that only which
must vex him.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Lucius solus. Lucius. TOmorrow they hunt in the Forest; I will meet
him, and in this disguise take my revenge; if he escape me, let him take her
for whom I scorn to fight; but that I hate him more then I love her; besides, I
know it will strike her soul to have him fall by me, and to see him killed for
whom she broke her faith; this revenge will render her despised, having neither
Honor nor a Lover left.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Cicilia and Calis. Cicil. O Calis, how vain are our thoughts, how
endless those desires that rule our hearts! Lucius his jealousy has so humbled
my heart, so discouraged me in the pursuit of happiness, that my soul is grown
desperate; it is vanity for any Maid to hope by Reason, or Virtue, to tie any
man to her friendship; the blind pursuit of some, may by chance some minutes be
happy; But no Rule can prescribe a certain way to make a Lover happy; Now I
find, it had been better far for me to have had a nature like other common
women, with a mind easily satisfied, and in a modest Ignorance have believed
all that their false Sex said, and have taken what my fate would have sent me,
then to labor the knowledge of the best minds, and, with a sweet Vexation,
make my self fit for such as I cannot find, so to be only more miserable then
other Women; for they in their folly gain that bliss I in my dreams have only
found, and not knowing better enjoy all their wishes, living contented, and
dying loving, and lamented, whilst I in pain languish, having lost that pride
and value of my self which Lucius once begot; But 'twas flattery all; I am not
fair nor virtuous sure; There is no Magic in this Form, as that dissembler
swore; Else were those graces here, how came Lucius to despise me? Had I
virtue, how durst that dissembler doubt my honor? O Calis, this scorn has
robbed me of all my Friendship, I have scarce enough left to protect my breast
against my own hands, which hate the heart that this false youth has wounded;
Therefore no more, no more, I know 'twas he, and I am resolved; and since Calis
has sworn to be secret, she shall now know my design.


Calis. Madam, I was never so much Lucius's as to abandon your Highness, for
him; when I can serve him without prejudice of my Faith, I shall do it, in
memory that he was once your friend.


Cicilia. That Idle thought is past and gone, my anger is resolved into Reason;
yet his Injuries are such, that I can calmly tell thee, thou might as soon
reconcile that Eternal Quarrel betwixt death and Nature, as Lucius and my
heart. His jealousy has committed such low sins; I wonder he is not ashamed to
converse with such mean thoughts; and I hate my self, to think I was such a
fool as to let it be twice in Lucius his power to Injure me; But, from this
hour, all the memory I shall retain of such a Crime as his Friendship, shall be
to show him I am Innocent when his Repentance shall come too late.


Calis. I hear, and grieve to hear, (You are both Subject to passion) and your
miseries are like to be as great as your hearts; And though I dare say, neither
of you love any thing better then each other, Yet that Love is like to be a
fatal Enemy; for your Anger and displeasure is as high as his Jealousy and
Rage; No one of you having patience to defer your Anger, or Revenge, till you
see each other; This wild Justice, which both pursue thus passionately, I fear
you and all that love you may repent too late.


Cicilia. That Is my hope, and my design, that misery is now my souls wish, for
you know I am Innocent; But since Lucius can doubt my Honor twice, and not
speak to me once, he shall never be satisfied by Cicilia but when it must breed
his despair, which shall only find him when I am out of possibility to redeem
him. For know, my soul is resolved to Morrow to find his Rival, and give him
all the Joys I had laid up in store for Lucius; Though it break my heart, I
will do it; which I know 'twill do, when I shall find my self embraced by his
Rival. This (Calis) is the Revenge I will take upon his Jealous Soul; and, if
he love, 'twill wound him more then his own Dagger; For to a Lover it must be
perfect misery, to see his Mistress condemned to a loathed Bed.


Calis. Heaven forbid -- upon my knees, Madam, I beg, you She offers to kneel.
will not Sacrifice to your passion all things that ought to be precious with
your self, your Friends, and your honor; No one of which but must be stained
and wounded by this Action; And give me leave to say, it is not all the virtues
that wait upon Amadeo, though in your lawful Bed, can preserve your Highness
from the Censure of the world. In this Action you will lose many grains of
Honor; for though the Prince weigh down Lucius, yet Lucius had your Faith.


Cicilia. Amadeo? No, Calis; Prince Amadeo is as far distant from his hope, as
Lucius.


Calis. Not Amadeo? Heaven guard my poor heart; If Manlius be the man, I am
lost; for I cannot with honor hinder his hopes; what shall I believe?


Cicilia. When saw you Manlius?


Calis. Ha! Now, Manlius, thou shall find I love thee above my self. Lately,
Madam, and a sad penitent for his Crimes; Is there no hope his repentance may
find your pardon; are his faults allied to Lucius? I hope they are, else Calis
is miserable.


(aside.) Cicilia. No, fears, Calis; my Intent is to punish the faults in one
brother, not to encourage them in the other; and my fate guides me to a Revenge
on Lucius, not Calis that is my friend.


Calis. Then the gods are favorable to Prince Amadeo.


Cicilia. No, Calis; Prince Amadeo has too many virtues to make me happy, as
Lucius has too few; and 'twill be as great a dishonor for Cicilia to marry the
Prince, as it is virtue in me to renounce Lucius.


Calis. Too many virtues? Heaven bless me, what fine points do we propose to
make our selves miserable! too much honor, and too many virtues, to become
Cicilia's Hymen's; this is a Riddle I understand not.


Cicilia. To be revenged, and save mine honor, is now my business; not to give
my fame to punish Lucius; Can you persuade the world that I left Lucius, and
resolved to punish my self for his Crimes, when they see me married to Amadeo?
A man that is made up of all that is Excellent, Great, or Honorable? one that
might Justify a Maid, even in the breach of Faith? should I marry him, 'twould
make the guilty Lucius Innocent; and Innocent Cicilia as black in story as
jealous Lucius shall be; for who will stick to say, when we are married, Lucius
then was Jealous upon too sad a ground? No, Calis, having practiced and known
the virtues of Amadeo, I confess, my heart told me he was a Subject fit for any
Lovers fear, where he would become a Rival; Therefore betimes, to prevent such
a danger as Lucius his Jealousy, you can witness I gave Lucius my vows and
faith, before the gods and thee; And after that, to have him doubt, and not
only fear, but call me false, robbing me of that honor, and good Name, which
with his life he should have defended, making himself those scandalls a Gallant
man would have stabbed, or strangled in the bosom of a Brother? But Lucius is
false; it is not a kind fear which all that Love must have; but a mean
jealousy, which does not only make me unfit for his Friendship, but the
esteem of all gallant men; This is his Crime, which Lucius may live to repent.


Calis. If not Amadeo, what rests then, where is the Rival?


Cicilia. Orante.


Calis. Orante, what of him?


Cicilia. To that wretched Creature Fortune has reserved Cicilia, not for his
good, nor that she owed him a blessing; But for my Curse, my Affliction; To
that wretch I will give my self; To him my vows of faith, if he will receive
me, are now designed.


Calis. Orante! Heaven forbid.


Cicilia. Yes, Calis, I will marry Orante, not withstanding thy wonder, and all
the worlds, and having vowed to him pay him a faith as just and observant as
Lucius should have had; And that false man shall see, honor obliges me as much
to that wretch as love should have done to him; This way, Calis, thou shall see
thy friend revenged, and the world shall justify me, and say, Lucius was
jealous without a Cause; for sure Orante is a Subject few or none will believe
I should break my faith for; and when Lucius shall see him possessed of what he
loved, the vexation that his heart must feel will be my Revenge.


Calis. But will your Highness, in a Passion, destroy your self, and punish all
that love you because one has been false? Did you love nothing but Lucius? What
have we that are your friends done? that you should afflict us thus, to see you
make your self miserable beyond Redemption? sure you never loved Lucius.


Cicilia. Yes, Calis, and 'twas my Crime; for I have loved and obliged him
beyond his hopes, beyond reason or Justice, preferred him before a gallanter
man then himself; you know I loved him, First, for his fears, and they were
lovely then, and his doubts as obliging as his jealousy injurious now; And
this Act will let him see I never loved any thing but Lucius.


Calis. But suppose Lucius despise you for this Act.


Cicilia. Why then I will suffer for having loved one so unworthy.


Calis. If Lucius his faults had not their Roots in Love and jealousy I should
not defend him; methinks I should love him more for doubting his fortune, then
for a saucy confidence of me, till I was his; There must be something, Madam,
of the vain and insolent, that pretend to love, and woo without fear, or
doubt; Rage in a Lover I should take for Love it self; If Lucius had loved
another, then a high Revenge were due; But all your anger strives to punish him
for loving you; suppose a friend falls, suppose he goes astray, suppose he be
sick, shall we then be angry? one of these is Lucius his case.


Cicilia. This I know, and that Orante's body is furnished with a mind more
mishap'd; one that will omit no means to gain his ends; one whose Lust prevails
with him more then Honor or Conscience, which beast in the mind adds even to
his deformity, and has bred such an invincible hatred against me; Yet now I
will stoop even to that hate, and suffer my self to be miserable beyond
example; My time will be the shorter to outlive the injuries of so false a man
as Lucius.


Calis. But what have we that are your friends, or Prince Amadeo done, that you
should punish us?


Cicilia. I have said Prince Amadeo has too many Virtues; and could I love
again he were the man; This I said when I thought my self happiest, else I
should not say it now; This I said, when I refused Amadeo, else I should not
say it now when Lucius has refused me; And when thou see him tell him this
story, he will hate Lucius, and pity me, who will punish my self and become fit
for his pity, for not having been wise enough to preserve my self fit for his
Love, of which crime Lucius was the original guilt.


Calis. Can you forgive Orante all his deformities, all the sins and
wickednesses that are natural to him, and marry what you have ever loathed, and
not forgive Lucius that loves you, Lucius that you have loved, one fault, one
crime? A sin yet to be disputed, whether it be so in Love or no; for Jealousy
was once Love, Jealousy in the root none doubts is Love; It Is true, what the
fruit may be is doubtful; But Lucius his Jealousy yet has only born
unhandsome fears, passionate choleric words.


Cicilia. O Calis, thou art yet to seek what abused Love is, thy Fortune was
kind by chance, that made thee always love unbeloved again; But when thou
shall be sought to by diverse Gallant Men, till thy free Heart fix on one whom
thy kindness will oblige above the world; When neither Honor, Person, nor
parts could tempt thee; when, like me, thou shall have loved for Love only;
then to find thy self deceived, suspected, injured, and despised by him for
whom thy partial kindness has thus made war against the world, as I have done
for Lucius, then thy Honor will fire thy Heart; and rather then not be
revenged, like me, strike through thy own Breast rather then let such a sin pass
unpunished; Disdain and Scorn will rise in the face of Love, when thou shall
see thy faith and kindness accused for false by one that begged at thy feet
till his false tears had gained thy Charity; And now the saucy Beggar will
proportion and give Rules to my Bounty, and confine that Honor, that pity,
that kindness, that from a Beggar, made him Master of my Heart; This
ungrateful, dissembling, insolent, jealous, injurious Lover, is Lucius; and I
by my Folly made so miserable, as to find a pleasure in being revenged on the
thing I loved; which design to morrow I will pursue: And, by all thy Friendship
I conjure thee, plead no more against my Resolution; But, in order to thy Oath,
prepare for to morrow; and when the chase is up we may avoid the company and
retire to some place, to put on that disguise which I have already furnished,
till when Farewell. --


[Exit Cicilia. Calis. Something I must do to prevent this mischief; when she
has spoke with Manlius the occasion will be fit; and to morrow, when we return
to put on our disguise, I will lead her as by chance into Juno's grove, 'twill
be proper to conceal her; And those sacred limits will afford a privacy fit to
reconcile us; which being once done, I will break all vows rather then see her
throw her self into the loathed embraces of Orante, though I will not now
oppose her Passion.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Otho and Clorinda. Otho. THis time has been so full of Tempests, Madam,
the storm would scarce give Loves gentle wings leave to fly in the Court;
Jealousy and foolish Passion, those Birds of prey, still stooping at his
Mothers Doves; And here, where Love should be heard sing, mutinous war has
given our Hearts more Alarms then the Camp; But now these troubles are blown
over, I shall hope it is not unseasonable to invite the Prince to honor our
Hymen's with his presence.


Clorinda. Amadeo is yet all the staff Clorinda can in Honor lean upon; and I
hope he will not refuse this hand now, when I am to walk in paths so strange to
Clorinda as Hymen leads to; For though Otho had my hand to be his Bride, yet
Amadeo most not be forgot, that has always been kind as a Lover, faithful as a
Brother; And 'twill show a kind of insensibleness in me to desire his stay,
only to add to this affliction by seeing others happy, and then to begin his
misery; Nor would I punish Otho for others faults, by delaying his rights,
which I confess are due; This straight your kindness must lead me through.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Bandito and Turnus. Turnus. SOftly, and follow me; now you have seen him
make ready; The first that meets him shoot. Saw you the Prince Orante?


Bandito. Not since he went to the Hermit's; It Is late, I wonder they stay thus
long.


Turnus. Stand close, I hear some body coming.


[Here enters Orante and whistles. Orante. Be ready, he comes.


Turnus. Away then, we will follow you.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Lucius and a Hermit. Lucius. MY Brother at your Hermitage?


Hermit. Yes, and Calis with him; They are now gone to walk in the Grove, they
have some design to morrow, I heard them appoint it; This path will bring us to
him; and I am confident when you see him you cannot but pity him; So sad, and
so dejected a Mind I never saw, yet I have concealed him all I can.


Lucius. His poor mean Treachery was the first step to my misery; Had he been
true to either of us, Amadeo had not lived to have acted, or Lucius suff'red a
second Injury: And all the ties of Brother can scarce forget his Crime, though
I know he hates himself for it.


Hermit. 'Twill be Charity at least to reconcile your self to him.


Lucius. His Injuries are yet too fresh; pray let a day or to pass, and then we
will meet at your Cell and embrace; till then, no words of my being here: The
Sun is low, and I will retire to your Brothers Hermitage.


ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Manlius (solus.) Manlius. THe Repentance of this Crime has brought a
quiet and a calmness over my Mind; Anger, Jealousy, nor Lust have no longer
power over me. One good Resolution has dispersed them all; I am now Master of
my self again, and can with the world see and admire that Star without Ambition
of plucking it from Heaven, and aspiring to its place; I could find Lucius, and
kiss his feet, ask him pardon, and rejoice to see him possess the blessing I
have lost, and, without Envy, hear him call the Divine Cicilia his; This storm
has made the Harbor sweet; I had such perpetual quiet, such constant
happiness, before I knew not the value of it. This Affliction wak'ned me; and
if to morrow be fortunate in the Princesses Pardon, all the rest of my days
will be full of Joy and Calis Friendship.


[Enter Banditoes and shoot him, he draws and fights with them, they wound him,
and he falls. Enter Orante. Orante. Away, I hear company, leave him. --


[Exeunt. Manlius. Oh my Fate! this is sad to die I know neither how, nor why,
and fall ere I have made my Peace with the Princess; a fullen Fate has
prevented me to be grateful to Calis.


Enter Lucius and the Hermit. Lucius. 'Twas a shoot.


Heruit. 'Twas so, and in this place, What might it mean?


Lucius. Hark, I hear some body groan.


Hermit. Ha! your Brother lies murdered, Manlius; Sir, it is your Brother
calls, he faints, give him air.


Lucius. Quickly find his wounds that we may bind them; then Lucius runs to
him. He stirs. we will convey him to your Cell, where I have some remedies.


Hermit. Trouble not your self with that; if his wounds be not mortal, I have
a Balsam will give him a sudden remedy.


Lucius. While you attend this Cure I will find the Murderer, he cannot be far.


Hermit. Help me to convey his body to the Cell.


Lucius. Poor Manlius, thou art my Brother still, for all thy Crimes. --


Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
Enter Orante and Turnus. Orante. SO, this is past, and we are far enough from
search; this poor habit will secure us; yet it is good to be privately armed,
lest any suspicion find us.


Turnus. To night he cannot be found in that unfrequented place, and our
business will be done early in the Morning.


Orante. Where shall we expect her?


Turnus. Upon the entrance into the wood, where we can stand and see them
undiscovered; when they are entered seize and bind them, and convey them to
Juno's Grove, whose privacy will be fit for our design; For being sacred to the
Roman Deities, none will come there to disturb us: The Act once done, you may
resolve to quit this shape and stay; or protected by your disguise thus escape.


Orante. I am not satisfied with your leaving Manlius: The fellow says he was
not dead, and believes his wounds but slight.


Turnus. Slight? A shot and two thrusts, that you may see through him; if he
licks them whole time enough to hurt us, I would have the Praetor keep him to
lick the Army, instead of leading them, he will heal them as soon as a Charm;
Besides, I have no Malice to him, he was always a good plain fighting fellow,
that would never talk much; one that when he was outwitted would repair to his
hand still, and use his cold Iron as his last Argument: I have seen him so beat
a better wit then himself, for disputing with him beyond his Reason, that he
could have wished himself a fool to have been out of his hands: Besides, he is
none of our Enemy in this quarrel; Alas, he is as angry as we, a poor despised
Lover, and mutinies against Prince and Brother; He is a lame Cripple of Cupids,
that has both the blind ones against him; Love and Fortune are both his
Enemies, and a Man need no more affliction in this world then to be in Love,
and have those two declare against him.


Orante. Let us not part to night, that we may be sure to attend our design to
morrow. --


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. V.
Enter Lysander and Dyon. Lysander. THe Princes are both in their Chambers, and
now a making ready for the Chase.


Dyon. But Manlius is missing, and Lucius though banished, is not far off; His
Peace is made by the generous Prince Amadeo, and was for certain, last night,
at the Gardiners little house in the Grove; Calis confesses she brought him
thither, and that he flew from her in a Rage when he saw the Prince Amadeo
taking his leave of the Princess Cicilia, and mistook their parting for a
conclusion of what his jealousy has apprehended; This, if you meet him, you
are to assure him of from Calis and my self, that his mind may find some peace;
Let us divide our selves, he was seen to enter this wood, and his Horse was
taken up this Morning loose; I will take this path, and we will meet in the
place where the Hounds are uncoupled; Let not the Praetor know he is hereabouts,
till we have spoken with him.


Lysander. I shall observe; but if there were no other way to women then these
Princes find Lysander would curse his Stars; Do thou think there is so much
to boot betwixt a woman and a woman as these foxes pretend? If there be, I
thank the Gods for my ignorance, that understand not the difference of the
commodity in my practice; Sweet, and young, and kind, if sound, goes far, and
when they were alone they would all hear Reason that I have had to do with: But
here is such fighting, and sighing, such hunting and losing, and squatting,
starting, and turning of a Coney, such erring, swearing and staring, and Puss
is as angry as any of the kennel of Madmen that hunt her. Are all Roman
Princesses thus hard to be caught? Sure he that gets this will not complain she
is tough; And if a hunted Mistress be a good Bedfellow, bid him put this in
crust; I warrant her she will eat short, yet I have heard a Lover say, his
Mistress Heart cannot be too soft, nor her Arse too hard to make a servant good
sauce.


Dyon. Beast, such a description I expected from thy Camp, and sucklers
observations; And how many servants does't thou think Gentle-folks can in
Honor make happy?


Lysander. In a Day and a Night, how do you mean?


Dyon. No, no, in all her life, fool?


Lysander. Why, a Regiment of Horse, and a Brigade of Foot, I dare say,
Faustina has past so many pikes as that comes to; and yet she works for her
living, and has no good convenience to dispatch her business neither; had she
time and opportunities that your idle Ladies throw away; their several rooms,
and loneness when they please; she would have done brave things.


Dyon. If I had malice enough to publish this in the Court, how the women would
all to behang thee for this roguish opinion; why I tell thee, it is sometimes
seven year ere a good sufficient Lover gets leave to kiss his Mistress, and
fourteen ere she kiss him again; but to let two men kiss her, Heresy, and they
are burnt; I never heard of but one that was seduced, or persuaded to that
Heresy; and the Rogue told of her, but no body durst believe him; for the
Plague is not more mortal then such a discovery against a Platonic Lover of
this age.


Lysand. And do we take pains to preserve this Race of Fools? prithee, let them
find and kill each other, to the end of the Chapter; God's Death, if my Lady, or
her woman, should deny to do me reason when she had time to answer my Question;
By this hilt I would hide this blade in her belly; A pox of this fooling, Does
your Prince use my Princess so? By this hand, if I did not think he had knocked
her down ere this I would poison him; she is a blade, in faith, Dyon, none of
your no forsooth, none of your whyning no fies: By this hand, if she does not
strike first she has cozened Lysander; hark, I hear the horn sound in the
plain.


Dyon. Farewell then, till the Chase is done; and then I will bring you to
Calis, and she shall make you a Platonic Lover.


Lysand. I will be gelt as soon as be converted by that whyning Broker; she is
Cupid's Baud, and withers in her Petti-coat, for one of those thousand
Curt'sies she has done for others, she loves men for loving other folks, and
she has reason; for unless she mends her face she will scarce do it, for loving
her; Calis's old sayings, and I had as many Maiden-heads as she has brok'd
away, I would not be dis-virginated in a year; she hunts Manlius counter; and
if he go on when will they meet, less in a Comedy? where to see an old reverend
Maid that has sat seven ages in a Court Receiver of Loves Customs, at last,
pretend with Arguments to persuade a Soldier to the love of shadows,
Platonique friendship, 'twill be as ridiculous as the Miller that laid the Sack
upon his neck, and then got up to ease his Mare. Farewell, Dyon.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. VI.
Enter Lucius, and Hermit. Lucius. NEither this last night, nor this morning,
could I find any that I could suspect for this murder; those were the Keepers,
and to them I dare not be seen; the woods are full of people, sure the Praetor
hunts to day.


Herm. He does so, I spoke with the Master of the Game this morning when they
were pitching of the Toils.


Lucius. I lost my horse last night, and I fear I may be discovered by him;
therefore I will retire; and if you can discover any news in your Cell I will
expect you; I will to my Brother, who since he has rested gives me hope his arm
will not hinder our search in finding out who it was that shot him.


Herm. I have persuaded him to eat something; fasting and loss of blood are
both dangerous for him; I will mingle my self among the people, and to all but
Calis conceal your abode.


Lucius. Pray do so, and tell her Manlius and my self are reconciled, but
mention not his being hurt.


Herm. I observe you.


[Exit Hermit. Lucius. How unreasonable a thing an enraged man is since I have
listened to Manlius his discourse I find the fault my heart has committed
against the divine Cicilia such as I cannot hope for pardon; a fault so great
and so unjust I am so far from believing she will forgive me, I cannot forgive
my self; what a fool a Lover may be? what beast but Lucius could have doubted
Cicilia? there is a folly in jealousy, and a kind of cowardice; I wonder any
thing that is man, and has converst with honor, could let it prevail over his
thoughts; there is nothing so maliciously bent to the destruction of Love and
Honor as jealousy; it strikes at the first blow the root of both honors, the
Lovers and the Loved; it calls her what is not fit to be beloved, and tells her
we are incapable of loving; that low passion calls our selves what we would not
hear another say, nor live with that man that we believe thinks so; Lysander
had reason when he despised my jealousy, because it confessed my Rival deserved
better then my self; else my Mistress is either a fool or false vanity; though
it be poison to love, yet in this case a little is Physic, and allowed to
defend us against the danger of jealousy; all Treacles have some poison, which
like the key open the door to let the Cordial in; vanity in a healthy
proportion, and taken in season, may do our selves justice, and defend our
loves; and Cicilia would sooner have forgiven Lucius a little vanity then this
jealousy; Lucius might have said, what if Amadeo be a Prince, and Lucius a
subject; is not Cicilia a Princess too? and what though the world prefer
Amadeo, she has chosen Lucius; and if I have grace in her eyes, let him be hapy
where he will: what if Amadeo have Otho's consent, while I have Cicilia's
faith? this I ought to have whispered to my soul; and when my fears apprehended
Amadeo's person, or his parts, my thoughts should have prompted me, Cicilia had
honor and friendship for Lucius; and those thoughts would have smothered that
fire which jealous anger bred in my unfortunate breast; and rather have died
then doubted the fair Cicilia, while intemperate love, I fear, has thrown down
the Altar we were so long a building; unless her goodness will still act more
of the Deity then Lucius of the fool or madman.


Enter to him the Hermit. Herm. Sir, the Forest is full of people; the Praetor
and the stranger Princes are all abroad; the Game was up, and all men inquired
for you and your Brother; your horse was taken up this morning; I saw the
Princess Cicilia, Calis was with her, they are both sad; it is my opinion you
retire till Calis come.


Lucius. I will follow you; men in misfortunes have a large Stage to show
themselves upon; and he that Acts well, be his part never so Tragical, leaves
the blame upon his Stars; I am now engaged, Love and Honor have brought me on;
and though jealousy has made me stray, yet those guides will find the way.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. VII.
Enter Calis, and Cicilia. They strip themselves of their upper Garments, and
remain in Boys habit, they are followed by Orante and the Bandito. Cicil. IN
this disguise I will make my revenge perfect, though my fortune be miserable;
it is not Orante's deformed body, and soul crookeder then his back, lost his
fame, low as his condition, and a nature worse then his fortune, shall make me
change my resolution; to whose loathed embraces I will now fly; yet here I
confess, death's cold lean arms would be welcomer far, could I then see Lucius
miserable; no reply, as thou love me, but haste to the place of our retreat
till this business is over.


Enter Orante, like an old Beggar-Woman, leaning upon her staff. Oran. Stay,
fond Girls, and know your fates from me; Weak and poor your designs are; you
may vow to what gods you please; but here in this place you shall find your
Destiny at his utmost date, born to enjoy nothing but what you fear and hate;
sieze upon them.


Enter Bandito and Turnus, they sieze upon them, cover their heads, and force
them away. [Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Amadeo, and Lysander. Amadeo. PRithee, Lysander, stay; my heart bodes
some ill, there is a heaviness upon it will not let me enjoy neither the
Company nor the sport to day; saw you which way the Princess Cicilia went?


Lysander. Calis and she entered the Wood but now, and see where their Clothes
lie.


Amadeo. Heaven, what may those pretend? Some violence sure, ^hey look ^n the
^lothes, They search beir Pockets. Murder, Treason.


Lysander. Undoubted, Thieves would have taken their clothes; see, there is
money in their pockets, and a paper directed to Lucius; hold, Sir, I apprehend
from this paper the Princess has taken some resolution to absent her self from
the Court, to avoid being solicited in your highness behalf; for, faulty as he
is, she loves Lucius.


Amadeo. It must be so, let us away, and find the Prince; Bring the clothes,
that they may know the chance, I cannot guess enough to satisfy my troubled
mind, my fears have robbed me of my Reason; See the Prince.


Enter Otho, Clorinda, and Marius. Otho. What means this?


Amadeo. Here in this place we found them, and this Letter directed to Lucius.


Marius. Heaven guard my Child.


Clorinda. All the gods pro tect the Princess.


Otho. From all but her own Passion I believe she is safe; but I know her heart
is troubled at Lucius his Jealousy; I fear she has taken some desperate
resolution; Pray, Sir, open that Letterl for I am confident she there tells him
all her thoughts. Marius read* the Letter. He gives them the Paper.


Marius. Ha, Orante! to find Orante? to give him her vows, and faith for ever,
to marry Orante, to be revenged on Lucius, [all Orante? Read, Read,] my eyes
are lost in tears; Otho, your severity has forced her to this Justification of
her love to Lucius.


Otho. Away, Sir, let us all divide, and beset the Wood, they cannot escape,
it is but now we parted; for heavens sake disperse, lest the sad delay beget the
Curse she threatens, Orante's bride? a Grave rather, good heaven, theu see her
in that loathed place.


Clorinda. If we can find her, Sir, all is safe; I know, she has so much
kindness, honor, and duty, she will not refuse to give up her trouble and
passion to your Authority; I know it is only Melancholy, and displeasure
against Lucius; Which kindness from your Highness will in a little time remove.
She still with tears lamented to me your Highness severity, and that of late
the brother was quite buried in you, and all you said or did was full of the
Statesman, and the Prince, without a thought of her love, nor the least kind
sense of her, or her wishes; and being thus abandoned by a brother, wanting
some kind friend, to lament; to sadness, and grief, having no vent, Lucius his
Injuries has made her take this desperate resolution; and I am glad Calis is
with her, a person of too much honor and discretion to consent to this design,
though she may seem to comply with her passion.


Amadeo. However; let us not delay finding of her, and I believe it is fit
conceal our knowledge of this Paper till her mind be quieted.


Marius. Divide then; Otho, come you along with me.


Amadeo. Lysander, let us take this path. -- No Clorinda, there is Clorinda
would follow Amadeo, and he stops her. your path; Blush not gentle Maid, Otho
is a Prince, whose friendship no Maid ought to be ashamed of; Be faithful to
him and his fortune, dear Clorinda; Else all the kindness thou stealest from
him is not worth the taking; Love and Honor him next the gods, let Otho
possess thy heart, and then thou art kind to Amadeo.


Otho. This generosity in Amadeo is more chains then those we load Our Captives
with, and I willingly stoop to him; for it is no dishonor to be overcome by
Prince Amadeo; the great Example of Honor and friendship; But if the
unfortunate Cicilia had not been condemned to misery she might have paid a part
of this Debt; But fate that gave such a Jewel to the world as Clorinda, and
Amadeo, knew too well their Price, and therefore appointed them for fortune,
not merit, to possess.


Clorinda. Any time but this my thirsty soul would watch ages to drink the Joy
it has, to hear you vie who should love each other best, while I smile to see
how much a maid out-loves you both; which I do, or my heart deceives me; for I
am sure I would. And what a lover kindly would is to a Lover Current pay; for
Love is all as happy, and as obliging in the will, when it is placed upon a
Noble Subject, as the Act it self; But we lose time, and with that hazard the
most precious things of the Earth; Otho's sister, and Amadeo's Friend, which
Title Reason and her Passion both have given me.


Amadeo. In the plains we will meet if we miss them in the Woods.


Clorinda. Haste, Amadeo; a Lovers Eye is as curious in his search as the
Cretan hound in Chase; and my divining soul tells me Amadeo must find her
though he lose himself.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Manlius, and Lucius, (as from the Hermitage.) Lucius. O Manlius, the
gods then decreed my ruin when they let thee fall from Honor; Thy wild
Injuries distracted me; A Brother and a Friend at once I lost, and at a time
when I had most need of Counsel, Anger having broke her bounds, despising love
and reason; and that hedge thrown down all the ills that uncollected man is
capable of, like weeds, possessed my wild breast, and overran my mind.


Manlius. I cannot but wonder at your Jealousy for those few days past, when I
was so bold in ill as to tell her my crime; she was then all Lucius's; The gods
and my Brother had only Interest in her heart; Nor can I, in all your
discourse, gather one cause of anger but her silence, that only was her fault;
for she was not in Passion though Lucius was; and therefore her friendship
should calmly have cleared his doubts, and rather have quenched his anger with
kindness then have kindled hers at his passion.


Lucius. No more, dear Manlius; though thou art now my dear Brother, yet from
thee my kindness must not hear the least detracting word, not a thought that
tends to accusing the Princess; It Is the Quarrel I have against my self, which
no friend shall reconcile; I hate Lucius for that sin so much, that thy
kindness, which is now new heat by a happy reconciliation, and would now
receive all impressions from thee easier and readier then before our
unkindness; I must not hear thee speak in that strain: shall I, that would not
have heard my bosom friend say the Princess loved Lucius, endure to hear it
told me, she is false? as if her love had been a Crime or sin, and her falsehood
a virtue? No, dear Manlius, thou can witness, with a Sacred Reverence We held
our Loves, till this fatal Jealousy robbed me of my Reason.


Manlius. Reason had saved us both, But the gods will not let Reason be always
in Season; Men came too near their Deity, did not our Passions master us, could
we keep them tame and low, how quickly our hearts would have found the
precipice we stood upon; When we both made it our business to find arguments to
hate what we loved, and with tongues and words strove to publish to the world
that lie that said Manlius hated Lucius, or Lucius could hate Cicilia.


Luc. And I, that all my days despised the worlds opinion, and their way of
love: Did we love like the common people? Did we make the world our Judge, or
guide to love by? No, no, nor shall their depraved Customs stand Examples for
Lucius now his Reason is returned. How I will oppose her past favors against my
present fears, and they will defend Lucius; This thought, and such a friend as
Manlius yesterday might have saved me from this misery; He might have told me
how late I came to Court; When love with all his strength had besieged her
heart, youth and beauty, honor and fortune, power and wealth, were there
seconded by all that were famous for Arts or Parts; Thus engaged I found her
heart, yet their Batteries, nor Mines, nor Assaults, nor Intelligence within,
could win the Excellent Cicilia; who, with honor made defense, till Lucius,
(Then too happy Lucius) came and raised the siege; In which he such glory got,
he stood the envy of the gods and men, till this Cursed Jealousy struck him to
the Earth.


Manlius. Had not I been mad too, a friend might have saved us both; a Friend
is the staff and safety of our Peace; he might have said, shall we, when a
friend loses a Limb, or Child, or any other the lesser gifts of Fortune; Or if
by sickness afflicted, will Lucius in these cases be sad, and show an
Extraordinary kindness in Tears, or diligence to give them Comfort; and when
his Mistress has broke her Faith, or lost her Honor, will he then be angry,
and seek a Revenge? how unreasonable were such an Action, to add his
afflictions to the shame and trouble of her mind; her guilt would be load
enough without thy hatred or thy anger; sooner fatal wounds should let out my
life, to banish from her sight an Object that upbraids her, e're I reviled the
name I loved; such a hate declares 'twas self-love, else thou would pity her
now; and in this sickness of her mind, at all rates of mercy and kindness,
compass her peace; such a generous silence, and handsome bearing of her
Injuries would speak thy love to her; and who knows what such a Cordial may
work upon the most desperate disease that love is subject to, and restore her
heart, or at least pay that debt Lucius owes her, whose mercy could not see him
sad, but at the rate of her self once bought his Peace.


Lucius. O Manlius, chide me still, chide me, till my blushing soul has with
shame and hatred of my self expiated my guilt.


Manlius. Hark, Sir, the Noise of people draws this way, pray let us retire;
and if Calis can prevail with the Princess, here you may find an unexpected
blessing, for she has promised me as soon as they can lose the Company, to guide
her, as if 'twere by chance, to this place, to beg her pardon for that fault
which you must both forgive; But I would not have her see you, till Calis be
acquainted with with your being here; Hark, they draw near, pray let us retire.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Orante, Turnus, and Bandito, leading in Cicilia and Calis. Cicilia. O
Calis, it is Orante, I know his voice through his disguise.


Turnus. It Is so.


Orante. Yes, it is Orante, That Orante your scorn and Malice so lively
described even now; But thy knowledge of him will cost thee dear; for when I
have took my pleasure of thee prepare to die, I will try if your Curious Lover
can find by those steps which my Lust shall leave on thy proud Body, who it was
trod down thy Virgin Flower; Know fond woman, thy scorn has made me hide self
in a thousand shapes; But to take a full Revenge, which I now shall do, by
thine own folly; This Occasion Calis gave me; for which Manlius shall thank
her; for know ('twice betrayed) thou art come hither to meet the lust of
Manlius, who here was appointed to expect thee; But that danger my Interest,
not hate to him, nor kindness to thee, has removed; And when those Soldiers
have entertained themselves with Calis, they will show her where she may busy
her self with burying of him.


Calis. O monster, unheard of Villainy!


Orante. It Is high revenge to vex you, and to have in my power to force what
your scorn would not give; and now know, all the Treasure that the Earth has
shown, or hid; All that Treason has bought or Sold; All that the Sword has won
or lost; All that Love has given, or lust has cost, shall not buy from me this
Revenge; Turnus, bind her, and then leave us.


Cicilia. Calis, O Heaven, do thou see this, and not protect the Innocent?


[She resists. While they are binding her, Orante kisses her by Force, while
they hold her. Orante. How sweet this Rose smells; Much more Honey is there in
this Nectar, then in that Jove drinks; Dispatch, Turnus, that my soul may be
drunk with Beauty and Revenge; Let Heaven frown another Age upon Orante, if
Fortune would but give him such another Revenge.


Turnus. They are tongue-ty'd already.


Orante. Dumb, Cicilia? How their Hearts swell, now they play Orantes part, her
Heart would burst now to be revenged; This is that pastime your scorn used to
take upon Orante; Come dispatch, no resistance. -- A Bracelet of this Orante
now might wear without He holds her by the hair and kisses her. wooing for, but
that Lucius and Amadeo would be jealous.


Cicilia. Ye Gods, what words can express this villainy! what voice can speak
the Injuries and Rage my Soul suffers! Heaven in Thunder tell this monster what
I designed for him; and then to punish that crime save but my Honor, and let
thy lightning strike him through this unfortunate breast. Turnus struggles all
this while to bind her.


Turnus. S' death, I think they have gotten men's minds and strength with their
breeches; A Jury that should condemn your Highness of a Rape upon either of
these two alone, ought to be hanged themselves for false Rogues; 'Twere an even
lay a Jury did not do it; S' death, she bites, and scratches, hold her hands, a
pox. -- S' death, you whore, had it been a little higher it had sped my plough:
What shall we do now? she will be mischievous. --


Orante takes her by one hand, and struggles with her, she snatches his dagger
from his pocket and stabs him; he leaps off, and she stabs Turnus: He looks on
the wound, and runs at her with his sword, Orante beats down the thrust.
Orante. Hell upon it, kill her, and I will enjoy her while she is warm; any
thing rather then let her have her sullen will to die a Maid, and rob me of my
Revenge.


[He runs at her, she puts by the sword. Cicilia. Hold, Villain, till I have
spoke, and then do what Hell and thou shall decree; for having thus secured my
Honor from thy force I can smile on death. From my last words take this truth,
and believe me; though thou hate me, I am not so wicked voluntarily to go to
my grave with an useless lie in my mouth; Stir not, leave that vain thought
that bids you hope to disarm me; for know, though this dagger and a feeble arm
be not able to defend Cicilia; Yet she has Honor enough to defend her Honor,
and kill Cicicilia, which I shall do upon the first step that moves this way.
Know then, thou have prevented thy own Fortune, for witness Heaven, (to which
thou have now forced me take a hasty journey) my business and this disguise was
to find an occasion to give my self to Orante for a Bride, if he would have
received me.


Orante. Ha! it cannot be, this lie will not save you.


Cicilia. No, monster, it is so much truth I will not be saved; for I confess, I
ought to die for having so base a thought; Yet because thou shall believe what
I say, thou owe me nothing for that desire; for had Lucius been worth the
having, ^^ Cicilia worth the presenting to generous Amadeo, Orante should never
have had her; whom my Soul feared and loathed, and my Heart divining some
horrid villainy from thee, has always trembled at thy Name; and but to punish
my self and jealous Lucius, Orante had sunk unthought of.


Orante. Riddles, by Heaven Riddles; But I shall find an Oedipus to read them.


Calis. No monster, the truth is too sad; And had thou been a Man of Honor,
and fit for any Hymen's but one enraged and blind with Passion, Amadeo had this
day been happy; But his Honor made him unhappy, having as much nobleness more
then weight, as thy base mind was poor and destitute of good.


Cicilia. It Is truth she tells thee, and now I defy thee. This kind Remedy
Heaven has sent me against all my past miseries; And thy horrid intents are the
loud calls, the Gods have used to bid me make haste to them; and if thou movest
one step this way, thus I go.


Orante. Shall foolish fear or pity make me afraid to embrace or enjoy Cicilia?
Fond Girl, do thou believe I will lose thee when there is only the
difficulty of a dagger betwixt us? No, proud fair one, thou art mine in the
spite of Fate; even in thy dying groans, it is decreed, I will enjoy thee. --


[He runs to her, she stabs her self, he closes and struggles with her for the
dagger. Calis. Help, Rape, Murder, Treason, help, Murder, Treason, Rape, help
for Heavens sake, Treason, Treason, O horrid Villains! --


[They struggle still Orante. Stop her mouth. --


[A Soldier goes to her and stops her mouth. Sold. Hold your prating, or I
shall cut your wezill.


Enter Lucius and Manlius, with his Arm in a scarf, with their swords drawn.
Manlius. This way the noise called, 'twas a woman's voice that cried for help;
Ha! See, Sir, the same that wounded me last night. --


They set upon them, all fight, Lucius kills Turnus, Manlius kills one of the
Bandito 's, while a Soldier shoots Lucius; He falls, Orante wounds Manlius,
and he falls, the third Soldier falls too; Orante only remains upon his feet,
goes to Lucius, disarms, and treads upon him. Orante. So, this danger is past;
and there is yet enough left of the proud Cicilia to satisfy my Revenge.


Lucius and Manlius. Cicilia, and Calis, Heaven! what chance, what calamity is
this?


Cicilia. Do thou wonder, false Man, to see the ruin thy jealous Soul has
made of all our happiness? Murder, Self-murder, Rape and dishonor threatened,
Self-murder, whose black path thy jealous Heart has forced me to tread, to
save that Honor Lucius would first have ravished. Live, and find all that thou
mistrustedst innocent; And, for thy Curse, let them thou trustest next be as
false as Lucius.


Lucius. O my Fate! Why have I lived to see this day? Orante, be yet so kind in
thy crime as kill me. Durst thou stab? Had thou a power to strike that
breast, and find remorse at mine that am thy Rival? Villain, or kill me, or be
sure thy hated soul shall never sleep in that cursed body of thine, though when
it is let out 'twill but change Hells; Dog, do thou smile upon our miseries?


Cicil. Thy jealousy struck deeper, and more fatal, then his Dagger; that gave
the first wound, that struck my fame, and wounded more then his fury can; false
and unkind, thou deceived'st my heart, and were false to her that loved thee;
this wretch has only acted that my hatred ever feared; the world expected
nothing better from Orante, branded and marked from heaven, and despised by
men; But Lucius, jealous Lucius, has deceived both gods and men, and abused
their trust; but these wounds, I hope, will justify me, and punish Lucius, and
deceive the hopes of cursed Orante.


[She faints and falls. Lucius. Heaven lend your hand, to save the Princess. --
O, my fate! --


[He offers to rise and falls. Call. If I were loose, I might call for help.


Manl. Like Birds with broken wings we lie expecting sad fates, to be the spoil
and scorn of the foolish fowler; sure I have so much strength as to crawle to
Calis.


[While he crawles to Calis, and unbinds her; Orante lifts up Cicilia. Oran.
She is faint, but not dead, now she is tame enough; see Lucius, this was your
Cicilia; there is beauty and pleasure even in her dust.


[He kisses her. Lucius and Manlius. Villain, Murderer.


Lucius. Oh ye gods! lend but so much strength as to save the noblest of women.


[Orante laughs. Oran. Sure heaven's kind to Orante; what music there is in
their cries.


Call. Help, Murder; Treason, help!


[Exit Calis. Oran. Ha! loose, I must not lose; time when I have dispatched
this, then prepare your selves to bear us company. -- Lucius, this Orante
kisses her.

He kisses her again.

He takes her up in his arms, and carries her out.

They fight, Calis unbinds the Princess, takes up a sword, and runs to kill
Orante, just as he falls under Amadeo.

kiss grew upon Cicilia's lips, fruits designed for thee jealous fool, which
thus I gather, lest it wither on the Tree. Farewell, Lucius, the scorned Orante
with all this deformity will leave thee to imagine the rest; be all the world
cursed, so I am blessed.


Lucius and Manlius. Help heaven, Murder and Treason.


[As Orante goes, he meets Amadeo and Calis at the door. Oran. Ha! Amadeo and
Calis; then Fortune's a whore, Lie thou there; yet he is alone, and Orante
never feared a single sword. -- Hold, it is enough; death could never have come
so unwelcome as now; had he staid his visit till my revenge had been perfect I
would have saved thy sword this pains; for I had no such foolish thought as to
outlive this day, in which I would have made some as fit for graves as Orante;
Hell on that Sunshine that made me believe there was one hour of joy destined
for Orante; my fate is now all spun in one thread; from the first to the last
accursed.


Call. O, Sir; leave talking with that monster, and lend your help here to save
the Princess, that now breathes her last breath, murdered by that horrid
villain.


Amad. The Princess! Heaven forbid.


[He goes to the Princess. Oran. There is music in that voice, so she dies; I
care not so no body else has her, it is no pain to lose her,


Cicil. O Calis, is it thy arms that embrace me?


Call. Yes, Madam, and your fears are blown over by Prince Amadeo, sent from
heaven to revenge, and save our honors.


[The Hermit runs for a Balsam, and the Alarm is gone to the Praetor and her
Brother. Cicil. Prince Amadeo! are his hands sent from heaven to heal the
wounds Lucius gave a heart that loved him beyond her Reason; for I know, 'twas
her blindness in me that neglected Amadeo; but faith and passion must plead for
me, yet this truth let me leave with you; though I lived by love and vows
Lucius's; yet his injuries have made me room to dye Amadeo's, who had my value
in spite of my passion: do not despise me, Sir; for though this heart once
swelled with Lucius, proud of that name, while he was faithful; yet since he
could doubt, it breaks with Amadeo. There lies that false man that beat it from
him, when it pursued him with all that love and kindness could pay; 'twas his
ignorance in the value made him neglect such a Jewel, whilst I too much prized
his broken friendship which has broke my heart; yet by all the peace he has
robbed me of I have not lost one grain of honor the gods gave me in trust, but
what his jealous heart has stolen from me, and pulled strange curses down.


Lucius. Hold, gentle Cicilia, cease to find a new curse; your hate is mortal
enough; and if your wounds give you leave, you will find Lucius needs no enemy
but Lucius; since he has lived to dye unpiti'd, unlamented by Cicilia's, who
shall make his funeral fire since she has frowned upon him? she said Lucius was
false; who then will mourn him? she has condemned; after whose sentence he
scorns to live; Cicilia lived Lucius's, and dies Amadeo's; O heaven, after she
has condemned him, why should your thunder spare Lucius? yet thus innocent he
will fall, and these wounds witness Lucius's innocence, who lived and died
Cicilia's; whose name only filled his heart, and with it thus it breaks; to
show that He stabs himself. jealousy, though it be a weed, yet it springs from
noble seed, and no where to be found but in Loves richest ground; a sad truth
avowed by pale Lycoris, and proved by unfortunate Lucius.


Cicil. O, what has he done! O hold his hand, for Heavens sake.


Lucius. What have I done? why, I have let out cruel Cicilia, that she might
flow to Prince Amadeo?


Manl. O Lucius, Brother, Friend; what has thy rash hand done?


Lucius. I have done that I would always do to the man the Princess Cicilia
hates, destroyed him; yet this advantage my story will have, I found no peace
after she withdrew her friendship; yet my crime was only excess of love,
unpracticed love; dear Manlius knows I was so unpracticed in loves passion, it
cut a Brother and a Friend from my heart to make room for Cicilia; but love was
a rude guest, and thus I have forced him from my heart, where he has broke all
Laws of Hospitality; O, it is late, and this darkness over my eyes tells me I am
near my home; Manlius, thy hand. Farewell, forgive me, Madam; Behold I dye,
would your hate have more? Behold I dye, nor shall I repent my fall, if my
death find that faith my love could not, who never feared nor loved any thing
but the fair Cicilia; and at what rate, witness this fate.


Cicil. O, help to lead me to him. -- O Lucius stay, and hear my last breath
(in sighs) give my sad heart the lie for having said it loved ought but Lucius;
see these wounds that I wear for Lucius, had I not loved thee why did I select
thee from all the world? O look up, and in charity outlive me; for dying
Lucius brings despair and horror on my soul; O ye gods, lend so much life, at
least, to tell my story; and from dying Cicilia take this truth; Prince Amadeo
has surprising virtues; but 'twas Lucius his jealousy made me see them, 'twas
his injuries pleaded more then they; the Prince called long before; and yet my
heart was deaf to love and him; this Lucius knows, who severely has punished
that passions that distraction which he begot; Not one word? can Lucius his
heart be so incensed as to forget all humanity and civility too? Death, sure
will not refuse thy eyes so much light as to wait upon thy once dear Cicilia to
her grave; O kind heaven, forbid that my sad heart that could not be happy here
should meet Lucius frowning in Elysium too; there at least let us be friends,
that we may meet and mourn this part of our story, and kindly seek each others
shadow; for I am kind enough to believe and mourn the wounds that I have given
Lucius; and I hope Lucius will be so kind to me as to believe these wounds
bleed for Lucius, who thus dies upon his breast; and would fain get into that
heart again from whence thy cruel kindness forced me. One cold kiss I will
take, and then farewell; did Lucius ever love? O be merciful, and say so,
though it be false; there is less sin in such a well natured lie, then with a
cruel truth to add to a friends dying misery, who thus with wounds and prayers
her heart sets open to seek the flying soul of welcome Lucius, loved companion
of my heart.


Amad. O Lucius, can thy soul be deaf to such charms as these, of force to
raise a Lover from his ashes! O look up, and see Amadeo offer all his hopes to
Lucius; Live gentle soul; if thou hunt'st for Paradise, here it is most perfect
in the friendship of this generous Princess.


Lucius. Prince Amadeo is noble, the Princess divine, all Angel; and Lucius too
earthy to aspire such a friendship.


Cicil. The gods give us but a span of days, and we with folly waste that too;
O for an hour to thank Prince Amadeo, and weep to Lucius those truths which now
break my heart! who if he be just will kindly read and understand these sighs,
and love these tears.


Amad. Every common spirit can indulge an appetite; choler, lust and revenge
prevail with every beast; but man the noblest creature, made to delight and
imitate his Creator, appointed master over the rest, should in such
difficulties as these (Madam) justify himself Prince of the earth; and this
act is my duty as a man; but as Amadeo, a double tie of honor obliges me,
being a Prince of men, from whom with what justice (Madam) can I expect
obedience when they see me rebel against the gods; and thus yield to my slaves,
of which this passion (being unjust) is one and with what shame shall I appear
when it shall be said, that is the Amadeo that disputed a great War against the
Roman Eagles; and in peace stooped to this Kite, this blind Boy; No, Madam,
these be the fiery trials that must distinguish and justify great and virtuous
minds; they are storms, not harbors, in which the skilful show their virtue
and their courage.


Lucius. Great, and noble Amadeo, still, by mind and birth a Prince! Amad.
joins their hands together.


Amad. Curse on his heart that breaks this love, noble Lucius; lovely in his
crimes which were but loving crimes; and all these wounds and tears betwixt you
are but like the thorns that grow about the Rose, whose beauty made me thy
Rival; look up, and see me deck thy breast; of whom I prophecy all that is
great and good, while she grows there; but when she shall withdraw her
friendship, even in Amadeo's heart she will pass for low, and very woman; forsaken
Lucius will find constanter enjoyments then beauty or any other love; those
doubts, this friendship, and the diverse faults, but show the Masker in his
several shapes; your rage, his doubts, those fears, were but loves chains and
charms, which unpracticed Lucius took for Love in Arms.


Lucius. Sure we are in heaven already.


Enter Otho, Clorinda, Marius, Lysander, Dyon, Cleon, and Attendants. Mar. Good
heaven, what a sight is here? Cicilia! what sad fate is this! They all kneel
about her.


Otho. O my dear, dear Sister!


Clor. This was unkindly done to steal away from us such a Pattern of virtue
and honor; to leave me ignorant, and alone, to tread the sad world when she is
gone which was my guide; how shall I do but stray and lose my way! I fear I
shall never find my friends.


Herm. No Questions, nor more discourse, if you love them; there is no kindness
like rest.


Cicil. Clorinda, Otho, dear Otho, come near; and if ever thy Sister were dear
to thee, love and forgive Lucius: Lucius the best Lover, but the worst
expresser of his passion that ever sunk under that god's displeasure. O Otho,
in one grave let our sad Corpse lie, that we may, at least, become one earth.


Amad. Use no words, give them no answers, I pray, but help to convey them to
some place of rest; lest you strive too late to prevent the ruin this danger
threatens. They take up their bodies.


Mar. Was your Highness a witness of this action?


Amad. No, Sir, I came too late; but from Calis, within, you may hear the
relation.


Mar. What a day is here? how different are the Torches from those that should
have burned? Hymen's yellow one must to the black, I fear, give place; Ha! who
is that? Orante disguised.


Call. Yes, Sir; and the foundation upon which all these miseries depend; this
is the cursed cause of all this sad day, 'twas destined to passion; but a Scene
so full of blood and fate no thought could ever have feared, though I confess
her Highness was bent to execute a very extravagant resolution.


Herm. A Fever only may beget our fears; else I find no dander, there being no
vital part perished; it is only loss of blood, which thus in faintness binds
their senses.


Otho. Heavens send a blessing that I may show to my Sister how much a Brother
Otho is, while this hated dog lies unburied, and unpitied by the world.


[He spurns Orante. Mar. Draw him and his cu^sed company off this sacred
ground; and then let their hated Carcasses lie a prey for Birds and Beasts,
while we in procession bear these Lovers; and when you have purged this
consecrated place from blood and murder, to morrow we will sacrifice Hecatombs
to Juno, the Deliverer, in expiation of these Lovers crimes; and join with you
in vows and prayers that kind destiny will restore them to us, while I provide
displeased Hymen's Rites may no longer wont the vows their hearts have writ in
heaven.


Clor. And if heaven smile upon our sacrifice, let me beg Prince Otho will
defer our joys to wait upon their happy days; for I confess my superstitious
soul dares not approach the Temple thus alone, whilst death and black shadow
my heart; sure it must be a fatal Bridal-bed that stands so near the grave of
friends.


Otho. Be your desire the eternal law to Otho; let her love and command, while
I love to obey Clorinda.


Manl. Here Calis, I have one hand yet left, which thus I will lift to heaven;
and call all the gods to witness that love and faith, which here I give to
Calis, and her peace for ever; and if thy much afflicted heart can forgive what
is past, and love Manlius; we will vye with all the world for blessings, our
miseries will then be pastime; and these dangers, escaped, with more joy told
then now they are feared.


Call. The gods have heard my prayers; and now I am confident the Princess will
be happy; and we mortals are vain foolish judges of what heaven can or will do;
we measure the Deity by our weak capacity, who thus in justice lets us fall
beyond our hopes, to raise us thus above our wishes.


Mar. Lead, holy men, and we will follow; and with patience obey in bearing my
own bowels; but if kind heaven sinile, how happy shall Marius lay down his gray
hairs, after a sacrifice to the Hymen's of my Otho, and ever dear Cicilia.


Clor. That was the voice of heaven, piety and faith lay holy violent hands
upon the gods, it hastens their blessings, and it breaks their rods; and my
heart foretells me your aged virtues have yet reward in store; and that Cicilia
as well as Clorinda shall receive an Hymeneal blessing from you; let no jealous
Lover look Hymen in the face, but trembling call to mind the fortune of this
place.


Herm: Let all men sing, and in full Chorus join, and detest this crime. An
ancient Druid left this sacred Hymn, and against jealousy commanded all to
sing full Chorus round the Temple.


The Song in Parts.

This jealousy into the world?
From Hell?
Eternal hatred with disdain.
But she the Daughter is of Love,
Sister of Beauty.
She must derive, from the third Sphere,
Her heavenly offspring?
From those immortal flames could she
Draw her cold frozen Pedigree.

Had she her birth?
Beauty and fear did her create
Younger then Love, elder then hate,
Sister to both by Beauties side,
To Love by Fear, to hate allied.
Despair her Issue is, whose Race
Of fruitful mischiefs drowns the space
Of the wide earth in a swollen flood
Of wrath, revenge, spite, rage and blood.

Proceed from Parents so divine?

Do sweet and clear their Waters bring;
Yet mingling with the brackish main,
Nor taste, nor color they retain.

Still fresh, can jealousy do so?

Of hope and fear, her equal bound;
Hope, sprung from favor, worth, or chance,
Toward the fair object does advance:
While fear as watchful Sentinel
Does the invading Foe repel;
And jealousy thus mixed does prove
The season and the salt of Love.
But when Fear takes a larger scope,
Stifling the child Reason, Hope;
Then sitting on the usurped Throne,
She, like a Tyrant, rules alone;
As the wild Ocean unconfind;
And rages as the Northern Wind.
This Chorus was written by M. Thomas Carew, Cup Bearer to Charles the First;
and sung in a Masque at White Hall, Anno 1633. And I presume to make use of it
here, because in the first design, 'twas writ at my request upon a dispute held
betwixt Mistress Cicilia Crofts and my self, where he was present; she being
then Maid of Honor: this I have set down, lest any man should believe me so
foolish as to steal such a Poem from so famous an Author; or so vain as to
pretend to the making of it my self; and those that are not satisfied with this
Apology, and this Song in this place; I am always ready to give them a worse of
mine own.

Written by THOMAS KILLIGREW, Resident for CHARLES the Second in Venice,
August, 1651.
FINIS.
THOMASO, OR, The Wanderer: A COMEDY. The Scene MADRID.

Written in MADRID BY THOMAS KILLIGREW: In Two Parts.

DEDICATED TO THE FAIR AND KIND FRIENDS TO Prince PALATINE POLIXANDER.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

Dramatis Personae.
Don Pedro, A Noble Spaniard, and late Commander in the Spanish Army. Don
Johanne, His Friends. Don Carlo, A lean Don, Officers of the Army. Another Don,
An Italian. Three French Gentlemen. A Prince of Poland. A Flanders Merchant.
Don Mathias, One of Lucetta's maintainers. Stephano, His Friend. Lopus, The
Mountebank. Scarramucha, His Man. Thomaso, The Wanderer. An English Cavaleer,
who had served in the Spanish Army. Edwardo, English Gentlemen, his Friends,
late Commanders in that Army. Ferdinando, Harrigo, A sober English Gentleman,
attending the English Ambassador. Cornelius, A Captain of the Spanish Army.
Philippo. Paramour to Lucetta. Sancho, Her. Bravo. Diego, Servant to Don Pedro,
Rogero, Servant to Harrigo. Two Bravo's of Angelica's. Porter to the English
Ambassador. Serulina, A beauteous Virgin, Sister of Don Pedro. Angelica
Bianca, A beautiful Curtezan, Mistress to the slain Spanish General. Anna, Her
Bawd. Saretta, Two Curtezans of the first rank. Paulina, Celia, Wife to the
Mountebank. Helena, An old decayed Curtezan, that hopes to be restored to 15.
by the Mountebanks Art. Calis, Waiting woman to Serulina. Kecka, Servant to
Lucetta. Guardian to the two Monsters. (These last only mentioned.) Servants
to Don Pedro. Spectators (Men and Women) for the Mountebank.
THE FIRST PART OF THOMASO, OR The Wanderer. A COMEDY:
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter Don Pedro, Don John, Don Carlo, and Diego his Man. Pedro. WHat? The
death of the brave General has begot discourse and change in Madrid; I hear the
Action too, though most Noble, traduo'd by his Enemies; Wretches that durst not
look upon the dangers his gallant Mind broke through daily: Their Envy will not
let him find peace in his Grave neither.


Johan. That cloud is dispersed now; it is true, at first we had the report of a
total rout, and that the Enemy advanced to Pampalone, with which the affrighted
people began to fall into some passion against him, who had been so unlucky as
to command that day.


Carlo. But when they were for certain informed of the following Action, How,
contrary to all hope, he had engaged and stopped the Enemy, and at the rate of
his own life purchased their safety by throwing himself into certain dangers,
The whole City lamented his loss, and he has been honored and mourned for as a
General Parent.


Pedro. And with Justice he might expect it; for Decius fell not more vowed the
Roman Deliverer, then our General a sacrifice for his Country; But he is gone,
and with him a Soldier, and such a one, Johanne, as his Enemies both admired
and feared; We shall see how his Successor will redeem those miseries we are
fallen into by his Envy and opposition of the dead General in all his designe^.


Johan. Of this some other time, when we have paid those joys are due to the
return of our Friend and Patron; Who if he hold his good humor still, there is
news in Town will concern him much much more; The famous Paduana, Angelica
Bianca.


Pedro. Who? The Italian, our dea^ General brought from Main? What of her?


Johan. The same; She is now the discourse of the whole Town; all the youth in
Madrid dress themselves for her sake; Their Horses prance in no street but
hers, hers are the Colors they all wear in the Prado; Where her Coach drives
there is the dust, there is the throng; No song in fashion but her praise, her
Story is the Theme of all the Muses in the Town.


Pedro. Prithe^ be quick and serious this is strange to me; Why now more then
when her Patron lived?


Johan. That Is the news; Know then, since the Generals death she is exposed to
sale; Her price and Picture hangs upon the door, where she sits in public view
dressed like Aurora, and breaks like the day from her window; She is now the
subject of all the Love and Envy of the Town* it is sport to hear the Men sigh
for, and the Women rail at her. And if Don Pedro be a Lover still, there is no
need of Fayries, old Women, or Confessors, to deliver or return a Message; Now
it is but so much a Month, and you are Patron; four days and nights in the
week are yours.


Pedro. You amaze me; it is true, I Love the Girl with all the passion youth can
with Honor spare one of her humor; (but no farther) And if money or a sword
can purchase her. I Will bid as fair a^ another but I Will enjoy her.


Carlo. Now do not I see that witchery, that M^gi^k inner face; she is to me no
such excellence, but that a Man may ^^d greater Beauties in the two Sisters,
especially in the Sar^ta.


Pedro. Old Carlo, constant Carlo still; Thou art one of those believ'st it is a
duty to love a Mistress till her Eyes change color for fear he should get the
name of an unconstant Lover.


Johan. Faith, Sir, we are the same Men you left us, I am for Paulina still;
Yet I believe, it is rather laziness then constancy; we are acquainted; and
though both are weary, yet both are ashamed to say so; and till she can find
one that pays better, or I one that pleases better, it is like to be the same
dull Matrimony it has been.


Pedro. You are patient men; keep to one Wench a year! I would wear one shirt,
one pair of shoes, or eat of one dish as soon as let the Sun set twice upon
the same sin of their form in my company; I would flea a kennel of Spanniels in
the Dog Days as soon, for the Quarrey and skins of the vermin; I dare say, I
have had a hundred since; all praised and adored by some body, though forgot by
me; such Saints as these I could never pray to; there is none of them have any
charms in their eyes, no fear nor terror in their frowns, nor can their
kindness surprise a heart; I never found my self grow greater, or less in my
mind, when they were pleased, or angry, unsavory, flat, insippid beauties, good
meals meat, but no Feasts; no Banquet in their faces, Carlo; there is no Music
in their Caresses, no Empire in ruling over such hearts; yet it is truth,
Saretta's voice and humor is good, and her skin not ill, but she is dull; a
soul that neither youth nor beauty can awake; she only works in her trade, and
sells so much love; a dull sufferer only, no acting party in the Bed.


Johan. That Is not her Sisters fault; a Squirril in a Cage, or a Dog with a
bottle at his tail, will lie still as soon as Paulina; she has indeed as much
fire as her Sister has Phlegm.


Pedro. I, she burns her Cake, and the others comes out dough; their Ovens,
Johanne, would be better heat if the fire were divided; and I cannot but wonder
to hear thee praise her for being kind; I have beaten her to make her lie
still; their kindness to me is like Dogs that leap upon me, and dirty me; a
fawning dissembling whore that frisks to all men, and is as free of her bones
as her Sister is sparing of her flesh; she is the Emblem of a lean Prodigal
that spends all; and Saretta of a fat Usurer that will spend nothing.


Johan. Yet she was once such an Humor, such a Dancer, such a Wit, such a
Shape, such a Voice; 'twas Comedy but to see or hear her.


Pedro. I, for once she was, and for once she may be all this again; and but
for once, whoever shall practice her longer shall find her the other; besides,
I am now weary of purchasing beauty by the peny-worth; here one for a voice;
there another for a shape or humor; no, Johanne, if Carlo's news be true, I Will
sell all those ends of Gold and Silver; and turn out all those common people of
my heart; and fit the Palace for a Princess, and purchase that Jewel which is
now at sale; and trade no more for days and nights, as I have done with these
Cattle upon the Common; but raise a sum, and in the divine formed Angellica
purchase all those several beauties contracted and united there in one which we
find scattered and dispersed in other women.


Car. Now is your time for a thousand Crowns a month; four days and nights in
the week she is yours.


Johan. A thousand crowns a month! sure she makes but few Musters in the year.


Car. Faith, it is thought she has vowed chastity; and takes this way to be
private, and I am of their opinion; for sure there are few will give so much
money for a cast Mistress of any man's, bred in craft and dissimulation, and
Mistress of her trade as she is.


Pedro. That Is ridiculous; for though a wife cannot be too ignorant which is
honest; yet give me a Hawk in flying, a Hound that is made, a Horse that is
dressed, and a knowing wench, so she learn it in her youth; Come, let us go to the
Piazza, I long to see how she bears her humor; haste you home, Diego, and tell
my Sister I am arrived; have either of you seen the Girl lately?


Johan. Not since the last feast, she comes not in the Prado.


Pedro. You shall dine with me to day if you be not engaged, because we will talk
the Town over, and her news.


Carl. Faith, and there have been some changes since you went will make you
confess all are not guilty of ove-rconstancy, that despised, old,
out-of-fashion virtue.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Paulina, and Saretta. Paul. 'TWas they and Don Pedro, which it seems is
newly arrived from the Army.


Sar. Prithee stay till they are gone out of sight; those hungry Dons will
think to make a meal with us else upon the remnant of their Sabbaths days
dinner.


Paul. They have my curse that made the decree against Jews; my lean Portugese
pretends Christianity now, and does so devour my Bacon; a flitch, heretofore,
would have lasted him as long as the old Law.


Saret. Would the Army were drawn into Garrison; I long for some fresh Lovers to
dress our house; these grow so withered and poor they scarce keep Cobwebs from
before our mouths, which they break with lean bits, God knows; mine only sighs
of late, and in Poetry whynes his passion; I told him last night I could
neither feed nor cloth my self with Anagrams, or Sonnets; but desired him to
let his Pen alone, and express himself with his Purse; so he gave me this Ring,
and I returned him his Ode again.


Paul. And there is Shittlecock, Cork and Feather too, their Patron and Comrade
together, Don Pedro, now he is returned; we shall have all their visits in the
afternoon, for fear of the charges of a meal.


Saret. My life upon it, they are gone to the Piazza to see the Picture and the
Petti-coats of the Italian; if I had thought any man so mad as to give such a
sum, we could have taken that course too; I hate the whores impudence for
setting such a price upon her self, and undervaluing all us by raising the
Market upon the opinion of her own flesh, as if we sold Carrion only.


Paul. It Is the humor of most men, they love difficulty and price; slight
them, they are yours for ever, Riches and a fair House, Plate, Jewels and
Furniture, Petti-coats too; Death, they will make love to Petty-coats; nay, some
Fools Court Quality a great Lady, though she stink above the Allay of Amber;
One that never goes to Bed, all, nor sleeps in a whole Skin, One whose Teeth,
Eyes and hair rests all night in a Box, and her Chamber lies strewn with her
loose members, High shoes, false Back, and Breasts; while he hugs a dismembered
Carcass, such as is fitter for an Antiquaries study then a Lovers Arms.


Saretta. Peace, and hide close, what are these?


Enter Thomaso, Edwardo, and Ferdinando. The Wenches show only an Eye, and a
hand, through their veils, Edwardo and Ferdinando sneak when they pass by them,
and put off their Hats. Paulina. It Is a proper Fellow, would I had Opportunity
to tell him so; has he not something of the English Colonel in his face?


Saretta. He has, and they are strangers; and strangers are our Plumbs.


Paulina. And we their Wine and Banquets.


As they go off the Stage Thomaso looks upon his Comrades, and points to them,
and takes hold of Paulina, and looks earnestly upon her, till Edwardo pulls him
away with his Hat off; then the Wenches go out. Edwards. What do you mean?
S'life, affront a Lady! prithee be Civil.


Ferd. Pox on it, there is no Jest in abusing Ladies; We that are strangers to be
first known by a Barbarous insolence toward Women! Thomaso laughs. prithee
consider.


Thoma. Why, good homespun, honest, ignorant Country Gentlemen, what do you
think these were?


Edw. Why, we see by their Mien, what they were, some Ladies, Persons of
Quality, going privately to their devotion; you see they are entered the Church.


Thoma. These two are Ten whores in Essex.


Ferdinand. Prithee speak softly; this rude humor of Scandalizing Women is
ugly, and we shall be beaten for being in your Company.


Thomaso. Pray, Master Justice, give me your warrant; and if I do not prove
them Whores, whip me.


Ferd. This humor is worn old and stale, and to me as troublesome as straight
Boots, or sore Eyes.


Thoma. A king Teeth, a Salt Itch, a tired Horse, or a gal'd Arse; Death, will
you believe me when you lie with her? It Is strange Logic because your Bond is
better then mine, I must not know Spain better then you; I Will be your Baud but
I Will satisfy this scruple.


Edwar. Do you hear? I shall be an unbeliever too, if I thought you would give
such satisfaction to all that have weak faiths in this point; for if these be
of that Gentle-craft, I Will not give six pence for an honest woman for my use.


Thoma. Yes, Sir, they are right, though they will neither be drunk take
Tobacco, nor speak Bawdy; these will not swear neither, and yet they are whores;
in all those fine Clothes and Jewels, which are their own, and right ones too;
No bright blazing Bristow's amongst those Diamonds; These are sweet too, and
wear clean Linen; None of your Roostlings, that lie in Cock-lofts, in the
Suburbs; These have houses in the City, and lie in Beds, and in sheets as large
as those Beds, which no Rug adorns, nor yellow Curtains stained with some
Martyrs Story, without; and all to be hanged, and pinned like a Frippery,
within; no Sea-coal, Faggots, nor fowl dishes, with broken bread, lying under
their Beds: yet they are wenches.


Edwardo. Prithee, where do these Lady whores live?


Thomaso. Where no Constable, lousy Watchman, Beadle, or Saucy Bell-man dares
break into their Chambers; These will not be kicked neither; nor suffer your
Blades, inspired with Sack, to break their Windows; These are not of
Turnbal-Street, I dare assure you; For their feet do not stink neither; yet
they are doxies, and shall be yours; or I Will be subject to your Character, of
barbarous and rude.


Edwardo. Nay, nay.


Thomaso. A pox on these English humors, you come abroad to learn, and yet take
it ill to be informed; Do you think the wise world will spend their fortunes
al'Inglese, where you must pray, and pay, and not be suffered to tell neither;
Hear you cannot injure a Woman more then to conceal her kindness, nor give a
greater glory to a Mistress, then by describing handsomely every part, and
lively painting every Beauty of her Body, and her heart; who hides or conceals
his Mistress favor here calls her ugly, or unsound; If you doubt what I say,
follow them to the Church, and try your Fortunes.


Edwardo. By this hand, such a Wench would pass for a Person of Quality in any
County of England.


Ferdinando. Few Ladies, I have seen at any Sheriffs Feasts have better Faces,
or so good Clothes; and if these be wenches, such Arguments as these may
reconcile me to this unpromising Town, a place in which if we find not the
Bowels, (hight the Kitchen, and the Cellar) better then the Prospect, or the
Seat, I shall swear, Never King but Ours was ever so betrayed; is this all they
can afford him out of his Sixteen Kingdoms? By this Light, a Smiths Forge, and
his Trough, are as cool as the air, and as deep as the River in the Dog Days.


Edwardo. I, that River; What a Devil made them build the Bridge so big?


Ferd. 'Twas in Imitation of the Ancient Romans, who, in their Conquests buried
great Spurs and Bits, big enough to ride and rule Elephants, only to beget
Admiration in succeeding Ages.


Edward. Two and twenty Arches, over a Kennel of Snow water! By this hand,
there is not stream enough to quench the Mules shoos as they pass; the Coach
wheels hiss as they drive in it, while Don Phaeton sits in the Box, and Apollo
flaming about his Ears; it is the first River I ever saw Coaches take the Air in.


Ferd. I dare say there are twenty Coaches cast away in it for One Boat; and a
thousand Whores caught in her stream for one Fish, all the Summer long; The
Curso looks like a Sea Triumph; Just so some Inland Painter makes Galatea
sport; if you show us no better Pastime at Madrid then Don Neptune, and Dame
Thetis coach'd in a River, I shall believe you a better Poet, then a Judge; and
sooner read your descriptions then travel your Journal.


Edw. Those marinated Men and Women were not very Curious to day; Who saw them
bathing in their Pickle; 'Twas like Ovids description, when Phaeton fell;
Me-thought, they looked like those afflicted heads of Rivers, and stood gasping
like run-hounds in thick puddles, half above, and half under water; Meza Cotta,
Meza Rosta per Diana, and then watered high ways; Bless me what a Mountebank art
thou, to praise this Nest of Turds which are laid with a kind of Pride, in such
Order, at Every man's door!


Thoma. Have you done? if not, I have so much pity and patience as will hear
you out.


Ferd. Done? No, by this light, as long as my Arms burn and itch thus; I Will
as soon stand Centry till my Pike grow in my hand, as put my self naked again in
the power of their Inbeds; I would not suffer such another night for their
Indies; By this light, a Leager Osteria Louse bites as venomous as a mad Dog,
and then a new vermin called Punesies, more offensive then Garden Toads, or
house Spiders in our Country; a Gnat here wounds like a Scorpion; a Be not
only stings, but stabs as mortally as a poisoned Dagger, and would destroy the
People, were it not for Relics and Madonas's that protect them.


Edw. Prithee let us forget these Calamities; and if it be possible save our
selves by a wise and early retreat; a Town Quoth you! I have seen the Dust fly
in many Towns; But I never saw Dust crawl but in Madrid, enlive^ed Dust, part
Moor, part Castilian, all Lowse.


Thoma. Essex has none of these Grievances.


Ferd. No, by this hand, it is Paradise to this; and our Oysters are worth their
pearl, but this is from our business now; Either let us follow, and take our
Fortunes; I have marked those partridges, let us find them, or the Ambassadors
house.


Thoma. To let you see I have more kindness then you deserve, I Will do either;
yet I would willingly call Arrigo, at the Ambassadors, to witness what wretched
things you would have been if you had ^in seven years longer sleep'd in Ale and
Beef broth at Croyden.


Edwardo. Prithee do not name those savory things; you know, there is no
Jesting with my Stomach, it sleeps now; but if it wakes, woe be to all Our
shares at the Ordinary.


Tho. It Is in this street; see, there are the Arms.


[Tho. knocks, the Port. comes out. Porter. Who would you speak with, Friend?


Thoma. Old England still, Gown and Staff: I warrant he would not have a Swisse
seen at his Lords Door, for a Rose Noble; Friend, I would speak with Don
Arrigo, if he be at home.


Porter. He is at home, Sir, you are sure; for it is Noon; This is an Englishman
you may swear; how they are bred! Knock at an Ambassadors door at Meals!


Thoma. Pray tell him, here are some Friends of his would speak with him.


Porter. His servant is already gone, they are in good Clothes; yet they look
as if they had rather eat with him; Sir, I shall tell him.


The Porter offers to go out, and they shut the door after him; but Thomaso
holds the door. Thomaso. How now, why do you shut the door upon us?


Port. Friend, this is no time to leave the Gate open; it is noon in the
Ambassadors Kitchen, and the silver dishes are loose about the house; besides,
if I should let the steam out, there would be such a swarm of Castillians at
the door, feeding upon it, here were no living; Alas, Sir, we are forced to
shut up all when the pot is uncovered; and if you have not dined I advise you
to retire, lest the smell overcome your Stomach, in this pure Air; These are a
Nation of the finest clean Teeth; if they use their Swords no oftener, a
Scabbard would last an Age.


Ferd. Prithee what Countryman art thou, that put'st so many R's into thy
English?


Porter. A Britain, Sir, Glamorgan-shire, Srie, and Dam.


Thomaso. Take heed, do know what thou have done, to ask a Welshman what
Countryman he is? By this light, it is ten to one but he falls into a fit of
Heraldry or Genealogy, and then you have brought your self into a fair nooze,
to be bound to hear, how many aps, and ap Williams, e're he comes to Adam ap
Munmoth.


Enter Harrigo, and Rogero his man. Harrigo. Gentlemen to speak with me, and
why do you keep them at the door? My Friend, the Wanton Wanderer still; what
Thomaso runs to him, and they embrace. new ill luck drives thee hither again?


Thomaso. Salute my Friends, and then I Will answer you; They are true blades,
Hall. -- Remnants of the broken Regiments; Royal and Loyal Fugitives, highly
guilty all of the Royal Crime, Poor and honest, Hall; you see his Majesty's
marks upon us, English, and that gave us a safe Conduct, and here we are to
snuff our wits.


Harrigo. The same man still; I see, Winning nor losing can ^ange your humor;
you must wander still.


Thomaso. The same, self-same still, and would not change for all the Sun has
shown; or the Sea hid; I would not be the Catholic King, confined to one
place, one company, one any thing, nor marry the Infanta, though she had as
many Graces as Nature could crowd into one Woman and be faithful; Change,
change, Hal, of Places, Clothes, Wine, Women, Faces; It Is the great and
surprising Pleasure, variety is the Soul of Pleasure, a good unknown, and we
want faith to find it.


Harrigo. Yet there is one exception to your rule, a secret which we'll
discourse of at leisure; And I believe a Woman that may purchase you from this
life, in whose Embraces you may find such varieties of Joy, as you may keep
your Humor and your Faith too.


Thomaso. Who, me? I will not be tied to one Woman, Hall, for all the sword has
wonn or lost; All that Love has given, or Lust has cost, all that Treason has
bought or sold, could it be told down; I would not sell my freedom of that of
span of days that is left me, for it all; I am no Mutton to be folded, Nor Bird
to sing, though in a golden cage: Home, Hal, is all this to me, till in a
Grave, I Will not be found at home; I am resolved those tame Spirits that can be
conjured into a wedding Ring, and dance in that dull Matrimonial circle all
their days, I pity their Bodies that must suffer this slavery, and despise
their lean starved Souls that threw them into those Chains.


Harrigo. We are of one Country, though not of one Mind; I Would name my Prison as
you call it, and sing all my days; Yet I have seen the world too, and know a
face would reclaim a wilder Heart then yours.


Thomaso. Tell not me of faces, Child; when I wink and call to mind the
thousand beauteous volumnes these Eyes have read over, whose stories I can
scarce remember, though we set marks under their Peti-coats; Think not then a
face can bind me, when her arms could not; My Heart will digest a Mistress in a
night, and hunger again next morning; Surfeit to day of Youth and Beauty, and
yet thirst all night for a new Friend; and those are the strong healthy
stomack'd Lovers that thrive upon Love; A pox on your whining, sighing,
Consumptive Platonic humors, your waterdrinkers, they cannot believe it, Hal,
they cannot; else they would too, and only out of craft insinuate themselves
to make their weakness seem Virtue.


Harrigo. Gentlemen, he is your Comrade; and though I will not pretend to know
him better then you, yet I dare say, he does not only doubt our Faith when he
says this, but I am consident he does not believe himself.


Ferdi. Sir, we know not what to believe, and yet, for mirth, we let all pass;
He is one has past all Fortunes by Sea and Land; surfets, and want of bread,
loved, and been beloved again, and of that passion has tasted both the honey
and the sting, thrown from his cradle into other men's grounds, naked, and
unthought of by his Parents and Friends, and what was cruelty then, is his
happiness now; for being bred with the wolf he grew wise enough to thrive in
the forest.


Edwardo. Those miseries set an edge upon his mind, with which he eats through
the difficulties of Fortune, and now emboldned by success doubts nothing; I
have seen him in a morning put his hand as confidently into his pockets for
money as if the Devil had been his cashire, when he knew he put them off at
night, as empty as his gloves.


Thomaso. Why, if I had lived at Croydon all my days, I could have found money
in my pocket in the morning, if I had left it there at night; Why, either of
you can fetch a penny loaf for a penny, though you are Country Gentlemen, and
if you can do this, why will you not allow our experience in the other?


Edwardo. Pray leave this discourse, and pursue your promise; The Church and
the Ladies, shall we not see those sinners? Prithee let us not lose the
occasion, we have but young Faiths and great doubts; Assure us these are
wenches, and we submit, else we rebel for ever.


Ferdi. We are covetous fishermen, and for want of Faith in better luck, would
fain keep these in the Net; Prove these Merchants of Love and his small ware,
and we are ready to be cozened; A Heart, a piece or so we have to spend, and
if they be kind, I care not how quickly I Am undone.


Harrigo. Who are these they speak of?


Thomaso. Our old Friends the two Sisters, that passed by even now; I staid
Paulina, but she did not know me, yet she looked earnestly; A perriwig and
seven years misery, will change a wiser Man then I pretend to be.


Harrigo. I left them in the Church just now, if they desire to see them a
Credo's time ill spent will satisfy that curiosity; Will you go, or shall I
lead you the way? Come, I Will be your guide so you do not mistake it for the
Welsh-man in me.


Thomaso. Come lead, and we'll follow you without this Apology. Thomaso and
Harrigo bug one another, and go out together.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Lucetta alone veiled. Lucetta. THey are strangers, I know by their
staring, and English, by Don Harrigo; If he has metal he follows me, and if I
have wit he is mine; for they say it is a kind hearted Nation, when they come
first abroad; But frequent ill usage hardens their Hearts, a People that loves
every thing, even themselves, and so kind to their Mothers Son, that they
believe all women are so too; If this be one of that foolish Family, I shall so
fit him for a Mistress. See, here comes Sanco, now, the news, where is he?


[Enter Sanco. Sanco. Gazing upon the two Sisters, they have formerly known one
of them; It Is the English Major that served here under Don Pedro's Father, he
went hence in the beginning of the rebellion; You know him, he was Paulina's
Servant, a wild fellow.


Lucetta. It Is he, I thought I had seen him, Thomaso, it is Don Thomaso; But let
him pass, how goes our own business, did you speak with the other?


Sanco. There was no fear of that, for you no sooner left your seat, but he
flew to me; I find by his wheeling, he is an old Cock of the game, he will follow
strait and come alone, he would not let his company see us talk together; I am
to expect him here, haste you home, and put on your best face.


Lucetta. Tell him, I am in Love with him, and Daughter, Mistress, or Wife, to
some great person; Lament in my behalf the sad condition of a Woman of quality
in this Nation, whose jealous customs will admit no occasions for Men to make
their addresses to us, which exposes us thus to their censure, forced against
the modesty and custom of our Sex to speak first; But were we so blessed to
enjoy the liberty of other happy Nations, where Men and Women meet and converse
without scandal --


San. What large heads, and herds of Cuckolds would Spain breed?


Lucetta. Leave fooling now, I am serious, say this in defense of my modesty,
and that I beg he will not mistake my desires of seeing him; whose Eyes have
taken such venom from his, as nothing but the Scorpion can cure the Scorpions
wound; This secret tell him, I blush to you, my Friend and Kinsman; This, and
some very very fine things, such as fools use to be tickled and taken with,
Dear Sanco.


Sanco. This is fine, by St. Iago, I could find in my heart to forswear your
service; Death, have I taught you your Trade to become my Mistress? Do I wear a
sword, am I a Castillian, and shall a foolish Peti-coat, a shallow Woman, tell
me what is to be said or done, to cousen a dull greesy brained phlegmatic
Tramontano, how often have I brought you dead dogs for visits? When I do, give me
the tail for my pains; Till then, play your own part, go home, and attend your
Q and leave me to guide this small vessel to your Port.


Lucetta. I am gone and will expect you.


[Exit Lucetta. Sanco. These Girls with good faces, have the true magnetic
virtue, and if a Man be a Blade, his steel will incline to them; I am but a
scurvy Philosopher, else, me thinks a Man might prove the Lodestone; and the
steel, the Fornication of the Earth, sure we are, there is a he and she in that
Mass; and why not these the two Sexes? But observe how kindly she takes it to
be plowed too, and the deeper you put in the spade or culture, the sweeter; If
I could read, perhaps I might find some odd book would prove this further. At
the Gate I Will stay for him.


[Exit Sanco. ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Saretta and Faulina. Saretta. WHat dull things were we not to know him?
yet I am to be excused; But for you to forget a Man that had got your
Maidenhead, what will thy Memory retain?


Paul. I confess he was not in my thoughts; the absence of seven years, that
beard and Perriwig, all conspired against me; yet I am glad to see him, he
keeps his old humor still.


Saret. Thou love him, and I do not know for which of the two Reasons best;
whether for taking thy Maidenhead, or giving thee Plums; it is much what
seasoning will do, those kindnesses will taste still; else, to me he is none of
those men I could dye for, or live with; there is too much of the Curd, and
Dutchman in him; he is too white for my eye; if I were to take my choice of the
three, the black should be he, I love the Raven in a man; those Pigeons do
nothing but bill and prune themselves; nay, they expect a woman should Court
them; and when they are won there goes such a deal of care for fear of spoiling
them; Hang them, they cannot last a nights watch, nor stand the shock of a day
of Battle.


Paul. The Raven do thou love? the Raven then pursue thy choice, for he looks
as if he were right Ravens Chick, a Bird that any Carrion will please as well
as Venison; I am glad to find we shall not be Rivals, take your Crow, give me
my Dove; there is beauty, youth and sweetness in him; a flower fit to be worn
in a Ladies bosom; yet, if I mistake not, I have seen as stout and as high
flying Hawks of the gray Male as any of your Kite-colour; would he were at home
to try if I could get my Maidenhead from him again.


Saret. Why truly the man is civil; and it is odds but he will be persuaded to
leave it where he had it after seven years use; it is almost as long as thou
kept'st it.


Paul. And yet if you had not been weary of it first, I believe he had not had
it so soon.


Saret. Faith, as good I sell it while 'twas there; for I was afraid thou
would have played with it till thou had lost it thy self.


Paul. It made me a friend then, I do not know what he is now; and though they
have an ill name in the world this last seven years, for bloody and cruel; yet
I never saw any of them that were not kind, well natured, and frank to their
Mistress.


Saret. An improvident sullen race of men, that will spend or give a hundred
pound rather then pay five shillings; governed by a nature cross to all other
Nations, I have known them take a kick from a stranger, and kill one another
for a wry look; they are governed by no Rules; either impudent beyond
Mountebanks, or else blushing sneakers, bashful as Girls in the Novitia; I
know nothing good in them but their humor of giving to their shirts when they
drink.


Paul. If I mistake not the Nation, you have made but an ill observation; Dull
and Phlegmatic as you believe them; their acquaintance will tell you Don
Thomaso has no such fool in his forehead as you read there; step before, I see
they follow us.


[Exeunt. ACT. 1. SCEN. V.
Enter Harrigo, Thomaso, and Ferdinando. Har. SEE, there they go; halt a
little, and give them law enough; the Course will be the fairer.


Thom. Not too much law, pray; consider, it is but a Puppy-lover that runs.


Ferd. Gentlemen, whilst your mirth has so good a jest as this in chase, I am
contented with any part of the sport.


Thom. Where is Edwardo?


Ferd. He has lodged a Deer of his own; I saw him steal out of the Church, and
follow a good woodman that gave him the sign.


Thom. Why so, there is one of the Covey flown; if I were to give an account of
him to his Parents now, 'twere fine; to cry a lost English Boy of thirty,
'twould be welcome news to his friends if he had any; this it is to travel with
a Justice of peace, when he is out of his Clerks sight that keeps him in awe;
the Rogue was only hedged in with the fear of his neighbors, and the Penal
Statutes at home; now he is brok loose he runs neighing like a Ston'dhorse upon
the Common; I hope she will find him a young Traveller, and dress him fit for our
mirth, that we may have a revenge.


Har. If she be a practiced sinner, he is fitted; perhaps, she will sell him to
the Spirits that take up Planters for the Indies, or flea and beat him; and
then turn him out to seek his fortune; what humor is he of that he runs thus
wildly alone?


Thom. What humor is he of, he runs thus wildly alone? an English elder
Brother's humor, bred in a Nursery with a Bib and Muckander, and a Maid to
tend him till he was in his Teens; one that knew no joy beyond a Birds-nest,
Angling, or a Play-day at twenty; one that is whipped in a Free School, and
would cry and scramble for Nuts till he was out of his Wardship, and lay with
his Grandam till he was married; A pox upon him, h'as all our money about him;
and if she rob him she plunders the party.


Ferd. Never fear him, he has a sufficient ill nature to defend him; beside the
blessing of pride and self-love; which will save our moneys from any danger his
bounty may threaten; Marry if she should profess love to him, and can persuade
him handsomely to believe it, there is some danger; else, if she get above his
Ducat, geld him.


Har. That Is no good ground you go upon, 'twill not save him there; these women
are none of those tenderhearted Lovers you find in Comedies, that sigh at
first sight; and run mad for strangers in the second acts if he go into her
house she has all she desires; and will either pluck his Plums by flattery, or
else so shake and cudgel the Tree, he will be glad to let them fall; then that
Rogue you saw entertain him, and talk with such gravity in the Church, is her
Pimp, and a Bravo; a slave condemned to the Galleys for more murders then he
has Beads upon his Rosary.


Thom. For beating him, I Will venture that; and it is odds but he will beat some of
them if they speak twice without respect or beyond his knowledge; the Rogue is
stout enough, and 'twill be as hard to beat as please him; but let him pass and
tell me, Ferdinando, how do you like these visions? I am for Saretta, it is a
brave plump Girl, there is substance in her; her heart has room to dance and
play in her breast; the Rogues soul lies soft and white; and in these Dog Days
to lie in her arms is sleeping in Fresco; your lean women in the Summer burn
like kindled Char-coal, I must find some means to purchase a sin, or so with
her. Come, let us go see them.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
The Scene changes, and discovers a Piazza and Balcony-windows in which the
Angellica and her wonan appears, other windows, and other women in them; near
the door of Angellica stands a Pillar, upon which hanges her Picture, and by it
stand two Bravoes to protect it from affronts; and to give answer to such
Questions as are asked. Under the Picture, is written this following. THis is
the Picture of the Angellica Paduana, that was Mistress to the dead General;
her friendship is not to be purchased under a thousand Crowns a month, for
which her Lover is Master four days and nights each week and she his Servant.

Angellica Bianca Paduana.


Enter two Bravoes, and place themselves by the Pillar. Angel. SEE, they are
come; prithee observe, with what malice and envy yon women look upon us.


Anna. They are vexed to find the Trade so refined by a stranger; alas, they
have no ambitions here, but to secure an Olio to dinner, and a Coach to the
Prado; a pound of Bacon, and a Royal of eight transports them; would our
conclusion were tried that we might return to Venice; if ever you be tempted to
leave that Paradise again, may some mangey Don ride us through Madrid; 'twill
be another condition now with us, you have youth and fortune to spare, you may
look about and choose your man to make a friend at leisure; we can eat now
without being forced to sell our liberties but upon our own conditions.


Angel. I would not stay a meal in this Town; but for the vanity and pleasure,
to see and be seen; while the General lived, his jealousy made me lie hid in
the world, neither seen nor enjoyed; chaster then their Nunneries had my mind
been as innocent as his Bed. Profit and to be sought was all my pleasure then,
with which profit I will seek my pleasure now; the doubtful world searce
believed I was handsome: thus I shall remove that doubt, and leave a name and
memory behind me; the novelty and humor, besides the price, will beget
discourse; I know there is few will give the money, though he is not born shall
enter under; for though I want no money, I Will have the gusto to see them gaze,
sigh and wish for what they have not the hearts to purchase, nor merit to
deserve, gratis; and when our nine days wonder's over, we will begone; and in our
own Sphere enjoy all our souls can imagine of peace and pleasure; get the
Theorbo, I see some coming.


Enter a lean Don conducting another Don, and an Italian, Officers of the Army;
they salute her and read the Paper, and speak to the Bravoes. Italian. Now
Comrade, what are the conditions we must submit to before we can spend an hour
in conversation with your Lady? I am her Countryman.


Brav. Sir, be pleased to read that Paper, 'twill inform you.


Ital. A thousand crowns! Cape Bella per Dio, Ma Cara. Shrugs, and goes out.


Angel. What said they?


Brav. He Is of Millain, Madam, and would fain have seen you; but they say a
thousand crowns is dear, though you are fair.


Angel. Is he of Millain? would I had known it, the price should have been two
thousand Crowns, to him, for his Generals sake.


Anna. Ha, the Furb has a mind to give horns to his Generals Ghost; see here
comes more men, but I fear no Merchants.


Enter three Monsieurs without Cloaks. 1 Monsi. What Is this? a thousand Crowns!
sure it is a mistake.


Brav. Not at all, Sir, a thousand Crowns is the least price.


2 Monsi. Does she give or take so much by the month?


3 Monsi. One as soon as the other, there is two O's mistaken sure, a thousand
Crowns, pray is she not mad? thou have black-lead, prithee write it down, there
are so few good Whores in Madrid, that an Italian holds at a thousand Crowns a
month; the next Merchandise we bring shall be every man a tame Whore; a
thousand crowns? why it is a portion for the Infanta, and a good one too, if we
keep Catalonia, and Massaniello Naples. There Is nothing to be paid for seeing
your sight, is there? They cross themselves and laugh.


[Exeunt three Monsieurs. Angel. What said they?


Brav. They were of opinion the Painter had put in an o or two too much, and
asked me whether you gave or took a thousand Crowns a month? they were merry,
and said, 'twas a portion for the Infanta, and more then the Catholic King
gave with his Sister now in France.


Anna. They look, indeed, as if they wanted a service and wages, but not such a
Mistress.


Angel. A Mistress! a Livery would be more useful, or a Laundress; what Linen
they wear! Boots and no Cloaks in Madrid; Monsieur! monster, you should have
asked them what Trade they were of.


Anna. You may see by their Mien they are of the Gania petits the poor people
expected so long; and we shall find them by the stink the rusty Bacon leaves in
the Town; their Linen's hired by the month, you will not find two shirts in a
Family; and for smocks they have no such word in their language; they prize a
woman! their Curtezans dare not show their faces; their Prince will beat his
Whore; they are seldom paid, but always robbed when they come amongst them; how
they would demolish our Trophee, if it stood upon the new Bridge, in spite of
old Halls Ghost in Brass, though he were a friend to the Petti-coat!


Angel. No, faith, never think they should bear respect to their dead King,
since they do not do it to their living; the three Christian Kings are so used
by their vassals; Frondeur, Roundhead, and a Massaniellian; which is the worst
devil of the three?


Anna. There Is no Rogue like your Roundhead, a dissembling, insolent, bloody,
blasphemous traitor; whose originals were never got between sheets, nor lay
under one, but the Sextons, in charity; Rogues that had of right only a grave a
piece, in those three Kingdoms, which they so long reigned over. -- See more
Sons of wonder, Gazers, though no buyers.


Angel. No matter, I have my humor in their wonder; when we are gone, this
will live upon their Stage; and be a Theme for a thousand discourses; all which
are Trophies to that vanity which pleases women.


Enter a Polish Prince, and a Flanders Merchant. Prince. But a thousand crowns!
would I had passed here before I went to Rome; I could have had her as cheap in
my Bed as a Coach in the street; would she would take bills upon my friends,
I Would give her two thousand.


Brav. Only ready money passes here; there is no credit, Sir, in this Trade.


Prince. Let Us go lie privately two or three months at Salamanea till my bills
come, and then return.


Merch. Or till the King pays me, and then I Will furnish.


[They salute and Exeunt. Angel. Well, and how?


Brav. Why these are kind-hearted, civil men, but out of Cash; but if you will
take Bills of Exchange to Cracovia, or assignments upon the moving Scotch
Factory in Poland, the Prince is your man; or if you will deal upon Account to
be paid when Brabanter gets his money of the King, he is all te mall your
servant.


Angel. Wishes will not drive our Mill, though I confess I am not displeased
with him that would buy if he could. -- See some one to steal because he cannot
purchase, how they are hid in their cloaks! she will catch all; see how he stalks
to the Bird; fear not, Sir, she will sit still till you shoot; what! they are dumb.


While she speaks this, Don Pedro, Johanne and Carlo, pass over the Stage
mufled; read the Paper and go out without speaking. Brav. Yes, but I know them;
it is Don Pedro and his old Comrades.


Angel. Don Pedro! his Father died last Spring and left him a Million; it is the
same that was wont to vex us with inquiries.


Anna. Is this he? I have known him beset the street as if an Inquisidor had
been hunting a Jew; if I guess right, he is likely to purchase one month of
idle time.


Angel. He is rich, and I believe frank enough; but they say he is of an
insolent and froward nature, and so jealous he will neither lead nor drive, a
proud valuer of himself; let us be gone before he return; some men are got with
shadows, and some birds with chaff; others that are wiser will have the corn in
the sheaf; and Don Pedro is observed to be a better Lover in a window, then in
a bed, and will give as much to be rid of a Mistress, as to purchase her;
therefore I am resolved nothing but his golden-key shall let him in.


[Exeunt Angelica and Anna. 1 Brav. They Are gone, and we will even turn our Lady
to the wall, and to dinner; I am of opinion this bait will catch no fish; I Would
be loath my wages should be deducted out of the first fruits of this project.


2 Brav. What is it to us, whether it thrive, or no, so we are paid? the sooner
she finds her fool we are casher'd; and though it be but a dull trade to stand
watching of shadows; yet it is better then bread and match, a frozen naked
Sentinel in Flanders.


2 Brav. Nay, I am not so wanton as not to taste the sweet of feeding well, for
nothing; it is a Crown of Plate a day, easily gained, to be a Knight of her
Post; but I fear that remedy will cure her fit sooner then good counsel; two
crowns a day hardly earned will quickly appear a dear price for folly, and
quench the heat that bred this opinion of her own face. By this hand, she
should have got more in a Booth with the Elephant, for two pence a piece.


2 Brav. Pray let us in, and keep up the humor, rail at and despise the
Spanish avarice that knows not how to employ their Indies to the right use; and
be sure to admire her beauty; vain women are ships that sail only with windy
flattery.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Harrigo, Thomaso, Ferdinando, and Cornelius. Thom. It Is the same by all
descriptions; is she handsome?


Corn. Esteemed one of the most Garbato in the Town, virtuous, young, and a
high flyer is her character; but I have no practice with her, I am now going
that way, and I Will inform my self particularly; Gentlemen, your humble servant;
Don Thomaso, I hope, when I can be serviceable unto you or your friends you
will command me.


Thom. Lucetta do you call her?


Corn. Yes, Lucetta, and her house is near the Jesuits.


Thom. No words, pray, that we know any thing of his haunt; he is a young man,
but time will reclaim him.


[Exit Corn. Ferd. Prithee, who is this that knows all the world? By this
light, he has described Edwardo as if they had lain in a Belly; h'as a shrewd
memory; I Will take heed how I promise him any thing; but I fear his credit is
not so good as his observation; for though he be a blade, his scabbard's old;
how he eat at dinner! if his heart be as good as his stomach he is a brave
fellow; prithee, what is he?


Thom. It Is a fellow of a most temperate soul; one that makes his own humors
his slaves, and himself a slave to all other men's; I have known him long and in
diverse Countries, a kind admirer still of the place and people he was in; as if
it had been his own Country or Family; and it is thought he can live in all
Countries but that he was born in; one of his maxims is, No man has wit that
cannot be what he will, upon all occasions, in all companies, and in all
conditions; Harrigo knows him better then I.


Har. By this character you are no stranger to him; this is he that traveled
with a young Lord, a Countryman of ours, till he spent and sold even his name,
for he was feign to change it; 'twas not current where they past; and at last
were forced to hide themselves in Pilgrims weeds, and beg devoutly home.


Ferd. What could he say after such an action? methinks he should fly the
conversation of men.


Har. I met him in that condition; and he told me, 'twas for devotion, a
penance they had vowed for a great deliverance in Germany.


Thom. What? they fell from the Butt at Heydelberg, or stumbled into another of
Bachrac.


Har. No, but miraculously delivered from a party of Swedes that robbed them;
but had you heard him gravely applaud the humor of such who voluntarily put
themselves into those private habits; so by a Philosophical hiding a man's self
to peep and spy upon the world through a cranny, as it were, the only best way
to see and judge the true natures of men, who commonly are more free and unbent
before the despised poverty of such whose eyes and opinion, as cheap and low
things, they esteem not.


Thomaso. But when his Baits take, or the merry bill comes, then it is true the
plain Clothes show the sober solid man; yet abroad, the habit and the mien
distinguish the Persons; and for his part he has found it an Advantage still,
to look like some body, and good Clothes pays us in respects, and observation,
what they cost in the reckoning; so, long hair is comely, till it falls; Then
short Civiller, and less subject to disorder with a Beard sometimes in the
Greek-Mode, rough and unhewn, sometimes Spanish-Biggateroes starched to his
Ears, and upon a sudden, those formidable Whiskers reduced to a pair of
Eyebrows, and those plucked with Pincers, till they stare like Pallizadoes, or
a row of Pins; These things he will suffer, and be rather thought out of his
Wits, then out of the Fashion; but see who comes to break off our discourse.


[Enter Edw. Edw. Thomaso, Ferdinando, Harrigo?. Your hands all, and as you are
kind friends get me a dark room, and clean straw, before this flood of Joy and
pleasure oppress my Brain; Ferdinando, hark you, will you buy any Land at
Croyden? I Will sell you all, by this light, house and woods uncounted, and at an
under rate too; for so much saved here is so much got there, and here I Will
build my Tabernacle; Thomaso, thou art a kind Friend, thou have Wit and
Judgment, and know how to choose; I have been an Ass, and Cozened all my
days, but my Eyes are opened, and I repent, and ask thee pardon for abusing
thee, and the place; Ferdinando, such a Mistress, so handsome, so kind, and
full of all those Beauties the curious eye and kind heart seeks, and all for
Love; She sighed, and smiled, and kissed, then sighed again, and wrings my
hand, sure it is a dream; yet her Arms methinks hang here still; Prithee try if
thou can taste her kisses; The Odor and the dew I taste them still upon my
lips; I never felt such a melting Snowy Girl; All her kindness, with such a
Grace, such a Majesty, such Crowds of pleasures in her Arms, I could scarce
crawl from betwixt them; And from her door to her Bed but two steps in Love;
What wretches were we to come so late abroad; Now Thomaso's discriptions taste;
Now I savor his discourse, and by this One dish can judge of those Feasts of
pleasure which We use to listen to as Romance; Ferdinando, If thou will be
happy sell all, and let us two plant here.


Thoma. Not all; Keep the Birch-wood to jerk this Joy, it is too hot to hold,
Ned; yet I rejoice you have so good Luck, a Mistress that you dare tell of her
kindness, it seems, your Spanish Loves enjoin no ungrateful Secrecies; No
troublesome Honor, to throw Thorns in a Lovers way; She fits thy humor, who
had as lieve be publicly pox'd, as privately hapy; do you know her Name?


Edw. Her Name? no not I. What matter is it for her Name, a kind young and
handsome Woman; what a pox shall a man do with more names then these? I shall
not marry her.


Thoma. What did you give her?


Edw. What did I give her? What do you think she is to be bought? No, Sir,
Edwardo is not every body; give her? Why, are we in stock to buy such a Woman?
No, not to purchase a kiss; give her? by this light she gave me this Chain for
the foolish Diamond you saw me wear, and then such Wine; 'twas a Present sent
her by that Grandee you saw me speak to in the Church; he is a civil, well bred
man too, I warrant him; I am engaged to sup there to night.


Ferd. We Will go with you.


Edw. Not a soul; No Gentlemen, you are of the Wits; I Will follow mine own
fortune, and when I have suffered Loves violence for a Night, Ten or Twenty,
then I care not if you do see her; But not a kiss till I have surfeited.


Thomaso. After all this Joy I would be certain your Purse were safe; You know
it is all our Stock; Come, pray impart; it is no time to venture all our
Fortunes, in one Bottom, especially when you are resolved to sail without a
compass.


Edw. Here, Take part, or all, if you will; useless Trifles now to me that can
command such a Girl, and her full Fortune; Don Harrigo, pray favor me with
your Servant, to buy my Supper, and to choose the wine.


Ferd. How the Infidel is turned Idolater! and he that would believe no Woman
faithful now believes and dotes upon a Common whore, she works like a crafty
one; and if she be right Spaniard she will discover some of the old Serpent in
her.


Edw. Never fear it, Ferdinando; It Is but the malice of men, that disperse
those scandals, to brand the Nation; what time of day is it? I have not dined.


Thomaso. Marry, you must feed; Venus will have Bacchus and Ceres too; Else
you will be but cold Company.


Ferd. I begin to believe the Rogue has met a Fortune, however, h'as tasted of
her and her Bottle; would I had such an one to cousen me too; of all the Love I
could spare to Night.


Thoma. Hark you, Ferdinando, be patient, and answer me; have you observed
such a scarcity of men in the streets as to believe a handsome young Woman need
run Rampant for want of a man? or do you see any such temptation in Edwardo,
that he should make a wench choose him out of Fifteen Kingdoms, to offer up her
youth and beauty for nothing? Observe me, she will abuse him.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Angellica and Anna appear above. Angel. ANna, what musing! give me the Theorbo.


Anna. I was thinking what sullen Star reigned at your Birth, that has
preserved your youth from being in Love, that green sickness of the heart that
vexes all our Sex, early or late.


Angel. A kind and a thrifty star, to which I owe my chief happiness; yet there
are Natural Reasons too; For, to speak ingenuously, how should I become a Lover
that have not so much leisure as to wish or long for any man; All I see are
offered before I asked; I have refused many, and enjoyed more, but never yet
desired one since I parted with my first Friend.


Anna. Nay, I Am clearly of Opinion, love thrives more in a Monastery then in a
Court; A Nunnery with a high wall and double grate, there Loves grows mighty
and Imperious; What would those Prisoners give for the Crumbs of Lovers, that
sigh and fall from your Bed; the Table where Love banquets either refused or
surfeited.


Angel. Did thou observe, the other day, how the poor Girls crowded to the
Grates when we came in?


Anna. Yes, and 'twas easy to read their Curses in their looks, that darted
poison at us; Their eyes were ponyards in their wishes, for envy of that life
which we loathe as much as they Covet to taste.


Angel. It Is sad to see youth and beauty so betrayed, condemned and forced by
Covetous Parents to wither in those shades; Roses in their prime of Beauty, of
Force to have led Nations in Triumph; Their Sighs and Tears have Rage and Pity
in them; how they beat themselves against the grate, like old sullen Birds put
lately in Cages!


Anna. It Is a misery I have been acquainted with; and I wonder no State has
been so Curious as to condemn some young Malefactor to be thrown naked into a
Nunnery; you talk of your Royal Chaces, and Jocodotories; I had rather see a
Kennel of Nuns worry a Friar of twenty, then all the Boars lanch'd in the
Forest.


Angel. Bless the man so condemned; as good thrown in the Lions Den; how that
Novitia's teeth would water, whose turn 'twas to read a Chapter while the
Abbess tastes his forbidden Fruit!


Enter Don Pedro and his Company, and gaze upon the Picture. Anna. What have we
here? New men? No, it is the same Dumb Crew; would they were condemned to the
Experiment for walking thus muffled in the Dog Days; if he continues he will be
baked in his own Oven; That Scarlet in August looks Red-hot, and it is enough to
set ones eyes on fire this Month; he is poisoned, I see by his swelling so;
so, do, do, gaze; yes, yes, it is she; compare them together.


Pedro. It Is an Excellent Picture, whose hand can it be?


Carlo. Van Dikes, and it is well done.


Johan. He was a great Master, and a Civil Penoil.


Carlo. Why, do you think he has flattered her?


Pedro. By Saint Jago, he cannot; Observe her without prejudice; Is there one
Grace, one beauty more then she set before his Eyes? And softness, such as
pencils cannot reach; That smile, there is a grace and sweetness in it Titian
could never have caught.


Carlo. Why do you hide your head then, when you know there is thousand
sweetnesses are to be sold, Three for a Crown? Were I Don Pedro, I would
Resolve that Question e're my Month were out; it is true, kindness is the best
sauce, I know, to Beauty, and will increase, nay beget an appetite; But sure,
He that loves a Woman, if her face prove not his sauce his stomak's ill, and
your scruple should never trouble me; To have shut out Don Pedro, and now let
in his Money.


Pedro. No more, they observe us; she has her Theorbo in her hand, I hope
she will sing.


They all three lean against the wall, by her house; Then Enter two Bravo 's,
and plant themselves by the pillar. 1. Bravo. See, Our Merchants are returned,
and new ones are arrived; what are these?


2. Bravo. Strangers by their Colors, and their Clothes; some Officers from
the Army.


Enter Thomaso, Edwardo, Ferdinando, Harrigo. Harrigo. See, we are upon the
place; Now observe with what Gravity and Decorum Whoring is settled here; By
virtue of the Inquisition, in this most Catholic Country.


Ferd. That pillar, what is it? a whipping Post? it is the first gilded one I
have seen.


Edw. They are very neat, to paint and gild their Gallows; See, there is a
picture upon it, it is some body hanged in Effigies.


Harrigo. That wonder is it I told you of; it is the picture of the famous
Italian, the Angellica; See, she is now at her Window.


Thoma. I see her, it is a lovely Woman; hark, I hear a Theorbo, is she Musical?


(She strikes the Theorbo.) Harrigo. Judge by what you hear; These are the two
Sisters in the other Window, and that is the Polack Prince with the Saretta.


Thoma. Peace, she will Sing; What a Garb she has? A Thousand Crowns? By this
Day, a thousand Kingdoms were not dear; a pox of this poverty, it is always
heavy upon these Occasions, where no virtues can make a man's way. Bread and
water I can digest in a furrow upon a Rendevouz, and sleep in it, without
thoughts of Envy, till an Alarm wake me; And then start up from among those
Clouds, when the Trumpet sounds, as if 'twere Doomsday; Custom and Honor,
Hall, makes that sufferance nothing; Nor has ambition or Fortune any Beauties,
that tempt me; But as they can purchase Beauty, which we see set at a Rate,
like Flesh in the Shambles, and spoiled too, like that, by ill Cooks.


Harrigo. Hark, she Sings.


The Song.
1.
COme hither, you that Love, and hear me sing of joys still growing;
Green, Fresh, and Lusty, as the pride of Spring, and ever blowing.
Come hither Youths that blush, and dare not know what is desire;
And Old men, worse then you, that cannot blow one spark of fire.
And with the power of my enchanting Song;
Boys shall be able men, and old men young.
2.
Come hither you that hope, and you that cry, leave off complaining.
Youth, Strength and Beauty, that shall never die, are here remaining.
Come hither Fools, and blush, you stay so long, from being blessed.
And mad men, worse then you, that suffer wrong, yet seek no rest.
And in an hour, with my enchanting Song,
You shall be ever Pleased, and ever Young.
While she Sings, all admire, and Thomaso seems much concerned; The Song done,
He walks to the pillar, looks upon her, and reads the paper; There must be two
little pictures posted upon the pillar; Thomaso offers to pull down one; The
Bravo holds his Arm; Thomaso looks scurvily at him, shuffles him away, and
pulls down the picture. Thoma. How now? what would you have, Sirrah?


Pedro. What Insolence is this? Death, I Will not suffer it.


Johan. Stay a little and observe; you see they are strangers, and perhaps it is
Ignorance.


Anna. What does the Ruffian mean?


Brav. Why do you take down the Picture? restore it, or we shall force it.


Thoma. How now Rascal? Sirrah, put up your sword, and quickly, do you hear? or
by this light I Will draw mine.


(He strikes the Bravo, and the Bravo draws his sword, Tho. laughs.) Harrigo,
Ferdinando, and Edwardo come about him; Don Pedro and his Friends come to.
Pedro. Why this violence, Sir! what right have you to this Picture, more then
another?


Tho. Possession; and I Will keep it; you, perhaps, have money enough to purchase
the Substance; We poor folks must be contented with these shadows, unless she
were to be fought for, and then neither you nor the proudest in Madrid should
out-bid me. Lady, do you grudge Then he turns slightly from him, and looks to
the window and speaks. the honor of this paper? If not, I Will keep it, in spite
of all these frowners, and show it, in honor of your Beauty, through all the
world.


Angel. I am confident, Sir, you will; and I am so far from being displeased,
that I shall take it for an Honor you will keep it.


Thomaso. Your Servant, Lady, and here I Will wear it; a Buckler against all that
dare be angry, what ere they be. Put it into his Breast. They all praw, Bravoes
and all, and fight.


Pedro. S' death, shall we suffer this? you are very brave in your words, we'll
try what your sword dares do.


Thomaso. Beat us at this sport, and we'll wear swords no more; Why, a Pigeon
will fight for his Hen.


Angel. Don John, Don Pedro, Don Carlo, what do you mean? Sir, to you that seem
to have some kindness for me, hold, I conjure you by her you love most, by her
that loves you most, I conjure you, hold; They are all deaf, run down, Anna,
make those Villains leave siding and part them.


Anna. We are lost, undone, you and I, all, all lost and confiscated to the
State; It Is some plot upon you; that Ruffian is set on purpose to destroy you;
it is some damned Soldier hired to this; Those Soldiers, those damned
Soldiers; 'twas never a good world since that race of Men and buff grew in
fashion; In peace the Rogues use to sneak from cellar to cellar, and conversed
with none but Alguaziles. ^ nomaso 's party beats the other of the stage.


Angel. Haste, I say, follow, raise the street, ere they Murder one another;
'Twas Don Pedro's Insolence that caused this; what pretense had he to question
him?


Enter Thomaso and his company. Harrigo. Pray let us retreat, before some worse
consequence follow; You know, these are a Nation that will not be affronted.


Thomaso. You bleed, are you much hurt?


Harrigo. Not I, it is theirs if there be any blood.


Ferdi. If your Dons fight no better then this, they will never recover
Catalonia; why must he be concerned in taking down the paper?


Edwardo. By this light, we'll have the picture too; We have won it in Battle
field, fairly won it; The Knights and Giants are fled that should have defended
it: Come, Ferdinand, lift me; I Will take it down.


Angel. Hold, Sir; and ere you do me an injuy, give me leave to speak to your
Friend; Sir, as you are a Soldier and a Gentleman, I expect protection from
you; It Is their profession to defend, not injure Women; and I am so far from
deserving ill of you, that I know you not; Yet if you please to come up, I am
confident we shall give you full satisfaction for all the displeasure you can
with Justice imagine me guilty of.


Edwardo. You are not mad to put your self into her power? Do you know how many
trap-doors there are in her house, or how many leiger Bravoes lie there?


Ferdi. Prithee leave fooling, and let us go to our own lodging; A pox of these
gilt whores: By this light, I Will find as good flesh in Flannel, for a yard of
ferret ribband, as she sells for a thousand Crowns; and a man must fight for it
too; she will cut thy throat.


Thomaso. Is it possible you two should know me so little as to be serious in
this point? Not go where a woman calls, a young fair woman, a woman that I love
too, because there may be danger; Death, is there any danger like loving her
without money in her purse, whom nothing but a thousand Crowns can purchase?


Harrigo. If that be so why do you lose your labor, and afflict your self with
seeing of her, unless you had the sum to pay?


Thomaso. Why, though she may not sell, it may be she may have a fancy to give
a Courtesy; Who knows? I am sure of two kisses, at coming and going.


Harrigo. You know that is not the style of this place; she will lie with you as
soon as kiss you.


Angel. It Is a gallant fellow, and the rest poor spirited things; Fear not,
Sir, there is no danger threatens you; See all the weapons we wear, and if
these Eyes do not wound you, you are safe from women's dangers.


Thomaso. Do not mistake this dispute, it is but the kindness of Friends; and if
mine own Eyes brought not more danger by gazing on yours then any Enemy
threatens, it is not your doors could have kept me out; And to remove your
doubt, would you durst meet me as naked in your Bed as I durst enter. Farewell
Hal. --


[Exit Thomaso. Harrigo. We'll expect you in the next street.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Angellica, Thomaso, and Anna. Angel. WHy did you pull down the Picture?


Thomaso. Rather, why did you set it up, If not for that purpose? sure you know
the excellence it exposed to our Eyes; which I would now describe, but that the
conversation with your Glass will do it better, which I perceive you have
consulted, by the price you seem to value them at; In short, I saw and loved
you, fair one, as who does not; I wished for you too, as who would not? But
when I read your paper, I found the price of this Jewel too great, not for my
value but my Fortune; had that been equal to my Love, you should have found at
what rate I prized the Beauty and the Friendship of the famous and fair
Angellica, that Star of Italy; who had she been as fixed as bright, a Prince
might have worn such a Jewel in his Breast, and receive greatness and luster
from her; These thoughts my wounded Eyes, and ravished Ears, suggested to me
seeing that Form, and hearing those charms thy hand and voice dispersed
amongst the surpised, and sighing multitude; When guilty of my own condition I
despaired any success with my Alms-mony, to think of purchasing your person;
Angellica is serious and attentive to all he says. And therefore I resolved at
all hazard to possess this shadow to feast my Eyes with, and to kiss and
imagine kindness for it. -- You smile now, and look upon my Clothes, and
despise me because I am poor.


Angel. No, Sir.


Thomaso. Yes, yes, I see it and can bear it; Yet, in these old Clothes I am a
Gentleman and a Soldier; and though my habit be ill, my heart and my sword are
good, and I think my Reputation, as any Soldier needs; for though I have lost
my Fortune, yet I have preserved mine Honor still.


Angel. You wrong me, Sir; And when you know my Heart and the thoughts she
labors with, you will confess it.


Thomaso. Nay, I have told you I can endure it, if you despise me, so you do
not tell me of it; But what is all this to you, who are fair, young and lovely,
and indeed Mistress of all the Virtues depraved man seeks? Good Heaven! What
faults have I seen Wealth and Beauty hide! Even Princes flatter faces, and wink
at the sins and crimes they commit; and while Riches break the Nets, Beauty
numbs the Fishers hands: Riches weighs down the scale, while Poverty lies open
to the Law and censure, liable to the scorn and punishment; for though all are
taught to know the penalty of the Law, it is the poor man is made the example.


Angel. What poison is this my Ears suck in? His words shake my Soul. --


[Aside. Anna. How silent the stands and hears his railing? Good Corporal,
will you trot and leave your preaching? Bless us from a Capuchin in buff; have
you no text to take but my Mistress when you are to rail? Good Centry, of old
St. Frank's Order, this is no broken bread, nor sour porridge, this House
affords no Love for Charity; Pray pack, and search the stalls when it is dark,
or whistle the poor Bulker.


Angel. How now, who gave you this liberty of railing? Get you gone, or lie
down behind you door quickly, or I will kick thy carrion carcass out at window.


Thomaso. No, no, let her vent her spleen, for the same question is in your
heart too, only you can be so discreet as to hide it; What would you have? Who
are you? One that scorns to play your parts; and though I dare spend my blood,
I scorn to sell it for so base sallary; No, not to enjoy you, though I avow a
Love and admiration for thee, and would run any hazard to purchase thee; See
here the last sum I can command upon the earth, the last meal I know where to
eat now in my Body, when this money is gone; Yet I am such a servant to Love
and Beauty, this last, last hope, I Will freely give to enjoy thee; here, pray
take it, I conjure you take it. Do not scorn me, fair one, now I have said
this; For know, She turns from him. if you do, I can hate at as great a rate as
I can love; and for my Revenge, not only give this last penny, but hazard the
last drop of my blood too: Why are you coy to me? I know you are to be had, and
would be mine had I money to purchase you; it is printed, and by your own Order
published; Which Cordial, I Will still repeat to my heart, that knowledge has a
virtue, and in time will heal these wounds; Never frown, fair one; I would not
for the earth thy Fame were as fair as thy face.


Angel. Why so severe, Sir?


Thomaso. Not that I despise you, but to secure my self; All those flames I
feel now are but so many Lusts, I know them by their sudden bold intrusion;
The impatiency and the sawciness of the flame betrays it, still devouring till
it be devoured; had it been Loves pure dart, I should have pined at your feet
in silence, ere found a daring to tell you so. Lust his bastard-brother, and
born of the same Mother, can brook a denial of that which Love dares not ask,
and only grows angry for a time; But the next kind Girl quenches his flame.


Angel. After all this severe truth, what are we guilty of that you have not
confessed? What crime stains us that you would not now act? You men are
strangely partial to your selves, you would not despise us else; Is the fault
single in us? If not, why should we lose our Honors in the Act, when you think
it an Honor to be the Actors? Who made the Law against Love? Or where will you
find it obliges women only? If the Law be general, must not the crime be so
too?


Thomaso. Yes, in Love; for Love it is equal, but not in you, because you will
be paid; you sell your blood which is your guilt: It Is Mercenarines in you that
makes the sin, Nature else would plead for you too; When I hang out my picture,
and at a rate expose my self to all comers, then I will not wonder if you
despise me.


Angel. And I could urge, when you will take a House and furnish it, deliver up
your Youth and Liberty a slave to our Sex, and wait like a spider in your web,
for all flies that pass; When Angellica knocks at your door, and leads you to
your bed, I will not wonder if you ask a price before I enjoy you; Nor ought
you to wonder when we desire some satisfaction for the slavery we suffer.


Thomaso. I am not here to defend such baseness in men, but to condemn it in
women.


Angel. You have reason, Sir; and I am pleased to find such Honor in your
heart; But your truths are a knowledge I have learned too late: And to afflict
my self with the consideration of that which cannot be remedied is second
folly; Only (once a whore and ever) is the world adage; yet there may be
degrees of ill; and I am vain enough to believe, though I am not a good woman,
I am not an ill Mistress.


Thomaso. Faith it is a very ill woman, (if she be handsome) that will not make
a good whore.


Anna. Gospetto, I can suffer no longer; stab me, kill me, do, tread upon your
Nurse, wound these Breasts that fed thee; All for a Villain that has railed an
hour; Hell upon him, Beggar; why do you talk to him? Sirrah, you know the
price, either pay or begone, He offers Anua a piece of Gold. there is the door,
and here is the window; Would I were as young as I have been, I would make thee
leap it for all thy bragging.


Thomaso. Here, prithee good fore-woman of the shop serve me, and I Will be gone.


Anna. Keep your gilded Royal, and troop, good Rutter; here is no selling by
small ware.


Thom. Yes, on my conscience, thou have sold many a Marvadies worth of thy
commodity ere now.


Angel. When you speak of a price, Sir, you know what it is; you have the Bill.


Thom. It Is truth, Lady, and I desire no favor; let me see; the month is a
thousand crowns, how much comes that to, for a Pistol; divided by four nights
in a week. I, by four nights in a week. -- Hark you, Grannam; take your chalk
and cast it behind the door; see what it comes to, that I may have my penyworth
out of your Lady, and I Will be gone.


Anna. I tell thee, scurvey, saucy fellow, we sell not this stuff by the yard;
the whole piece, or nothing, Sirrah; I could beat him, A pox take him, h'as
vexed me into a Fever.


Thom. That Is hard; must a Customer buy whole ships lading? your Shop, or
nothing! faith, Lady, I can be none of the Merchant, as well as I love you,
unless I could conjure; yet now I think on it I have partners, I Will see if they
will join, we will take off your Commodity amongst us. -- ('It Is a likely Girl, if
we can purchase her we cannot be losers; we will take what we use, and sell the
rest of our ware,) I am thinking, Lady, how to compass this Geer, though I am
out of Cash; will you truck, or venture a courtesy? Death, not a kiss, or so,
for a pattern? By this light, I Will have a mouthful of kisses.


Angel. If I thought they would please you you; should could I be certain you
had a kindness for me more then as I am mere woman, I would not deny you a kiss.


Thom. Have I eyes, have I soul, or sense? Death, I bleed yet for your shadow;
and offer you freely my last bit of bread; if after this you doubt, command me
something, and try whether I can love or no; or dare frankly serve what I love.


Angel. No more, thou art a gallant fellow; put up your money, Sir; for though
I wish thy purse as great as thy heart, and thy credit as good as thy humor,
or nature, yet know I would not sell thee a kindness but for kindness sake; By
this and this I swear. She kisses him and he her.


Thom. What will this come to? I was never struck first by a woman before.


Angel. Can you forgive a fault, and love for love? can you forget I was to be
sold, and value this gift? can you tell your heart I am yours, and not remember
I might have been any bodies? say, can you do this? have you kindness and good
nature enough left to hide such a stain? if not, yet have so much mercy, at
least, to say so; and though you cannot love, yet prithee flatter me.


[She leans upon him. Thom. Nay faith, outdo me with kindness, and hang me; if
I be not as well natured as any woman of you all, the world is cozened;
inquire where I have gone; if my women rail upon me for that fault let the sex
frown.


Angel. Kindness is all I ask, and, for that command me; yet know what I offer
thee has been often sought, often denied, seldom enjoyed; but, By heaven, never
pleased; often a Mistress, but never a Lover till now; if thou be'st kind,
forget and forgive my faults that are past, which are crimes of the Nation, not
mine; sold by a Mother, oppressed with misery when I knew no better then to
obey her; though I confess he that had the flower of my youth laid great
obligations upon us, such as good nature and gratitude will always make me
remember with love and kindness; but 'twas not like the Passion that now
disturbs my breast.


Thom. If this be real, I am mortal; she weeps, sure my Pistols are not worth
this trick; besides, I offered it with all this stir, I would fain believe her
kindness real; but I have been so often bit with sighing, weeping, flattring
sinners, I have no faith left for the sex; yet my Reason tells me I may venture
here; her house is fair, her clothes good, here is furniture, and there are
jewels, her very Baud a Matron-like woman, gravely clothed, and all of a
piece; sure I may trust her; if the worst come to the worst, it is but a few
Pistols lost; rob me they cannot, and beat me they shall not. Well. it is
resolved, I am a proper fellow, and she loves me. -- Come, no more tears, fair
one; All passion but love is unseasonable, and out of tune now; and since you
are a Lover you shall find I can be grateful, kind and serious too; and when
you are collected, tell you it is not only good nature, but wit in women, thus
to surprise a Lovers heart, and give, though not before it is asked, yet before
he hopes, such a favor; the seasonablenss of a courtesy is the beauty of the
action; and Loves fruits above all expect we should gather them in season, if
they hang long they rot or wither; and if neglected, Loves flowers fade and
fall; what beauty had that Rose yesterday, which to morrow is only fit for the
Still? such, and so seasonable was the bounty of this kindness; our Rose and
fruit has now all the fragrancy and season in it; had I won it at long running,
wooing still, and tasted kisses here and there, what is Angellica now would have
been a dull and common joy; for such tastings dull the edge and deads the
stomach of a Lover, who after such weary steps lies down by his Mistress tired,
or without an appetite.


Angel. Do not distrust our joys then, nor my love; let me not find that curse
to have my first vows doubted; if they be, here will fall in showers all those
tears others have wept to me; all their treasured waters at once I Will pour out
at thy feet; oh! that such a stream could make me as pure a Virgin as I am now
a perfect Lover; then I would beg to be thy wife; but that must not be; for
love bids me not ask that which honor forbids thee to grant; yet you may be my
friend.


Thom. No more, the gods are merciful; and sins of youth and nature, such as
ours, have their friends amongst them; come, dry those eyes whose fire those
tears cannot quench; and though their beams cannot stab through those waters,
yet they bruise a Lovers heart; and though Love ha^ a Balsam for every wound,
yet nothing heals love so kindly as love again; his wounds then leave no scars
nor feel no pain; it is scarce a sin what they can do who love and are beloved
again.


Angel. Let Us retire, and not only learn but practice this new Doctrine, whose
Rules are easy, and Laws so sweet, 'twill give the blind Lover his eyes, and
the Law his feet, but they will meet.


[Exeunt Angellica and Thomaso. Anna. Nay, then a Whores fortune and my curse
befall thee; have we spun and stich'd, dressed and watched for this? is all the
honey we sucked from so many flowers in their youth carried to that hive, for
this Droan to waste? What curse made me consent to her vanity! a thousand
Crowns, a fine plot to leave a fame behind us! what a stink will this story
make in Venice? a curse on this Caterpillar; by that time she has clothed and
fed him, we may resolve to go naked our selves; there is but one remedy left,
Best rob her my self, while she has something to steal; I may keep her when
she is old; well, I begin to think this is no good trade we drive, 'twill
thrive neither Whore nor Baud; I have been as painful in either calling as any
she in Venice; my youth had as much beauty and as powerful friends; and my age
as much thrift, Anna Garbota, says one Anna Spiritata, says another, Anna
Bellamana, says a third, Assasina, Echephorbe, Calladora, these were my names;
then Anna who had higher fame! yet see all these trophies shrunk into one poor
Baud and these ruins: who admires but to moralize upon them? and now to add to
the afflictions of my age, in my age this curse is fallen upon me; 'twould make
one swear to be poor and honest to see such luck as follows me; Love was always
fatal to our trade; but I did not fear this curious mischief, to dote upon a
Beggar, a Souldier-beggar, a trade as ill as our own, as poor too, and as
impossible to be made rich; one that thinks it a dishonor to get or save; we
shall never eat again neither, for he will have all in drink; nay, it is an English
Soldier too, and one of the Kings party, three titles to perpetual poverty; a
race of men who have left praying, or hoping for daily bread; and only rely
upon nightly drink.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Don Pedro, Johanne and Carlo. Johan. BE he what he will, shall a drunken
Tramontaney abuse us in Madrid? Are you a Spaniard, and suffer this Affront? By
Saint Jago I Will strike him in the Church, but I Will be revenged.


Pedro. It Is the same that saved my Sister, when Pampalona was sacked; The
Action was kind and Gallant; such as ought to plead against any Injury that
chance begets; and indeed 'twas our faults to hide our selves from him.


Johan. The Devils in 'em, when they get abroad; The Dogs are so muzled and
tied up at home, with Constables, and romwel, they fight for sport abroad.


Carlo. I have seen one of those painted staves disarm a Scarlet Cloak, and
command him into the stocks without resistance; and here they are so sullen
they will not give the wall to Saint Jago, unless he be painted upon it.


Johan. There is somewhat of the Cock and Mastiff-dog in them all, sullen proud
snarlers, any thing, one another, rather then not be worrying.


Pedro. Methinks that race of Cavaliers should be extinct or quiet at least;
they have been killed or banished, sunk, hanged and starved this thirteen
years, and yet they swarm still; I pitied them at first.


Carlo. Pity'em, hang'em, they are as proud of their persecution as the Jews;
and brag as vainly of their wants as a Castillian would of his blood; no
servants, no money, no clothes, no meat, and always afoot, neither daunts nor
dejects them; they beg as confidently their surly way, and they think as
meritoriously as Capuchins; By this light, I believe 'twill be an order in
time, they are admitted into the Mendicants already; and those that loved the
man least called their great Charles both Saint and Martyr, and the Rogues hope
yet to make a black-red-day for him in their Calendar; their Princes too look
as high, and charge as far still upon one lean Mare, as if they had a hundred
led-horse behind them; and their Duke too fights now in France and Flanders as
his Brother did in Scotland; at the old Rupert rate, ten to one still; And by
this hand they look so above the rest of men, for all their calamities, that
when they past last through Flanders no man durst be heard to pity them, for
fear some one of his dull honest ones should mistake that pity and strike him.


Johan. I, but that humour's changed now, France has so cut their Combs; the
Louvre and the Pale-royal have been sad enchanted Castles to them, they have
kept a Lazarello's Court there; darkness, loanness, and the nest of poverty;
but two loaves a day, and without fish, to work the Miracle; yet the Gallery
was a Christian Coney-warren filled with Cavaliers of all Trades; and unless
they fed upon their children, it is not visible what they eat.


Carlo. They are now removed to the Palace Royal, where they eat so seldom, and
dung so small, you may as soon step in a Custard as a T -- in the Court; they
that do S -- save it for their own Pig; there is not a blade of Grass left in
the Garden, nor a drop of Oil in the Madona's Lamp; sacrilege and their
Sallads make it burn dim, they are happy that swim, they dive in the pond and
steal the Fish. The younger stomachs browse upon the Cops as high as they can
reach, they have starved the poor Antelope in eating up his Commons; their
Grandees only dine, and that but when fortune smiles: the Grasshoppers are grown
Pismires now, and are abroad as early as the day, and industrious as the Ant,
for food. Brown-bread and old Adams's Ale is current now; yet if little Eve
walk in the Garden, the lean starved Rogues neigh after her as if they were in
Paradise; there is their Resident too, his Arms are up still; but it is long
since he had the Supporters; it is thought he eat the Unicorn last Passover, his
Butcher and he are still in process for the horn; the Lyon's lean too, but he
will never be tame; you may see the Royal Beast still in the Fair; and I have
heard an Irish Capuchin swear (for he is a blade too, though in a gray
scabbard) that if the Cavaliers could be brought to pray as well as fast, he
believed the King would yet have more Saints in his Army then St. Ignatius has
Lamps burn dim.


Johan. There Is a Roundhead in Town, a pleasant fellow, I heard him describe
their Court the other day: the Rogue makes good sport with it; if a man had ill
nature enough to laugh; Carlo heard him too.


Carlo. Yes, he swears the Waiters act Tantalus better then Ovid described him;
for there are those that follow the Cup and Plate, still, constant, lean and
loyal, that have the smoke of the Office though the roast be run away, such as
have privilege still to see, and only to see, what others eat.


Johan. Condemned twice a day to suffer an apparition of meat; it is sad always
to see and never to eat, food in vision only; nothing to dinner; and sup all
night in a dream, will make your Cavalier but a lean wight.


Pedro. A Court with three Chapels, all Head, and no Bowels, neither Cellar
nor Kitchen but what the Cobbler or a Tailor stitch in.


Carlo. Yet the soul feeds high, spiritual food abounds still; he says; not a
meal of prayers less then in the old Kings days.


Johan. Besides their Princes breakfast and collation made in private
devotion; admirable souls-food for all the faithful that will come; Pistle and
Gospel with Common Prayer by the Tune; but for belly-timber, not one crum.


Pedro. By this character, if poverty or virtue can plead, sure the English
Court will find a reward; it is great loyalty can make all fast, some pray; and
though few have linen, all wear gray; sure they walk at least in the narrow way.


Carlo. Why, the very stables have their vigils too, they say, and the poor
Jades keep them without Oats or Hay; and let the Master of the horse take care
what Grooms he trusts to keep them; for if they dye within the verge, he
swears, By this light, they will eat 'em.


Pedro. Yet their Footmen swarm still; how came they to stay?


Carlo. For want of strength to run away; and, for the Queens side, there is
neither fornication left nor pride; nothing but Madam Bluto remains of all the
Kitchen, none above stairs but Suzan, Civil, and her Capuchin.


Johan. Hot-spur's grown old too, his Gout requires ease; and from head Ostler
of the Court is become Chamberlain with staff and keys.


Carlo. Yes, for the young Prince is from the Indies come; and though his brave
Seahorse foundered in his journey home, yet the poor Jades are now become his
cares; he is no more Admiral, but Palatine Polyxander, great Master of the Mares.


Pedro. Then the young Neptune will to Sea no more.


Carlo. It Is thought so, for the neglected Trident sticks in the Dunghill, at
the Stable door.


Pedro. By this light, it is Pity such parts, and such a Spirit should be buried
there; who, when he was in Action, bred both fear and wonder; His Enemies call
him still the Devil, and Robin a Cumber.


[Enter a Bravo. Brav. Sir, he that struck me is now above in the Synniora's
house; and Anna tells me, he begs and Rails, but has not a Royal of Plate to
bless himself.


Carlo. Lets stay, and see him speak, when he comes out.


Johan. And give him a Royal apiece in alms, and laugh at him, 'twill be some
Revenge.


Pedro. You mistake the man, he has a mind above those little things; but I can
sting him; here Carlo, fetch me a Thousand Crowns, you know where to find it;
with that we will destroy his hopes; and to see us possess her, and himself shut
out, will vex him worse then Blows.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Harrigo, Edwardo, and Ferdinando. Harrigo. THey are gone, and there is
some mischief in their design I see by their whispering.


Ferd. I saw one of the Bravoes return from her house, and spoke with him in
the Red, I am confident they know he is within; and who knows but they are gone
to surprise him by some back way?


Edw. It Is a willful Folly, to throw himself upon dangers needlessly, only for
humor; He knows I have business too, a design of mine own, that waits me. --
I Will knock.


(He knocks at Angel. door.) (Angellica above.) Angel. See who knocks.


Anna. What would you have?


Harrigo. Prithee tell Don Thomaso it is late, and we stay for him.


Anna. Would you had him out at Window, so we were rid of him; A curse on the
Door where he enters in, for Anna.


Enter Thomaso, and embraces his friends; Angellica peeps through her window
upon him. Harrigo. And how? come be Ingenuous now; does fortune smile? shall we
break her Windows, or Sacrifice in her Temple?


Thomaso. Do you not see it here; Is it possible, such joys as mine can be hid?
Does not the little god appear upon my Brow to distinguish me from the Common
Crow'd of Lovers; No Cupids hovering in the Air, kissing their hands, nor
scraping their short Legs; Formantias bona Mane, something to drink for the
service they have done me? We Will call him no more the blind Deity; Do you see
that Eye that peeps there? Death, it is his Quiver, Hall; And has more Darts
then his old one in it, but they are all to friend. Prithee tell me, where had
thou the Sack we drank at Dinner; The Eloquent, Bold, Fortunate Sack we drank
to day? say, that I may go kiss the spiggot, and kneel to the Butt; It Is Sacred
Liquor, I Will dip my Beads in it, and then touch all things that I would have
kind or happy with them.


Harrigo. The wine was good, and there is more of it; If you will walk we will
take a Bottle, and hear the Story at leisure you so labor with; There is good
French wine too, to whet your Stomach with.


Thomaso. French Wine? not I, it is the Omen of some ill luck when I drink it;
French wine? when would that Corrasive had such success? No, I abjure it;
Satyrs, and ill Nature, Costiveness, and narrow soul, shrunk heartedness, and
ill luck followed me as long as I conversed with that hungry juice; Cheerful
Oily Sack, you see, has in an hour of happy Minutes crowned all my wishes; I
have not one desire left; Prithee let us be all wanton, and think upon something
to want, Hark? Here Is those Friends will remove all difficulties -- Hark, how
they dance out of tune for Joy to be fallen into my hands; That while we have
the pleasure of spending, these little Rogues may have the Gusto to be spent?
it is He and She Gold while it is here, and begets young pleasures; The fruit
shows their beauty, while the covetous savor, with severe Eyes, keeps them
Imprisoned in their Chests; they have no opportunity to meet, but lie barren;
The separated Sexes for want of use wither, without putting forth either Leaf
or Fruit; Or will you Collation, or Sup with me at our house? I am serious,
all is mine own, and you shall be well-come.


Ferd. What the two Sisters are forgot, I see. The young Lady too, and the plot
upon the hundred thousand Crowns, and all drowned in this joy, wife and all?


Edw. But thou art not married, I hope, for all thy fooling.


Thom. All the honey of Marriage, but none of the sting, Ned; I have a Woman
without that boundless Folly, of better or worse; there is a kind of Nonsense
in that Vow Fools only swallow; I can now bid my Friends well-come without
Jealousy; Our vows are built upon kindness only, they stand and fall together;
We neither load, nor enslave the mind with Matrimony; No laws, nor ties, but
what good Nature makes, binds us; we are sure to meet without false well-comes,
or dissembling smiles, to hide the Sallary of a sin, or blind the Fornication
of a Platonique Friendship; Our knots hold no longer then we love; No sooner
wish a liberty but we take it.


Ferd. I wish you Joy, Sir.


Thoma. And I have it, Ferd. full joy; hark, how the Chorus sounds; poverty
has a slavery tied to it; It makes Wit and Honor sneak; My soul grew lean and
rusty for want of Credit; It withered the Root of Man in me; But this kind
seasonable Shower sends out Buds again; Thou shall see mirth renew in me; look
here, Ned, your Saint, has she such a Shrine as that Pallas? Does she give such
Oracles as these? hark, how sweet they sound, and in a Language all Nations
understand; there is no Riddles in ready Money.


Edw. I Will tell you to morrow; This night I am to try how fortunes wheel will
rise upon my Anchor; if I be lucky I envy not any he in Madrid; though it is
granted, The Angellica cannot be excelled in Garb or Beauty.


Harrigo. You must consider he is but a young Wencher, but new come to Loves
feasts, he is at's first Course still.


Ferd. And a hungry Lover too, such as never tasted any thing but Loves
porridge, and his Barley pudding in Wedlocks Ordinary; But when we have
surfeited of Spanish, French and Italian beauties as often as you have done, We
shall search out such plumbs as the Angellica; and our nice stomachs will
require such curious plates and sauce to tempt it as those that love us will
prepare; yet what we Love will serve turn.


Harrigo. You name Foreign Beauty, as if England had none could please you;
Show me where Cupid has such a Shambles, or such a Market as London affords?


Thom. I, but you know the proverb, Hall; For flesh and blood; but the Devil
sends Cooks.


Harrigo. Gentlemen, your mirth would be more seasonable, when you have thought
upon your safeties, which, I am confident, is not here.


Thomaso. Our safety? What danger is there, in Nature, for men to apprehend in
our Condition? Let Us mock and despise all danger, now we have conquered those
of Love and Want; By this light, Famine grew formidable; The lean Rogue was
seen to enter within our Court; and though he skulks in private now, It Is
feared he will grow bold and walk abroad.


Harrigo. Since you went up, They passed again; and now I am certain Don Pedro
is one of them; And your acquaintance with his Nature must tell you, He will
not brook an Injury; Which you have repeated to the quick; His sword and his
Mistress he has lost; and how do you believe a Don will brook two such losses?


Thomaso. Don Pedro, The Serulina's brother! a mischief pursue him, (for
putting her into my thoughts) are you sure 'twas he? By this light, he is too
blame; Not I, his disguise has injured me.


Harrig. I Am of opinion, 'twill be fit for you to give him a visit; we will go
with you; The truth of this Accident is enough to excuse us, and satisfy him;
A word in season will overcome him more then blows hereafter: besides, As full
of joy as you appear to be with this new fortune; I know you cannot be so
little a Friend to your self, to slight and neglect such a Fortune, and such a
friendship, as the fair Serulina brings.


Thomaso. Prithee, dear Harry, let us not be wise yet; this is for serious
hours, and grave thoughts, and but puts water in our Wine to day; yet I Am of
your opinion to find Don Pedro; for he is a person for whom I always had a
value and kindness.


Harrigo. Well, Sir, take your own way; As if you could visit him and his
Sister not know you are arrived; which news I Will venture to give her, and find
some way to serve you with her without your Commission; I know the Rogue is so
proud that though he loves nothing else but her; yet he would starve e're he
would say so, for fear she should refuse him.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Lucetta, and Sanco. Sanco. What Is that?


Lucett. A Feather, the Bird has many.


Sanco. It Is a Diamon'd, and a good Water; Is there no ready money too?


Lucet. Fie! Money? I carried it with such State, he believes has got the
Indies; I began, and gave first my Copper gilt Bracelet; had you seen how
carelessly I parted with it, and how unwillingly I received this Diamond, till
forced upon me;


Sanco. Go on, Excellently good; Do you think, he would give me any thing if I
should pretend to love him? I Would so fit him with a speech, if I thought he
would.


Lucet. Your part must be beaten out of him, Sanco; if he will not stand till
we pick his Pockets.


Sanco. No, hang them, they are Oaken Rogues, your English; knotty, sullen,
crabbed, wooden Fellows, and will fight upon as little reason as they love;
you must either flatter them, or Cozen them out of what you get, else their dry
udders will give no milk.


Lucet. Of this some other time; and, dear Sanco, haste, and call my Philippo,
to whom thou know my heart is all in serious, what I would seem here; and I
were happy, if my truth with Philippo found but such success as this Fiction;
Prithee tell him, there is a Supper and a Ring attends him, and a better
Fortune, if he can sail the streights, and find it; The Mine in his Pocket is
then our own; Dear Sanco, be still kind, and use thy Art to bring him.


Sanco. Be you ready to receive the stranger, and let me alone to persuade him;
This place of mine has good Fees belonging to it; Else 'twere not to be
endured, it is so pointed at, and this is one of them -- There must be some
Allougho had too, for I shall be dry He kisses her, She gives him money. in the
search.


[Exit Sanco. Lucet. When I consider the base means we submit to ere we can
gain our Ends, The sordid ways, besides the sin and shame we pass, to arrive at
fortune, It makes me wonder how any woman can abandon her self so as to play
our parts; A Common whore, How I tremble at it? One that must yield to all
Embraces, submit to all that Lust can invent, nay farther, not only obey their
base desires, but blow the fire too, and tempt, as well as suffer; Bowing
before all Deformities, and all diseases, not daring to refuse either number,
time, or place, when their lust Commands, and all for base Sallary; though we
see Our selves despised, sometime before enjoyed, but always after; No one
setting a price or value upon that youth and beauty we expose; But because it is
common, therefore cheap in their Eyes; Thus when I look back upon the Paths I
have trod, I could curse my Fortune, That, in my Autumn has given me a slave to
Philippo.


[Exit Lucetta. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Serulina, and Calis. Serul. DId you see my brother since!


Calis. Yes, Madam; Carlo and he were talking; he inquired for Don Alphonso;
they have some Quarrel; Both are hurt, though slightly; I left your Brother at
the Door.


Serul. Don Alphonso? he is upon his old design, I see; which I shall easily
satisfy, if his inquiry reach to me.


Enter Don Pedro and Carlo. Pedro. I was inquiring for Don Alphonso; I wonder I
saw him not since I arrived; when was he here last?


Serul. I know not, Sir. Calis, when was he here? I considered it so little my
self, I have forgot when 'twas.


Pedro. And why do you hold so slight an Esteem of him whom your Friends
value? a Person that, besides his Quality and Fortune, has a passion for you.


Serul. So I have heard you say; but it is more then ever he told me, or had a
desire should be known, as near as I could guess.


Pedro. I am apt rather to believe his visits had more of Love, then your
Modesty would see then, or confess now.


Serul. If he had a passion, as my Brother believes, yet I am certain, 'twas
but a Passenger in his heart, no Native, nor Dweller there, some sudden
kindness to himself, some complacency and Inclination Incognita, that never
appeared, still without the Garb of a gallant Love, such as is fit for a Maid
to take notice of; else I should have seen it, he still appeared to me of a
Nature so Indifferent as if he cared not to Conquer, which made me always think
him not worth the being overcome; and so I lost him e're I found him and if
some one, more concerned then either of us, had not missed him before me, he
had vanished like his Shadow; This, Sir, is all the Account I can give you of
one who was never thought of when he was present.


Pedro. Men of his Birth and Quality, when they find themselves slelghted, you
must not wonder if they seek a revenge; and though your Sex be exempled from
his anger, yet your friends, that introduced them, may be Subject to it.


Serul. I do not at all apprehend it, not that I want Care, or kindness for my
Brother; But because I know Don Alphonso has neither sense nor good Nature in
him, to let his Love afflict him; his addresses may make some Women angry; but
his Anger will never be fit for any thing but your Pity.


Pedro. I believe there is some other cause makes him thus displeasing to you,
which time may discover; and then I shall be better able to judge of this
Character.


Seru. Sir, I am your Sister, and one that has as much value and kindness for
you as any Brother can pretend to; and it is grounded upon so much reason, that
were you not my Brother I should still Honor you; For I believe Don Pedro's
humor and nature's such, as may justly pretend to an esteem from any virtuous
woman: But I would not see you presume upon the ill customs of our Country so
far as to make a slave of your Sister, who, if you will be just to her, will
give you greater power then you can ask without blushing.


Pedro. Encouraged by your kindness I shall try my Interest in a small request;
I ask not to be preferred before the world; I only beg to be ranked in your
esteem with Don Thomaso; Why do you frown and blush? Is there any guilt belongs
to the Name of that Wanderer?


Seru. You are my Brother, Sir, that ask this question; But 'twould have been
altogether as noble in you, not to have given Faith to those whispers that made
you thus curious.


Pedro. His private return to this Town will authorize my fears; and my cares
and love of you will exact this question from you, when you shall know I met
him to day in Town. Why this confusion?


Seru. You mistake me, Sir; I am not at all confounded with the News, nor
ashamed of any esteem I have for him; My value sprung at first from that praise
your self and my Father gave him. Then Honor, Justice, and Gratitude, made me
his Debtor, being forgot and abandoned by all, and exposed to such dangers as
the licensed Lust of common Soldiers threaten; When Rage and Conquest flew
through the City, ruining all that was virtuous, Then Thomaso, this Wanderer,
came and saved me; for which action my Soul has a high value for him; Nor will
I blush to say it to you, though I never said so much to him, who has ever paid
me an humble and a civil respect since that action, which no time nor absence
shall deface: 'Twas gallant to all men, and particular to me, who, when a
Father and a Brother could forget me, left a prey to the first comer
voluntarily, and for my sake threw himself into all dangers to redeem me; That
Wanderer did this, that Wanderer that saved my Life and Honor; and Serulina
has so much virtue as to prefer him and his Friendship before any frowns or
Fortune whatsoever.


Pedro. This is high, and enough to satisfy my question. -- Johanne, a word.


[Exeunt Pedro and Johanne. Carlo. Sir, you are too sudden and serious, and
your question heats her.


[She walks and museth with her eyes fixed, till Calis comes in. Enter Calis.
Calis. Madam, Madam. -- She is full of thoughts, but I must awake her; Madam.


Seru. Hah!


Calis. Do you hear the News? Don Thomaso is for certain in the Town; your
Brother and he fought this morning for the P^duana's picture; they say, he is in
Love with her.


Seru. It may be so, but till I hear him say it I Will not believe it, nor then
neither; for it is the last thing I would believe of a Lover to say he Loves;
few ever did it well that said it.


Calis. That Is but one part of the story; Diego says they are resolved to be
revenged upon him, and that they have hired Bravoes to watch him this night;
'twill be worth your thoughts to prevent the danger, if your Mind be not
changed; I am so much his Servant as to offer my self in any danger, in memory
of those services that are passed.


Seru. Calis was ever faithful, and shall allways find me kind; and if I live
she shall not say I am ungrateful; It Is now St. Cecilia's Eve, his own Feast,
get our veils, and let us go in disguise to the Caletravo's; There Is the great
Music to morrow, and we shall certainly meet him at the Vespers; He was
always a devote to the fair Cecilia, and Dona Francisca; Music was ever his
delight, but their voices especially; If I meet him there I shall tell him of
his danger; and if he be false, of some which do not threaten yet; But till I
am certain he is false, it shall not lie in the power of Malice to blast his
hopes; I know his humor is wild; and for his Love of Women, it is upon his own
score; he that can be kind and constant to his women so against the hair, as he
is, in spite of Law, conscience, or his own profit, buying at all rates their
kindness, when he does not so much as hope they should really love him; What a
friend would this man be, when all these, and Love to boot, shall seek him, and
if found oblige him? He must either change his Nature, or Love me too; Come,
Calis, I am resolved in two lines to write him what we hear, and something of
what they would have me fear, which I cannot do; For he that had virtue enough
to prefer her before Fortune, quitting his Country for his Honor, shall never
want my Fortune nor my Friendship, when it can serve such a Virtue.


[Exeunt ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter Lucetta, and Sanco. Lucetta. I See them, they are fat, fresh, and young,
as well foul as fish in season; All excellent in their kind; and since my
Philippo will be at the eating, most welcome; But how shall we do to be rid of
him in time? Dear Sanco, be ingenuous.


Sanco. He^rk, I hear Philippo's whistle, within we'll resolve.


Enter Philippo. Philippo. Now, the News; what sudden storm is this that blows
so kindly? The business, for I am in haste.


Sanco. See here one good part of the business, good meat, and better wine;
Smell, pure fragrant Eskeyvous, St. Martin, and old Catholic Sack, with Pane
Benit too; when we consider, (why that scurvy look, Sir,) I speak sense when I
said Pane Benit, and such as I believe you have scarce blessed your belly with
these ten days: Good scurvy Don, be not so starched and hard to please? By St.
Iago, I shall lose all respect for you if you despise my Patrona.


Lucetta. No more, Dear Sanco.


Sanco. No more; By this day you spoil him with cockring of him, and I Will not
suffer't a day longer; Never smell, Sir Botho, I shall grow extravagant, I
shall, and drink this Wine, (do you hear?) and make you eat the Boracho; you will
find the pitch and hair as hard of digestion, and lie upon your stomach as long
as the Jest; you will, Don. Let me alone, a Rascal that has but Lucetta holds
Sanco. half a shirt under his laced Doublet; one that your kindness has only
made considerable; I hate to see him swell and look over us, a Rogue, whom all
the world treads upon; and if you will but look on, I Will make him stand as tame
as a vaulting Horse, till I gnaw off those whiskers he plays with and frights
children.


Philippo. Sirrah, Baud, lousie Baud, scurvy louse, bite me once again and I Will
crack thee. Sanco strikes him, and throws him down, and with his dagger would
kill him, but that Lucetta holds him.

Lucetta strives all this while to save Philippo




Sanco. Rogue, let me flea him, and show you when his velvet case is off a
breast plate only of lining; and under those Cordovant boots bare legs;
Slave, do not I know thy shoulders are laced with Galley-lashes, and that thou
bear the mark of the flock on thy back, two F's. Swear to come thrice a week
without sending for, or, by St. Iago, I Will cut thy throat.


Lucetta. Why Sanco? As you love me, let him rise; you know the passion I have
for him; and if you hurt him, you wound me; A Curse take me if I Revenge not
all injuries you do him at the rate of Life and Fortune.


Sanco. Death, let him be kind to you, and I Will be as much his slave as ever;
else, by this steel, he shall only have time to confess before I absolve him
with one stab.


Philippo. What shall I do to assure her or you I love more, then to obey your
call; or, when my affairs permit me, come unsent for?


Sanco. Your affairs? what are they? stealing Garlic and herbs at night; The
committing Sacrilege on the lamps for oil for a sallad? And choose this rather
then eat a supper for a Prince with us, unless you have money too: You must be
purchased, with a pox, with our money, earned through a thousand difficulties
to give your Tarantula a dirty cold whore in a cellar; our Dogs lie better;
whose starved poverty, and raw stomach, boyles out in a salt itch; It Is two
peoples work to claw her, you are fain to scratch a spell too, till the
hangman take the office out of both your hands; and this is the Jewel for whom
you must despise my Patrona: This you know too, and yet you dote upon him; my
life upon it, he has given her some charm, some philter; which either confess,
or by this hilt thou dy'st without mercy; do not build upon her foolish pity,
let me alone, speak or I strike.


Philippo. Hold, Sanco; hold and I Will confess.


Sanco. Be quick, I say. -- Stand off, by this day you will anger me else.


Lucetta. What, will he confess?


Sanco. Something of which I have been long jealous; and you should have known
my doubts before, but that there was no trusting your fond humor with a
secret; Come, be speedy.


Philippo. Having heard much of a Mountebanks powder when I was in Naples, I
purchased some; it is the same which is now sold in the Piazza, and by the same
man; I had no faith at first, but gave it you upon adventure; but finding the
effect, monthly renewed the dose as the paper prescribes; And had married you,
but for a crafty whore, who jealous that my success with you grew from some
such cause, called to mind that I had formerly mentioned such a powder; she
found the box, and gave it unto me unknown; by whose force I am become a slave
to that wretch, as you are subject to me.


Sanco. O Rogue, Dog! shall I not cut thy throat now?


Lucetta. Not for the world; it is enough I have hopes of my recovery, and the
certain pleasure of his kindness while the frenzy lasts.


Sanco. Have you any of this powder left, Sir?


Philippo. Yes, three or four doses in a box tied to my beads; you Sanco
searches his pockets. will find it in my Reliquery.


Sanco. So, now will I give the Coundess she Bear a dose in the name of
Philippo, and the Rogue another n the name of the Bear; and when it works, give
him opportunity to ravish Calipsa: Then accuse him to the Inquisition, and have
him burnt for Sodomy.


Philippo. Hold; Madam, have you no pity upon me?


Lucetta. Fear not, he shall not hurt you if I have power; I love him yet, and
it grieves my Soul to think that I shall hate him, which is the last effect of
this powder. Rise pray, and let your kindness make amends for the injuries you
have done me.


Sanco. A pox of all ill luck; have I been a Bawd these 20 years, and might,
for ought I know, have been Amoroso to the Infanta, and Heir to 16 Kingdoms? I
have the dose now, and if I can get an opportunity, she is mine; Then do I come
forth King Sanco, there is no Heirs Males to pretend but the Comediantes; Nor
is it the first Prince Spain has seen of the Sanco's; why should I dispute? if
detected, have not I the loving Infanta still to plead? Or, if the worst All
this while Lucetta makes much of Philippo, and he is sad succeed, it is but
dying after I have enjoyed her; And is it not better to be mourned for by a
Queen, then to live Sanco? It Is decreed, King Sanco if I prevail, or a gallant
Villain if I fail. -- Come, Don Philippo, I am friends with you as I am Sanco.


Philip. You are, Sir; it is well you can be friends considering --


Sanco. Why, there is the difference betwixt an injury done by a Prince, and a
subject; Princes when they do an injury they never forgive him it is done to,
but hate the man, because they believe he but dissembles, and has not forgot
the injury; now I that am your vassal freely forgive you all the displeasures I
have done you; come, kiss my Patrona, and smile out this Moon, and let us follow
our design; -- Which, I hope, will put me in equipage for my great work, Aside.
the Age is destined for such a mischief.


Philip. Come, no more tears; I am satisfied, still in doubt! these deeds of
Love are never well sealed; come, print that kiss again, and then let me know
what the design was I was sent for; for I believe neither of, you know what is
happened since.


Sanco. It Is truth, though my fears have long doubt'd what is discovered; yet I
had no thoughts of inquiring that secret now; but it is past, and you shall know
our design; see who knocks.


Enter Don Mattheo 's man with a Basket. Lucet. It Is Don Mattheo's man with his
Basket; I forgot 'twas his day; prithee, Sanco, tell him I am sick, or abroad,
or busy, or any thing to be rid of him, or desire him to dine with me to
morrow.


Philip. Look out, and then you will be kind to the Cesto, what ere you are to
the man.


Sanco. The Capons and Veale look well, and shall be welcome; and how bright
that Bacon shines, larded with lean.


Philip. Such Bacon is a beautiful savory sight in a Kitchen; and those Pigeons
have Olive-branches in their mouths; they look as if they had flown out of his
Holiness Arms to come to you Pamphilians; and will you refuse to receive them
with peace?


Sanco. By no means, Lady; those Annemellys too win my soul; I am resolved to
let in his Supper, it is belly-timber, Child; consider that, able to build two
good meals of when we will; I love a Larder when it is full of such good
company; a clean washed Kitchen it is as ill as a dry Cellar; then there is Dona
Borachia and her handmaids, their pregnant wombs swell like the Grapes that
filled 'em; and can you be so cruel to refuse their great bellies to lie in the
Cellar, take heed of being inhospitable to Bacchus. Don Philippo and I will
refer our selves to one of them, that our quarrel may be perfectly reconciled.


Lucet. See Matheo's be not troublesome, I Will yield to all the rest.


Sanco. Let me alone to manage this affair, while you inform Philippo of our
design.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Edwardo, (drunk.) Edw. A Pox of this sack, it is windy and fuming, would
I were lodged; the Rogue told me he would stay for me at the corner; but which
is the corner of a full Moon, that question will pose a great deal of sack to
resolve; I have passed twenty corners since; I would the Rogue were nailed to
one with a Planet, that I might see him blaze before me; 'twere easy to ask
the way if a man knew whither; here is a door open; If I can hit it, I Will go in
and sleep under this great man's arms, perhaps they will appear to me in a dream;
I Am sure I have sack enough about me to breed a vision.


[Exit Edwardo. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Serulina, and Calis. Serul. WHere are they?


Call. Within still, but upon going. Don John is violently bent upon his
revenge. I heard him say; a sword and a Mistress were not to be lost, nor the
injuries put off with a rallery; but your brother seems more concerned for your
kindness then his own quarrel to him; there is no stirring for me till they are
gone.


Serul. Only observe those Bravo's well that we may be able to describe them to
Don Thomaso; and see my Letter in some safe place till you can deliver it him;
you shall, find me in the Arbor, when they are gone; dear Calis, be diligent,
you know what is at stake.


Calis. I shall not fail of my part.


[Exit Calis. She gone, Enter Johanne, stops and hears Serulina 's discourse.
Serul. It Is not what they have said or threatened frights me; for I know Don
Thomaso has courage and friends to defend him against them all; and I hope
honor enough to deliver him from her charms too; but what am I the better for
his being unconcerned in her, if he does not love me. In Town thus long and
neither see, send nor inquire after me! something like jealousy would fain
make me angry; it is many years since I saw him, but that is excused being
engaged by honor to serve his Prince in his troubles; but being in Madrid, my
fears tell me if he were a Lover, that ingenuous Diety would have found some
way to have seen a Mistress. -- Ha!


[She spies Don John. Johan. Madam, I am glad this chance has gained some
serious knowledge of your mind; yet 'twas no saucy intrusion nor curious nature
of mine that made me give you this interruption, but obedience to your Brothers
desires, who has commanded me again to tell you his fears, that he may, at
least, have the satisfaction to know upon what ground you build your faith that
Thomaso is a Lover.


Serul. Don John has ever been honored by my Father and his Family, and I
shall be proud to find I have not lost that value he had once for his Daughter;
and to confirm him in my esteem of him, I shall satisfy him it is no blind
willful passion, but an affection grounded upon reason which I profess (if love
can have any reason in his sacrifice) besides those thousands which to day I
gave my Brother; who if he found a froward answer must chide himself; for Love,
Johanne, is a child; and if waked too rudely will be out of humor.


Johan. Madam, you will honor me in this trust; and I shall not rudely cross
your heart in her designs, but join to serve you in arguing calmly your reasons
with your Brother, who only fears you may be cozened of your heart; for Don
Thomaso yet promises no great stock of love to purchase such a Jewel; what kind
of address he has formerly made I know not; but since his arrival, methinks,
there has been but little of the Lover seen; then his humor and his actions
are too wild and extravagant for a serious heart to consider.


Serul. What his humor has been to day, or yesterday, I know not; I shall
rather judge by those years I knew him, then by these few hours of which you
accuse him; all his addresses to me were still full of humility, and had honor
enough for any Maid to avow; nothing of the earthy, heavy, envious Lover, that
eats his own heart, if I but praise another man; none of the watery eyed,
whyning sigher, that thinks to gain from a woman's pity that favor which he
could not deserve or win from her Reason; none of your fiery, choleric Lover
neither, whose bloody rage speaks in his passion war and destruction; one that
will frown and look pale upon a Mistress, as if he would win that heart by
force and storm, which he has no title to by love or virtue; no, Don John, none
of these, nor your aerie Humorist, your Dresser, Singer, Fencer, Horseman,
Dancer, Poet; all the all that all women, in all men, admire, I can prize, but
it shall not slave me; had Thomaso loved the common way of men, I would have
paid him with ordinary favors; and for his Mistresses, that great crime so
often urged by my Brother and your self, I despise it, and inquire neither who,
nor how many he has; I scorn to fear he can be such a fool as to give them his
heart; and for his body, 'twas always the least of my thoughts, and only known
as it went and came upon Loves Errands betwixt us; and she that is concerned in
her servants bestowing his body till he is hers, (were I the man) I should
believe such an anger were but darkly telling me she had a mind to it her self;
come Johanne, let Thomaso keep his heart and mind fit for my value; let them be
chaste, and for his body I shall never consider what it does.


Johan. This is a new Doctrine; can you love a man and not be jealous of him? I
thought jealousy had been one of the greatest signs of love, though it be a
crime in a Lover.


Serul. Jealousy is, no doubt, a sign of Love; but it is not of the man I am
jealous; I would be as soon jealous of my Cook or Keeper, as of my Lovers
person; for they have flesh of mine in keeping too; yet I allow jealousy both
proper and honorable in your sex; and were it not troblesome I would wish it
in my servant; for it is fit he should be jealous, not only of my heart and
person, but every word, look and motion is worth his fear and care; for a
Virgin once blown upon by the world, or touched in reputation, is for ever
stained; and yet this stranger, this jealous Lover, the eldest son of Love, is
by foolish women traduced, and his birthright denied him.


Johan. Faith, Madam, as they Marry now, it is no matter what either does, where
their friends buy and sell according to the Market; here is a man and such a
jointure; give me a woman and such a portion; so they truck their Children a
common coin in Matrimony; yet I am of opinion most men have this merit of
jealousy, and do not know it.


Serul. And most women want wit, or justice, to reward, or see it.


Johan. I rather believe they want justice, then wit; and dread it as the Cage
into which few Birds enter willingly; they do not dislike such love, but fear
the consequence of such a Lover; they will not be impaled, such a passion cuts
off their liberty, and his diligence is looked upon as a spy; most woman love
servants as they do fruits, in, and of every Season some. It Is not the Grape,
the Melon, the Peach, will always please; no, nor the old Apple it self; and
though few women can deserve one gallant friendship, yet none are contented
with a hundred: All would have all, nor do they care so much to be loved, as to
have it said so; they dress, Feast and Court for the vogue of the Town; and you
will find in the Herd a hundred brace of fools, and not one pair of Lovers;
though I will hope you may find Thomaso one; upon your score, Madam, I shall
serve him; I beg your pardon, Madam; your Brother She steps into an Arbor, and
lies down. expects me before this.


[Exit Johanne. Serul. This, I know, goes to my Brothers ear; for Johanne does
not brook the fortune Don Thomaso has made in my friendship; and it is easy to
discern (what he durst never discover) a design, himself to have been admitted
a pretender, and that made him pleased with my neglect of Alphonso; but those
are foolish women that will let such mean people, and their weeds grow to look
them in the face, when they may frown them down, and with a look tread them
into their earthy breasts.


[Enter Edwardo drunk. Edw. This house is haunted, haunted, By cock; every Room
furnished, and every door open, and not a servant to be seen; sure they look
for the Devil, the Devil Incognito; I have reeled and stumbl'd through all the
house, without a Question. What Is here? a Garden? it tempts me to take a nap in
Fresco, I shall sleep without He reels, turns round and stumbles. a Cradle, I
have sack enough to rock me. -- Who is it? this Greco is a Witch, and has
transformed me into a Dog; I turn round thrice, ere I can lie down: How now,
what have we here, a woman! By this hand, a Wench; is she drunk too? it is a gay
Girl, what fine Petti-coats and gilded feet she has! I Will catch her sitting,
He falls down by her, she starts and would rise, but he holds her.

Then be offers to force a kiss.

-- Sweet soul, let me kiss thy feet.


Serul. How now, what mean you, Sir? do you know where you are?


[She strives, and he holds her. Edw. We are here, are we not? prithee kiss me.


Serul. What insolence is this?


Edw. Only good luck, parlous good luck, Child; it is a finer Wench then mine;
By this light, she smells as sweet as any Posie; prithee Sirrah, let us not lose
the occasion; I am a very honest fellow though I am in pickel now; thou may
safely trust me; By this light I will not tell, for I do not know thee.


Serul. He is drunk; let me go; sure you do not believe your self what you say;
I never saw such a beast before.


Edw. Therefore be kind the rather; to lie with me is scarce a sin now; there is
neither malice nor design in it; solicitation and perseverance makes it a sin;
this will be only a venial escape, mere chance on both sides; should I kill you
now in my drink, you know there are Cities of refuge for such men; and if I
should stab you in heat of blood, it would be but chance medly, on my side; and
a little fornication in your own defense, for you; indeed should I court you
any longer, and vow and swear till you believed and granted, that were to make
it willful whoredom, a crying sin; therefore thou art bound in conscience to
lie with me without any more words.


Serul. Unhand me, wicked impudent beast.


Edw. Why wicked? a jury that had wit or youth, and saw that face in this
place, would swear you struck first, and fools only see that face and doubt the
provocation; come Child, prithee be kind, I Will warrant the sin as soon forgiven
with me as any man alive; for if I do not make thee as fit for repentance as
another, Hang me; you shall not need confess this fault, I Will give you a
penance with it, 'twas given me lately; A pox on her courtesy, I Will kiss thee.


[He pulls her. Serul. Help, ho! who is there? help.


Edw. I, do, call witnesses to see how you use me.


Serul. Help, help, murder.


Edw. Help, for what? I warrant thee we need none, I Will do thy business well
enough alone; how finely she dissembles? a crafty Rogue, she knows how to grind
a man to an edge.


Serul. Calis, Johanne, Carlo, help, Rape, Murder.


Edw. Rape! you lie, Baggage; how now, as if you were not as willing as I; what
do you do here alone else? in a Garden at this hour, and your door set open,
good Spider, but to catch a Passenger? do you frown? By cock, I shall grow
angry too; come, and kiss me, and leave your fooling. -- Hold you, there is a
piece of eight for you.


[He feels in his pocket, and pulls out a Doller. Serul. Away, impudent beast.


Edwardo. You will not, you are sure, you will not have it. -- I give no more,
and yet I Will have as good a face as yours; Nay, you He offers it again, and
then puts it up. shall not go neither.


Serulina. Where are all these Officious Rascals? If I had been whispering they
would have been here long since, to betray a Mistress; but now, when my
Honor's at Stake, My cries for help cannot reach their Ears.


Edwardo. Do you hear, if you cry help again, By Cock I Will leave you, and go
sleep; how now, Manners, where have you been bred, refuse a Gentleman's money,
and kindness, when you are alone; Pox on you, let go my hair.


Serulina pulls him by the hair, when he offers to lay hold on her. Serulina.
Villain, do not touch me, I Will tear thee to the Street.


Edwardo. Let go, or I Will cry Murder, and Rape, if you pull thu^.


Enter Johanne. Johan. Sure I heard her call for help; Ha! what is here; How
now, Sir, what do you mean?


Edwardo. What do I mean? I mean to be served first, because I came first?


Johan. Let the Lady go, or I shall loose your Fingers with my Dagger.


Edwardo. Let me alone, and get thee gone, or I will beat thee with this sword,
most unmercifully beat thee, for being so unmannerly to interrupt us.


Johan. Drunken beast!


Johanne strikes him, both draw and fight, she runs away, Johannes Sword
breaks. Edwardo. They are both gone; a Pox on the Rogue, he has got the Wench.


Enter two Servants, set upon him, he retires, they pursue him. Enter Johanne
and two Servants. 1. Serve. Where came the Rogue in? do you know him, Sir?


Johan. Yes, it is one of the English Crew; I shall find a time to be revenged
upon that Covey.


[Exit Johanne. 2. Servant. The Rogue had clawed us if he had been sober, who
left the Gates open?


1. Servant. That Is a Question out of season; Let us go, and shut it.


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Lopus the Mountebank's People planting a State; To them Celia, and
Scarramucha, several Audients; Then Enter Lopus, and addresses himself to the
Company. Lopus. MOst Illustrious Dons, and egregiously beautiful and virtuous
Madona's, with the rest of my Gentle friends and Auditors; Behold your humble
and most officious Servant Lopus, arrived from the most ancient and stately
City of Saragosa, on purpose to make a Present of the wonderful effects of his
Physical and Chemical Arts to your fair acceptance, in this most glorious and
Courtly Town of Madrid; I protest to you, Gentlemen, I and my wife, with all my
Servants, are not able to make of this Precious Oil you see in this Glass, half
so fast, as it is fetched away from my Lodging, by Gentlemen and others of this
famous Town; and sent for by many of the greatest Dukes and Condees of this
much celebrated Nation; Some of which have detained me to their private and
particular use awhile, since my arrival, by their splendidous Liberalities; And
worthily, for what avails it your rich man to have his Cellars stuffd with the
purest grape; and his Tables furnished with the rarest variety of dainty
Acates, when his Physicians prescribe him (on pain of death) to drink nothing
but water gruel, or over-stewed herbs, in a thin heartless Broth? O health, the
blessing of the Rich, the Riches of the poor! who can buy thee at so dear a
rate, since they cannot enjoy any happiness in this world without thee? Be not
then so sparing of your purses, Honorable Gentlemen, as to abridge the natural
course of your lives; For when a humid Flux, or Catarrh, by the mutability of
the Air, falls from your head into an Arm or Shoulder, or any other part; take
you a Ducat or Castilion of Gold, and apply it to the Place affected, see what
good it will do; No no, It is this blessed Unguento, this rare Extraction, that
only has the power to disperse all malignant humors, from whatsoever ill
affected Causes they shall proceed. It has power to fortify the most indigest
and crude stomach in the world, though it be of one that (through extreme
weakness) vomits blood; Applying only a warm Napkin to the place, after the
Unction and Fricace; for the Vertigo in the head, putting but a drop into your
Nostrils, likewise behind your Ears, a most Sovereign and approved remedy. The
Mal Caduco, Cramps, Convulsions, Paralysies, Epilepsies, Tremor Cordis, retired
and shrunk Nerves, evil vapors of the Spleen, stoppings of the Liver, the
Stone, the Strangury, Hermia ventosa, Iliaca passio, stops a Dysenteria,
immediately eases the Tortion of the small guts, and cures Melancholia
Hypochondriaca, being taken and applied according to my printed Receipt; For
this is the Physician, this the Medicine; this Counsels, this Cures; this gives
the Direction, this works the effect; And in Sum, both together may be termed
an Abstract of the Theorick and Practick in the Aesculapian Art; The price is
but four Royalls, that is the price, and less I know, in courtesy you cannot
offer me; take it, or leave it; Howsoever, both I and it are at your service; I
ask you not near the value of the thing; For then I should ask you a thousand
Ducats; so several Grandees and Grandessa's have given me. But I despise
money, only to show my affection to you, Honorable Gentlemen, and this most
inclyte Town; I have neglected the Messages of diverse Princes and Nobles, and
directed my Journey hither, only to present you with the fruits of my
experience, and travels.

I have here likewise a most inestimable water, or Quintessence of Spirits
drawn from all sorts of Medicinable Vegetables, which is equally to be valued
with my Oil; of Both which if I had but time to discourse to you the miraculous
effects, with the Countless Catalogue of those I have cured of the aforesaid,
and many more diseases, the Patents and Privileges of the most Catholic and
Christian Kings; as also of all the Princes and Commonwealths of Christendom;
or but the depositions that have appeared, on my part, before the most learned
Colleges of Physicians, where I was Authorized, upon notice taken of the
admirable virtues of my Medicaments and my own excellency in matter of rare and
unknown secrets, to disperse them publicly for the common good. And though
diverse have professed to have as good and experimented Receipts as my self, and
have assayed to make both of this Oil and water; Bestowed great cost in
Furnaces, Stills, Alembicks, continual fires, and preparation of Ingredients
(as indeed there goes to each of them six hundred several Simples, at least,)
yet they ever lost their labor and cost, both, for want of that large Talent
of knowledge, requisite to such a work. For my self, I have always hunted after
the most recondite secrets, and to get them. I have spared no rest, or labor,
but taken indefatigable pains therein; Insomuch as, Gentlemen, I will undertake
(by virtue of Chemical Art) out of the Honorable Hat that cov^^s your head to
extract the four Elements, that is to say, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, and
return you the Felt without burn or Stain; For, whilst others have been at the
Balloo I have been at my Book, and am now passed the craggy parts of Study, and
come to the flowery plains of Honor and Reputation.

Here is likewise a Powder concealed in this Paper, of which, if I should speak
to the worth, five thousand volumns were but as one Page, that Page as a Line,
that Line as a word; so short is this Pilgrimage of Man (which some call Life)
to the expressing of it. Or if I would reflect upon the Price, why the whole
world were but as an Empire, that Empire as a Province, that Province as a
Bank, that Bank as a private purse, to the purchase of it. I will only tell
you; It is the very Powder that made Venus a Goddess, (given her by Apollo)
that kept her perpetually young, cleared her wrinckles, firmed her gums, filled
her skin, colored her hair; from her derived to Helen, and at the Sack of Troy
unfortunately lost, till now in this our Age it was as happily recovered by a
Studious Antiquary, out of some ruins of Asia; who sent a Moiety of it to the
Court of France, but much sophisticated: The rest, at this present, remains
with me, extracted to a Quintescence; so that, wherever it but touches, in
youth, it perpetually preserves; in Age restores the Complexion, Seats your
Teeth (did they dance like Virginal Jacks) as firm as a wall, makes them white
as Ivory, that were as black as Jeat; and with the addition of a most wonderful
Bath, of my own preparation, It will tinct a gray hair pure Auburn, and make it
grow so; make you cast your old harsh skin for one as fresh and smooth as
Laeda's, and so supple and quicken your Joints and Nerves, as but seldom using
it, you shall ever enjoy your juvenile Activities, Gustos, and total Abilities,
to the Admiration of all that formerly knew you; Many other rare effects there
are of this Powder and Bath, too tedious to reckon in this place; but whosoever
has a mind to try them, if they please to repair to me at my lodging, shall be
more particularly informed. Only this I shall add at this present; This Powder
has likewise a wonderful variety of Amorous effects belonging to it, which are
not here to be enumerated; And for my rare Oil, thuogh I impart it to the Rich
for money, I often cure the Poor for God-sake.


And so God preserve his Most Catholic Majesty. Enter Thomaso, Harrigo,
Ferdinando, and Cornelio, and Listen to the Mountebank. Cornel. He is a famous
Fellow, and has offered to restore to their perfect shapes the two Rich
Monsters.


Ferd. What Monsters?


Cornel. The two Sisters that came from Mexico: Jews it is thought, of vast
Fortunes, no wunder a Guardian of the same Tribe, though the Rogue eats Bacon;
their Fathers and Families were both drowned coming from the Indies; they are
worth a Million of Crowns.


Ferd. And why are they not married?


Cornel. Marry a Monster? who would have them? One of them is so little, and so
deformed, it is thought she is not Capable of Marriage; The other is so great an
overgrown Giant, no Body dares venture upon her, she is out of Fathom.


Thomaso. Let Us go and see them; 'twill be good sport to pass an hour; what do
you pay for going in?


Cornel. Pay? why, they are worth a Million, and cannot be seen, but by
particular favor of their Guardian, who is my Friend.


Eerd. No words, Captain; you and I Will talk more of this anon; I Will venture a
paper of powder upon one of them; it is but a royal lost.


Thomaso. How shall I do to speak with his Puppet? I have a question or two I
would fain be Resolved of.


Harr. I believe I can do it without a Witch; Serulina, and Angelica, upon my
life; whither the old love, or the new, will be most lasting?


Thom. Prithee do not name those two together; Thou know that name has
divinity in it; and when my soul is serious it still adores her; one is my
religion, the other my sport and diversion; and though you have not guessed far
from truth, yet this is neither time, company nor place to discourse of her; we
must now follow our design to the Sisters, where we are expected; I see Ferd.
swears in his mind, for being thus long delayed.


Ferd. Faith, you let me cool so long upon it, my desire is over; and if she
does not use me mighty kindly, and put my toy in tune, my Fiddle will make no
Music: Pox on it, they have played me all this day like a puppy whoremaster;
Now put me on, then take me off; you have pulled me back and forwards so often
I am out of humor; You know I am a Country Gentleman, not practiced to play at
game whores; you should have got me a gay Muzzel'd Harlot, to have tows'd at
first, at my pleasure; and if once ent'red, I had been in for all night.


Enter Helena, an old decayed blind, out of Fashion whore, gay, and fine, as
Girls of Fifteen, but out-of-fashion in her clothes, she is carried by two
Bravo's to the Mountebanks Stage, where she is lifted up. Tho. See, here comes
one muzzel'd by gaffer time, that has neither teeth nor eyes, a blind whore;
thou may have the whipping of this.


Har. She has been a strapping queen in her time; Two couple of Almayns at a
course, I have seen stav'd, and tail'd off, on her.


Thom. Prithee who is it?


Harr. It Is Helena, a Famous old Curtezan.


Thom. She may be that of Troy, There Is Antiquity enough, both in her Face and
Dress; though she be fitter now for Priapus his rape, then Paris's.


Brav. By your leave, Noble Gentlemen, room for a patient.


Scarr. Gentlemen, Ladies, courteous Gentlemen, room, pray, for the patient to
approach the Stage.


(Then they lift her up upon the Stage.) Celia. Who is there? a chair for the
Lady -- What seek you, Madam? your Fortune from the old Oracle in the Box? Is It
the powder, She sits down. or Elixar, a Restorative Bath; would you be your
self, at Fifteen again or try our transformation? would you your Sex, or
fortune change; all rests in your power; Here is the Secret, name your hour.


Helena. Celia, my Child, I know thy voice, whose Name has long been my Envy;
Yet now thy Fame has brought me hither; see the sad remains of what was Helena.
Fame does fill the Worlds Care with thy Husbands skill; They say, he can change
Forms and Sexes, and (which is more,) youth restore; He can both wound and Cure
a heart; O my Child, it is the remedy I seek; Let him try his Art, I have here
brought the dart; I love, I love, my Child, and fain would be beloved again; A
proud, and yet (they say) a lovely Man; My Age is burnt with desire; Cold limbs
feel that fire, Blind as Love, and yet in Love; I sigh, Prithee use thy Art, to
cure the smart, or freeze my heart, Why should Lust and desire stay? By what
right, since youth and Beauty attained their flight? Why should not the Bloods
fire die, with those that sparkled in mine Eye? Age shakes me now, more then
fear did then; Helena was ever cruel, Helena, for all Loves fire, was still the
Jewel; 'Twas my pleasure still the youth to please, and the raging Lover ease.
O let thy Bath replenish those dark lamps with new Virgin Oil; Do but fix
these Teeth, and trembling Hands, and restore what at fifteen I wore; Give me
my Gold or Auburn hair, let time this silver wear.


Lopus. Pray retire with my servants, who shall prepare the liquor and the
fire, and in few hours give you your hearts desire; You shall have Beauty to
your Art, such as shall catch each Lovers Heart; Such amorous luster in your
Eyes, and your gray Hairs so bright shall rise; Your Cheeks shall such fresh
Roses bear, your skin so white a slickness wear, as shall a general wonder move
and pierce the hardest Hearts with Love. But you must give us your Age.


Helena. I have forgot, unless by past accidents you can collect; in Charles
the Fiftht's days I was a Lover.


Lopus. And when a Maid?


Helena. Ha, ha, ha, you make me laugh, a Maid? Alas, a very little, little
while; God knows, if ever; Since I knew what 'twas to be one, I am certain I
was none.


Lopus. Gentlemen, it is late, and my Patients attend their Fate; Come, bring in
this Lady, on whom I will show such Art, shall make you all that see admire my
part.


[Exit Lopus. Scarra. Help, help, bear her in. -- The chippings of these old
women are my fees, as Master Pantler to the Devil my Master; Ah Mistress! when
shall I have the paring of your crust? This shell Exit Helena with the
Servants. which your Soul is in I must have the natural use of; You know the
case of the Coney is the Cooks fee.


Celia. O Scarramucha, if thou were but faithful, what would not I do for thee?


Scarra. Faithful? Venture but a kiss in my keeping, and command what you will.


Celia. A kiss, thou shall have a thousand; All thy Heart can wish, my bed, my
purse, my friendship for ever; do but one thing for me, and be secret.


[Scharramucha kisses her, groaps, and plays his knavish tricks. Scarra.
Propose, propose, Dear Mistress; how I long to earn a favor from you! This
powder works through the box sure; has it virtue by sneezing? Why do you delay
the secret? You see they are gone.


Celia. Why should I fear? Is any condition worse then to love that wretch?
It Is resolved, I Will venture all kinds of danger, but I Will be rid of this; You
shell swear to be secret.


Scarra. I swear, I swear, I swear. -- Dispatch, Dear Mistress, for I do so
long to deserve your kindness. He kisses her thrice.


Celia. Be faithful and take it; Know then, you shall swear to join with me,
and as soon as the Bath for Dwarfes is ready, help to throw my Husband in; And
this Evening, when Helena's Bath for Restoration has all the perfect rights
in it, you shall dip me thrice, and thrice repeat my Name, and then command me
out, Celia at fifteen; Do this, and command me ever; thou shall find me a
faithful friend, and still as kind as fair.


Scarra. It Is a bargain, give me only a Curtesy in earnest, a cast of this old
Celia's office, and I Will sit you; and to show my Dear Mistress, how faithful a
Lover her Scarramucha is; Never shall woman enjoy me after, if you will promise
to be as kind to me as I am faithful to my Mistress; You shall even dip me too.


Celia. Why? What would Scarramucha be? Is he not young and healthy?


Scarra. I am even weary of being Scarramucha; I Will be dipped, it is resolved;
I Will be dipped, and my Mistress shall call me Helena, Hellen of fifteen, and you
shall see what a dainty Lady I Will come out; I Am weary of being a Man, and
subject to be beaten. And if a Man have a mind to a Wench, the making Love is
so tedious, that it is an affliction; then paying is to my Heart unsupportable:
No, I will be a Woman, and be courted, have a house of my own, and Servants
about me; Live at ease, have both the sport and the money; and it is so fine to
be without a beard, and speak small, and sing a trebble, with a fine little
hand and foot, and squeak if the wind but blow upon me; I am sure never to be
cudgel'd again, still cocker'd and flattered; And Men will take it so kindly
too, if I Will but let them put their hands under my coats; I am resolved I will
be a Woman, unless I could be both; A fine Lady with a dagger and a scabbard
too; however, Mistress, it is no bargain unless you will observe Covenants;
Either Scarramucha must come out Helen, or Celia dwells in her old clothes
still.


Celia. In serious faith, I vow; Be just to me, and I Will diligently observe my
part.


Scarra. It Is agreed, within we'll take our leaves of Scarramucha and Celia;
But what shall we do with the good old Gentlewoman?


Celia. Hang her, she is not worth our thoughts.


Scarra. Yes faith, when we have done; In Charity let us throw her in, and call
her out by any young things name, there is neither pains nor cost in the
Charity; Yet, now I think on it, what say you by throwing of her in, and calling
her out by the name of Scarramucha? Her Soul will make good sport disguised in
Scarramucha's body, how shall I laugh to see her rise in a bread and breeches?
'Twill be good sport to see her wonder at her self, when she finds the
Appurtenances belonging to a Man about her; I Am resolved I Will do it for mirths
sake.


Celia. Any thing, so you will be secret, I consent to.


Scarra. Hark, he whistles; a kiss Dear Mistress, for old Friendships sake at
parting, and Fortune guide us. -- Now could I cry and Exit Celia. sigh, to part
with this old Friend of mine. Do not sob, nor cry, poor Scarrmucha; I Will
provide for thee; and yet it is most ill natur'dly done, to leave an old Friend
in misery; How pitifully he looks upon me! The poor Rogue apprehends the misery
he is going to suffer, when he shall have the Mind and Heart of a crafty Whore
possess him; What a fit of the Devil must he suffer that acts her desires from
fifteeen to a hundred year? What must poor Soarramucha suffer? What will not
she expose thee to? It Is not the Sex nor Breeches will save thee, I foresee
it. How, shall I be dishonored? My Country and Family despised for that black
sin; who would have thought it, says one; I should never have believed it,
says another; No, no, I must not, will not use thee so ill; I Will even give her
my Masters case for her old Soul to witch in, and put my Master into mine; I am
so divided, I know not what to do: It Is fine being a handsome young Curtezan,
but it is unkind to expose an old Friend to be ill used in his Age, after the
faithful service of his youth; No, I me resolved I Will be Helena, Helena shall
be Lopus, and Lopus, Searramucha; Nay, nay, no grumbling, Friend; rest Lopus,
and be thankful; You shall now no more play Zany Scarramucha, but Operator, the
secret, the bank, and profit, all your own; No more conduct a Whore for Lopus,
no more eat poison, or be stabbed for Lopus; thou shall have a Whore, a Zany,
and a Name thy self; Nay, do not anger me now by being sollen, when I have
taken care and thought for you; if you be, I Will leave Scarramucha in the broth
with old Helena, where you shall boil Celia cries within, what ^o Scarramucha,
your Patron calls. to a Cullis. Scarramucha, as we have lived Friends, so let
us part; And upon your Life, not a word of what has passed betwixt us, good
Scarramucha.


ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Edwardo, and Sanco. Sanco. STay here, Sir; Till I go before and knock,
to see if the coast be clear.


[Exit Sanco. Edwardo. I am horribly sore after my apparition in the Garden;
Edwardo feels himself, moves his Arms and shruggs. The anguish of their blows
refreshes my Memory; all the rest is a dream still; A pox on the unruly Sack; I
would he were come back, I long to be in bed; Give me a Girl that loves me, I
hate a gilded post that must be purchased; It Is a fine Girl, and pity she is
cast away upon such a jealous Husband; it is a consolation to think upon her;
The Rogues kisses taste still, the savor and the smack are in my Heart yet;
and if the piece prove as good as the pattern, a night with her is worth all
the days I ere spent at Totnam or Istington; How woollenly those Sisters look
and feel to this Silken Girl! This dainty sinner wears no Coife nor Ear-wyers,
to make her Luggs smell as sour as Runnet or a Dairy; Now do I call to mind how
wretchedly I spent my Estate in the Country, to keep a Kitchen and a Hall
stinking; I would I could prevail with her to go into Surry; we have Whore
enough there, But we want some good example to employ the stock; This would be
a dainty Plantation sinner; she has the finest odd Name to; our Parson would
not have christn'd a Child ofit, because it is neither in the old nor new Law;
The Rogue stays long, it is late, and they have my supper within; If they
should eat it now without me, the jest would be better then the feast; a
disgracia would give my Comrades such a Theme to laugh upon; a man had better
have fined twice for Sheriff, then endure their insolent wits in such a case. I
hear one whistle.


[Enter Sanco. Sanco. Where are you?


Edw. Here, is all clear?


Sanco. Yes, yes; follow me.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
Enter Lucetta and Philippo, dressed like a Cook. Philip. ANd how do you like
this disguise? is it natural? let me alone to fit his pallat; I Will give him
good sauce to night; for which he shall be our sauce this month, or else I Will
lose my aim.


Lucet. Hark, hark, one knocks; away to the Kitchen, and observe your Q.


[Exit Philippo. Enter Sanco and Edwardo. Edw. Lady, I must beg your pardon for
coming thus late; there was an accident hapn'd staid me beyond my expectation.


Lucet. Sir, you are not only master of your own, but my time too; nor shall
any person, so welcome and deserving as your self, need make excuses here,
where all are proud to be commanded by you; Love, Sir, has that property,
'twill hide faults, and glorify every virtue, which is in Love a virtue too he
will not be divided from; nor is it fit for me to say how much your absence
afflicts, but what joy your presence brings her eyes that loves and adores her
friend; nor shall you find any of those saucy passions here that imposes upon
the mind and person of those they love; those troublesome humors make
friendship heavy, and the delight short, Edw. nods his head and shrugs. when it
must with such slavery be bought.


Edw. I Will kill her Husband, and Marry her; I Am resolved; it is a pretty house
this, and finely furnished; she loves me so she will never think of asking a
Jointure, nor I a portion; such a wife is Portion enough.


[Aside. Lucet. You are sad, Sir; I hope what I have said does not displease
you; if it should it would be an affliction greater then you believe. -- His
eyes are blew too, do you love me? I know you will say so, She looks in his
eyes. though you do not; and I confess I am such a fool, I had rather you
should flatter me with such a lie, then hear any truth that says you love
another better.


Edw. Gentle soul, why do thou blush and hide thy head? can thou fear I can
be false or cruel to such a heart? what stony breast can hear and see this, and
not become a slave to such innocence and sweetness? I never had but one heart,
a plain one, and an honest, and that is thine; I would thou were not married; I
would try who would first propose a kindness that the other would refuse.


Lucet. O, that I were as free, and my fortune as great, as when perjured
Philippo betrayed me here! I would find a friend, or lose my self.


[She weeps, and leans upon his breast. Edw. Come, no fears; for though those
showers are seasonable in the spring of Loves choicest flowers; yet to good
natures such kindness bears a sting; you should smile on Love, tears but wet
his wings; Come, retire, it is late, and love would roost; this bed gives the
Boy both rest and food; what joys my wanton heart promises it self I want soul
enough to comprehend; sure her embraces will far excel all the pleasures I have
tasted; for I never loved, nor was beloved till now; this is Loves holy day;
the rest were working-days, in which I but plowed the sex; our dull cold kisses
were common seed, thoughtless sown, and full of weed, not of force to kindle a
heart; here every look or touch inflames or burns my blood; it is pleasure thus
to be stung; for though it swells the heart, it is with delight, not smart.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Harrigo, Saretta and Cornelio, with Napkins in their hands. Saret. LEt
me go; had I thought Don Harrigo had more kindness for me, then to hear an
insolent fellow despise one that has ever had an esteem for him.


Har. You complain, who are indeed too blame; do you believe men will spend
their money in these houses, and not have the freedom of their humor?


Saret. Let him be as free and wanton as he pleases, so he keep it to himself;
why should his mirth choose us to despise? bragging, here the beauties and
favors of other women; we know you came all now from the Angellica's; is this
friendship? to make us the subject of your scorn and mirth, as if we could not
deserve or distinguish a civility; if Don Harrigo had any esteem for us, he
would not have exposed this place to his insolent rallery; sure you have not
observed, Sir, any such obsceneness find encouragement or liberty here.


Har. It Is true, we are merry; but since it dislikes you we will be gone; I never
knew you expected Homilies, moral Philosophy, or Lectures in Divinity to be
read hear; you should set up a cross and a pot of holy water at your door; it is
the first Bush or Baudyhouse I ere saw exacted more then the reckoning.


Saret. I thought Don Harrigo had come upon another acount; I took him for a
Lover, but I am deceived.


Har. Not a whit; a Lover and a perfect Lover, one that loves but one, and
that is my self.


Saret. Then it is not possible to oblige you!


Har. Nothing easier.


Saret. How comes it then you are thus free, after all your professions, and my
civility?


Har. Because I have wisely resolved against the slavery which I see all you
women condemn your Lovers to; when I have a nature can lick my self whole, sigh
and blow out a passion, or weep to quench the flame, be sullen and kick till I
have thrown a Mistress as other Quacking Lovers can; when I have their oils to
cure the burn, then I Will venture to play with his flame.


Corn. But, for old acquaintance sake, you may teach a friend how to know these
Emp'rick Lovers that have such remedies against a Mistress; prithee, tell her
their marks, that she may shut her door against them.


Saret. They are easily known by Don Harrigo's company.


Har. And better by the Saretta's folly, who puts out her Birds eyes; not
contented they should be her prisoners, but they must be blind too; which cruel
curiosity I shall not approve, though the Bird sings better; sure you women
have great imperfections, which you are afraid a Lover with his Reason might
perceive; therefore upon the first springing of an inclination it is your
business to depose that.


Corn. Pray, tell me how to know him; is there a new mark besides sanguine, fat
and merry? will they be so cured, as to leave no scars behind them, not a
twittering?


Har. Scars! yes, and visible ones, which they are proud of too; those that are
best healed, either by scorn or counsel, choice of wine, or change of women (as
fair and kind as they) yet the Cicatrice will stay.


Corn. But does Love leave scars, say you? -- Nay, you shall stay and hear
Doctor Harrigo read upon Love; who knows but you may profit in your own cure,
of a slight wound you say he has given you? the scars, good Don Harrigo, the
scars.


Har. Alas, Sir; they are as many and as different as the wounds the Boy gives,
besides his Mothers; but hers are visible, the young man's are more innocent;
see here, Knots of old Ribband, Braids of Hair, Rings with Poesies, Seals and
broken Gold.


Cornelio. What, you are sad; did you think to find men constant?


Saret. Not sad, nor much pleased; yet I am glad to find Don Harrigo is so near
his cure as to know his disease; I see he will try to cure fire with fire, the
remedy has been often proved; Angellica must now be applied to his breast to
take out the sire Saretta's eyes kindled; yet I doubt not but we shall have the
pastime, to divert our selves with him in his days of repentance; when he has
given his thousand Crowns, 'twill make us all merry; poor Montebank! she asks a
thousand Crowns, and descends to a Ryal; and yet no Chapmen; at last she gave
her ware to the standers by, which Thomaso took for love; and she will want none
at this rate; Don Harrigo will be one too.


Har. And that is all your sexes pride, every one would be Cupids shepherdess,
and govern the whole Flock of Lovers; I have seen some have a handsome troop,
and the poor beasts knew not which was best used; all bleat and run when she
calls; this has the Bell and Garland to day, that the Ribband and Bough to
morrow; they will sing and pipe before their Flock, when each one sighs, and
thinks she sings to him, when she but keeps them together; and if she fold them
in her arms by turns, it is for the Lamb, and the Fleece; Saretta knows the
commodity of a Flock of Lovers is etter then the pleasure of a tame Ram.


Saret. Being of this humor, and this opinion of women, I wonder you will spend
so much of your time amongst them; but fly, and avoid the danger and save your
fleece and flesh.


Enter Thomaso, Paulina, and Ferdinando. Corn. See who comes here to break off
your discourse; come, pray no frowning, you know his humor; and say what he
will now, I heard him speak kindly of you this morning, and prefer your beauty
before your Sister Paulina's; what? I see Don Thomaso can be reconciled to a
lean woman, though he admires the fat.


Thom. I love what loves me, which supplies beauty; it is for young men,
Cornelio, to flatter and pay.


Ferd. It Is the way never to come late to Loves Feast; if any dish be standing
you can make a meal upon it; necessity and kindness will furnish all that
beauty wants.


Thom. I never saw any man yet cut my piece; some are for secret, others
charity, a third for conversation, and cares neither then for face nor fortune;
a rusty, moldy Maid, filled with Platonique sentences, is the same things to
him a Girl of fifteen is to us; he despises the body, yet I love to see that
Prince in good clothes when the soul inhabits a Palace built in perfect
Symetry; I know no jest, no eloquence, nor Apothegms, have more savor or
pleasure then a voice, nor more salt then a kiss from a Girl of fifteen,
smooth as Rushes, white as Lillies, plump as Grapes after showers; give me
this, and let your Wit take his Sybill and her Oracles instead of teeth in her
mouth; and while he spends his days in such Monuments of women, let me clasp
this smiling Girl, whose Ruby folds above her chin, laughs and discovers those
pearly flocks within; and for wit in women, so they say kind things, we know
it is no matter whether they be true or no.


Paul. Can you be contented with flattery, Sir? sure your heart is easily
satisfied; that is a root from which you can expect no constant friendship.


Thom. Constant friendship, Child? Marry God forbid such a curse as constancy
should follow me; I Will leave that for your Anchorit-lovers, whom Matrimony has
vowed to some old woman's Cellar of threescore; there the sin of constancy and
rashness of the vow, for better for worse, finds a just judgment in the
conversation of Aches, Palseys and Catarrhs, which Wed-lock and Hymen hangs
upon fools; who would have it thought constancy, to dote on Age and wrinkles,
and pass their ignorance for a virtue; but the Vine and the Sun teach better
things; beauty cannot be divided from variety, no face is too new, or wine too
old, nor a friend too true.


Ferd. Faith, Secrecy is even the Brother of that Folly, a foolish humor that
women have made a virtue, because it is convenient sometimes.


Thom. Secrecy a virtue; a damned ungrateful vice, only known where small beer
is current, despised where Apollo or the Vine bless the Country; and though
Joves Wife was a shrew, yet we find none of his Mistresses hid in Roots or
Plants, but fixed stars in heaven, for all to gaze and wonder at, though few
have wit to admire, or power to imitate; and though I am not Jove, to place my
Angellica, or my Paulina there; yet my kind heart shall proclaim how fit for
such places such starry beauties are; and when my Brother comes from Salamanca
he shall write our Chronicle.


Paul. Pray, when will he be here? I have heard much of him, and I long to see
him; is he like you? has he your wild humor?


Thom. No, he is a serious black fellow, he smells like Serge and old Books; but
yet he loves a Wench too, for curiosity, or so; for he only lies with them for
experiment, to be able to approve or decry the pleasure the more feelingly in a
Satyr. When he comes I Will wait upon him to your froward Sister, because their
humors will agree; for she is for a serious threshing Lover.


Har. Come, I say, embrace, or I Will break all correspondence with you; what,
fall out with your Brother!


Paul. Sister, these frowns must blow over; I will not see them thrown upon my
friends; you know I love him; and if you expect I should converse civilly with
your interest, you must comply with mine.


Saret. I have no mortal quarrel to your servant; only I would not have him
rail upon me because I have not wit enough to fall in love with him; it is true,
his hand and head are white; but I am past the nursery, no Child to be taken
with such Cream and Custard; yet if you have such kindness fot the Dairy, much
good may it do you; give me my old friend, Don Harrigo; I love this color,
sullen Sack; I love the Kitchen and the Cellar in a man; this is gravey and
man's flesh; and this Oak will have leaves upon his head when your Rose-tree and
all is withered.


Thom. Nay, now I Will kiss you; and if you anger me with this humor toss me in
a Blanket; By this light, I had rather be handsomely abused then dully
flattered; prithee Ferd. call for a bottle and a glass; come, we will have the
Song we made last.


A Song in two parts. Thom. Come, every man his Glass.


[They hand Paulina. Thom. Women, Women, Wine and Health,
Ye gods, we ask no other wealth;
The rest of Nature and of Art,
For this kiss I Will quit my part.

Har. These blessings, though they flow on earth,
Jove enjoys not but by stealth.

Thom. Why else, my Girl, did Juno frown?
And poor Simele to ashes burn!
The god turned Bull, and Maid a Cow!
So we know why, no matter how.

Har. See, my Love that flaming star,
'Twas once Ariadnes Aubourn Hair,
Which her god in Bracelets wore,
Not less esteemed cause Theseus whore.

Thom. Then in her god, to her god let us drink,
Of the Vine, in the Vine let us think;
And sacrifice this glass of Sack
To those sparkling gray eyes, and the flaming black.

[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Matthias and Stephano (Matthias knocks at Lucetta's door.) Kecka. Who Is
there?


Mat. It Is I, prithee open the door; is your Mistress at home?


Kecka. Yes, Sir; but she is busy, a man of quality sups with her; Sanco was to
find you, to desire you would come to morrow; your basket and your bottles are
safe.


Mat. Prithee, Kecka, come to the back door that I may speak with thee.


Kecka. Walk off a little till they are quiet; as soon as I can come without
being missed I Will wait upon you.


Mat. False Devil, how durst she do this? and that dull stranger too enter
without my leave?


Steph. Alas, Sir; it is their trade; Boat-mans-luck, you know, pass as his
fraught comes; this is some job of work she has gotten by chance; and you that
are her friend must not be against the good of the house.


Mat. I shall know all when her Maid comes; the Queen dotes, that makes me
steal a bit now and then from her Mistress to give her.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Lucetta, and Philippo, in his Cooks habit. Lucet. WEll, and how think
you? was this a purchase to be Lost for a little Coyness? where shall we make a
voyage, if we refuse to touch at these fortunate Isles, because they are
strangers?


Phil. No, I Am of your side now; But when you love for shadows, and dote upon
gay Clothes, some young thing for dressing himself; when a Feather, Gittern, or
Sarabrand, begets Admiration, or when poor Poetry prevails upon your passion,
to give your youth and fortune for a Sonnet, when nothing, but the Dedication
belongs to you, such Fondness makes me rage; I speak without Interest now; For
since you know and have forgiven the fault I made, I shall hereafter faithfully
serve you in memory of past kindness.


Lucet. Except your own; and you know I was never guilty of such a Folly; No
other wound nor scar afflicts my mind; and when once the Moon has prescribed a
remedy for that Poison, I shall quickly recover the old Character, of being
insensible again; what are you thinking on?


Philip. The party within, his silver, sword, gay Clothes, and Rings, besides
that at his Bandstring, bundles of Seals, Watches, abused Gold, bowed into
Bracelets? All shows the Rogue is at his Ease, a merry soul, and a wanton
Fortune I warrant you; such superfluous Expenses shows he wants no money; His
Breeches too, those shells, I believe, have good Kernels in their pockets.


Lucet. Those toys are such Feathers that grow upon Fools, for wise men to
pluck, All the difficulty I find, is, his being a stranger; and the noise of
such an Action will hinder our Trade with them hereafter.


Philip. Rather, that will be the security of the business. This is not only a
stranger to us, but to the Country too; This knows nothing, neither your Name,
nor street, so far from knowing your House, that he does not know his own; And
when it is done, do but change your Quarter, and he is at a dead loss for ever;
If not, within ten days he is gone; and I perceive he will be flayed e're he
goes; as good you do it as another; he shall have no harm, a merry Night for
his Money; we will have the profit, and he the Experience of the Jest.


Lucet. He Will kill me when he misses his Clothes and money.


Phil. Leave the care of your safety to me; he shall undress himself in my
Chamber, your Toy let and night Gown are laid out already; let Sanco and me
alone to fit him, for a Cook, and a valet de Chamber.


Lucet. Well, I am not of your opinion; yet, so long as you do him no harm, I
submit.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Mathias, Kecka, and Stephano. Math. I Am resolved to see the depth of
this design; If the stranger stays I Will take my Revenge at Leisure; if he goes,
she shall see I am sensible of this Affront, to admit a Visit upon my day,
without my consent! Farewell, Stephano, lets meet to morrow at the old
Rendevouz.


[Exit Stephane. Kecka. Softly, pray, Expect me here; when the strangers gone,
I Will call you.


Math. Not a word to her, that I am here, I shall put her to another confession
fit again.


Kecka. Undress you in my Chamber; lest they find the Goose has been here by
his Feathers.


Math. Mum wench, make haste, lest the pot boil over before you come; I have no
patience betwixt the sheets.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Lucetta, and Edwardo unbutton'd, she carries the Candle, and he proffers
to take it from her. Lucet. SOftly, I pray, and make no Ceremonies, but follow
me, I must carry it my self; For I dare not trust my Maid with your lying here
this night; she is too kind to him that was sent away.


Edw. Hang her spy, Turn her to grass; I Will get you a dumb Girl.


(He kisses her.) Lucet. Within you will find Sanco ready to serve you.


Edw. Make haste my Dear, you know the pain longing Lovers suffer, when their
Joys are drawn within the afflictions of a few Minutes; All steps move slow,
time has lead upon his wings; The youthful Sun runs lazily, and we throw our
selves to meet the Embraces of Friends whom with greedy longing we expected.


Lucet. You speak my pain, whose love and desires still precede your wish;
(Though I blush to say so) and grudges this lost time, though spent in hearing
the Music of thy voice, that tells my heart you love me.


Edw. This kiss only, and then take thy Flight on Loves wings to return again;
Love, that knows no grief nor pain like those that sigh in vain.


[Exit Edwardo. Lucet. It Is foolishly done to abuse him, for he is of a humor
one need not pick his pocket, he will do it himself; it is an ill natured Crime,
twice a sin, to rob such that give so much; The ill natured Devil would have
had me done it, without giving him a Nights lodging for his money.


[Exit Lucetta. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Edwardo, and Sanco. (Edwardo is in his Night Gown.) Edw. HOw Propa this
little Rogue is, in every thing! Night gown, slippers, Cap, and Toylet? As
brave as if she were to marry some Prince to night; sure it is my wedding Night,
at least I Will imagine it so; And that which is the Excellence of this Blessed
Country, A man may every Night have a several Bride, for a Pistol Jointure;
Prithee call the Lady.


Sanco. As Soon as you are in Bed, Sir, I shall.


Edw. That fellow too, I took him for a Cavalier at least, and it is a Pimp; He
might be a Justice in our Country, by the garb and gravity I met him in.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. VII.
Enter Philippo, in his own Clothes, and all Edwardo 's under his Arm, and
meets Lucetta undrest. Philip. SEe, here is the Nest, I have taken the old one
sitting; you shall have the watch; the case is Gold, and Cordial. This purse
and hundred Pistols, and in the waste and knees of his Breeches a Magazin of
heretical Gold, old Besses Coin all, our arch Enemy; the act is now
justifiable; the Inquisidor might have done it; he should have lost it at
Vittoria; If he complain, I Will make his Process; and had it not been a hard
heart could have let these Birds sing in another Woman's Cage!


Lucet. But what shall I do in the morning?


Phil. Sanco is to wake you in have, and cry your husband's come; you must
start out of the Bed, as if to save your self; then I swagger with my own
shadow in the next room, till Sanco urges the danger to him, how impossible
it is to escape with life, if surpised; that there is no denying or defending
the act; for he had found his Clothes and was now staying for men to destroy
him; having thus frightened him, seduce him, in his drawers, to follow him to
some place of safety; Then convey him out at the Backdoor, and lose him in the
street, and come round to the foregate, where I Will expect him; he being then
unarmed and naked, with darkness and fear about him, his anger will open no doors.


Luc. This is a most inhumane jest; and I must not consent to such a Barbarity.


Phil. Only a Jest, a Summer Jest, I vow; if he be met let him pretend h'as
been in Fresco. Now Sanco, the news. Enter Sanco.


Sanc. Why, he is in Bed, and expects you with much impatience. impatience.


Phil. Give us the Key of one of your Chests, to lock up these transitory
blessings, and then we will wish you good shipping, and a fair wind, till day
break; But then we shall raise a storm shall wake you; O Sanco, little does he
or you think what price he must pay for this Night; His Breeches have a Mine of
Gold in 'em.


[Exeunt Philippo and Lucetta. Sanco. My share comes pat for my design, to make
me brave in Clothes; Being once in order to Court I go; all there are fine, but
the Infanta will be only mine, or the powder shall fail his force.


[Exit Sanco. ACT. V. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Mathias, and Kecka. Kecka. THe Stranger is gone, there is some disgust
amongst them; For she is gone fullen to bed; she would not let me light him
because I grumbled at her for disappointing you.


Mathias. But where is Philippo?


Kecka. He stays; She Is become such a slave to that wretch, that she smiles or
frowns upon us just as he commands her; And I know she has disappointed both
the Stranger and you, only to pursue her extravagant passion with that Beast.


Mathias. Thou art a kind Girl, and I shall not forget it; prithee come quickly
back again.


Kecka. In a minute; but pray be quiet and silent lest she discover us; You
must find the way to my Chamber in the dark; for I dare have no light in it,
lest she should be angry at my siting up; I Will peep, and as soon as Philippo
goes to bed I Will return.


Mathias. Make haste, I Will not to bed till you come.


Kecka. Her sullenness has gotten me an opportunity; when the Mistress will
not, the Maid is handsome.


[Exit Kecka. Mathias. Now have I a curious Humor to rout the whole Family,
disappoint Philippo, and cozen both the Maid and Mistress; It Is but stealing in
the dark to Lucetta's bed, and surprising her in her froward Humor, where she
lies expecting that crooked Rogue; But then Kecka will be mad, and if she be,
there are other days and nights to cure her; If not, it is but a Chamber-maids
Exit Mathias in his drawers only, and his coat. wrath; and those fires of straw
quickly burn out; It Is resolved now, if I can find the door; so, sostly, puss,
softly.


ACT. V. SCEN. IX.
The Scene changes, and discovers a Chamber and a Bed in it, in which Edwardo
lies. Edwardo. SHe is very long in coming; Some nicity now, some gentileness,
to make her more welcome; Some perfumed smock now, or finer night clothes then
ordinary; These Women are right City Cooks, and stay to garnish the dish while
the meat be cold; I could find in my heart to steal out of the bed and see what
she is doing. Hark, the door opens.


Enter Mathias. Mathias. If she be awake, I Will tell her boldly who it is; if
not, I Will surprise her.


Edwardo. Whist, who is there?


Mathias. It Is. I.


Edwardo. Come, my Dear.


Mathias. So kind, she has had some inckling of my designs. -- Where are you?


Edwardo. Here, my Heart. -- Mathias gropes for the Bed.


[And catches hold of Mathias, and pulls him into the Bed. Mathias. You can
counterfeit, I see. --


Edwardo kisses him, and they both start and feel each others faces and find
Beards, Mathias shruggs, and would be gone. Some trick, I find it; these Whores
have laid betwixt them to afront me.


Edwardo. How now, what are you? what would you have?


Mathias. What would I have? I believe both our businesses here may be guessed
without a witch; But I shall be revenged. Mathias strives with him.


Edwardo. Nay, you stir not, Sir; I can hold a bearded Venus as fast as you;
This is some Theif; what ho, Sanco, bring some lights here.


Mathias. Light Kecka, light Syniora; Thieves, bring lights.


Edwardo. Thief or no Thief, I Will have one bang at him for my kiss.


Edwardo strikes him, and they cuff in the Bed; Edwardo throws him down, there
they cuff and struggle upon the floor, and are both bloody, occasioned by
little spunges tied of purpose to their middle fingers in the palms of their
hands, The noise is heard into Philippo's Chamber, where Lucetta, Philippo, and
Sanco are undressing her; they open the curtain window and listen to the noise;
Edwardo and Mathias are cuffing still. Lucetta. What noise is that in my
Chamber?


Sanco. 'Twas the Strangers voice.


Philippo. And Mathias, or l'me mistaken.


Mathias. Dog, Rogue, will thou worry me?


Edwardo. Hah! Traitor; In my Bed take the advantages of a naked man?


Lucetta. It Is their voices, I am undone; That Whore Kecka has let Mathias in,
who finding the Stranger in the Bed, I fear, has murdered him; Run, as you
love our lives save the Stranger, we are all lost else, confiscate to the Law,
and shamed for ever; This is a just curse upon your covetous mischief.


Philippo. That Whore shall dearly pay for it.


Sanco. Take your Sword and second me, it is no time to waste in talking; If
Mathias be there, you're sure he is not alone; take your sword, that we may be
able to force him to reason; Pray stay you here, that nothing be laid to your
charge whatever happens; lest his Rage having power should act some bestial
Revenge upon you.


Lucetta. Leave talking of mischiefs that may be, and hasten to prevent this
certain ruin that threatens us.


Edwardo Be what thou will, I Will make thee repent this visit.


Mathias. What a Devil art thou that usest me thus? I neither know thee, nor
looked for such a Bedfellow.


Edwardo. What am I? A Gentleman and a Stranger that is to be abused, robbed,
and jeered; But if I do not make you repent your share of the Villainy, I am a
Dog.


Mathias. Help, Murder, Murder; his fist lights like a hammer on my Face; a
black mischief befall that damned Kecka.


Enter Philippo and Sanco, with swords drawn upon them, and lights in their
hands, and cut them both. Philippo. Kill that Rascal; Death, are you become
Master of this Philippo pursues Mathias all this while. house? Cannot the
Syniora dispose of her time and person without your leave? I Will learn you to
come when you're sent for.


Sanco. Save your self from him by the back door, and follow me; I Will convey
you to a friends house, and immediately bring your clothes; and as soon as I
can inform my self of this mischief you shall know it; but, by my Iife, it is a
mystery yet to all.


Edwardo. I Will not stir a foot: Give me thy sword, I Will warrant I Will defend the
House against them all, till you fetch a sword and second me.


Sanco. No, Sir, I will serve you with it, but not quit mine; where is your own?


Edwardo. Would I had but a knife to cut yonder Rogues throat with.


Sanco. You know not the Law of this place; we are undone if any such thing
should happen in the house; For the Syniora's sake, Sir, follow me.


Edwardo. I will not stir a step till I am revenged on you all.


Sanco. Retire, however, and preserve your self till you may be revenged; You
shall find both the Syniora and my self will join with you.


Edwardo. I Will follow you; but be certain the day shall not surer rise, then
I Will find my Revenge.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. X.
Enter Lucetta, and Philippo. Lucetta. WHy so; Now you have had your will, and
I am destroyed; what mischief made this encounter?


Philippo. I know not, but I can guess; Where Is Kecka? That Queen has a finger
in the business.


Lucetta. Well, what remains to remedy this?


Philippo. The same remedy will cure it yet, if Sanco observes his first
Instructions, and lose him in the street; the Stranger knows nothing, neither
him, nor us, nor the house.


Lucetta. But if he should come to know who we are, what then?


Philippo. When that accident happens we must think of a remedy for that too;
In the mean time send for Kecka, that we may inform our selves what is past.


Enter Sanco, with Mathias 's Sword and Clothes. Lucet. The news, Sanco;
where is the stranger?


Sanco. Where I left him, at the turning behind the Jesuits; but he is in such
a fury, I Am confident he will hazard a hundred lives rather then sit down with
this affront.


Lucet. 'Twas well he got not a sword, you would all have paid for your trick.


Sanco. And I counsel you to let me carry him his clothes and his money, this
morning; and tell him ingenuously the whole truth; then you may make friends
again; for I know he loves you, there is nothing lost neither by it; for I dare
say he would give all you can steal where he is kindly used.


Phil. What have thou there?


Sanco. Mathias his clothes, I found them in Kecka's Chamber, who has confessed
all; you shall have the story within; Mathias and she should have been merry to
night, but with no ill intention truly; but when he heard the stranger was
gone, and you alone (which you told Kecka yourself, and gave cruel Mathias
occasion to be false to love and Kecka from whose bed he stole to surprise you
in yours) there he met his punishment in the martial Maid, who with a Beard and
Buffets quickly laid the Knights lust in the dust; the jest will afford
laughter on all sides, if well carried; Mathias can blame no body but himself,
nor the stranger accuse any thing but change; and if Mathias that was beaten
can forget, sure the other may forgive the beating; if you will be ruled, I Will
heal all to morrow; if not, somewhat worse will follow.


Lucet. Where is that damned Kecka? dear Sanco, as thou love me turn her
naked out; she shall not sleep in this house, false beast.


Sanco. Yes, that she may run and find the stranger, and tell him all that is
past; rather shut her up, and chain her; lest she break loose and discover us
before we reconcile the business.


Philip. Sanco has Reason; shut her up, and put out the light; lest that
discover us in the street when the rogue makes a noise; come retire, and leave
the care of him to me.


Lucet. No, I am of Sanco's opinion, to send him his clothes and money again,
and invite him and Mathias both to dinner, and make a perfect peace; the jest
will be good too when they shall both see 'twas accident; so we shall avoid
both the scandal of such an action, and the danger of their revenge.


Philip. I am not of your mind, I apprehend no such danger; if he be angry it
will be forgot ere he can express himself to be understood; if not, I can
digest my part with this Cordial; Nor can I repent an action that carries ready
money with it; and when will his friendship be worth a thousand Ryals of Plate
apiece to each of us? if he frowns, we have as good Arguments against his anger
as he has for it; a sword and an arm; I know no other; yet if you approve it
we will out of Town, for a day or two, and be gone before day to avoid suspicion:
you and Sanco shall walk to the Bridge, and I Will meet you with a Coach; then we
may pretend we were out of Town when this happened; we will take Mathias with us and
stop all mouths; come, pray be ruled; here is six hundred Arguments in Gold of
our side; we will see the Escurial in our walk, and be merry a month upon the
jest; and is not that better then spoil a good business with a little sneaking
repentance?


Lucet. Before that month I hope to see you deposed from that Tyrannick power
over my heart, which makes you command thus absolute; I obey, but if my fears
prove true you will dearly pay for it.


Philip. I, I; let me suffer, be you ruled; and leave the rest to me.


[Exeunt Philippo and Lucetta. Sanco. I am not sorry to hear they have
abandoned the thought of restitution; my share, I Am sure, will be least in the
danger, though it be equal in the spoil; for I can run away and prepare my self
for my great design with this ready money, and the powerful powder: I will
enter Sanco, that must go forth a Prince.


ACT. V. SCEN. XI.
Enter Edwardo in his Drawers, he whistles and listens. Edw. I May whistle and
whistle, but the Dog will not come; it is dark and late, few people stirring in
the street; the villain is gone, and has left and lost me on purpose; what
course to steer I know not, either to find mine own lodging or theirs; her name
too is jumbled out of my head; hell and mischief go with it; now had I as live
go to the Gallows as return home; the rogues will so rejoice and triumph over
me when they hear of this mischief; their jests will sting worse then a
Dog-whip; what a day and a night has this been? twice drunk, twice cozened,
and twice beaten; mischiefs by couples; I shall give a fine account of my
travels; a few of these unnatural days will make the journey seem tedious; what
an ass was I to believe such a woman, so clothed, so nobly lodged, and richly
furnished, could be maintained or had for nothing! Puppey, blind wilful Puppey;
dull, vain Ass, to believe she could fall in love with me at first sight; no, I
am an Ass, it is visible; she read the fool in my face, the Essex Calf; for what
grace indeed, beauty or virtue, can I plead, then this face which I can suffer
because I am acquainted with it; dull Ass, to be flattered into a mischief when
I was sober too! I could pull my self by my long ears, which, methinks, I see
by starlight they are so visible, there is nothing to redeem such a folly, but
a home, full revenge without mercy, upon the whole nest of them. What lights
come there? I must hide my self some where, else the people in the street will
pass their time with me. -- More strokes of fortune yet! A Enter D^n Pedro,
Car. Johan. their servants with lights. pox of the Whore; will she expose me to
their mirth too? where shall I hide me? I Will get upon this stall, and lie as if
I slept.


Pedro. See here is some Lover sleeping in Fresco, after his Serranad; what was
the business, Carlo, at Lucetta's, this night?


Edw. Lucetta, Lucetta, that is the damned name.


(Speaks softly.) Joh. Some quarrel amongst her Amoroso's; one leaped the
window in his drawers.


Edwardo. That Is some comfort yet; I went out at the Door.


(Aside softly.) Carlo. That Philippo will undo her; He is still playing the
Bravo amongst her Lovers; I wonder what she sees In that Beast to love him for?


Pedro. She Is a beast her self, false and proud; Nothing but Pikeroons, and
falsehood amongst them; There Is that Sanco, a Bloody infamous Villain; and while
she admits him, No man of Honor, that loves his Throat, will sleep under her
roof.


[Exeunt omnes but Edwardo. Edw. Lucetta, Philippo; Those are they against a
world; That Sanco too is the Squire that lost me. But if my revenge find not
him and them too let them laugh at the dull English man; ha! The light again;
I Will step off, e're I am discovered, and take Sanctuary in some great man's
Portico.


[Exit Edwardo. ACT. V. SCEN. XII.
Enter Don Pedro, and his Company, making themselves merry with Mathias in his
Drawers. Pedro. NOt know him?


Math No, faith; nor understand him scarce; I Am sure, he is a stranger, one
that supped there.


Johan. What said Lucetta? was she of the Plot?


Math. No, nor none of them knew of my being in the house; nor was he less
amazed then I; 'twas in the dark; For I went in Knavery, without a light, to
surprise her, who, I thought, had been alone in her bed; We kissed, and hugged
each other, till our Beards discovered; but afterward, you may see by my face
how he set up mine.


Carlo. Where are your Clothes?


Math. I was even glad to leave them behind me, and escape so; He Is naked too.
I saw him stalk before me, like a Ghost in the shade; you must needs have met
him.


Pedro. We did so, He was got upon a stall; Do you not remember, I told you
there lay a Lover in Fresco; It Is one of Thomaso's crew upon my life, let us
walk; if we find him, we will laugh him into a Fever.


Math. Gentlemen, you may laugh, but believe it, I cannot; would I were in my
own Bed, I would not quit it for any she is in Madrid. Now do I smell a Ballad
to morrow in the Prado, of the two Bearded Lovers, kissing like the Devil and
the Colliar in a Ladies Bed; If I be not revenged I shall pine in my mind.


Carlo. You cannot be revenged on her; it is clear, she is Innocent; indeed
Sanco and Philippo should be well stroak'd with Cudgels; and larded with
ponyards, to refresh the Rogues memories, and teach them their duties toward
Gentlemen.


Math. The Dog made me leap out at a Window; Else I am confident he had killed
me; he gave me these Three hurts e're I could pass.


Pedro. What a Rogue 'twas to strike a naked man! come let us try if we can find
your Enemy. Give us but the satisfaction of that mirth, and we will all join in
your Revenge.


Johan. There is time and ways enough for a Revenge, for those Rascals have
more Enemies then thou have friends. The Galleys and the Gallows are their
Common disease, and all unnatural deaths their natural Ends.


[Exeunt omnes. Partis primae Finis.
THE SECOND PART OF THOMASO, OR, The Wanderer: A COMEDY. The Scene MADRID.

Written in MADRID BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

Dramatis Personae.
Don Pedro, A Noble Spaniard, and late Commander in the Spanish Army. Don
Johanne, His Friends. Don Carlo, A lean Don, Officers of the Army. Another Don,
An Italian. Three French Gentlemen. A Prince of Poland. A Flanders Merchant.
Don Mathias, One of Lucetta's maintainers. Stephano, His Friend. Lopus, The
Mountebank. Scarramucha, His Man. Thomaso, The Wanderer. An English Cavaleer,
who had served in the Spanish Army. Edwardo, English Gentlemen, his Friends,
late Commanders in that Army. Ferdinando, Harrigo, A sober English Gentleman,
attending the English Ambassador. Cornelius, A Captain of the Spanish Army.
Philippo. Paramour to Lucetta. Sancho, Her Bravo. Diego, Servant to Don Pedro,
Rogero, Servant to Harrigo. Two Bravo's of Angelica's. Porter to the English
Ambassador. Serulina, A beauteous Virgin, Sister of Don Pedro. Angelica
Bianca, A beautiful Curtezan, Mistress to the slain Spanish General. Anna, Her
Bawd. Lucetta, A famous Curtesan. Saretta, Two Curtezans of the first rank.
Paulina, Celia, Wife to the Mountebank. Helena, An old decayed Curtezan, that
hopes to be restored to 15. by the Mountebanks Art. Calis, Waiting Woman to
Serulina. Kecka, Servant to Lucetta. Guardian to the two Monsters. (These last
only mentioned.) Servants to Don Pedro. Spectators (Men and Women) for the
Mountebank.
THE SECOND PART OF THOMASO, OR The Wanderer.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter Thomaso, Ferdinando and Cornelio. Thomaso is not dressed, he buttons him
as he talks. Corn. YOu rise late, methinks!


Thom. At Feasts men sit long, and the Rogue made me a kind one; she bound me
in her bed, where we so kissed and talked over the stories of passed love. She
swore 'twas not day till the procession was passed.


Ferd. It Is a kind and a bucksome Girl; but I am for her Sister who has
promised me we shall be merry at night; but what will your Angellica say when
she shall hear you lay here?


Thom. Say, as much as I do when I hear Don Pedro lay there; why, do thou
think I Will be tied to one Wench, Ferdinando? No, I am for a herd of Whores, or
one honest woman; while I am an out-lying Deer, have at any man's Corn; impale
me and take me.


Corn. What do you resolve this morning?


Thom. Why, I must find Harrigo, I have some business with him.


Ferd. And I am for that visit I told you of.


Thom. And pray, Captain, solicit your Tailor not to fail of my clothes to
morrow; you know Saint Cicilia is my Saint, and we must keep her feast to
morrow; and then, Ferdinando, you shall see I Will change my Garb, and step, when
I come forth Don Thomaso.


Corn. And Don Cornelio leap into Monsieur Con, with long Hose, and a short
Coat, and after they have been seen here, sometime away; and become an honor
to the Regiment in Portugal.


Ferd. What, it is a bargain then I see, Coat and all?


Thom. All, for the new Buff-coat and old kindness sake, upon the condition he
wears it at Saint Cicilia's feast; and therefore haste your stitcher that I may
get my self sheathed in Don; Come, Harrigo expects us at home.

How now, the news? we were coming to you.


[Exit Cornelia. [Enter Harrigo. Har. Have you heard nothing this morning?


Thom. No, what is it?


Har. Nothing of news?


Thom. Nothing, what is it? some roguery I see by his eyes.


Har. Such mirth, if you can laugh at the affliction of a friend.


Thom. Who? Edwardo, upon my life, beaten, robbed and thrown out at a Window!


Har. Not altogether so ill; but beaten he is and robbed, turned out of doors
naked, at midnight; h'as lost six hundred crowns in gold, besides a Watch,
Rings and Seals; the Guard brought him to our house, to see who knew him; 'twas
such a sight to see him come in torn and bloody; and yet no man durst pity him,
or laugh at him; he storms yet, and will not endure a Question; he struck the
Porter for asking him who abused him.


Thom. I am sick till I see him; let us away, and study as we go home to abuse
him; the Rogue has been so wantonly bred in perpetual plenty, you shall see how
shittenly he will look without money in his Purse, and how sneakingly he will borrow,
and how scurvily he will ask a courtesy.


Ferd. He was never out of his depth before; you shall see him plunge and
struggle like a young swimmer to get of the puddle; 'twas well I took the rest
of our money from him last night.


Thom. He shall bite upon the Bridle, 'twill him make hear reason the sooner
hereafter; my Bills are as good as his now; he shall want nothing, but I Am
resolved I will not offer him a Ryall; I Will have the pleasure of acting his
part a while; not one of these black Dogs shall stir out of the Kennel before
he whistle; you know, Ferdinando, I prophesi'd this last night.


Ferd. Prithee, let us find him ere he has time to get to bed; for the sight
will be half the jest, and I long to see him just as the Wench has dressed him
for a Comedy; where is he now?


Har. Gone home in a chair.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Edwardo with a Sword and Belt, and meets Harrigo and Ferdinando. Ferd.
EDwardo, how now! bloody, not wounded I hope.


Edw. for the blood, I Am sure it is none of mine; and I I have the satisfaction
of beating my Bedfellow beyond a Jest, what ere he meant by his visit; And I
had burst my Gall when I found my self cozened, had it not been for the vent
my Rage took by discharging my Heart upon him, who must needs be as full of
wonder to find his Ears beaten with English and blows; for the Devil a word of
Spanish could I get out.


Ferdin. Can you not remember their Names yet?


Edwardo. No, that is my trouble now.


Harrigo. You Will be quickly out of that pain; when Cornelio comes he can inform
you.


Edwardo. Cornelio, where is he? Let me but once know where they are, and I am
content to suffer your severest Jests till I am revenged.


Ferdi. He Will not be long absent, he is only gone to the Tailors for Thomaso's
Spanish Habit; there is a truck betwixt them two for Thomaso's laced suit;
that is it makes the Captain so diligent.


Harrigo. But was the Drab so eloquent, such a fine flattering Devil;
unmerciful Whore, to bring a Lover within an inch of her mirth, and then to
beat and rob him not only of his money, but his Gusto too! A young longing
Lover, that would only have tasted of her Milk; what a jadish Cowes trick was
that to kick down the pail?


Ferdi. Pish, a Mistress is nothing to him; he will have a pair of new ones the
first Mass: Ned has nets and catches the Covey; were it you or I that fly at
single Women, whose Cupid makes not above one flight in an Age, and to find her
false to Love, 'twere sad; But for Ned, he only walks the Street, shows the
man, and the Town is his own; The German piper was never more followed then he,
when he will apply himself.


Edwardo. This, and more, I expected. Alas, Fred, where will thou find a wit
that is not mortal? All that are Active must be subject to these calamities;
Yet I had rather venture where these storms threaten, then wear out my days
dully in some Widows dock at home; When I miss my voyage I Am as happy as
either of you; one of us Gamesters may win a Fortune: But Fred, that dares not
hazard, but only spends himself in stakes, is only some Plant, some Tree; and
I had as live be a stone or Tree, as know the height of my Fortune: See who
comes here; Don Thomaso, by Enter Thomaso. this light, raised by virtue of a
Tailor, without a Circle, Sieve, or Sheares; Now would not I play that part
naked as I am; I had rather be Tege in my Drawers still, then such a hide-bound
Don.


Ferdi. Do you hear? Is there any privilege due to this habit for Strangers
that will wear it? Can you be admitted into an Hospital above three nights
with these clothes? Else, if you cannot have two penny loaves for a penny, to
wear it, By my troth, I would not be committed to such a Prison as that Doublet
and Collar, those shoes too, with the toes longer then the soles; I would wear
the stocks as soon, and I think sit as easy in them.


Edwardo. Is it far more justifiable, Fred, to ones Friends to be thus at ease
against a man's will? This Liberty of Waste-coat and Drawers in the dog-dayes;
Is it not better then to purchase thy Penance calmely to be crowded, and
stuffed by a Tailor into a Doublet and Hose, and look like a bag of Bays full
of fools flesh? 'Twas beaten into this Fresco, it is true; But when you find me
leaping windows voluntarily, you may laugh at me.


Thomaso. For your part, Ned, I Will allow you not only to dislike the Fashion,
but the Nation too. They Are twigs of those Rods that jerk'd you so lately; and
the Jest stings still so much, that I dare say, thou will not endure the sight,
nor sound, of Don this month. Alas, it is ordinary; We see Children that have
been frighted with a Cat in the cradle hate the poor Beast for ever; And it is
to be hoped, you may come to hate a whore too in time; by that a Fardingale has
used you as ill as a man in a great bellied Doublet has done: But for thee,
Fred, thy dislike is as Pannick as his fear who died the next day at the sight
of a past danger; So thou tremblest at what is to come, and apprehend'st being
cozened and beaten to night: You know where you are to go; take heed, it comes
with a fear, especially with a Countrey-gentlemans fear; Your Essex man in
Madrid, their prophetic Fantasies make their Dreams Visions still.


Harrigo. How came you both to suffer me in the habit? I am an Englishman too:
How came you to comply with my Breeches?


Edwardo. Had we seen your Metamorphosis, as we do his, we should have started
at that too; What Friend can see Circe's cup given to another? It Is an
Affliction Ulysses cannot bear, to hear his Friend grunt out of a Gotillio.


Thomaso. Fetch the black box with the Perriwigs, and let us not lose our time,
although the Gentlemen do their censure. Exit the Tailor to fetch the Perriwigs.


Harrigo. Prithee make haste, for it is late; and the Church will be so full we
shall get no place at the Music.


Thomaso. Pray, will you persuade Edwardo to go.


Ferdi. Whither, to Church? Take him in a Church again till he be carried
thither by Torch-light, and I am deceived.


Enter Cornelio, looks on Edwardo and laughs. Edwardo. Do you hear, Captain?
laugh your laugh and away; for it has been a Jest too much handled; What will
you give for my Clothes instead of Thomaso's, and be bound to fetch 'em.


Cornelio. Why that is not so impossible as you believe; what will you take for
my losses last night? Be at a word now.


Edwardo. Why, I Will take a good Revenge and a sudden one, if you will but tell
me who has abused me.


Cornelio. I know the woman and the man you followed out of the Church
yesterday; and if you will walk, I Will show you their Door.


Thomaso. Yes, and the very window you were thrown out at; he can, Ned; Con can
do this without conjuring; See Don Thomaso play such a trick, and then I Will
subscribe to Monsieur Edward.


Edwardo. Captain, prithee let thee and I talk seriously: Do thou know their
Names? They are damned hard ones; I have heard some like them in a Comedy.


Cornelio. Her Man is called Sanco, and her Name Lucetta; is it not so?


Edwardo. Yes, by these Bones; Luc. Luc. Luc.


Ferdi. How now, what do thou look for?


Edwardo. My black-lead; but now I think on it it is now in my Breeches; Prithee
lend me thine. Luc. Luc. Sanco, Sanco; the street, good Captain, the street
again. He writes their Names.


Cornelio. By the Jesuits.


Edwardo. One Question more, and I have done; Cannot your Tailor cut a pair of
Christian Breeches as well as a Catholic Doublet? I Would fain venture one suit
more in this unchristian Country. Thus would they use the Defender of the
Faith were he here.


Cornelio. Yes, yes, he will fit you in both kinds.


Edwardo. Farewell, Noble Gentlemen; you may hear News from Dametas. Exit
Edwardo, and Enter Tailor with a box of Perriwigs.


Cornelio. Give me the box, I Will put the Perriwigs in order; Is not the suit
well made?


Ferdi. Your bargain was better that got his other.


Cornelio. What a Devil have we here? These Perriwigs belong to the
Tyring-house; they are all as black as the Devil is in a Comedy.


Thomas. Harr. and Ferdin. How! Black?


Ferdi. How came this mistake?


Thomaso. That dull Rogue, Pogio's man; a pox upon his welsh memory.


Ferdi. Is It possible he could mistake thus? Why then there is three Crowns
cast away; I always told you, you might cut him as often as you would of the
simples, you could never cure him; Who is that he speaks of?


Thomaso. Even your Brothers wise man, a Munmoth Witch; William ap Merlin ap
Roger, a tame Countryman of yours, that lives as innocently as Ale and fool
can keep them; If there were no more Charity then Profit in it, a man would keep
a Cough of the Lungs, rather then be troubled with such a fool.


Ferdi. There Is a couple of them, a Richard and a William; They have been at
the Apes Academy these six months to breed them fine Gentlemen; and yet
there is a Cobblers dog in a Doublet, that lives in a cellar in the louvre, has
out-revel'd them both, and passes for a finer Gentleman.


Thomaso. These are those Perriwigs my Boy bespoke for your Brother, who will
be as far to seek with my white ones as I shall be with his black.


Ferdi. The mistake is plain, but what is the remedy?


Thomaso. It Is easy to wonder; But I would fain see all this College of wits
now, to prescribe a cure; Show all your craft now, to make a black Perriwig
white.


Harrigo. In this extremity the business may be easier reconciled, and you come
forth a complete Don; it is but dying your Beard and Eyebrows black, and a
little mouth glew-to your whiskers, and the business is done.


Thom. It Is but a but, But where is this means for this But, other then walk the
streets like a Magpy; else I am not so in love with white hair but I can sleep
in a black beard.


Ferd. By this hand do; and we will say it is your brother come from Salamanca,
till you get a white one.


Cornel. Keep but your own Counsel, and no man can betray you; let not Don
Edwardo know it till you have saluted him in Spanish; you may be resolved by
him whether your disguise be perfect, or no.


Harr. If you resolve, I Will fetch you the Water; Our old Secretary has of it;
it is that he uses daily to his Beard, and you see it keeps him as Black as a
Raven.


Thom. Never doubt my resolution; Prithee fetch the water; silly Rogue, to put
up the Box without looking into it; My first visit shall be, to try whether the
Angellica will know me; But we must be all Secret, and serious, till the Jest
be over.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Saretta, Paulina, and Cornelio. Paul. I See them follow us.


Cornel. We have such a Revenge upon Edwardo; he knew nothing, neither the
persons, nor the place, till I told him; But then he flew like lightning to his
Revenge.


Saret. Why, who was it? I am her Friend for ever for it.


Cornel. I guessed right; 'twas Lucetta, and her two Bravo's.


Paul. Lucetta? would she be guilty of such an Action? she had a better
Reputation in the world; I wonder she is so foolish as to expose her self to
the power of a stranger that can fly the country when he has done her an
affront? Besides, she is in danger of the Justice, and the Law.


Saret. The Law? She has small friends in faith, if he get Justice against her;
I would it had been his Friend Thomaso, so I had answered the throwing of him
out at Window, and he has good luck if he Escape, for he will deserve it richly;
where are they now?


Cornel. I left them upon a design to visit the Calatravo's, it is Saint
Cecilia's Eve; Thomaso is full of Money.


Paul. I am glad to hear it, a rich Lover makes his Mistress smile; Captain,
Farewell, we will to the Church.


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Thomaso, Harrigo, and Ferdinando. Harrigo. AS you Love mirth, Gentlemen,
be secret, till some body discover him; say only, it is his Brother Don Jacomo,
newly arrived from Salamanca, that we may be all found in one Tale.


Ferd. Content at the Church; we shall meet acquaintance.


Thom. We Will only pass, and so to the Angellica's, and try if she can know
me, see who comes here.


[Enter Saretta and Paulina. Harr. I know not, pray be serious all, and carry
it gravely; See, now they open; so, now we shall know them.


Ferd. It Is the two Sisters.


Harr. You have reason, let them pass, see what they will do.


Paul. There Is Don Harrigo, and the other Englishman, your new Amoroso.


Saret. It Is so; but who is the third? it is a handsome Man and a stranger, but
none of their Nation, his Mien is too grave.


Paul. Some Merchant, I believe, to whom they are recommended.


Har. That Eye has a Fellow; Why hid, Ladies? would you play the spy upon your
Friends? What is it you are Curious to discover?


Saret. That stranger, what is he?


Harr. A Servant of yours, if you please; a brother of Don Thomaso's that
arrived last night from Salamanca.


Sarr. A brother of his? The Hen had several Cocks, sure; This looks as if he
were worth a Woman's kindness; it is a proper man, would he were less a kin to
that wild humor.


Harr. This is a man of another Temper; but we hope to abuse him out of it;
Thomaso swears he is a Maid still.


Paul. A maid! so is his brother, it is a proper black fellow; and I dare say
'has as much pride as Thomaso has good nature; This looks as if he would be
Courted before a woman had the honor of his Conversation; where is my Friend?
see, he Eyes us.


Saret. Your Friend has more wit then to appear when his brother is in place,
for fear of being despised; 'Twas the first modest action I e're saw in him;
This letting him walk alone; has this as ready a tongue as the other?


Harr. Come, I Will bring you acquainted. Don Jago, Here are Ladies, Friends of
mine, desire the Honor of your acquaintance.


Thom. It Is an honor, Sir, to me, and such as a stranger ought to be proud of:
especially such private persons as we Students, that are not only barren of
Desert, but frustrate of Occasion how to merit the most diminutive favors of
so fair a Lady.


Saret. Sir, I have had the happiness to know your brother by my sisters
Friendship with him; and though we Quarrel sometimes, that shall not hinder
your well-come to me, when your leisure will bestow a Visit upon your Servant.


Thom. Truly, Madam, he has much more to do in the world then I pretend to,
that has any business beyond receiving the honor of such conversation; And
therefore you are to Expect a sudden trouble, by the importunity of your slave
being conscious, to my self my Company may be troublesome; Else I should be
more Ambitious to have the honor to be esteemed your Creature; For yours are
the first Eyes that ever yet had power to pierce my heart; and without vanity
let me say, your beauty is the first that ever threw chains upon your Jago.


Paul. It Is a fool, a formal Ass, he talks like a Mountebank, diminutive
honor, Glorious, Happiness, ambitious of Friendship, Chains, and Flames, and
Slaves; Sweet Lady, sure you cannot be so weak as to believe he has wit and
means this for one of our Trade, at first sight too? Pox on him, he is either
an Ass, or thinks us so; this is but a la Parakito.


Saret. Thou art so versed in Rallery and Railing, from thy Lovers tongue, Thou
can not savor any handsome serious reply; thou will come to talk baudy,
drink and swear too, in time, If Huff Cap and Ale were but a little more
Domestic here.


Harr. No more of this, now; we will come and see you at home, and satisfy all
your Doubts.


Saret. Your Servant, Sir.


[Exeunt Saretta and Paulina. Ferd. Here Is mirth, beyond expectation.


Harr. I would drive this Jest to the bedside, e're she knew it.


Thom. To the bedside, Hall? I, behind the bed, and upon the bed, in the Bed,
or against the wall: if I do not nail this Jest to her Belly, let a Beadle
scratch me with a Dog-whip.


Ferd. Fie, two Sisters?


Thom. I, Ten, if the Litter be kind and handsome, good Country Conscience;
What Advantage do I get by turning Catholic, if a Saint cannot forgive such a
sin? You think a man gets his own Children in this hot Country, as they do in
Essex; Thou art an Ass, There Is not such a thing as two Sisters by Fathers and
Mothers side, on this side the Hills.


Harr. I Will leave you to pursue your Fortune, for I am resolved to have no hand
in it more then the Jest; she is too much my Friend to betray her.


Ferd. I Will go and see how he will look, when she discovers him; for it is not
possible, when we are near, and Converse, but she must find him.


Thom. Well, I Am resolved to hunt the mischief till she finds her Error;
there is Revenge, as well as Love in the pleasure.


ACT. I. SCEN. V.
Enter Angellica, Don Pedro, and Anna, with a Bravo, and the Money. Angel. NOw
I find Don Pedro Loves me, when he will give this Idol of the World for my
Friendship; And you shall find me, Sir, as kind as you are bountiful, and your
Arms outvie her that sighs most for Love.


Pedro. It Is many Months since I offered you my Service, without limit; and
that which I took ill, was, you doubted my complying with such a poor Sum,
which now has opened your door, where Don Pedro was shut out.


Ang. That Is a Quarrel all your Sex has against us, though most unreasonable;
Thomaso urged it yesterday; and he upbraided me with selling of our selves.
It Is truth, and the same Answer serves you both, when either of you set a price
upon your selves; If I have a mind to you I Will pay it, and purchase you; Ours
were a fine trade, if we kept shop, and gave our Wares for Love; would it turn
to account, think you, to dress and hire this House, and venture our Bodies,
and Souls, to receive all that would enter? Try the Trade some one of you.


Pedro. I urged not that, as a displeasure, that took any Root, only an
unkindness, which is blown over; though I wonder to hear you are a Lover, the
Insensible being as vulgar, as the fair Angellica.


Angel. It Is but the wonder of a Day; A heart I have, Sir, like other Women
too, though no man had wit to find the way to win it; He is dearer to me then
all the Earth besides; and if you love me you will not hate him, you cannot
embrace me single; My breast is full of Thomaso; it is his, and Loves Nest.


Pedro. Can I give you a greater Argument of my Love then this patience, while
you prefer my Enemy and my Rival before me, and avow it to my face?


Angel. Can you be an Enemy to my Friend, and Love me? No, Sir, he that loves
me loves and hates as I do; My Friend will protect me, and revenge my wrongs;
It Is not the purchase of my bed that tells me you love; that is your pleasure;
Mine is to see you smile when I smile, and embrace what I embrace; and I know
there has passed nothing between you and Thomaso but what may with honor
enough be forgotten; as if you were the first that love and anger had blinded;
what is there so ordinary as to find those Passions throw friends upon the
swords of Friends?


Pedro. I confess as much; and when the heat was over my Reason did not condemn
him; 'twas accidental, and his back was toward me, and we were both angry e're
we knew with whom; He has been since at my house; but I was not at home.


(One knocks.) Angel. See, Anna, who knocks.


Anna. It Is a stranger, I know him not; he inquires for Don Thomaso.


Angel. Call him in. Would you speak with Don Thomaso, Sir? Enter Thomaso in
his Spanish habit. Aside.


Thom. Yes, Lady, from a Brother of his.


Angel. A Brother of his? -- It Is he, I know him -- Well, and what business
have you to dispatch from that Brother of his that might not have been done in
Gray as well as Black? Good Don, let us know the reason of this Disguise; have
you any guilt, that you mourn for?


Thom. None; but since I am discovered give me leave, first, to salute this
Gentleman, and then you shall know the Cause. Sir, I know Don Pedro has too
much Honor to doubt it in his Servant, who if he were a Stranger would not
make this Apology; But having had the honor to be known to you formerly, I
venture upon the score of a Gentleman and a Soldier that once was commanded by
you; to whom it is known, I left neither the service, nor the Country with
blushes; which will be enough, I hope, to prevail with you to forget the
accident of yesterday, in which I am only guilty of having so late called to
mind a person whom I Will so much honor as I shall ever do Don Pedro.


Pedro. Sir, you have prevented me by your disguise; else I had been earlier in
the confession of my fault; but your disguise, to day, must plead for me, as
mine begot our mistake yesterday; and Don Thomaso may be secure nothing but
mistakes can beget an unkindness from me, who have the same ready heart to
serve him.


Angel. Embrace then -- so; now I am happy; and this is kinder, and far more
welcome to me then all the price you can give -- They embrace. She kisses Don
Pedro, and then Thomaso. That is yours, you bought it; this is mine, I have
paid for it; I am yours, and this is my Mistress; and now our hearts are free
from fear or anger; for wonder sake, unriddle, why this disguise? some roguery,
upon my life.


Thom. No, in earnest; a mere chance: you know, yesterday I resolved to put my
self into the habit of the place, and this morning when I was dressed and
called for my Perriwigs, there was none but black ones in the Box; my man
mistook when we parted at Paris, and put up my Comrades Box for mine; and to
make the chance a jest, Harrigo died my Eyebrows and Beard, as you see; and
our chief Plot was to try if you could find it out.


Angel. And does Don Harrigo, or my friend, think, it is colors or habit can
hide a Lover from a Lovers eye? No, Thomaso, neither the Hawk, nor Hound have
any sense quicker or more sagacious, then a Lover; there is too much of the
heart pierces with every look to be deceived by shadows.


Thom. Yet I have passed this jest upon one whose wit and malice is as great
and curious as your Love; her hate too as full of poison as your kindness can
be of honey; yet she has been deceived; and she that despised me when I was
white dotes upon this shadow; and takes me for my Brother, whom I hourly expect
from Salamanca; yesterday I was a fool, a better kind of Bravo only, neither
wit nor person to deserve from any serious woman; but, to day, all the graces
and excellencies of our sex scarce express her character; she invited me to
dinner, but I sent my excuse; else I could, this day, have had that offered
gratis that would not be purchased before.


Angel. And why did you refuse her? Fie, a cruel Knight deny a Lady that sighs
for you! especially when such a jest may be followed.


Thom. Do you ask why I refused her? is not the Angellica reason enough? thinks
my Love, I would quit my place here to sleep in any second bosom? no, I Will buy
no jests at that rate as well as I love a piece of knavery.


Pedro. Who is it that is fallen into this snare?


Thom. The Saretta, a humoursome Merchant as any Trades, one that has wit and
beauty enough to answer all his bills.


Pedro. I know her, it is a friend of yours; she will grow lean when she hears your
Picture is down; she hoped no man would purchase your friendship at the rate
proposed.


Angel. I know she hates me for praising her Sister, who has much the better
nature and the sweeter voice; I like Paulina's humor, it is gay and ingenuous,
you may read a real heart in her eyes; there is woman in her aspect, her very
looks are soft and kind, yet a Girl of a sprightly Mien, and graceful in every
motion; it is pleasure to converse with such a humor; I could love her before a
hundred of her Sister; and I am resolved, this business shall not dye thus if I
have power.


Thom. I, I; hereafter we will think on it when 'twill be a cheaper jest, that is a
work will be done in an afternoon as well as in a night.


Angel. I swear you dine not here to day, as well as I love you; I Will starve
the Boy, or watch him tame, or delay love till he grow desperate, rather then
lose the sport of this jest. Let me alone to have it sung in the Cachery; the
two Foresters abused the two wits of Madrid with a Perriwig; it is resolved, no
reply; but away to your business, and I Will teach you how to strike two Birds
with one stone; follow your design with Saretta, and oblige Don Pedro, in
giving him your day here, and I Will give Saretta mine; be but kind when you are
here, I ask no more; till night, we will expect the success.


Thom. Well, it is resolved; and the willinglier, because one of the Tribe has
abused my Comrade; and if I succeed, her story shall accompany Edwardo in the
Prado.


Angal. Edwardo's story! what is it, any new accident?


Thom. Have you not heard how he was beaten and robbed, and turned out at
midnight by he knows not whom?


Pedro. 'Twas last night near the Jesuits; I passed by when it was done; Don
Mathias was beaten too and thrown out at a Window; he is out of his Wits to now
who did it; 'twas in the Lucetta's House.


Thom. I know not Don Mathias his part; but, Edwardo, no thief taken and
whipped had more shame, or worse usage; but if she passes clearly with it I am
deceived in my man; she might have had his heart for a kiss.


Angel. Fie, 'twas base and ugly, but not strange amongst these Mulotto's; and
lest you believe all our Tribe such, see here is my Argument to buy your faith
of me, when I say I love, -- If you love She gives him the money Don Pedro gave
her. me you will not refuse it, and with it buy thy pleasure; follow thy
Capricha with any woman in Madrid.


Thom. I shall not blush to receive any favor your kindness gives; it is the
vain and the miserable that make benefits heavy, and slaves the generous mind
more then want; benefits when they are done with Bon mine; it is a pleasure to
become a debtor to such a nature when they shower upon us. Fair and kind,
farewell; and if Love can pay my debts, I am certain I Will owe no score amongst
women; and since you will have it so, let this Spanish wit look to her self; if
I do not lay the jest upon her belly, let her lay a cudgel upon my back. Sir, I
am your servant, and hope to find some time more seasonable to tell you so.
Farewell, be kind to the kind; and it is but just to love where you a Lover find.


[Exit Thomaso. Angel. You are sad, I hate a melancholy Lover; one that must be
kissed still out of his trance, else he will neither pipe nor dance.


Pedro. No, I was only admiring what I see and hear; and wonder, why I could
not master my nature as well as you; this Thomaso loves as much as I, with his
sword he purchased you; and for your conversation neglects both the fortune and
beauty of one that is not to be despised; and for your passion, I have the same
Arguments to conclude it that I would use to prove mine own; for I see you pay
the same rate for friendship; yet you two can both tame your hearts so, that
they calmly consent to let each other give and take the fruits of Love; as if
his Tree on the Common grew, enclosed by no vows.


Angel. So he does not marry and impale the Tree, let him give the friut to any
she; Me he will not marry, nor shall not if he would; because I love him he
shall not for my sake be guilty of any action he may blush for; nor will I
stand the curse of a chaste bed, whose robbed sheets, when holy vows have tied
him, wound as sure and fatal as lightning.


Pedro. Why thus severe to your self? I warrant he may marry you, and with
honor and profit enough forget passed faults.


Angel. No, Sir; though honor be that I think not of, because the custom of
the world has placed it beyond our power; yet I can prize it in others, and
despise that man that wants it. Kindness and faith to my Lover, good nature and
charity are the height of our ambition; and it is one comfort, that heaven is
easier satisfied then men; who think this fault of ours a gallantry in them, a
sin so light they sing and dance under it all their days; a sin so tamed by
custom that few or none hide it, as if honor had no pretense below a man's
Girdle; so his heart be right all is gallant; chaste men ridiculous, neither
believed, esteemed or trusted by either sex, scarce held of honor if once
branded with that stain; Nay, the contrary, both sexes admires him who has the
potent'st arms, and gives the frequent'st and mortal'st wounds in Venus wars;
while women are so slav'd with custom, that virtue, parts, nor fortune can heal
the wound in us, though Nature, Love and Kindness give it; for which, but that
I know we shall have other judges of that well natured sin, and never a man of
you all be of the jury, I would eat bran ere any he that breathes in breeches
should come between my sheets.


Pedro. This quarrel would soon be reconciled, could you prevail with your own
sex to a reconciliation; it is the women, not the men despise; they cry, Fie,
and frown, else we could digest it; for I observe your severest women that cry
whore most, are the likeliest Timber to cut a Cuckold in.


Angel. Nay, on my conscience, the dissemblers of our sex are more then the
public Whores, both for weight and number; but that will not excuse your
partial Idolatry of yours selves.


Pedro. Our guilt is not so general, we like and enjoy some one; you like nor
refuse none that will buy; which truth I would not urge but for Arguments sake.


Angel. You must then confess, it is not virtue but nature makes you less guilty
then women; for could you act as often as we can suffer, few of you would
refrain for the sin sake; this I believe, because you all boast not only how
many women you have known, but how often too; and lest the sin should want its
weight to be current amongst you you will give him grains of oaths, and belie
the number. What partial folly then is that governs the minds of men; and what
fools are women to submit to their Lunacy? I prize my self as high for having
enjoyed a gallant man, as you would do for having won his sword, or a gallant
woman's heart; despised because enjoyed by others! tell me, to morrow, if you
find any paths or steps upon my body where former Lovers trod, or any print of
passed kisses cleaving to their lips; if you can miss those Graces, those Roses
they gathered, and find not as fresh and full handfulls for you to reap, as if
he or they had not found their harvest.


[Exit. Pedro. Yet it is the opinion, such credit gives love more reputation
then women; and those bills the oftener drawn, and the oftener paid, make a woman
a better Merchant then a Lover.


[Exit. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Serulina and Calis. Serul. NOt find him?


Call. No, Madam; yet I came twice just as he went out; I have hunted him both
by the eye and question through the Town, and cannot meet him.


Serul. Were you at the Angellica's? I hear my Brother has sent a thousand
crowns; I hope he will be so busy with his new purchase he will have no leisure
to think upon an old quarrel; else this delay may be fatal.


Call. I was there, and saw Don Pedro at the Window, and a Brother of Don
Thomaso's come out while I was there; I knew him not till he was past.


Serul. His Brother? which, he that was at Salamanca?


Call. The same, he came last night to Town; I saw him since with Don Harrigo;
it is a proper black man; and has as much of the Don as the other has of the
Monsieur; I left him here hard by, under the Portico.


Serul. It Is strange he should be thus long in Town and neither come nor send;
an injury from him would work more upon me then all the Arguments his Enemies
can urge. -- See who Har. knocks. knocks.


Calis. It Is Don Harrigo.


Seru. What can his business be? Some Message from Thomaso; I Will seem as
unconcerned as he has been negligent.


Enter Harrigo and Ferdinando. Harrigo. This is the House, and there is the
Lady.


Ferdi. What a dog it is to follow such carrion upon every dunghill, and leave
such Manna here?


Harrigo. Farewell; and tell him since he resolves to be serious, I Will serve
him faithfully, and I hope succesfully.


Seru. Don Harrigo, you are welcome as any man can be that from a familiar
friend have made your self a stranger; Since Don Thomaso went I have only seen
you as the seasons change; How came you to exceed in your favors? It Is not yet
the fall of the leaf; And I remember you did me this Honor the last Spring.


Har. Faith, Madam, it is not for want of Respect or Affection that I pay my
visits so seldom here; It Is a time that makes all our Nation sneak and hide
themselves; There is a National guilt that beats our Hearts, we are out of
countenance as we walk the streets; The Ages crime hangs upon us; it is not
enough that I know my self honest, unless I could make that knowledge general;
All can say, there goes an Englishman, though but few know what part he played.


Seru. This is a noble sense to you, but I meant not to beget your trouble;
'twas only a kind quarrel for your long absence, which has not paid all that
trust your friend reposed in you.


Harrigo. And I am now to beg your pardon, not only for my self, but a servant
of yours; who dares not appear till he has made his way by this excuse.


Seru. My servant, and you mediate for him? What will your Friend say when he
hears it? But pray who can this servant be that sends before?


Harrigo. It Is Don Alphonso, Madam.


Seru. You are merry; but when I send you Gloves from his Wedding, they will
not smell so sweet as those you expected from Don Thomaso; But I would gladly
know where Don Alphouso gave you this Commission.


Harrigo. I had it, Madam, from Don John; who told me your Brother and he had a
private meeting this morning at the Capuchins; where they resolved your Wedding
should be sudden, and by your consent, having declared you had no such
intentions for my Friend.


Seru. I will know the depth of this; It Is some new design to disgust Thomaso.
-- Why truly, Don Harrigo, my Brother, and my Friends, have given many Reasons
fit to be considered ere I make my self a slave to a stranger; One, that
besides his ruined Fortune, can (in the time of his pretention, after five
years absence) fall in Love with every face he sees, and fight for a whore
against my Brother; One that has had three Quarrels, three Ballads, and twenty
Mistrisses in the Prado, ere he could find leisure to pay one visit to me; If I
were that foolish Lover he believes, I see how fit for pity and scorn his Heart
would leave me.


Harrigo. Madam, I am ashamed to hear this; Nor can any ingenuous Nature deny
what you have urged; and I shall be loath to destroy your Faith of those Truths
I come to deliver, by going about to justify him, though he be my Friend;
Only I will confidently say, when you shall know how accidentally he came
engaged in all that has happened to beget the discourse of the Town, you will
say, It has been a day of Chances; at which you will laugh your share, and not
condemn his part; Especially your Ladyship being so well acquainted with his
humor, which cannot be out at a Jest; But I am confident his serious thoughts
and highest value, are confined to the happiness you have promised him in your
Friendship; Though the Condition that Fortune has now thrown him in, since his
Princes troubles, makes him not so confident to appear before you, till I had
ventured to say something in his defense; Which, if you please to retire, I
shall deliver; and I hope, with more success then his fears expect.


Serulina. I should be sorry to find my self so far concerned in your Friend,
as to be very angry with any Arrives of his; No, Sir, you will find it is all
Thomaso can do to find me, when he shall seek Serulina; And I hope you are too
noble a Gentleman, either to wish or believe I shall seek him.


Harrigo. He scarce hopes to find such a Virtue in your Sex: Yet allow him as
ill as your fears, or his Enemies would present; I will prove you are as far
out of the way of being happy with Alphonso, as with my Friend with all his
faults; Nor is Alphonso chaster or confidenter then he, only duller and more
niggard, one that fears his flesh more, and loves his money better then
Thomaso; which are the hedges that keeps him in; it is neither Love nor Honor
that binds him; only his Craft can dissemble better to gain his own ends, the
fair Serulina and her Dowry; Besides, the Beauty of her person, and Honor of
her Family, are Blessings any man would dissemble to purchase.


Serulina. Yet he can pretend a Portion, for he can make a Jointure as
honorable as my Dowry; And though he be not so fine a Gentleman as your
friend, yet he may be as good a Husband; he can keep a Wife too, he has a
fortune will make her live splendidly like her self; and discretion bids us
consider those real goods, and not dote upon flowers; and give me a Husband
that can feed and cloth me as well as hug me. What Jewels will Don Thomaso
present his Wife with? those of his eyes and heart; and hang his Arms in stead
of Pearl about her neck? or in her ears fine Verses in stead of Pendants?
suppose this yet; it is a stout man whose sword can defend his Wife from cold;
and although Don Thomaso's wit be better then Alphonso's, yet his bond is worth
twenty Colonels.


Har. Faith, Madam, since you are in a good humor, I Will argue Serul. walks to
and again upon the Stage, and Har follows her and says. his Case with you.


Serul. These Arguments you urged, Sir, are hazards which the virtuous mind
must arm and resolve against.


Har. I doubt not, Madam, but you have virtue enough to digest the worst of
these their homely pleasures, which reach only to the body; but it is sin to
consent to slave the mind; for how will she rejoice or exercise her nobler
faculties when that comes in question; all that have ingenuity must subscribe;
wherein can the soul busy her self in the Country; but in studying of Simples,
and preparing Medecines for nasty Surgery? and perhaps, kill more by error and
mistake, then your charity can expiate; then to suffer the affliction of such
grounded ignorance, such resolute folly, such natural dullness as most
Country-families are haunted with.


Serul. Yet it is sweet being in the Country with all this; and when I marry it
shall be to become a Wife, not a Slave, Don Harrigo.


Har. That Is resolved as I could wish; and for the Country, it is no question
but it is as sweet as Lavander or Rose-mary can make it; but I think the Orange
and Jessamine in a bottle, and the Trees all the year in your house at Madrid,
as sweet as those in the hedges.


Serul. I, but to walk and gather these flowers, is there no pleasure in that?


Har. When? by Moonshine? I am sure you dare not meet Signior Sol abroad,
unless you will come home, like Rose-cakes from a Still, baked and sweating; which
though your dew be sweet (as common civility will make us allow that) yet it is
troublesome and a new sight to meet Ladies abroad, when the dogs cry as they
pass the streets, when to walk in your Court but two turns is evidence for
chastity, and out-does the old Law Ordeal: It Is enough for your Alphonso and
his Indian breeding to endure such stabs as the Sun strikes in the Dog Days;
it is true, they say he will beat the hoof in his woollen-hose, till his feet
sweat and stink more then a hunted Bores, and are fain to be steeped at night
as long as the Beef, ere they be fresh again; this commonly out of freedom is
done in my Wives Chamber; and if he be kind, and dares trust you, perhaps he
desires you to cut his Corns and dress his Issue, signs of favor I can assure
you; and such as you must not hope, unless your woman be out of the way; and
that honor being passed, the Giant stretches himself, yawns and sighs a belch
or two, stales in your pot, farts as loud as a Musket for a jest; and then
throws himself under the Rug, and expects you in his foul sheets, and aspitting
cloth, where hangs as much of his Lungs as remains in his body; and ere you
can get into the bed he calls you with a snore or two; and are not these fine
things in a Ladies bed? who would not rejoice to meet his woollen-waste-coat
and knit-night-cap without a lining? a shirt so nasty a cleanly Ghost would
scarce appear in at the latter day; for his linen is a kin to him ere he puts
it off; thus prepared for delight you Ladies meet your Country-husbands; the
Alphonso, high shoes; and there lie and suffer them to abuse you as often as
they please to use you, which you will too late repent; and there you may lie and
sight whole nights away, he will snore and snore till it be day under the same
covers, and in the same bed his forefathers lived and died in, and some so
lately you may smell the very earthiness of the Corpse still; and it is a better
savor then his arms or breath, a stink composed of vile Tobacco and dead Wine,
stuffed nose, rotten lungs, and hollow teeth, half whose number has been drawn
with dry Cheese, and tuff lean beef; yet this man you must kiss; nay, you must
kiss none but this, and muzzle through his beard to find his lips; and this you
can submit to for threescore year for a jointure; which you must purchase too;
for he sells you that and this Paradise, his bed, for the price of your portion
only; and in strict sense you give him so much to lie with him as long as he
lives; for unless he dies you have nothing but a place in his Family, and so
has his dog, who shall have a pension as well as you; for in these bargains of
Wedlock the Wife is to the portion only the handful over measure; a Chattle
that he takes to stock his Family, as other Cattle to stock his ground; nay,
perhaps he is a blade too, and then you may spin at home, while he is abroad
with Phillis in the field; by which you find, the Alphonso's are as subject to
the ills you dread, as the Thomaso's; only, as I said before their differences
is, the Alphonso's are more nasty lusts, and cheaper Whores, and the sin more
dirty there then in the City.


Serul. Sir, By this I gather a kind of necessity of being miserable; either
way affords precipices enough to make a Maid tremble ere she makes a choice.


Har. Therefore from frail men choose the least or best ill; take such a
Gentleman as my friend, that you know has wit and honor, and a passion for
you; one that you see has lived and maintained himself in spite of cross fate;
and though he has lost his fortune, it is with honor enough; never burthening
any with his wants, without cheating or tricks, one stained with no base
action, his name and honor still clear and fair both with his Prince and
Comrades; and when your kindness has added a fortune to his experience, his
grateful heart will be eternally obliged to you, and so busy to serve you and
justify your choice to the world, so industrious to deserve new favors as
well as pay the old, that 'twill be a joy to your soul to see. What cares Don
Alphonso for you or your opinion? sick or well, live or dye, he is prepared; the
funeral cloak is brushed and laid up for the good day; and if you dye, it is
upon your own account, for he is sure of your Portion; and your Jointure serves
again, never the worse for wearing; and will bait the hook for some other fool
to bite at.


Serul. And none but fools are taken with such baits, nor none but mad folks
suffer such chains; I am yet free, and will be, from all such slavery.


Har. In serious earnest, Madam, it is nobler far to buy a friend whom you
affect, though at price of your fortune, then to be chaffer'd or sold to
slavery by friends, who only think upon joining wealth to wealth; with my
friend you command as much as you must obey there; Don Thomaso has seen the
world, and gathered from every Nation what is excellent, and can comply with
times and natures, for he has been bred in Courts and Armies, those schools of
the mind, where men learn to tame their wills and pasons; for Princes are to be
studied and obeyed, not disputed with; with him you will know no cause of dispute;
with the other you must expect perpetual civil war, a sullen, rude, louring,
willful, scowling clown, from whom if you escape blows, it is well; an unhew'd
rudeness, whose very kindness bruises; that when he but strokes or flatters his
dogs, they cry, This will seek and bring all that is pleasure home, either in
humor or conversation, to divert you; the one will devour this youth and
beauty that flows with such grace in every form and feature in that lovely body
and diviner face, like common food, for his dull appetite, without a thought or
value of the feast you set before him; while Don Thomaso with awe and respect
and faithful kindness from a ravished soul enjoys you. Alphonso, Don Indian! By
this light, he thinks he is trading at Gamba still, and would sell you, himself,
that Bell and Bauble for your youth and fortune; it is his last venture, and
you will make a voyage if he catch you.


Serul. I am not desperate; nor find no such disease in a single life, as to
drink this poison to become such a wife; when I find my self desperately sick,
and nothing else can please, I Will send for a Priest and change the disease.


Har. Faith, Madam, and Marriage is one disease which women are necessitated to
pass; for an old Maid is an evil without a remedy; an ill husband may be cured
by a divorce, but there is no flying the other curse; a kind husband is the best
cordial you can provide against infection of Marriage; and if you should be
sick or sad (which heaven defend) Thomaso would so divide your griefs with a
kind sense of what you suffer, so pity your pain, so feel all your griefs, that
you will find sadness vanish, and sickness it self decay, while health, perfect
health, by kindness charmed, returns; and you will find so much more pleasure to
walk with such a friend in one of his descriptions of a Garden* then in twenty
of Dameta's Orchards; and read in his relations the Histories of persons, times
and places; And such such minds, Madam, and such men, are fit for such Brides
as the Gentle Serulina; and they only make happy Hymen's; the rest but join the
sex and beast together; and such sordid coupling is base and mean, and the
herds afford as good Nuptials; this advantage Colonels (Madam) that have wit
and breeding may pretend above those who have nothing good but their Bond and
Jointure. Your servant, Lady; my hour is out, and so much shall serve for this
time.


[Exit Harrigo. She stands still with her eyes fixed on the ground, then walks
a little, looks after him, shrugs and shakes her head, till Calis pulls her by
the slieve. Call. Pray, Madam; where was father Harrigo's text? I hope he will
not find it in our family; after this counsel, it will be fool the first and
the second; and if he does, pray consider the Doctrine and use, how he cited
his Saint without a Calendar, urging his Thomaso still to prove his text, and
has so confuted Father Alphonso for Schism.


Serul. If I had been disposed to have listened to that clod in the Country,
what a character he had given him to have shook a resolution? but the truth is
there was no fear of that punishment; and this shower of reason has but given
growth to a former aversion.


Call. Marry Alphonso? such a wedlock would have more sins to answer, with him,
then adultery with another man; I had as live follow to the Hostel de dieu, to
waste your youth in vows there, a handmaid to Lazars and Cripples, as spend it
in such a Marriage.


Serul. There is no danger, Calis, of such a folly; and I cannot but wonder why
my Brother is so bent upon it, as to attempt the forcing of my consent; sure he
knows whose Daughter I am; and I have so much of the Father in me, as but for
modesty sake I should be very sensible of his unkindness, though I love him
with all the tenderness a Brother can expect from a Sister; but I Am resolved
not to make my self miserable to please him; and for my honor I shall always
be as much concerned in that as he, and will dye ere throw the least stain upon
our Family.


Calis. And this he knows, though Don John still sollicites him to a sudden
resolution; Diego says, he presses him to see you married, or put into a
Monastery, to avoid Don Thomaso's pretention, whose fortune he could never
brook.


Serul. A Monastery! I am like to make a good Nun; this passion is an excellent
ingredient for a Grate; no, Calis, I have a Saint of mine own to pray to; and
we will try whether our women's wit can be more ingenious, then his jealous, or my
Brothers angry fit; get me your old Coat and Veil to put over me; I have a a
design, if it take, will put all their kennel of spies to cold hunting.


Call. I am glad to see you intend your safety; for I do believe women may do
most of their own business upon earth themselves, if they would but leave the
^^inning, and try; wit and handsome, in good clothe, will do our ^^ness as well
as the Madona.


[Exe. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Thomaso, Cornelio and Harrigo. Thomaso dressing himself in his white
Suite and white Perriwig. Har. DId she not suspect at all?


Thom. Mahomet as soon as me in her bed, I am confident; the Queen was so kind,
and the sinest armful of sweet white sin I have clasped in Madrid; I could wish
I were black indeed, for her sake, I would have given her handsomely out of the
Angellica's present, and, By this light, she refused it.


Har. Why do you put on these clothes then?


Thom. To meet Paulina, who will be here in a minute; but I must be gone first,
and leave word I am upon the Piazza.


Corn. A pox upon her, I thought to have been so fine in these clothes to
morrow.


Thom. It Is but a little patience till the jest be over, and then they are
yours; this was a chance I could not foresee, nor neglect when kind fortune
presents; -- But all this while, Harrigo, you give me no account of our serious
business; what success had your Aside to Har. visit to the party?


Har. Come, dress you and walk, and you shall know all; I have been with her
and found her in a good humor, and I believe I left her not in an ill one; but
upon my word 'twas time, if not of the latest, for all your fooling; it is not
enough to value her in your heart, but to let her see it in your actions too,
unless you mean to quit the thought of it; women are not to divine a Lovers
mind; it is well they will answer when Love questions their heart.


Thom. I am of your mind; and this day I Will find some occasion to see her; I
forgot to tell you, Don Pedro and I are friends; I met him this morning at
Angellica's; and she made us embrace.


Har. Trust not that friendship; for I am confident he brooks neither of your
interests, either with his Sister, or his Mistress; and where he has an
advantage you will find it, I know Don John presses him hourly to a revenge; you
know the man and his nature, a most implacable enemy, I speak upon sure
grounds; and therefore dispatch your business with Serulina; such a jest, and
two hundred thousand crowns, will make one laugh and merry an age; those you
amuse your self with are only for the Prado, or to laugh an hour within a
Comedy; where you will see them better done too, and exceeded by the Mountebank; I
am your friend, else I should not take the privilege to say this.


Thom. Dear Harrigo, it is kindly said, and I am thine for it; and we will find
some hour, to day, that may be seasonable and safe to visit her; for I confess
to my friend, my journey hither was to see what success that amor could find;
(...) whose kindness I am more concerned then any man but your (...) shall
know; nor can this mist of rallery and mirth blind a friends eyes, to whom I
shall say, it is no more my nature then my interest, though I choose rather to
put it on then give any woman's pride the Gusto, to think, because I am poor
'twas in her power to despise me; but to my friend I shall still be free and
serious; come, we must be gone, to avoid Paulina's visit; I am too much out of
cash to accept her Bills of Love to be paid upon sight; her Sister has had all
my ready money.


Har. When the trick is known all the load will be laid on me for keeping your
counsel; and pray tell me, am I such a dull fool as you believed for continuing
kindness for this Girl? By my life, I would not change her friendship with any
she in Madrid, if her spirit were not so furiously raging sometimes.


Thom. I love a froward Girl, a storm for variety; and it is Comedy to kiss
them when they scratch, and see how quickly a calm will follow their tears and
anger.


[Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Scarramucha and the Mountebanks People, preparing the Stage, as
formerly, and diverse Mutes, Men and Women, for Spectators. Scarr. COme, make
haste, you see the company begins to gather; is my Master returned yet?


Serve. No, Sir; he is gone to prepare a pair of Bathes in some private place,
and has left my Mistress with the old Lady within, she asks for you.


Scarr. It Is well, I Will attend her; salute the Gentlemen now that you may take
leave of them and Scarramucha with a good grace. Now I love you; excuse him,
Gentlemen, pray now; for his mind does so run upon a Lady, that he forgets his
respect to me, his old Master.


[Exit Scarramucha. Enter Serulina and her Maid; she is dressed in an old Coat
and Scarf of her Maids, and mingles her self with the Crowd. Serul. There Is
few or no company come, let us walk a turn toward the Church. --


Enter Thomaso, Cornelio, Harrigo, and meet her as she goes off. Call. See,
there he is, and his friend with him.


Serul. It Is he, be sure to speak with him ere he goes off the place, and take
some opportunity to give him that Letter.


[As they pass they gaze one upon another. Thom. There is one of our Tribe,
Hall; and a man were in stock, what commodities he might take up of this kind,
and at good rates too! -- How now? another? By this light, I must get a switch
to keep them off; now, your business, fair one? Calis follows and pulls him by
the slieve.


Call. I have some, Sir, and it is serious; which I would impart to you if you
please but to follow me to yon Church.


Har. You had best retire betimes ere they pull thee in pieces; you see what
it is to have the reputation of a sufficient man among these Merchants; 'twill
be long enough ere they come to offer their war to me thus.


Thom. Sweet Saint, or sinner; I am now, and have lately been so busy I have
no leisure to make a new friendship; it is all I can do to keep credit with my
old friends; if I had but a little little corner of a heart to spare thou
should have it for kindness sake; but ask this noble Gentlemen, a friend of
mine, if there be not, at this minute, staying in my Chamber one of Venus
Creditors dunning my sheets, for a promise, and I am now going to pay a debt I
owe upon my honor; else I were your man, Courteous and kind; Another time
command me.


Calis. Sir, my business is worth your serious thoughts; I have a letter for
you.


Thom. Nay, if it be from a writing Lady, she will never find me at leisure to
read her two leaved books; Those humble Ladies that write first, their wits are
best when their Faces are at worst; it is fair, if the fair will answer us; and
I dread to find a Lady that dedicates her self, thus, by Epistles to a man; if
it be haste give it to one of my Friends, I Will try if I can persuade one of
them to know your business.


Cornel. Let Us see your face Mistress; come, show a sample of the goods you
sell; would you have us buy a Goose in the Feathers? a woman in a dream is
worth a hundred of those visions; till this shell, this vail be off, who knows
what Kernel your Nut holds?


Thom. Where shall I meet you, Harrigo, an hour hence?


Harr. Con and I must go about our business, for an hour; then I am for you;
where you will appoint.


Thom. I Will call you at home --


[Exeunt Harrigo and Cornelio. Thomaso enters into the Angellica 's house.
Serul. What house is that he entered? follow, and give him the letter, or wait
his coming out; I Will home, and Expect you; dear Calis, make haste; tell him
'twas I that saluted him; and if he wonder why I was in this habit, satisfy
him I am to make a private devotion to Saint Cecilia's Altar this Night.


Calis. I Will obey you; but he is so full of his wild humors still it is ten to
one but he makes sport with me again, before I can deliver it.


Serul. Prithee make haste, lest he pass before you speak with him; you know
how much it concerns me; if it take, We shall be too hard for my Curious
ill-natured Brother, and his furious friend.


[Exit Calis. As she goes out she meets her Brother, Don Pedro, and Carlo.
Pedro. Who was that? how she eyed us? See, she looks back still.


Serul. If he follows me I am undone for Ever.


[Exit Serulina. Carlo. She Is right, I warrant her, and some one that knows
you.


Pedro. It Is the Angellica by her Tallea; She told me to day she would go
abroad this afternoon; that Coat and Scarf betrays her, for those shoes and
feet are not of a piece; some knavery in design, who e're she be, I warrant her.


Carlo. Let Us follow her, and be certain who it is; See where she Sails; We may
fetch her up yet e're she doubles yon Cape; she looks back as if she were
willing to be chased, and boorded too, I warrant her Prize; If you will not
chase with the Admiral, let your servant Carlo chase with his Frigate of Cupids;
I Will make her spread all her Canvas, but I Will speak with her; It Is no matter
for Commission; Pirat is as good Title to these Carvels, as lawful men of War.


Pedro. See, she stops, and looks back still; follow aloof, Carlo; I Will see who
it is.


[Exit Pedro. Carlo. What a task it were to make this Don Chaste, or Constant?
now is he as mad upon planting this new Island, as the Angellica's continent;
another thousand Crowns I foresee in Plantation; he is taken with the prospect
already; a good Eye, and a white hand, a straight Instep, and a clean pastern,
a pair of good feet, the Rogue will follow them to a precipice; Now must I
follow, and when he has set the Partridges, draw the Curtains about them; for I
warrant her lie whilst a man may draw a sheet over her; and 'twere not ill
sport, in payring time, to hawke these manned whores, but that they are subject
to be green-tayl'd too.


[Exit Carlo. Enter Serulina and Johanne, at several doors. Scarr. within, What
ho, down with our Banks, Excuse our Patron to the Gentlemen; he is detained by
urgent occasion.


Serul. I am lost, sure he knows me, he follows so fast; it is impossible to get
home before him, other place I know none, nor where to retire, but to a Church,
and there the liberty of being free with women will make him certainly discover
me; Is there no door open, no house I could shelter my self in, till he be
passed? see, he comes, something I must resolve.


[Exit Serulina. Just as she goes out, Johanne comes in at the same door, and
Pedro at the other. Pedro. There she goes again; it is the Angellica, I see by
her step; I Will follow her, for that look; she has some Roguery in Chase.


(Johanne looks after her. Johan. If I were not busy now, there were a
Fortune, she looks back; I, sweet soul, I would follow thee with all my heart,
but that I have business; is it not pity such Love-Beggars should want an Alms?
if I were as able as Charitable, Not a poor whore in Madrid should want a
kindness; See, Don Pedro is leering after her; Now Sir, you are stalking, I see
the Game before you; by this light, he will draw a whore dry foot.


Pedr. It Is a pretty wench, by the list; if the Cloth be as good, I am her Man
too; It Is some of our Friends in disguise; she gave me the sign thrice; prithee
let me go, e're she be out of sight.


Johan. Never fear her; She Will stop at every Streets point; but to our
business; it is certain Harrigo has been with your sister, this morning, from
Don Thomaso.


Pedro. Prithee meet me at the Caletravoes, and we will talk at large of it; but
I must needs see who this is.


[Exit Pedro. Johan. Would any man think he had paid a thousands Crowns this
Morning for a Woman's Friendship that he dotes upon, that should see him
stepping from his first visit; thus hot in pursuit of a Fresh design, that
shows a true-bred, Stanch, stout lover, Cupids Kennel love to change.


[Exit Johanne. Enter Serulina. Serul. He pursues me still; If he speaks to me,
in this disguise, I am lost, nothing less then certain death to be expected
from his Fury; I know his jealousy has contracted a hatred against me; it is
neither my Innocence, nor Justice can protect me; There is no disputing his
rage when it is armed with power, and privilege to destroy; which the base
Custom of this Nation assumes; and under, pretense of Honor Act all barbarous
power, even to murder upon Women; And so they can but tell a specious tale of
honor, they are excused, and we condemned; See, fortune, kinder then I
expected, offers a relief, here is a door Open; I Will enter, and shut it after
me; why should I dispute it? what danger can I apprehend worse then his fury?
this will at least shelter me from his pursuit; he will not be so impudent to
ask for one he knows not, however my necessity has no choice; Love be thou
propitious; and let once oppressed virtue find thee and Fortune kind; else, who
will wonder if we stray, or lose the way, when both our guides are blind.


[Exit Serulina. Enter Don Pedro, gazing up and down to find Serulina, whom he
has lost; he looks up at the windows, and in all the doors about him. Pedro. To
this place I followed her; she is entered some of these houses, or turned short
that damned Lane; a Pox of Johanne, his prating has lost her; perhaps she is
gone up the Lane to yonder Church, I Will see; if I retrive her, she is mine.


[Exit Pedro. ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Edwardo in his Drawers and Wastcoat, a Sword and Belt, and a Book in his
Hand. Edw. SO, now I am a little at peace; it is some consolation to my mind,
the hopes of a Revenge; would my Clothes were come home, that I might quit my
Fresco; yet this time I may waste to my advantage, by contemplating and
Philosophying upon my own misfortunes; a young handsome Whore to use me thus! a
young Dissembler must be an old Witch; if I had got my Night for my money it
would never have grieved me; how like a Boatswain I am clothed, and I have a
heart now as hard as any the Galley breeds; I grow malicious too, and am mad,
to see Thomaso's fortune; The Rogue is so succesful; All Trumps turn of his
Suit still; That black Periwig (a mischance as we thought, and laughed at) has
got as good Fish as any Hook he threw into the Sea, this Voyage; Well, all I
beg of Fortune is, but to send some one of the Sex into my power; Any thing in
Petticoats, that may be at my mercy: By this light, a Cat at Tower-wharf, or a
Cavalier at Westminster, a Whore in Bridewell, or a Bear at Stake in
Whitsontide, shall find more mercy than I Will show her: How many ways have I
killed that Sanco and Lucetta over, in my mind, since last night? I Will send
for a Bottle of Consolation; what cordial comfort, I and counsel too, have I
found in Sack! I shall be mad, if I stay at home, and think upon my injuries,
without it; here is a damned Book too tells me how to avoid such accidents now
when it is too late; by which I find, it is not amiss sometimes to read as well
as hawk or hunt; and yet it is some comfort to find some others have been ill
used before me; and now I have nothing to do I Will pass my time with other men's
injuries, and learn all the causes I can to hate this damned Nation, and the
false sex.


[He lies down and reads. Enter Serulina. Serul. It Is a handsome house, and no
body in it; yes, there is one, what is he doing? Armed in his Drawers, some
Master of Defense, or else a Tumbler; what ere he be I must speak to him --
Sir, if your study be not very importunate, pray let me divert you. She goes to
him.


[Edwardo looks upon her and srowns, and then looks round the Room. Edw. Ha! a
woman, and alone! Fortune thou art kind. -- What miserable thing art thou?


[He rises and takes hold of her. Serul. Your charity, Sir, guesses right: a
most unfortunate person; a Virgin, Sir, in distress, that is forced to seek
protection, though a stranger, from your roof; and if you favor not, she is
lost for ever.


Edw. What strange Curse can threaten thee worse than to be thrown thus into
the dangers of this place? Do thou know, wretched thing, where thou art? Does
not thy heart bode the ill, that is hanging over thy head? Do not observe me,
and the posture thou find'st me in?


Serul. Your words and posture, both, beget my wonder: But alas, Sir, I had no
choice of safety; either I must find it in this house, or fall into the hand
of ^^ mortal Enemy, from whose rage and power I was to expect nothing less than
a present death. But why you should threaten my misery with new fears, my
innocence is yet ignorant of the cause, my heart being guilty of no one injury
done you by this visit.


Edw. From death you are pretty safe, my anger is not mortal; but for the rest,
if any of your sex ever found a more implacable Enemy, let the Hangman shave my
throat.


Serul. Sir, as you are a Gentleman, I conjure you, consider, ere your passion
transports you. -- Why are you so barbarous to abuse a Maid, fled to you for
protection?


[He pulls her. Edw. Yes, yes, talk: I would fain see one of your sex talk me
into a faith again; Innocent, quoth you! so was I; come, no resisting; By this
light I Will bang your bones, if either you make a noise, or struggle: What a pox
are you grown so impudent as to follow me into my house? Is the fool so visible
in my forehead that you dare attach me here? Enrage the Boar, and pursue him to
his den? Am I such a Du-pe, as to be robbed and coozen'd thrice in a day? Come,
come, off with this Hood. He pulls and tears it, and kisses her.


Serul. You are a barbarous person; and I doubt not but Heaven will protect me
from you.


Edw. As barbarous as I can be; I Will assure you, I Will kiss, and see thee; not
that I care a rotten Orange for it; Nay, I will ly with thee too, and yet you
are never the safer from my anger; nay, I Will show one Whore how another has
used me; I Will even treat you upsie-dock, for I can kiss, and rob, and kiss, and
beat a Whore too, as well as she did me, and strip you too at noonday, as I
was at midnight, and turn you into the street for Flies to sting and boys to
hoot; Come along, or by this light I shall flatter you with such claps as will
make your ears ring.


Serul. Hold Sir, why do you pull me? Though you be angry, yet hear me speak;
you know I am not guilty of the injuries you have received, and 'twill be most
inhumane to revenge your self upon me; this is such a treachery, to set your
doors open of purpose to betray the wretched that fly for sanctuary to you; why
this violence? your eyes and Reason may tell you, I am not acquainted with such
barbarous usage: As you have honor, or any thing of gentle in you, consider,
ere you let your rage proceed to further injury: Do not mistake me for one of
those vile women; For by all those holy things, I vow, there is nothing
innocenter than my self; and this visit only a chance, and a sad one too;
Necessity, dire necessity, to save a life and honor, which were both at stake,
made me enter your doors.


Edw. Persuade me it is night, Tell me I dream, or my beard is gray; any thing
shall find faith as soon as the tears, prayers, or flattery of a Spanish woman;
a race of young dissemblers, false and bloody, in their youth, to weep my Purse
out of my Pocket, and flatter me into a beating! young Devils, to abuse a
stranger for being kind only; And I be not revenged upon all your sex, let me
pass for a tame fool -- Come, or by this Hilt I shall bang you with this
Scabbard, good Devil. She strives, and he pulls her.


[Enter Ferdinando. Ferd. How now, what Scene's this?


Edw. Fred, thou art come in the nick. A prize y faith.


Ferd. What, she is in love too? One of a great Family, that is fain to steal a
visit; some one whose passion has transported her beyond the bounds of modesty
and custom? Is It not so, fair one? or some mighty concupiscence which
Petticoats cannot tame.


Edw. No, she is one that is pursued by some near a kin, a Husband or a Brother,
and was fain to take sanctuary here at Fools Haven; and this poor innocent
simple young virgin had been murdered, but that by miracle she found the way to
pick the Lock of our Door, where she will find such a Sanctuary. Death, to me
for protection? As if fine words and tales could delude the Fool again! No,
young one, curse thy self, for the world shall not save thee, nor any thing in
Spanish Petticoats find mercy here, not a cloven Saint, no, not the Madona,
unless she were disguised.


Ferd. Now Lady fair, is this the story?


Serul. Yes Sir, and a most sad and serious truth.


Fred. She sighs; Take heed, Ned; this is in love with thy skin, she will flay
thee; if thou trust her, there are of her Tribe about the Town such excellent
Thieves they will geld a man ere he feels them: I have heard of one that robbed a
man's mouth, while he slept, of a row of teeth; another stole Jack Smith's Eye
out of his Head at noonday, and he never missed it till he felt the cold; Nay,
she made him buy it again; This is true, Dame, as nice as you make it.


Serul. Sir, some such ill women, void of honor and shame, there may be; but
why you should be so hasty to condemn me for one of them is most uncharitable,
till you have cause for your fears; have I asked ought of you, or injured the
place more than by putting my unfortunate foot in your house; nor that, but to
have saved a life that was pursued.


Ferd. Come, come, be real and confess, for this Trick will not pass upon us:
why here? why in this house? inhabited by strangers only, that neither knew
nor practiced with any of you till yesterday, and see how we are used! Behold
that wrack, a tall ship well rigged, and a good fraught when he put out of
Port, and see how a she-Pyrat of this Isle of Rogues has used him, but for
sailing one Tide in your Streights; all to be beaten and plundered, and set a
shore for Dutchmen; but if he will be ruled by me, you shall curse the story:
By this hand we'll both ly with her, one will be enough to beat her.


Edw. That I promised her before you came; Little one it is resolved you must
pay this score: Honor, Revenge, and Pleasure, all three condemn you to the
Couch within.


Ferd. Else we shall be alone the sport of the Prado; and the blind Fiddler,
who would else have roasted none but the Englishmens names upon his Lanteer,
now the spit shall turn with a new tune; I would Thomaso were here to see us
towse this Quarry, in revenge of our affront -- Come Sweeting, cry, I, I, poor
virgin in They both pull her. distress; rude fellows to pull thee thus, and
please thee against thy will. Cog, cog.


Serul. Do you know Don Thomaso the English Colonel?


Edw. Know him? yes: I would he were here, he would have a leg or a wing of
thee, Chicken; but it is as well, we'll leave him some of the Carcass till he
come home, he is not so nice-stomack'd, but he may make a Collation upon a cold
Whore and a Sallad.


Serul. For his sake, I conjure you, if you be Friends, use me civilly; and I
am confident he will take it kindlier than if you should pursue this barbarous
humor,; what is passed I can forget, because I have heard something of your
story; and if you be that Englishman that was abused, I confess I do not wonder
to find you thus enraged; 'twould make a better nature than you profess think
of their revenge; and when he comes, if you repent your delay of Justice upon
me, I am still in your power to be used as barbarously as he or you shall
decree.


Edw. She speaks sense, but it is out of time, and I am deaf to all but revenge;
I care not to be just or gallant; I Will be revenged on all the sex, Angels in
face and voice, but Devils in their hearts; I thought I had made a friendship
with a Saint, so young, so innocent; when the dissembling Whore would have
coozen'd a Jesuit, false and bloody as the common Stews.


Serul. Be you my Judges, my innocence dares appeal to your rage, for the worst
that that and malice can say; when you have listn'd to all that anger can
prompt you to, suppose me the worst of women, sent upon the blackest Errands,
you must confess my journey was either to prostitute my self for moan you lust;
one of these base causes is the worst your heart can think me guilty of; Now to
clear my self from those crimes, and to assure you I am fallen by chance into
this misery, take this Diamond, it is of no common price, I freely give it as a
Pledge of my Innocence, and a price to purchase only your delay of revenge
till Thomaso comes; and if he does not allow of my protection, let me suffer
all your displeasure threatens; you see I am so confident of my innocence, I
refer my self to be judged by your Friend.


Edw. It Is a Diamond. Hum, Fred, This mollified a little; it is strange how much
more sense this Diamond speaks than her tears or prayers.


Ferd. This Ring makes her sense plain, which was hard before; and do you hear,
Ned, 'twould vex us to be hanged for ravishing an honest woman, when we think
we only towse a Drab; and but a scurvy Why-not, to oversee a Gallows so.


Edw. A pox upon her, I cannot believe she is real; what if this Ring be false?
They are all dissemblers; the other talked as parlously as this, and gave me a
chain too; as false metal as her self, Gipsey


Ferd. However, there is nothing lost but time in this venture.


Edw. Well, I Will once break a resolution, and delay my revenge, for an hour;
come, I Will see you safe in my Chamber till your Friend comes; but I Will make
bold to keep you Company, lest you play another Cats Trick, and leap the window.


Serul. And if I escape this storm I Will no more to Sea, blind Love in thy Idol
Name, To hazard Honor; Life and Fame.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Thomaso and Harrigo, and meet Johanne with Don Pedro. Thom. DOn Pedro,
What occasion stops you here, Sir? will you do us the favor to see our house?
it is the poor habitation of strangers; We boast nothing Extraordinary; and for
Furniture, so the Kitchen and the Cellar be well, if the Bottles be good, the
Bed cannot be ill.


Pedr. It Is more then you know, Don Thomaso, what furniture you have in your
house; for if I mistake not there is a moveable more then you imagine, and now
I am confident she is entered here; We followed a pretty woman, and (as near as
I can guess) to your door, before I lost sight of her; she gave the sign at
every Turning.


Thom. Upon my life it is the same I saw in the Piazza; If you please to go in,
we will inform our selves better.


[Exeunt Omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Edwardo, Serulina, and Ferdinando. Edw. QUick Fred. look out, I heard
some body open the Streetdoor.


Ferd. It Is Thomaso, and strangers with him, some of the same Crew we had the
Quarrel with; Don Pedro what do you call his Name? he is one of them.


Serul. Don Pedro? As you have Honor, By all that is dearest unto you, let him
not see me; I conjure you, be not Calmly barbarous; though your Rage has
wronged me yet now you are collected, be not so inhumane as to Expose me to
misery, for your sport only.


Ferd. By this light, she is really Concerned, I see now, by her Paleness; poor
Girl, Come be not afflicted; by my life, he shall neither see thee nor Injure
thee here; come be confident: poor Rogue how she shakes!


Serul. Sir, I Will take your word, and if I live I Will deserve this Favor from
you; And now I consider your Friend better, it calls to mind a former injury,
so freshly acted that I cannot but wonder what Star makes me thus subject to
him? and though I take no delight in Revenge, yet I would not have him urge me
too far.


[Exit Serulina. Ferd. What was it she said?


Edw. I neither know nor care.


Enter Thomaso, Don Pedro, Don Johanne. Thom. Ned, see here are friends of
yours come to give you a visit; They heard you kept your Chamber.


Pedro. Sir, I am both sorry and ashamed for your injury; But since you know
who did it I shall gladly have the Honor to join in your Revenge.


Edw. Why faith, it is Lovers luck: but I should not have seen you so
confidently as I do, in this Garb, But that I am upon better terms with the Sex
then I hoped this morning; for here is one of the foolishest, or else
unlucky'st wenches fallen into my mercy, that ever was hid under the Curse of a
Petty-coat; By this light she found me and set upon me alone, and braved me
here in my Chamber; an Impudent tear-sheet; and if I had not been armed she
would have ravished me; she knows you both, and pretends some interest in Don
Thomaso; but, for your part, she will not see you; her cover is none of the
best, but she is fine and clean underneath.


Thom. It Is the same.


Edw. I have taken out Letters of Mart for reprisal against her; and vowed to
make a voyage upon her, e're she go out again; yet she eats nothing but Bread
and Water till she pay it, nor shall she lie alone neither.


Ferd. He had boarded her e're I came up; so she ransomed her self with this
Diamond; but she is only Repriv'd till you come, she says you will be her Bail.


Pedro. Hang her poor whore, some common Carryon; she would never haunt your
house else; it is some hungry Kite you see, she flies at all; your ring is
likely to be a good one, when she had rather give it then lie with you.


Thom. Ned, take my counsel; hide your Ring and deny this story as you love
your Credit; Two such affronts in one day! for the Nations sake hide them
before the Boys come to know it; robbed and beaten by one Whore, and another
rather pay then have you do her work; where is she, Fred?


Ferd. In Neds Chamber, will you go and see her? I have engaged my self you
must not; But you may peep, or so.


Thom. Give me the key.


Pedro. If I but see a Glimpse of her Face, I can tell whether she be a Wench
of any Garb or no.


Thom. Follow me, Sir; and when I go in I Will plant my self so, that when she
discovers her face to me you may see her.


Exit Thomaso, and Pedro peeps after him. Pedro. A pox on her for a crafty
Queen; she has turned her back to the door; there is no knowing her.


Ferd. It Is no great loss if you lose the sight; she has been here this hour,
yet I was not so curious to lift up her veil; Come, Don Harrigo, We have a
Bottle or two in Fresco, let us waste the time with that; and when Thomaso comes
we shall hear all the story; if she prove prize, Harrigo shall receive his
Majesty's tenths and fifteens.


Harr. No, Sir, I am not for that Game; I hate such hawking at the Bush with
those Bob-tails; Give me a long-wing'd Hawke, a high flying whore, it is sport
to see her stoop.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Serulina and Thomaso. Serul. NO more excuses, Sir; I am satisfied, 'twas
all full of chance; no intention of any injury to me, this habit and the
license of the place was only guilty; and it is all forgot, though my part had
like to have been sad; and those clouds and fears that darkened my mind this
morning, this joy, to find you the same we parted, has quite dispersed; nor
will I fear the frowns or storms that any man can threaten, since you are
satisfied; whose protection and opinion is all I would seek or find amongst
men; yet, in kindness and civility to my Brother, I would not have him see me
here; it is not handsome so to declare against a Brother; and though his anger
be an usurped power, it will be more modesty to suffer such a tyranny then to
war against it.


Thom. I am yet so confounded and surpised with my joys, so amazed to meet you
here, I can scarce settle my heart into a faith of what I see. The Sea works
still, though the storm be past; and my heart trembles to think what a danger
you have escaped, knowing the nature and the rage that now possesses both my
friends; to which is added the accident of your Brothers being within, my soul
feels the horror still; what strange misfortune directed your feet, in that
hour of mischief, into this danger; yet if self interest could govern me, I
have cause to rejoice; this storm having wrought through a thousand
impossibilities, and procured a blessing for which I, in vain, have labored
many years, and now possess with fears and doubts; for I was never so vain as
to believe I deserved this honor from you, nor never had a thought so insolent
as durst assure me I should be happy; yet, it is truth, I always adored you
above your sex, and still gazed upon the virtuous Serulina, as that divine
person from whom I was to believe and expect all that kindness honor and
justice could prompt her heart to; and see how those vows and that faith, have
not only paid but exceeded all my hopes, and, heaven knows, surpised my very
wishes; for which goodness, at your feet thus I throw your servant, bound by
gratitude with eternal vows of faith, to adore the virtuous and fair Serulina;
but we must be Thomaso kneels. short, and silent, Madam; lest the dangers from
within by some new mischief interrupt our joys: for I Am of your opinion, your
Brother should not know you are here; nor dare I any longer delay the incensed
mind of Edwardo, whose late injury has made him a beast, and ready to act all
inhumane things upon your sex; which danger I must prevent.


Serul. I confess, when Edwardo was alone, I had some apprehension, because I
had formerly known him by that accident that befell in my garden, where he
showed a most untamed nature, whom neither danger, reason, nor tears could
soften; but when Ferdinando came in I then took courage; for you seldom read of
two men so wicked by chance, as to act or consent to such crimes as Murder, or
Rape, where the looker on grows as guilty as the actor.


Thom. I beseech you, Madam, let me interrupt your discourse; lest while we
talk of passed dangers, those that are upon the way and drawing near surprise
us; your Brother is without, and expects me; pray be pleased to hide your self
in your veil, and shut the door till I return, who will with all possible
diligence disperse the company within and wait upon you.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Don Pedro, Edwardo, Johanne and Ferdinando. Pedro. WEll, Gentlemen, I Will
take my leave of you; I see Don Thomaso is pleased with his visit; and 'twill
be but an ill complement to speak in his draught; upon the Piazza this evening,
I Will meet you and hear his adventure.


Ferd. Nay, faith, never part till he comes; we will have only one bottle more,
and then I Will call him; Pox on her, it is some crafty Whore, and hopes to
flatter and mollify him; for he is such a good natured fool she will persuade him
to any thing.


Edw. Let them both use their best Oratory, try if they can prevent her walking
in Fresco this evening, with a most large Paper on her back full of causes why.


Pedro. We Will expect your prize in Spasso, I Will seek out one of your Ballads
against you come; you will have leisure to write the second part your self; I Will
warrant you 'twill sell.


Edw. Would there were no worse in the business; but I believe I shall scarce
get a thousand crowns by my Ballad; though I Am sure I paid little less for the
subject.


[Exe. Pedro and Johan. Ferd. What a pox can he be doing all this while with
that poor Devil?


Edw. Come, let us beat up's Quarters; what if she have cut his throat, and
leaped out at the window? I imagine all mischiefs from all women; yet this is a
fine straight tree, I long to be gathering some of her fruit, I could clasp her
Bool, and clime her with a good will yet for all my anger. -- See, here he
comes. Well, Sir, how Enter Thomaso. goes matters? what, you are charmed, I
see; wounded as a man may say, or stroak'd into a calm; not one wrathful billow
appears.


Ferd. He looks so serious as if we were to beseech him to let us take our
turns; come, the story; be quick, for we must have our hour too.


Thom. Where are the rest of the company?


Ferd. Harrigo left us as soon as you. Don Pedro staid the share of two
bottles; we laughed a spell with old Ned, and parted; he will meet us on the
Piazza; I believe it is a good fellow enough, if his mind were quiet; but I
perceive by his discourse he is jealous you have too much interest with
Angellica, which he can scarce digest.


Edw. He drank her health, and pledged for you; he took it kindly, your leaving
him there to day; but this is from my business; what a pox have you done with
our small sinner all this while? her time of execution draws near; if you did
but see the Paper within which Fardinando has writ, and I mean to nail upon her
shoulders with some Lath-nails when I turn her out, 'twould make you laugh to
read the causes; prithee say, has she clean linen? do thou think she is
sound? if I should go now to revenge one mischief, and get another, I should
curse my self.


Thom. Stay here, and I Will satisfy your Question.


Exit Thom. Edw. What does he mean to be thus serious? By this light, I Will have
my revenge in spite of his heart; let him frown to the Devil.


Enter Thomaso with Serulina, she has put off her old Coat and Veil. Thom. Do
you know this Lady? -- nor you, Edwardo? They look upon her, and then upon each
other.


Ferd. I have seen that face, but where I cannot call to mind.


Edw. Nor I; yet there are dark lines in my memory that lead me to her face;
it is not Lucetta I am certain.


Thom. I shall remove this wonder with another; have you never heard me mention
the name of Serulina. Horrid beasts! are you not both struck with the judgment
of this vision? -- Does not your black breasts accuse you of all the villainy
most barbarous Both of them -- Serulina -- aside. men can be guilty of? what
misery can this oppressed innocence inflict, that your own souls will not say
you ought to suffer? what mercy can you hope from this provoked virtue, whose
barbarous breasts, even forgetting her sex, could proceed to threaten blows,
which she could have suffered too with less affliction then those wounds your
rage and lust imposed? Fred. you saw her this morning in Don Harrigo's company;
could you so soon forget her and your self? I should be loath to find you
guilty of any malice; it is as much as your ignorance can do to plead that we
are friends; for him, he was a beast in his wine, before, as much as in his
rage, now; and both his injuries crimes to the law, not to our friendship; else
I should have found some other way to have expressed my sense of them.


Ferd. Sir, we are your friends, and reason may do much; but you must not think
to threaten us into a repentance; you know us both too well; yet I confess this
is a cause you may beat us in safe enough, though my part of the injury may
find excuse from her Veil, and the place I found her in; for, to be ingenuous
who would have looked for a person of honor in those clothes and your Chamber?
nor was her veil off; but when her fears and tears were on, which was such a
disguise I am ashamed to plead.


Edw. Madam, I am not yet so ill as to defend my faults; and though I cannot be
innocent I can repent my crimes; and I have now as much shame and sorrow as
there was wine or anger in my injury; and when I can serve you, you shall see
that sorrow express it self as highly your servant, as those crimes declared me
beast and madman. And if the fair Serulina will still be like the great
character Don Thomaso gave us of her, here we stand an object fit for such a
goodness; whose crimes are fit for such a mercy to exercise it self upon; and
for my part* I Will never rise from your feet till you forgive me, and command me
something to expiate my faults.


Serul. Pray, Sir, rise; for I am not now to be reconciled; your friend knows
my anger fell with my fears; nor can any man wrong me by chance; and I am
certain Don Thomaso could not make so ill a choice of friends, or converse with
men so wicked as would injure me when they knew me; and my faith is as
confident in my innocence as you can be in your carriage: and you see That
innocence has been, this day, successful, and overcome all the dangers blind
fortune threatened in this accident.


Ferd. Now am I such an Ass I cannot speak a word for my self: By this light,
Madam, I was never heartily ashamed before; the guilt of this action makes me
dumb; I shall never look upwards again till I have redeemed this fault.


Serul. If you will have me believe this sorrow real, I conjure you be still
kind to your friend; and to confirm you that I am reconciled, he shall tell you
what we have resolved on, in which you must both bear your parts; and when it is
past, if you will give me a visit at my house, I Will use you better then you
have done me for intruding into yours, though I will not promise to kiss you so
often.


Ferd. Nay faith, Lady, have mercy; we only pretend to that.


Serul. Why, and I hope a kiss will hurt neither of you.


Thom. Faith, they know not, for I believe they never kissed an honest woman
before; and for Fred, he is so little concerned in the sex, if he had been in
Paradise we had staid there.


Ferd. Because I do not talk so much as you do.


Thom. No, but because thou do nothing but talk; and I dare say, if thou were
as free from the sin of the Vine, as thou art from the Apple, thou might
safely return and claim the old Gardners place yet.


Edw. Prithee, let this subject pass; and give her this Ring again. By this
light, I dare not come so near as to do it my self.


Thom. No, no; give it her your self; you could towse her even now, and use her
like a poor Whore; tear her veil, kiss and threaten to beat her without any awe
or reverence to the majesty or divinity in that face or form; alas, it is the
same woman still, there is not a Poniard more in those eyes then when you saw
them weep, without remorse.


Edward. Though she be the same Excellency still, yet I am not the same Beast I
was; Prithee take it, and leave fooling; it is not friendly to urge a folly
thus, nor pursue a friend too far.


Thomafo. Nay, never hang a tail, but follow like your selves; See, Madam, the
later part of Rogues Restitution: This Ring, do you know it?


Serul. Yes, but I have no pretense to it now; Nor can I claim it, unless I
could pay back the price I received for it; It Is sold, Sir, and at a rate I
repent not.


Thomaso. Nay, Madam, now I am of their side; and hope you will not believe
them so little Gentlemen, as to keep any such mark of their crime to upbraid
them; This Ring will brand them worse then the Law in such a case; And I Will say
that for Ned, (and a pox take him) I know the Rogue will as soon wear the T and
the F in his hand, as this Ring on his finger; And I am so much his Friend, as
to desire you will receive it.


Serul. In earnest, I dare not, 'twill be an ill Omen to me; Should I take back
in safety what I gave with joy in Fears and Dangers, 'twere to repent my vows
when I have reaped the blessing; I am too superstitious to touch it, when I
eall to mind 'twas the price of my deliverance when both our Honors were at
stake.


Thomaso. Do you hear this? Well, Madam, what shall be done with it? Gentlemen,
you hear what the Lady says, which of you claims it? I Will only write his name
in Hebrew and restore it.


Edwardo. Madam, if you have any Charity left, pray take it for him; we must
fly the Country else, to avoid his bloody Jests.


Thomaso. Nay, faith; If neither of you will have it, what think you, Madam, of
giving me leave to offer it to St. Cecilia's shrine to morrow, in remembrance
of this deliverance upon her Eve, from two English Gentlemen, which shall be
hanged up in wax in her Chapel, with an Ex voto; A Spanish Miracle wrought by
the Saint upon an Essex Calf with two legs, possessed with a Colliar of Croyden.


Ferd. This is the Mercy we expect from such a Nature; Yet if I were better
acquainted with this Lady, I would ask her how she comes to forgive you so
easily, that are indeed the cause of the mischief? And in a Lover your crime is
greater then ours; and the neglect you have shown her a higher offense then
what we kneel for; our Insolence was a chance, and proceeded from Ignorance and
passion; for had we known her, we would have sacrificed our lives for her,
rather then have acted or suffered the least of those Crimes. But you that have
the Honor not only to be known, but esteemed by her, to be thus long in Town,
and never pay your own duty, nor inform us how we might pay ours, it makes it
our faults your guilt; You showed us all the Whores in Town, and were mad till
you had seen them your self; But, for this noble Lady, I never heard her
mentioned in Madrid; Had you paid that respect your Heart knows due to her, we
might have had, by such a visit, the Honor of being known to this Lady; which
would have given her Protection, and secured our Innocence. Do you blush? It Is
time; and if you had any grace, this Truth would be a Ring in your Nose, as
well as the other in ours. Good severe, small Friend, am I with you?


Edwardo. All blessings upon thee, for stinging him on that side; By this
light, my guilt has picked all the Guts out of my brains,


Thomaso. Show you this Lady? Prithee look upon her again, do you think your
selves fit conversation for her? No, Gentlemen, though I afford you my Company,
yet this is of another form; I showed you all my Whores, they were fit
conversation and acquaintance for you; Meat according to your palate, Souls and
Minds of the same size; This Virtuous Lady, what would you do with her? She Will
neither drink, nor swear; I dare say, Ned is the first that ever belched before
her, though she might have heard many men sigh; They are no such Dutch sour
ones, as your Beer breaks.


Edwardo. It Is well, Sir; you have the staff in your hand, and you use it.


Serul. Nay, now you are too severe, and I must take their parts; But it is no
matter, Gentlemen, what he says now; His first Character shall stand with me;
and for what is past, I assure you, it flies and dies with the hour it was
acted in.


Ferd. Your goodness, Madam, makes us blush, and ought to shame him too; But he
is so hardened, nothing can disorder him.


Thomaso. No more mutiny, lest I produce the Ring; This Diamond, Madam, will
work upon them like Medusa's Ass; And the Rogues are easily turned to stone;
For their Hearts are Marble already, though your goodness has forgiven it.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter Calis. Calis. NOt come home yet? Where can she be? I dare not see her
neither, till I have delivered this Letter; All things run cross to day, I
would they were honestly lost in the great bed at home; We shall never have
quiet hour till the Priest have knit a knot upon them, and thrown them into a
pair of sheets. There he is; I Will hold him with my teeth ere he scapes me.


Enter Ferdinando and Thomaso. Thomaso. Why I, Pout; I would not sup now, were
I Fred. Nor speak these two days; I would cry too, and not be styled with
plumms; What a pox would you have done to come off? Been grave and serious?
There is nothing you could have said would have made her so soon calm as seeing
me storm; And when you have read Women better, you will find it easier to make
them forgive ten faults committed against 'em, then forget one fault which they
commit. -- How now Child, at whose suit? what have we here, a cloven Alguazile?
Calis runs and catches hold on Thomaso.


Calis. Leave fooling, and read that, you know the hand; A mischief take me but
I Will burn it else; I have hunted Moonshine in the water for you all this day,
till my feet are so in Love, they are scarce sweet or sound.


Thomaso. Dear Calis, what news?


Calis. You are a kind man, you a Lover! A Woman has a fine time that affects
any Soldier of you all, with your Iron Minds, and tough Buff Hearts; You have
all got the Boys wings, feathered Lovers all; The Devil clip them for Calis.


Thomaso. Come, no more Anger; Dear Calis, your Letter is answered; at home you
will find your Lady, to whom you must make haste, she has business for you.


Calis. Have you seen her then?


Thomaso. Yes, and by a chance, which she will tell you; Here, Calis, wear this
Ring, you know whose 'twas; Your Lady will not be displeased to see it thus
disposed; there is a Story belongs to it, which you shall know hereafter;
Farewell, Dear Calis; be faithful still, and reap the Harvest of all those
Afflictions thou have sowed.


Calis. This was my Ladies Ring, I Will home and take my share of the Jubilee;
Farewell to you and your friend; methinks, you might have kissed me after five
years; you had wont to do it when you should not, and tell me 'twas the English
fashion; but I find we both grow old; Nay, now you shall not; there is neither
Grace nor savor in a kiss when a woman begs it.


[Exit Calis. Enter Carlo and peeps after her. Carlo. 'Twas Calis, and she gave
him a Letter but from whom; I can guess, though I do not know; What woman was
that he parted with at our door? 'Twas the same shoes and scarf we dogged from
the Piazza; I Will find Don Pedro, there is something in this worth his fears and
cares, if I guess aright. Carlo retires.


Thomaso. Come, let us haste to Harrigo's, and resolve with him what is best to
be done in our business: This Letter should have been given in the Morning;
it is Don Pedro's Resolution suddenly to put her into a Monastery, till she
consents to marry Don Alphonso.


Ferd. You are both fairly warned; and if you have not wit to prevent threatened
mischiefs, you will fall unpitied; Come, pray lose no time, but make use of her
kindness, before he does of his Power, to both your prejudices.


Thomaso. It Is resolved already, and with Harrigo you shall know all; We must
only get things ready for her design, it is she must Act; We must only be
diligent to attend her summons.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. VI.
Enter Angellica, Carlo, and Anna. Angel. NO more, Dear Carlo, it is but too
true; Don Pedro's discourse confirms it, and I am miserable; 'Twas he that
saved her in the sack of Pampelune, and it is my punishment to love one that
cannot be obliged; Yet I can bear his scorn, any thing but marry; though I know
he will never be mine, yet I cannot suffer the thought he should be another.


Carlo. If you expect Don Pedro, I Will stay; else, I must be gone and seek him;
for this is not a business to be delayed or slighted; It Is most certain, she
has a Passion for him; and the intelligence they hold, if not prevented, will
produce some sudden mischief.


Angel. Pray stay, I know he will not be long absent, unless this news meet and
divert him; As you love me be urgent in it; I Will tell him how much his Honor
is concerned, and how he is bound, in care and kindness to his Sister, to
provide against this danger as the greatest curse can threaten her life; You
see his Nature is unconstant, wild and rash, as common Bravoes.


Carlo. I shall be faithful and diligent in my part; but who can prejudice him
when you contribute such sums against your own Interest? But for these chances
he had sneaked long since; Leave him to his Fortune, and Poverty will quickly
deject him below the saucy thought of such a Woman.


Angel. I cannot repent any kindness I have done him; My fear is rather, that
Fortune will not have it in my power to oblige him. -- See here comes the man
you ask for.


Enter Don Pedro. Pedro. Carlo, how now? the news.


Angel. That which you have not a little apprehended: within you shall know all.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. VII.
Enter Saretta, Paulina, and Lucetta, with her face bound up, cut by Edwardo's
Bravo's. Saretta. THomaso in a Perriwig? it is not possible; Hatred and Aversion
have Eyes as curions as Love; and the Antipathy betwixt us must have discovered
him.


Paulina. I am amazed too, it cannot be so slight a disguise should hide him
from the Love of one, and hatred of the other; it is but some discourse to vex
us.


Lucetta. It Is a Truth great as his Villainy, as public, and as base, as
injurious and as wicked a Villain, to hunt the Bed of two Sisters; and if you
suffer it, may you be used as I am, and despised by all Men of Honor.


Saretta. If it be a Truth, I Will find some way to be revenged as he has been
curious in his Injury.


Lucetta. If it be a Truth? Are you Saretta, so true he is a Villain; There is
no Brother arrived from Salamanca, Don John knows him, (he is a little black
fellow) who told me the whole design; only two Perriwiggs, and two suits of
clothes; which when he comes next, you may easily discover: And if you find not
that damned Thomaso under that black Perriwig cut my throat, as the dog has
done my face, just as I had packed up his friends things to send them back; for
his injury, By heaven was a chance, in which I was as innocent as he; here
comes one can resolve you all.


[Ent. Philip. Philip. To cure your doubts, veil your selves and walk to the
Piazza, and hear whose names, and what stories fill the crowds with laughter;
while they glory in their mischief in vindication of the affront was done to
one of their Comrades; nay, they threaten new revenge; the Angellica is of
their counsel, and I hear the design was laid at her house.


Saret. I will not brag, nor threaten; but if I have any friends, or credit in
Madrid, I Will make it a black day with some of them.


Lucet. And a black mischief light on me, if I join not in any revenge at the
rate of life and fortune; and if ever Philippo will deserve from me, let him
now show himself a friend; be bold and kind in our revenge, and command me ever.


Saret. Kill him, and name the price; here is my earnest, be quick and secret.


[She gives him a purse. Lucet. Here, take this key, and make thy own price;
for 'twas he that set Edwardo on, and hired the Bravo's to my ruin.


Philip. And the same men shall cut his throat if you will forgive them.


Lucet. Let them but revenge me upon him, and I Will not only forgive, but reward
them too.


Philip. Well, I Will undertake this business so you will be secret, and
dissemble your hatred for a day or two; perhaps to morrow being a feast may
present the occasion; your best way is not to seem to know you are injured, or
known; seem to slight 'it, and laugh too.


Saret. Death, I could tear my very flesh to think that Rascal has touched my;
me blood rises to think how kind I was to the thing I hate; I scarce remember I
ere enjoyed a man with more Gusto; sure Harrigo was in the plot, and that
hungry Captain too; I Will be revenged upon the whole tribe.


Philip. Pray retire, I Will abroad to inform my self of them all; and, perhaps,
this night find those that shall dispatch 'em.


Saret. I never hated any man before; and see the Devil should give me a
passion for him only to plague me; how I hate these eyes that betrayed me!
these arms that embraced him; these lips that praised and kissed the dog!
methinks, all mankind like my self should despise this body stained with that
wretch; sure my flesh is turned carrion since he touched it.


[Exeunt omnes, manet Paulina. Paul. These are pure women's passions that
neither know what nor why they love, or hate; the accident vexes me too, but
not to that height as to engage my self in the murder of a friend; for the two
Sisters, that part of the story she knows I can unriddle; though for my
interest, I Will let it pass, in the opinion of the world; nor shall her mischief
prevail if I can prevent it; it is the folly of anger to threaten still, which
but alarms an enemy, and gives time to arm; their anger makes their hearts cold
and cruel; and love makes mine kind and warm, and resolved to save him from the
storm.


[Ex. ACT. III. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Thomaso, Harrigo, and Rogero. Thom. NOt seen since I went out?


Rog. The Mountebank and the Captain have been with 'em all day.


Har. Let them alone, they have some new design to redeem themselves; we shall
have the story time enough, I Will warrant you; but when you see Edwardo tell him
he has played the fool to cut Lucetta's face; for, believe it, she will be
revenged; I know the humor of these people; and I could have wished you had
not made your self so merry, to day, with the Saretta's character; there were
those by, who though they laughed at what you said, yet I know they love not
your humor, and will be the first that whet you on to such an error, and
afterward both do you a mischief and despise you for it; and, believe it, she
is a wench that wants neither friends nor malice, and as like to do you a
mischief as any she in Madrid.


Thom. I laugh at her and them; their opinion and their anger too; alas, we are
none of them that fear, we are of the number that fright others; I know the
trick of a Poniard as well as they, a dead wall, a dark night and a false
light, I know the advantages too of striking first; and wear a sword that will
bite as deep upon such occasion as any he is in Castile; and if they will play
at tricks, let them expect them. But I wonder more what it is these fine
Gentlemen, our Comrades, have in chase, just now when our business requires
their presence, which you know admits no delay; we are both undone if we
disappoint her to morrow; the Angellica is jealous too, I find it; and how I
shall bear my self with her to night, there is another trouble; one business
more will make me take my Bow and Arrows, and then lie down to sleep, with the
Proverb. Do you hear, Rogero, when they come, tell them I am gone with Harrigo
to his Chamber.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. IX.
Enter Cornelino, Edwardo, Ferdinando, and the Mountebank. Corn. NO words,
there is the money; it must be a secret for a day or two: what must we do when
they wake?


Mount. Rub their Temples with that oil, and give them some of the Vial to
drink, and they will come to themselves again.


Edw. I hope the loving fit will be over: By this hand, I would not for all her
Estate mine should embrace me two hours more: I cracked like Wickar in her Arms
when she laughed and grew gay: did you never see a Cow pretend to be merry?
even with such ungraceful motions she expressed her self.


Ferd. When will the Baths be ready? I long for the good hour, if that succeed
as well as the powder, we are made for Ever; and we will set up thy Statue in
Essex.


Mount. Never doubt it, Sir; my life for yours it takes effect.


[Exit Mountebank. Edw. Let Us lose no time then, but In, and vow a Pottle or
two to good Luck; and the Joy of the Jest is, all will be done e're Thomaso
knows of it.


Ferd. Their Guardian is a Jew; how the Rogue swelled at the Ceremonies! yet he
was as glad to be discharged of them, as we were to have them.


Cornel. You will not wonder at that when you consider what a sum he reaps by
the bargain; But there was no remedy, you must not have hoped his consent but
upon such advantages; The best is, you are sure to have no noise, nor suit; All
parties are contented.


(They give him a purse.) Ferd. Hold Captain, there is your share; come, no
Nicety; All men must live; and when profit runs round the Mill grinds merrily.


Cornel. Well Gentlemen, since you think I deserve this favor, I am not in a
Condition to refuse it; But I must desire you will get Thomaso to let our
Bargain stand for the Clothes; to morrow is Holy Day, and he wears them still.


Edw. To day only, for Evidence in our Plot; you shall have them at Night, now
the Jest is over.


Cornel. Then I shall be fitted for this Campania; Clothes and money too! Well,
I will pursue my business, to get you the Baths ready; I Will provide a good
Dinner, choice wine, and the best Music in the Town.


Edwardo. Prithee be-speak Ten Wheel-barrows of Tripes, for Jugg the Giant; I
cannot but laugh at our Fortunes; How many will envy us, and how many abuse us
for these wives! a Pox on the Captain he winked upon you; else I had got the
longest Straw; would thou had had the Giant; thine is the finest small Devil
I ever saw.


Ferd. See how hard it is to please you; Come, what boot yet between 'em? Yet I
know as well as you the Advantage of my small sinner, and what charges yours
will bring, both in Food and Clothing; besides some new Engine, with twelve
yoke of Oxen, to draw her into the Country, or take the Air after Dinner. Do
you mark? after Dinner; which Meal would victual a Kings Ship; Think of this,
and propose.


Edw. The Rogue is confident; else I know he would not treat this bargain, his
is one of the convenient'st Wives; Of such a fine Diamond cut; her Back and
Breast are crooked, in Table and Faucet.


Ferd. Where will you lodge her? there is no going above stairs; nothing but a
ground-room will bear her; Some old English Hall, for a Bedchamber; And now I
think on it, purchase Paul's, old, Idle, and unusefull Paul's; Separate the Isles,
and there is a Partment for her; and there she may walk upright, the Gates too
are big enough for her to come in at; Then there are some of the Marble Tombs
left still, which will serve instead of Benches, to sit upon; There are stone
Cisterns too, at the Porch, will serve her to piss in; Do you remember, when
she went out of the way to Stale? I thought the Spouts had run when she opened
her Sluice.


Edw. I forgot to bid the Captain bring a Ladder; that the Tailor might take
her measure.


Ferd. The Tailor! fie, fool, it is no Tailors work; let those that use to
furnish Churches do it; they are used to such heights; By this hand, 'twill
turn a Woman's Tailors head, to look down from her shoulder; Besides, the
others, when they have but paced her about, will guess how many pieces of
Tapestry will serve to furnish her; Think not upon Velvet, or Satin, those
paper wares, she will take up more then furnishes Saint Jago's Chapel; They
can furnish her with Frutages, and Festunes, for head dress; Neck-lace and
Chains, Bobs and Bracelets, they have always in readiness, as much as will
furnish a Church; Thou must get a Grate in the Bed, she will overlay thee else;
what a time her husband has, if he be bound to act that part! he may as soon
feed Whales with Worms.


Edw. If the Baths fail, all my refuge is, I can run away from her; Her portion
is big enough to pay the Post.


Ferd. Since you will not resolve upon this change, let us find Thomaso; But
not a word of what is past; we will only ring these Bells in his Ears; We can
Dance to our own Music now. He shakes his Pocket.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. X.
Enter Johanne and Don Pedro. Johan. UPon my life, 'twas she, my Author saw
her, and the confusion she was in for fear you should know it; 'twill be a fine
dishonor, when the Town shall take notice of such a visit; Sir, she is your
sister, and all her Actions will reflect upon you; But which is most Impudent,
Carlo saw him bring her to your door, and was present when Calis gave him a
Letter in the walks; Be not abused, Sir, Two hundred thousand Crowns, and a
sister of her merit, are not toys to be lost; they will expect a better Jointure
then a Scarf and a Buff-coat, and will be much better Ornaments in your Family,
then a Colonel and his Commission; Take my Counsel; see her in a Nunnery, and
I Will make him either fly the Country, or make him a Nest in the Churchyard.


Pedro. It Is clear, and I am satisfied; But we must be wary in what we do; They
have both too much wit and resolution to be surpised; We must dissemble our
Intention, lest this Passion betray us; and, for ought we know, the work may be
done to our hands: For I am told, the Lucetta and the two Sisters are highly
incensed, and have some design to be revenged upon him; I left the Angelica too
full of jealousy and rage: There we may Inform Our selves; and if We can blow
that Coal with her, we will resolve what is to be done: Women, when Rage and
Jealousy possess them, are as good Counsel as Mischief can inquire of; and
what she Resolves we will Execute; who is your Author?


Johan. The Lucetta, and she had it from Cornelio, who is himself unsatisfied
with Thomaso.


[Exeunt ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Edwardo, and Ferdinando. Ferd. NOt a word, Ned, till to morrow, of what
is past; we will consummate to night, and then defy the foul Fiend.


Edw. I am chained, See where they come. -- See the lost sheep; Enter Thomaso,
Harrigo, and Rogero. We thought you had been sunk or stolen: Fred has spent
three Groats in Cryers to day.


Thomaso. It Is well, I Am glad to see you are not flayed again; Beware of the
She-shambles, Ned: There are now snares set, I can assure you, and the whole
Piazza curse you for debauching the Mountebank, who was absent all day, and
Excused himself that he was employed by two strangers: Great wonders are
expected to morrow from his skill; it is thought he will make you two wise.


Edwardo. Well, Sir, Fool on; We may live to show the world some Essex men have
some Wit, though the Calf lie at the Door.


Ferd. No more, let time speak for us; Prithee what is it a Clock? This noise in
my Pocket drowns mine ear so I cannot hear him strike.


Thom. A cheerful sound, if no hue and cry pursue it.


Harr. What? there is some secret, I perceive, which we must not partake.


Thom. As thou love me, do not ask them; They will never tell, if they but
imagine We desire it; to get a secret out of these men, you must neither listen
nor consider what they say: But slight their discourse, and them, till they
hunt and hold thee to tell all they know.


Ferdinando. Yes, yes, Trust to that; To morrow if you behave your selves well,
it is Resolved you shall share the Blessing.


Thom. Did not I tell you so? now is he as sick, till he has told it, as one
that holds a Glyster too long, 'twill out, Fred. Room, Hall. let the secret
come.


Edw. Not a word, only this sound to afflict you.


Harr. Yet, in midst of your mirth 'twill be fit for you to know, you have
raised a Wasps Nest that may sting you; the Lucetta has vowed a Revenge.


Edw. Her Revenge? By this day I Will have her throat Cut now; I can spare as
much as will do it by the Law, whether it be right or wrong.


Ferd. Well, the Business we were sent for? pray dispatch; For we have affairs
of Our own that attend us.


Thom. Well, content; and let the Secret lie till Nature works; you must be in
disguise to morrow, and ready to serve the Lady you wot of; you must get you
fighting swords too, lest you be beaten; she expects you should pay her the
debt; I have promised her you will be as bold in her cause as you were in her
injury.


Edw. If you be serious, we will not deceive your Expectation; but why
disguised? you do not mean drunk?


Harr. Be well armed, and it is no matter for disguises; I Will have the
Ambassadors Coach and Footmen ready to receive us, and then we will defy their
Anger.


Thom. This is the business; and within Harrigo will inform you both of the
time and place; pray be early to morrow.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Angellica, and Anna. Angel. I Have no Patience till she be in a
Monastery; my heart can find no peace; Fool that I was not to try my Fortune
before; Why should I believe my self the only Woman not fit for a man of
Honor to marry, when thousands have married Women of as ill life and Fame as
mine, and yet find Swords and Friends to defend them? His Poverty too would
have pleaded for me, which his pride now will oppose, his heart being swelled
with the hopes of this Fortune; and 'twill be in vain to attempt him till she
be removed from a possibility of his hopes; He will not see me neither, though
thrice invited; That base ingratitude in the Sex makes me hate him, to find, he
that three days since fought for my door, and would have sold himself to the
Galleys but to purchase my Bed, will not now be bought or courted to a visit.


Anna. Don Harrigo and he are at the door.


Enter Thomaso, and Harrigo; Angellica walks up and down the Room, out of
humor. Thom. How now? turned shadow? fly when I pursue, and follow when I fly?
Anna, does your Lady use to walk in her sleep? There is no danger in
questioning this Noctambule; I have heard of them would walk upon Ridges of
houses, guided by the Fiend, without danger, unless you awake them; Therefore
we must speak softly; Stay, gentle shadow of my Love, and see how I will prove
thy fears vain, and anger light, and thus catch thee in thy flight, by falling
on thee in the Night; is it not so? Oh! there is a smile still; I thought we had
been arrived at the Court of sorrow, where Jealousy and despair, with
snaky-hair, will not let us kiss away our Care.


(He kisses her.) Angel. It Is well, Sir; your joys are full, and fortune
smiles, pursued by choice of Beauties, oppressed with those blessings which
others sacrifice for in vain; All the Cupids that break loose, and fly from the
Cages in others breasts, perch, and build in yours; which is become their
Nests; while we poor famished Lovers are glad to feed upon such broken bread as
your heart will yield; such wretches as your despised Angellica. Yet know, fond
man, Love poisoned with a Just Anger; for perjured vows make the mortall'st
hatred man can fall under; Nor does thy heart know what dangers the fury of a
Woman, robbed of her hopes, and couzend of her Joys, threatens even against her
Love.


Thom. Her blood was as black as any Ink, for she did naught but think and
think; If I were apt to fear what I love, how this would fright a man? There
are those would scarce recover their humor again to night; and there are some
that such a short speech, next their hearts, would make as Chaste as Camphire;
Prithee what Melancholy Planet has raised this dusty storm? Harrigo and I
came to be merry, and laugh at other Lovers, whose nests are on fire; and for
ought I see, we shall have enough to do to quench our own; This is such a Hymn
you may sing it to a Drum; I did not think you could have spoke such a Raw-head
and bloody-bones-speech; What, is your anger so high, a man cannot have credit
for a kiss, or two?


Angel. A kiss; who denies you a kiss?


(He kisses her.) Thom. Now prithee, Sot, tell me, what difference can you find
betwixt these and those of yesterday? What fond idle thoughts jealousy would
put into our heads! Why this fury on a sudden? What, Don Pedro is jealous you
will use me too well, and would have you believe I love the Saretta.


Angel. No, Sir, the Saretta cannot be my Fear; I know you scorn to marry her.


Thom. Scorn? why scorn? she is a handsome woman.


Angel. I deny not her beauty; yet I am vain enough to believe neither Beauty
nor Fortune shall have power to buy you from me; No, Sir, not the Serulina's;
Do you start? If her honor did not weigh the Scale more then they, Angellica
could be proud, and confident as she; it is honor, that Bubble, so prized by
men, which all Covet, though none catch the shadow.


Harr. Come, you are melancholy; and when your passion is over, you will find
this is but some plot of a jealous Rival. Serulina? That Is an old story,
revived only to Alarm your heart, and lessen your kindness.


Angel. Yes, by those that invented the bringing her to his house in disguise
too day; I do not know 'twas she Don Pedro followed from the Piazza; nor how
Edwardo tows'd her; and how she refused to see her brother; Yes, Sir, I do know
it; and he knows it too, and I believe will prevent your design.


ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Lucetta, Saretta, Paulina, veiled, and three Bravo's following them.
Bravo. WHich was he?


Sarr. That which went first, in the gray clothes with silver lace.


Bravo. It Is enough, leave the rest to us.


[Exeunt all but Paulina. Paul. Their mischief is bent against his life, which
is too precious, in my esteem, to sell for a black revenge; and though she
abuses the world with the opinion of our being Sisters, I that know the secret
and my interest in that opinion will not so far wed her folly as to countenance
a Ly with the price of his blood whom I love; That Villain Cornelio, to eat his
bread and betray him! -- Here 'twas he entered, I Will knock and speak with him.


[She knocks. Anna. Who knocks?


[From above. Paul. A Friend, that must needs speak one word with Don Thomaso,
it is business that concerns him.


Anna. Be gone in an evil hour; What do you haunt him in other women's houses?
This is fine Impudence; Be gone, or I shall empty an Oleo or two that was eaten
three days since upon your reverend Baudships head. My Mistress must not only
pray and pay for his company, but she must have Knights to defend her from
Ladies Lovers Errands. Where is your Squire with his shield to defend this
Chamber Pot, or his Wisp to cleanse you when I have done? See, here it comes;
by S. Jago, if you stay but a pissing-while I Will throw it.


Paul. I must find some way to tell him, he is lost else; there is is no
disputing now; this Bawd will do me some affront if I stay -- She meets Harrigo
as he came out. Don Harrigo you are met in a happy hour.


Harr. Hah! Paulina, what, spying! jealous, upon my life; Why you see what
frail things men are, especially young healthy men; Not a true Lover, Child,
in a hundred, that is to say, a constant Lover, but true to love Ninety nine.
What, you hunt now? Why faith he is within, all to be-hugg'd and kissed as if
thou had him in thine own arms.


Paul. You are merry Sir, and I am pleased to see it; but when you shall know
it is no curious jealousy, but serious business, that brings me hither, such as
concerns the life of your Friend, I doubt not but you will assist in his
preservation; but you must conceal me, because my Sister is engaged; if you
will walk you shall know the Design.


Harr. Since you are serious, let us retire; this comes of fooling; this
Climate is too hot to suffer these severe Jests, which will pass in our thick
Air.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Angellica, and Anna. Anna. I Know not what she was; some impudent thing
that plays the spy upon him, and would fain have spoke with him; but I sent
her away without a reply.


Angel. I would I had seen her, for my jealous Heart starts at every shadow
now; I am afraid 'twas some one from Serulina, some Letter, or some Message.
See who knocks.


Enter Rogero, with Thomaso 's black Clothes. Anna. It Is Rogero with a bundle.


Angel. Bid him pass into the next Room, and if she returns call me, and be
sure to let her in; I am afraid she has some notice of Don Pedro's design, my
Heart will have perpetual Alarms till she be in a Nunnery; I fear nothing but
his Marriage; I would he were as fit for my Hate, as he is for my Love; Or
would I were as fit for his value, as I am for his desire; Then I might hope to
impale his wandering Mind as he has mine: My Heart was once as unlimitted, my
Breast as untamed, and as much common as his; Yet his Eyes have enclosed it,
which makes me blaspheme Love that has destined me a slave to him that will not
be my Lord. -- See, he Enter Thomaso. comes, I must retire, he will be angry to
see me sad still; And I confess he has Reason; for it is most unpleasing to meet
storms where we seek our Pleasure.


[Exit Angellica. Enter Thomaso in a Nightgown, and Rogero with him. Thomaso.
Prithee give thy Master that note, and dispose of the Clothes as we resolved;
You must be certain to deliver them to night, though it be late.


Rogero. I shall, Sir.


[Exit Rogero. Thomaso. Villain, to betray us! Now I am certain, 'twas he
discovered Serulina's being at my House; The difficulty will be to follow our
business to morrow, and yet avoid their Malice, unless this design take; The
slave took my money, to hire the men to cut Lucetta's face, and for so much
more, told who set him on; But if I cry not quit to morrow, and stick a feather
for his Goose, let him laugh at the change as well as at the Robbery.


[Exit Thom. Rogero as he goes out with the clothes drops a Letter out of
Thomaso 's pockets, unseen of either. Enter Anna and takes it up. Anna. He Is a
Bed, and I must call my Child, he will be froward else. What have we here? A
Letter, it is a woman's hand, and directed to Don Thomaso; It Is none of my
Mistrisses, it is some of his other fools that complains. Some one whose Beauty
he has reaped; the Rogue pays not a sigh of Rent for all his Love; I could
afford to poison the Stallion; would he were lapp'd in both our sheets, so he
were laid in his Grave; What a life have I had since I saw him! There has been
a perpetual storm in our Minds; Reason, Love, and Interest, so disordered, so
shuffled together; 'twill waste a year of happy hours to place our thoughts
aright again.


[Enter Angellica. Angel. Where is he, in bed?


Anna. Yes, but here is a Letter cannot sleep; I found it alone walking about
the Chamber; the paper is guilty, and full of a foul Conscience sure; Pray will
you shrive her.


Angel. A Letter, give it me. -- It Is from her, that cursed name of Serulina is
subscribed, and confirms all my fears; That name She opens it and reads it to
her self, then stamps and tears her hair.

Anna runs to hold her.

has ripened all my miseries.


Anna. What ails you? For loves sake be quiet; Wretch that I was to give her
the Letter.


Angel. It Is resolved; Get me a pen and ink and put on your veil, while I write
two lines to Don Pedro to enclose this Letter; There Is Malice for Malice; and I
shall be Revenged at last, though my fears could not obtain his Love.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
Enter Harrigo, and Rogero. Harrigo. It Is late; but you must be sure to find
Edwardo and Ferdinando, and give them this paper ere they sleep; and conjure
them as they love their lives to observe my directions early to morrow.
Treacherous Villain, who could have feared such a mischief from one that
breathes by our Charity? And Exit Rogero had not this foolish girl exceeded in
kindness as much as he has done in Villainy, he had inevitably fallen; But
since we are advised, we shall find some way to prevent their Malice; I only
dread it may hinder our design, and disappoint the fair Serulina; I must find
some way to give her notice.


[Exit. ACT. IV. SCEN. V.
Serulina and Calis appear above in her window. Serul. MY Heart dreads some
mischief; Their stay thus late makes me apprehend they will this night attempt
us; Where are the keys of the Garden?


Calis. Here, Madam.


Serul. Is my Cabinet and Jewels put up, and such money as you found in the
great box?


Calis. All is done as you ordered.


Serul. Then let us sit quiet and hide the light; if they intend any force,
thus disguised and thus provided we may by the back door make our escape
through the Garden to the Ambassadors house; I have consulted both Nature and
Reason, and from neither find that right of Empire Brothers claim over Sisters;
and since he resolves to arm himself with those advantages strength and custom
gives him over our Sex, it is both Justice and Wisdom to provide for our
safety; My desires have neither shame nor dishonor belonging to them; Justice
and Gratitude both guide my Heart to serve him, that saved both Life and Honor.


Calis. I have a Dagger, and by my Life, the proudest He that dares lay hand
upon you, a black mischief find me if I leave it not in his Breast; They have
all such a care and kindness for your Portion; But were I you, I would build an
Hospital with it ere they should have it.


Serul. See who knocks. -- Anna knocks at the door.


Calis. It Is too dark.


Serul. Listen then.


Porter within. Who knocks there?


Anna. A Friend, Master Porter; one that has earnest business with Don Pedro;
and a Letter for him that concerns him to see it to night.


Porter. He is not at home; but if you leave it he shall be sure of it when he
comes in.


Anna. Are non e of his Gentlemen up?


Porter. All the House, except my self, are a bed.


Anna. Pray do you take it, and give it when he comes.


Enter the Porter with a Light. Calis. It Is Anna, the Angellica's Nurse. Some
mischief upon my Life.


Porter. Signora Anna, Caro Vecho, come in and pass an hour; I have Esquiuris
and a Biscuit; Come, we'll squeeze a Botto till he comes: Ha! you old Conjurer,
how long is it since the Devil danced last in thy bawdy circle? Come into the
Lodge, and let me brush the Cobwebs from thy corner.


Anna. You have Bell Tiempo, Master Porter; but I am now in haste, my Mistress
stays for me, and it is late; What a dumb House is here? Is this the Eve to
such a Feast as a young Ladies Wedding? No spits going, no Cooks chopping, no
pots seething, nor ovens heating? What, 'twill be a stolen Wedding. -- Farewell,
Master Porter.


[Exit Anna. Porter. What a pox ails her to talk thus? I hope they will not
offer to marry my young Lady without telling me of it.


Serul. It Is clear; we are betrayed, I find by her discourse, and they are now
upon some design to prevent us.


Calis. Let Us be gone before they come; it is better to prevent such a mischief,
and easier then to resist it.


Serul. I would fain see that Letter first; There may be some light in our
business, something may guide our Resolutions; Dear Calis, no trick to catch it?


Calis. I Will warrant you the Letter, Madam.


[Exit Calis. Por. These flesh flies how they haunt the shambles! pox take her,
she would not see him two days since; and now aMid-wife will not be so haunted
as he. -- So, stick thou there, that I may find thee when he He sticks the
Letter in the window. comes in; some great concern, no question.


Enter Calis, and peeps after him. Calis. So, he is eathed in his lodge; now
for my design, if I can find the window, it is done; See, here it is; now for a
piece of the Chamber-maids virtue, tread lightly; the hundred Arts that we must
learn, speak softly, see quickly, hear half sounds, read looks, keep her
secrets, and betray all others; smile when she smiles; frown, hate, and love,
as she does; lie with her, for her, either under, or upon her; and (unless a
Nunns) on my Conscience ours is the wickedst kind of Innocent Life women can
practice.


Exit Calis. Serul. She stays long.


Calis. The Rogue stood entertaining himself with his own shadow till now: But
here it is. She opens it, and finds her own Letter enclosed in one of the
Angellica 's, and starts at it.

She gives Calis the Letter to read.




Serul. Give it me. -- What a chance is this? We had been all undone if this
accident had not happened. By this you will find mine were no idle fears; it is well
we are in a readiness, for we have no time to spare; Early in the Morning we
must pursue our design.


Calis. What a false Queen is this, to take advantage and abuse his Trust!
Malicious and jealous Devil! what mischief must this have bred had it come to
Don Pedro's hands?


Serulina. Yet I find by this, they are not in a readiness to execute any plot
against us; And they shall find, though I stoop to the God that bears the bow,
yet I will not hold the plough; My Heart and Mind shall become his Priest; no
stooping Hind.


ACT. IV. SCEN. VI.
Enter Ferdinando, Edwardo, Cornelio: Edwardo is undressing himself. Cornelio.
COme now, this is but singing a long Psalm, better resolve and leap into her
Bed; When you are there, I must leave you; Don Thomaso has sent me the Clothes,
and I Will be as fine as any of you to morrow.


Edwardo. Now do I tremble to go to head, lest she should roll me betwixt her
fingers, or crack me like vermin against her bedpost: But since it must be,
come Captain, let us part like Friends; and if we do live to meet again, this
danger will be mirth; Pray Captain get witness ready against the Morning, for
I Will not lie with her another night without a grate betwixt us: This night will
make my plea good in Law, else nothing but Honor should engage me to charge
her breach again.


Ferd. And mine is such a small kitt, I fear I shall make no music upon her;
The little fool sits so quiet, and pearches upon my Breast like a bird; I only
chirrip to her when I call her, and she peeps me an answer like a Chicken.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. VII.
Enter Don Pedro, Johanne, and Carlo. Pedro. HOw merry he was when he heard the
design was not made to abuse him! only a trap to catoh the Englishman.


Johan, Yes, but I observed him; and he is angry still for all his mirth, and
not displeased when he heard her face was cut.


Carlo. His fall from the window was a worse bruise to his body then Edwardo's
to his purse, and will be longer in recovering; to morrow we shall hear what
her friends will do to revenge her; I am told the two Sisters and she are upon
a design; Cornelio has confessed Thomaso set them on.


Johan. I would 'twere done, it might be some advantage to my business.


Port. Sir, there is a Letter for you in the Window.


Pedro. From whom?


Port. That I know not, Sir; 'twas a woman brought it, some Caterpillar.


Pedro. Send it in; is my Sister a bed?


Port. A bed! it is almost day, Sir.


Pedro. Was any body here to speak with her to night?


Port. Not any body.


Pedro. If there be any body inquires for her, give me notice; we must be early
up, ho, to morrow; and, pray, send to invite Don Alphonso to dine with us, and
resolve upon our business.


Johan. You must be sudden, you know she has a high spirit, and wants neither
wit nor resolution to deliver her self from your power, if once she imagine
your intention.


Pedro. It Is resolved, and I have already moved it to the Abbess, in case she
should refuse; but I hope better, for she knows Thomaso lies this night with
Angellica; which humor will take off the edge of a woman's kindness, what ere
they pretend, when she sees a man in the height of his wooing haunt the beds
and conversations of common Whores; what can a discreet woman hope from him
when he is surfeited upon her youth and beauty, that can now when a fancy and
imagination labors in his longing mind, throw himself into the arms of every
prostitute? but of this to morrow, it is late. Farewell.


[Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Calis and Harrigo, she delivers him a Cabinet and a Letter. Har. YOu are
early; is your Lady stirring?


Call. Yes, Sir; she is early up, for she went not to bed; her Brothers stay,
having notice of his intention, made us expect to see the success, still
resolved by the Garden gate to make our escape hither; nor will you wonder,
Sir, at our trouble when you consider that Letter.


Calis gives Harrigo the Letters Angellica sent to Don Pedro. Har. It Is enough,
I Will take care for all; and desire your Lady to be confident in her resolution,
and she shall find all safety here, and in us a readiness such as our enemies
dare not dispute. -- Give this key to your Lady, and observe the door; when the
Porter sees this, she may He gives her a key.

Exit Calis.

pass without unveiling her self; I have given him his instructions. -- The
Devils sure are in the breasts of these women; what will their malice do, if
they express their love thus dangerously? had this Letter come to Don Pedro's
hand she had certainly died for it: and Thomaso is a beast not to burn Papers of
such consequence: this is Wine, and those Women are accursed that have a
friendship where it is loved: for though it has a thousand friendships made, all
women know how many secrets it has betrayed.


[Exit. ACT. IV. SCEN. IX.
Enter Thomaso and Rogero: Thomaso is in his Spanish habit and white Perriwig.
Thom. It Is well, thank your Master; tell him I will not fail to observe his
directions, and find him at his Chamber. -- I found her changed in my arms, she
had not craft enough Exit Rogero. to hide her anger; what a Dog was I not to
burn the Letter? but see the difference betwixt a virtuous passion and a
lustful flame; Serulina, busy to prevent my mischief, her noble mind forgot
all my crimes to her; while the others, malicious and bloody, designed nothing
less then the ruin of us all. But Love and Fortune, kinder then either my
merit or hopes could promise, has blown over the storm; and now I know their
malice, if I prevent it not, I ought to fall unpitied; it vexes me she should
be guilty of so mean an action, because I thought her of a gallant temper, but
she is a common Whore; and this life of mine, that which some men may pass some
months in for humor, but no trade for men of honor; Wisdom and Conscience
bids us seek a Nest ere Age and Diseases find us; and where we spend our youth
with Faith and Love, there man ought to expect patience for the impertinency of
Age: it is sad to be out of doors in the Winter of our Age. A gray Wanderer is
but a bad Tragedy to himself, though an old Beggar may be a Comedy to others:
These thoughts, and the noble nature of this virtuous Maid, have made me
resolve to abjure this humor; and having bid farewell to all the follies of my
youth vow my whole thoughts to the friendship of the fair Serulina; a maid,
whose Dower and Beauty may satisfy an avaritious heart and a wandering eye; yet
those are blessings may be found in other women; but her mind is a single
virtue, and to me constant kind, her love a chaste full stream, which no
out-lets of friendship, or likings, has exhausted or lessened. The stream
always bent on one object; and my heart shall faithfully meet her, and the
Wanderer shall in this friendship prove he has in all his past flames but
practiced how to love. Yet Paulina's kindness is as remarkable as the malice
and treachery of the rest; poor Paulina, for whom I have still regret; whose
kind heart has endured the test, and is of all ill women that I have known the
best.


[Exit. ACT. IV. SCEN. X.
Enter Philippo, and three Bravoes, Lucetta her face bound up. Saretta and
Paulina. Saret. MArried!


Lucet. Yes, married.


Philip. Two days since, to the Monsters; and so privately, it is yet a secret
to Don Thomaso; only Cornelio and the Mountebank were of the plot, by virtue of
whose Powder they were won; their Guardian too consented, and has his share in
the Portions; and the Brides are now at Thomaso's house, where they have
prepared a public dinner.


Saret. Hell upon their luck, they are as rich as Peru; and those Vagabonds
will only remit their money home, and leave them.


Paul. It Is but justice; the Jews their Parents cozened the poor of a Nation
to give it to these Monsters; and it is but equal the Jew their Guardian should
revenge their trust.


Lucet. Come, we have no time left to lose in talking; our design expects us;
and if all hit right we may light other Torches then Hymen's yet ere night.


Philip. Their feast will advance our business, and make them less curious to
observe or suspect our motions; Sanco the Rogue has failed us, I met him this
morning as gay and fine as the Sun, and flowers in June, going in all haste to
Court; and promises himself some fortune by my Powder: but he shall find I have
malice too, such as shall to the Guard betray the impostor, and make him in the
Galley find my Quondam Father Boat-swain, fit for such a Rogue a Foister.


Saret. At the corner of the Piazza we will expect you, where from the Carmelites
we may stand and see which way he takes; and when it is done it is but stepping
in and we are safe, or pass through the Venetian Ambassadors which is but
three doors off.


Philip. Take no care for us; be but secret and silent, and leave us to our
fortune.


[Exeunt ^omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. XI.
Enter Thomaso, Harrigo, and Rogero. Har. THe news; where are they? will they
come?


Rog. Yes, Sir; they will follow immediately; but I found them and the house in
such a confusion, it is a Jubilee at home; there is a whole Kitchen full of
Cooks at work all over the yard, and such loads of Meat and Wine.


Thom. What cause, prithee, for all this joy, or rather madness? this is Freds
fooling, a piece of country wit, always out of season; you shall find him play
M. Justice Over-do to day in spite of counsel, I perceive the Plot; now do they
intend to surprise us with a Wedding dinner, which may, perhaps, give such an
alarm to her Brothers jealousy as will beget some more mischief, or hasten the
old; A pox upon them and their Grand Jury jests; they are as unseasonable here
as long Graces at their feast.


Rog. Your worship is mistaken, Sir, in the cause; they are both married, and
have been these two days.


Thom. Married!


Rog. Yes, Sir, to the two monsters the Captain used to speak of; I saw them
both, one sits in the yard, for the house will not hold her; she is as big as
the Saint Christopher in Nostre Dame, and the other looks like the Christo upon
his shoulders.


Thom. Did thou see them?


Rog. I saw them, Sir, and the Mountebank with them, whose Powder got them;
they will be here immediately, and resolve you themselves.


Thom. This is what I have always prophesi'd; marry two Monsters! what
chicken-hearted Rogues are these to be cowed with one misfortune!


Har. What work this story will make in Town! By this light, there will be no
living in Madrid for and Englishman; the very name will entitle us to Green
Hats; see where they come.


Enter Edwardo and Ferdinando shaking their pockets, and showing Rings upon
their fingers. Ferd. Save thee, sweet soul, and thy friend; what, how goes
business? is this the day thou vow'st to Hymen? 'twill be a national Wedding I
see.


Thom. But is it for certain you two have done this horrible thing?


Edw. Yes, By this light, we have done it, By this fire, By this sound, By
these clothes, it is done and done, a bargain in faith, wedded and bedded, which
we believe no small action; and 'twas I that encountered with the Giant.


Thom. This is the common trick of Rogues; when they have done an ill act to
stand in it; and these are grown as impudent as carted Bauds.


Edwardo. As Friends we ask your mercy in this case; and if you be good men you
will have mercy upon our beasts too.


Thom. But'tis a Monster, an ugly Monster.


Edwardo. Not so, she has Beauties, diverse and sundry Beauties, which I can
really enjoy, and shall last Ages; a House and Family, fed and furnished, me
thinks a pleasing Beauty: her Hand has another grace, for the Beauty of her
mark only finds credit, and her Bills are honored through the World; Come
Thomaso, he that has Money has all; Money speaks sense, It Is Beauty, it is
Honor; and he that has it not shall find the rest but idle nothings: What
care I to keep any Man's Opinion, or any Woman's friendship: when the old will
not I Will buy new; Money will make a Liar speak true; you see the virtue of a
Wager, the new Philosophical Argument lately found out to decide all hard
Questions.


Ferdinando. These Trappings are the Beauties of our Brides, they give no
Ribbands nor Braids of Hair; when I would wear her Favors she can fell a
thousand Acres of Wood, Excremental Beauties which their Estate can better
spare, and 'twill grow sooner again than a Lock of Hair; from those Lillies
with the white Faces which you believed had so tied up our hearts; No, Child,
we have learned to choose better; for besides these Beauties of the House and
Field, you shall see standing at the Door four Footmen and a Velvet Coach,
with six Flanders Graces more, which wait ready to hurry us to those Pleasures
that expect us; for these Keys open all Doors.


Thomaso. And what becomes of all our Vows in Croyden? the bowed Twopence and
the Garter which was given with tears because the Present spoiled the Pair;
that Garter so bekiss'd and worn till 'twas a lousie Relic? All is forgot I
see; the Cream and Sugar is digested too, and all the memory of Sack-Possets,
though eaten with the same Spoon, that dainty way of expressing a Country
passion, so to eat each others Slaver, quite abolished, all; neither that nor
the Charms of Valentine, plucked Dasies, nor Yarrow, St. Ann's Vision, nor her
Fast, nor Ground-Willow under her Lovers Head, charms now: All these Magic
Rites, believed as often as tried, and confirmed by a ^ea with nine, when in
stepped Ned and Fred, whose Names had been the Night before nine times chosen
out of the Ashes; and what crowns all, the sacred Tomes of Ptolomy, who with In
and In sent us to Haly the first and second for that Fortune which she and you
then believed next (if not before) the Holy Writ; but all these steps of Love a
Monster has trod out with her Herculean foot.


Edw. Yes, that monster is my Wife, and at worst but my Trade; and good severe
Sir, will you not allow a man an honest Calling to get a Living by? You Will sail
a storm at Sea in a stinking ship and be lousie, starved and roasted under
several Climes for the gain of so much per cent. or flatter a faithless
Tradesman, or a less faithful Court, and wait upon Preferment till a Dropsy
swell your Legs; Why, this Monster is my Place at Court, my Ship at Sea, my
Vocation; and when Honor calls me here I charge, and Custom will reconcile
all; and the danger grows so common I shall not fear it; and for a little
patience here I purchase all my pleasure.


Ferd. You or he will let the Dog that loves you kiss you, and cherish every
beast that is kind to you; Is our case worse, what, for their money live with
these tame beasts? and is it not better to suffer for a time the Worlds nine
days Wonder, than an Ages scorn, for being a perpetual Cuckold, as thousands
are, who vow to that faithless thing called Beauty? Our houses may be haunted
with Wonderers; but we are sure to find no Lovers there; for my small Bird is
so lean she is neither good in the Field nor Bed, which makes me securenone of
Cupid's Falkoners will fly at her; And for Ned's, I would fain see him that
dares attempt her Honor either by force or flattery.


Thom. And when young Ascupat shall be born will thou make him a Christian
Giant, or no? Sir Bevis of Croyden, by this hand Ned, if it were mine it should
never be christened; a baptized Giant sounds sneakingly; the last holy one you
see shrunk from Christophoro to S. Kit. Prithee let thine be an Ethnic Knight
and run wild in the Wild of Kent, a Pagan of the Pagans in Surry, and breed
some new Romances; only breed him a Cavalier, that he may fight with the
Palmerines, Olivers, and the Rolands of the Age, for the Legislative Lady, and
I promise thee a Patent to show him thy self; a favor, but that you are a
Friend to the Master of the Revels, you should not easily obtain, the showing
your own Monster; and 'twill be worth your care, betimes, lest some Committee
be appointed to do it; Thou art undone if thou do not prevent it, they will
so imbezel thy Monster.


Rogero. Sir, Calis is at door.


Harrigo. Tell her we are all ready, and will follow her immediately -- Come,
we are expected; Calis has given the sign.


Ferdinando. And what is it we are to do, besides being laughed at? if that be
all we'll return; for there are two Pots boiling, in whose Porrage we are
concerned two hundred thousand deep.


Thom. We must be all in a readiness to attend the Design wherein Serulina is
concerned; if it thrive we shall have a home too; but that is not all, for
Harrigo tells me that Cornelio has betrayed us to Lucetta; and she knows 'twas
we that set the Bravo's to cut her face; that and the Serulina's being at my
house, Harrigo's message to her, All, all is betrayed; and we have only this
morning to prevent their mischief; which now we are warned of if we fall into
we deserve no pity.


Edw. Come, let us away; be you sure to strike first, let that be the sign; and
if we do not make some of them stand off we'll fall by them; What a pox, abuse
me, and think I dare not be angry?


Thom. The Embassadour's Coach and Servants attend us, but we must not let them
appear in the Piazza, for giving jealousy; the only thing I conjure you as
friends is, not to let your passion transport you if any accident happen, so as
to pursue your revenge rather than our Design; but keep together, and that
woman you see me take by the hand, do what lies in friends to protect her from
those that shall attempt us.


Har. The Porter will be ready at the Gate to receive all those that retire
thither.


Ferd. It Is enough, we are instructed.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. XII.
Enter Angellica and Anna. Ang. It Is late, I wonder Don Pedro comes not;
Thomaso I fear suspected my being displeased, he was so serious and so silent
when we parted; Are you sure my Letter was delivered to Don Pedro last night?


Anna. Either last night, or early this morning.


Ang. Then I hope, he is now about the Design; Come get our old veils, and hide
elose, if you see Don Pedro as we pass, speak to him that he meet me at the
Carmelites; my heart will find no peace till she be disposed of.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Don Pedro, Carlo, and Johanne, and meet Lucetta, Saretta, and Paulina.
Pedro. THere they are; Come Ladies, this Disguise is so thin we see through it.


Sar. Pray Sir, let us go; we wonder you are not in disguise too, it is a
strange confidence; considering your injuries, that you dare be seen; it is so
poor and so mean an impudence as makes us scorn to converse with such white
Spaniards: you Castilians! and suffer your swords, Sister, and Mistress, to be
taken from you by a flock of Dutchmen, a Band of Gypsies, a Troop of vagabond
wandering strangers, an old cashiered Corporal and his Squadron.


Pedro. Switzers with two colored Coats, Knaves of diverse colors, black and
white Knaves, such Proteans a Lady knows not when to love or hate them;
dissembling Knaves that make women kiss them when they should beat them;
froward Rogues that scratch Ladies faces; Fie upon them, go, go, naughty men;
come give me a stroke, I Will beat them.


Luc. It Is well Sir, and an easy thing to wound a naked woman; but though I
bear his mark, if we strike not as deep in our revenge let them despise us, as
we do you for being such tame Dons, such muzled Knights that dare only be
furious when women displease you, and yet let these wandering strangers put Bits
in your mouths, command and ride you, spur your sides till your hearts are
galled, and yet you neither kick nor stumble before them; See if we prove such
Jadey slaves as to suffer this --


[Ex. the women. Joh. Pray let us follow them; 'twill be good sport to see them
tear his hair and scratch his eyes.


Carlo. I have no great expectation nor apprehension from their anger; I know
their humor too well; but believe it, the Angelicaes is a resolved hatred, and
likely to make a mischief; for he has used her so coursely that she rages
without all bounds.


Pedro. I am glad to see him pay my scores there, for she uses me as ill as he
uses her, but I shall spoil his great design, and put him in worse company,
and fill his mind with lower thoughts.


Joh. Were that once past, and she in the Monastery, you would quickly see his
fire of straw burnt out.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. II,
Enter the Bravo 's, then enter Thomaso and his Company looking after them.
Saretta. FOllow close, I saw him cross the Piazza, we'll step into this Church,
at the corner you will be sure to meet him.


Bravo. Walk not so fast, people observe it.


[Exeunt Bravo's and Wenches at two several Doors. Thom. There they go; and
those Soldiers are they Bravo's; mark them and be ready, left they attempt us.


Ferd. Attempt us! why they are fewer than we; Prithee let us beat them first;
I Will pick his message out of his mouth with my Dagger; What a pox, it shall
never be said, Three Rogues made four of us walk muffled in Madrid.


Harr. Prithee be quiet, the Game plays it self, only keep an eye upon them.


[Enter Angellica and Anna. Thom. See the Angellica and Anna; let us step into
the Church till they are past.


Exeunt Thomaso and his company. Angel. I saw Don Pedro follow us; stay at the
Corner and deliver your message.


[Exeunt. Enter Serulina and Calis. Serul. Did you see him, Calis?


Calis. Yes, Madam, they are before; and We shall overtake them at the Church.


Serul. Be diligent, dear Calis, for all is at stake, my whole peace laid
down; It Is our first, and last venture, if Fortune frown.


Calis. Walk softly, Madam, it is he, I Will turn, and speak to him.


Serul. Who are these that stand at the Church door?


Calis. By my life Don Pedro is one of them; step off, and stand close, for I
see Don Thomaso coming.


[Exeunt both to the door. Enter Cornelio, in Thomaso 's Laced Suit. Cornel.
So, now I have my Ends too, and perhaps those wits will be caught, and their
scores paid by some as malicious as themselves. Con is a fool, yes, yes; But
the fool has money and Clothes too.


The Bravoes peep, and Shoot Cornelio, he Staggers, and falls upon his face;
Serulina and Calis Shreek, Serulina falls in a swound as she comes in. Calis.
Lost, undone, for ever ruined.


[Enter Saretta, Lucetta, and Paulina, at the other door. Paul. So may all
Treacherous Villains be rewarded.


(Saretta and Lucetta Spurn Cornelio as he lies.) Saret. There lie, insolent,
and false; now boast the Affronts you have done us.


Bravo. Come away, Ladies, there is no staying here.


Enter Thomaso and his Friends, they draw, and set upon the Bravoes, they wound
and beat them off the Stage. Saretta, Lucetta, and Paulina, run off the Stage
when they Fight, and as he pursues them finds Serulina and Calis upon the
ground. Thom. Bloody Villains, ha! what is here; by my life, it is she; I know
the Ribband, there is the sign; Harrigo, Edwardo, Ferdinando, hold, as you love
me, here is our business.


Calis. Don Harrigo?


Harr. Calis? it is she, struck with the mistake of the Clothes.


Thom. Do you follow, let me alone to carry her off.


Thomaso takes up Serulina in his arms, carries her, and the rest follows.
[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Pedro, Johanne, and Carlo. Pedro. SHot?


Johan. I, Shot dead they say, and see where he lies.


Pedro. Bloody Devils; see where they stand at the Church-door, and brave the
Act.


[Enter Harrigo, Edwardo and Ferdinando. Harr. So, that work is well over; Now
let us see what is become of that unlucky fool; who have we here? Don Pedro and
his Company, have they a hand in it? Sir, this is an Action both unworthy your
birth, and Profession, to set a Murderer to revenge your quarrel.


Ferd. Death, why do you talk with him, have they not Swords by their sides?
beat them till they draw.


Edw. Let Us fight for our Lives, it is better then be shot like birds sitting;
is this your Spanish Gallantry? draw your sword, Sir.


Harr. Hold, what needs this fury?


Pedro. Be not rash in your passion; Our innocence makes us pass by your
trouble, which we know ought to be concerned in a friends Murder, though we
scorn the guilt of so base an action; and though there were some reasons to
make me unsatisfied with your friend, yet I scorn such a Revenge; and there
stand those that will not deny the Act; it is true, I heard they had some design
upon him; But, by my life and honor, I could not imagine it had been bloody,
only some mirth to return his Jest; else it had been easy to have prevented
this mischief, which I should have gladly done; for by my life, I not only
loved, but valued him.


Harr. This Lazy Villain stays so long with the Surgeon too. Sir, We beg your
pardon; For finding you upon the Place, and having notice of your displeasure,
it looked as if you would have avowed the action; and I am glad with all my
soul to find Don Pedro Innocent.


Pedro. Sir, I love my Sister, and shall with all honor endeavor the making
of her happy; but if there be no way to compass it without a Murder, it is a
rate at which I shall neither purchase hers nor mine own happiness; Nor did I
ever urge any thing injurious against Thomaso, for I always esteem d him a
Gentleman, and a Soldier; One, to whom (I confess) she owes her life and
honor; an Obligation I would gladly have paid at a cheaper price then a
Sister.


Harr. See, he stirs, Help Fred.


(They turn him, and show his face, and discover it is Cornelio.) Paul. So, now
they will find their Error, and my malicious Friends repent their Folly.


Johan. Ha! Cornelio!


Edw. Yes, Gentlemen, it is Cornelio.


Saret. Ha, the Captain!


Lucet. What Devil put this Ass in the Lions skin? We are all undone, and
forfeit to his scorn, and the Justice too; lost and destroyed by a mistake, and
shall perish without Revenge; who went for the Surgeon?


Pedro. I am glad it is no worse; though this be a sad accident, yet the safety
of the other will allay the grief, and this mischief but just, for I am
confident he was guilty of the design, and has through all the day played the
spy among us.


[They carry off the body of Cornelio. Lucet. Saretta, how came this wretched
fool in these Clothes?


Har. I Will inform you; Do you see this Lady? how does her goodness upbray'd thy
malice, that could, for the Revenge of a Jest, design the murder of her
Friend? Especially knowing how false the pretense of Sister is; which though
she was content to hide, for Interest, yet 'twas folly to believe she would
with a lie, and a Murder, satisfy thy malice; fear not, Paulina; Thy good
nature shall find friends, when justice and shame has made Saretta hide her
head. And in short, Know, we heard your Bravoes had no other mark to
distinguish Thomaso by; then those Clothes which made us fit them to a person,
who, you see, is taken in his own Plot.


Edw. And, for you, Lady bright, that thought to have had me cold meat in your
Kitchen; By this light, I will have that Nose, and flay thee here at the Church
door; do not think it is your scratched face shall excuse you. -- And but that I
fear the He has bold of Lucetta all this while. whores blood is so envenomed it
would spoil a good sword, the earth should not save thee now.


Ferd. Hold, prithee, it is the Hangmans Office; he bleeds them twice a year
with a whip.


Lucet. It Is well nature has armed you against us; But if I had thought our
Revenge would have been thus slow, I would not have been within the danger of
your threats now.


Pedro. Sir, this is no time to give you the particulars; else I am confident I
could remove all your displeasureagainst this poor girl.


Enter Angellica and Anna. Angellica runs to Don Pedro. Angel. What do you
amuse your self at in this mistake? haste, and save your sister; Your modest
Maiden sister; I saw her fall in a swound at the shot, while Thomaso and
another put her into the Ambassadors Coach; She, you, and I, are all lost, if
not immediately prevented.


Pedro. My Sister? This Rape shall be dearly paid for; Cannot a Virgin pay her
devotions to the Church without violence? Sure there is Law and Power enough to
revenge this.


[Exit Pedro and his Company. Edw. Yes faith, the Gentlewoman is gone; and that
damned Soldier has all to be married her by this time; What a fool it is, to
neglect the Angellica for Serulina? There Is not above two hundred thousand
Crowns to boot; Nay, nay, be no angry sweet heart, nor do not frown, we will
find thee another man.


Angel. Fools cannot Anger me, especially Stripped, beaten, cozened fools; I
despise their Anger and their praise; and 'twas all my Quarrel with Thomaso,
for keeping such mouths company, such Monster-Mongers; and he was in the right
in his answer; Alas, what can one expect from Hobynoles, that are cut out of
Fools Timber? Prithee enquire out Fairs and Feasts, and join betimes with some
motion men, and go halfs in your Monsters; If your Comrade had not been another
kind of man you might have drawn like a Team, in your Trots, e're any Jade of
you all had found a Stable in my house; who now, I fear, is gone for ever.


Saret. No matter, would thy heart were burst with Envy, or with Grief; and may
thy Love turn to as great a mischief to thy self, as it has been a Curse to us.


Edw. No, no, she is wise, a shrewd crafty One, a witch of Lombardy; she
Cozened? not she; her thousand Crowns is but put to use; Thomaso, you know, is
turned Banker; Faith I would you had some more Bags to spare, here is a poor
Cozened fool would so love you for them, so sigh out all your Praises; I can
flatter too, and you know what a pleasure it is to be cozened in good Language.


Saret. 'Twas your vanity and Madness set him up; His starved soul was tame and
lean before, till your folly cherished the Frozen Viper, who now has bit us
all; What do we stay here for? to Invite and Tempt the Justice? Let Us away and
preserve Our selves; Who knows but we may yet gain a Revenge; 'twas Paulina's
falsehood betrayed us all.


Angel. I can resolve of nothing, my mind is so divided.


[Exe. Omn. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Thomaso, Serulina, and Calis. Thoma. PRay be at Peace with your self,
and all other storms will cease; Harrigo has sent word there is no danger of
Death, the shot having struck no mortal part. I confess, This mischief had like
to have spoiled all, had not my Trick been better then theirs; For the Bravo
had no other mark to know me by; with which I paid two debts, his Treachery,
and my Promise; But I must acknowledge my life and safety to poor Paulina.


Serul. Where are your Friends? are they in safety?


Thom. From all but their Monsters.


Serul. Pray be serious, are they married?


Thom. It Is most certain; why do you Tremble now? when by a Miracle all is
safe, and your self, the chief part of our Care, in a Place where no Injury can
touch you?


Serul. I am not troubled now; But you cannot expect to find the mind quiet
as soon as the Reason; The Alarm my fears took cannot be so soon composed; you
must allow some time to place again what the storm disordered; It Is but a
Minute since I found my self miserable; and this change of happy Fortune had
like to have finished with Joy the dangers which despair begun; Nor shall I
find a perfect peace till my Brother and you are friends; and here I make it my
first suit to you, that you will for my sake bear with his Passion; And as he
by an Extravagant Anger may express the value of a Sister he conceives lost; so
you will show your Esteem of me, by bearing patiently his Injury.


Thomaso. I were most unworthy of your Commands, if they did not bind me above
all Interest or Passion; But this is a Command so agreeable to my own wish,
that I am obliged to it by mine Inclination as well as Obedience, which shall
always speak me a faithful and an humble Servant.


Serul. Were this storm over, how happy should we be!


Thomaso. It Is over; only the fear remains which thus raises these billows in
your Heart.


ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Edwardo. Edw. UNdone, undone; Fool that I was, covetous, unthankful
Fool, undone, for ever undone.


Enter Ferdinando, pulling in the Mountebank all beaten and torn. Ferd. Slave,
Cheat, Villain, Thief; thou shall die no other death but boiling in thine own
broth to a damned jelly, spoon-meat for the Devil thy Master, slave.


Edw. Fred!


Ferd. Ned! They look upon each other and shrugg.


Edw. O Cursed Rogue, two hundred thousand Crowns in porrage! Let Us fley the
Rogue ere we boil him, he will be the tenderer for the old Devils tooth; A
Crooked Rogue with a wry Soul too; he will lie in the dish like a starved Hen
with two breast-bones; a carrion slave, how he looks!


Ferd. This was your doings, Ned; I am bound to curse thee; he has spoiled the
finest little tidy Jewel of a wife, just a wife and no more; Fool, that I was,
I must be trying conclusions, and make a Monster of a miracle.


Edw. And I, that had all things in plenty; Fool, dull Fool, fortune and wife
enough for a Parish, to lose all in a Cullice! I have sought and skumm'd the
pot, and cannot find a bit of her; I am afraid the Devil and the Cook were
agreed to rob the pot of the whole flesh; what a mess of Eve and pudding will
the Letcher have to his Supper!


[The Mountebank as he lies on the ground. Mount. Alas Gentlemen, I am not too
blame; your wine and kindness made me forget some Rules; I shall never love
Mace, nor tope again; I told you then my brain was weak, nor am I faulty; I did
my part, and prepared your Baths fit for my experiment; A nobler work had never
been done, nor prouder Subject of my Art will never be shown, had not that
cursed Wine made us forget to limit the operation and proportion in the charm,
to such or such a form; you should have named some body for similitude or
shape; you should have seen what miracle our skill would have performed; But I
too late, remember your dispute, (which was handsomest) held you so long in
resolving, drinking to this, and admiring that Beauty, till you forgot to
resolve on one whose name but called on in the Charm had stood the form or
mould to have cast your wives in. And now when Wine and delay, (your own
Crimes) have undone us all, unjustly you punish the chance on me, though your
nwo Heart knows the Charm was of high force, and wrought but too effectually.


Ferdin. And is there no remedy then? must mine continue in this horrid form?


Edwardo. Nor no retriving my wife, is she absolutely lost in fumo? Is It
possible to fix the broth again and recover her? No Art to save so much as is
useful of her? Only so much, good Sir, as will make a wife but to stand good
in Law; I desire no more, pray will you use your Interest with his Highness the
Devil, to spare me so much of my wife; there will be enough to make him merry
besides.


Mount. Alas, it is neither in Art nor Nature to relieve you; For I confess,
the parings, or chips, as we call them, which the Charm has hewn from the
Giant, are the Devils fees by contract; for which he is bound in exchange to
furnish so much of his own store as wanted to build your Dwarf; And your
Worship knows, how impossible 'twill be to get a pound of sweet woman's flesh
out of his hungry kitching.


Ferdin. Why then, mine is more then three parts Devil.


Mount. Not so, Sir! the stock is only Devil, the graft was your own little
wife inoculated.


Edwardo. Now, have thou found my wife?


[Enter Rogero. Rogero. Yes, Sir; We have found her at last, but we were fain
to strain the broth from her first, and then we found her lying in the Herbs;
It Is a fine little Gentlewoman, and she sleeps still.


Ferdin. And mine, Rogero, prithee how does she bear her burden?


Rogero. Yours, Sir, is lusty, and walks about the house, starts, and wonders
at her self; seems angry with her own shadow, then frowns, and listens as if
she were frighted; she will not believe she is her self; yet she knows me, and
wonders why I call her by her name; she asks for you, then pinches and pricks
her self till she squeeks again, ere she would believe that load at her back
and belly belonged to her; in earnest, Sir, it is a sad sin to wrong them thus.


[Enter the Guardian. Guard. Gentlemen, is the Report true? have you murdered
your wives? The Town is full of such a mischief.


Ferdin. Fie, no Sir; murdered them? my wife's gone out just before you; we
only tried the foolish experiment of the Baths, which the famous man professes
that sold us the admirable powder.


Guard. What Baths?


Edwardo. Those of excellent virtue, which make a Dwarf a Giant, or Gyantize a
Dwarf; rendering any person bathed therein, great or little, as you desire; And
we, to express our Affections to our dear wives, willing to spare no cost,
forsooth, when their good was concerned, employed this Artist to prepare two
privately; which, by a mistake, or rather omission of some Ceremonies, the
unlimited remedies have wrought a little beyond our desires, and have boiled
away so much of my wife, as I fear the remainder will be of no use; But she is
very well in health, and the heartiest little thing, as much Soul as ever; what
was a Marble Rock before is contracted into a Diamond; if you will please to go
in; you shall see her, she lies so fine and quiet in her cradle; but she will
grow every day now the Spring comes on.


Ferdin. And mine had a mischance to be cast into an evil mould, and is come
out like a wry bullet; But we'll mend all these misfortunes, by being the best
Husbands; and you must speak a good word for us to reconcile the business, and
we will yet be more grateful to you for past kindness; Come, Ned, let us wait
on our noble Kinsman to dinner, and drink down this sorrow.


Guard. Gentlemen, this is no drinking nor jesting matter; I must desire you will
restore the money and Jewels you have rereived; Besides an Account, before the
Justice of both my wards; where your unlawful using of witchcraft to win them,
and now to murder them, shall be presented to the Inquisition; who, I hope,
will not see a couple of lewd Heretics to murder their Wives, and rob the
true Heirs of the Estate; I Will find the Justice for you, and he shall sing
your Epithalamium.


[Exit Guardian. Ferdin. Witchcraft and Murder? Fine points for a Member of
the English Church to answer in a Spanish Inquisition! Now do I smell the
faggots and the fire, or a rope, for fooling.


Edwardo. Not only lose our fortunes, but come to make a Holly-day for idle
folks! For my part, I am so angry at my luck I care not if I be hanged; it is all
the remedy that is left us; Pox on it, it is but an ill quarter of an hour; and
when it is past, let Fortune kiss me where I sat a Saturday; I Will even go hang
my self, and be revenged of a Croyden fool.


Ferdin. I and Thomaso how he will Triumph upon this second chance! His Tongue
will sting worse then the Boatswaines pissle, if our sentence do find so much
grace as the Galley.


Edwardo. But first we'll spoil your Quacking, Sirrah, you dog; Help Fred, by
this flesh, you go into your own porrage; and let me alone to call upon your
proportion, as high as my wife, and four times as big, with a stomach equal;
I Will secure you from the Galleys, They take hold of the Mountebank, and pull
him off the stage.

They pull him and throw him off the stage.

Sirrah.


Mount. Oh noble Gentlemen, have mercy upon me, let my Art plead; You know who
dies with me, the age is wounded, Nations will perish with my secrets; No
mercy! no pity! Spare me and I Will redeem all yet.


Edwardo. So, there is one Rogue fitted.


Ferdin. There are three in already, who are they?


Edwardo. No matter who, I have taken an order for their size; We'll have such
a nest of Giants to revenge my quarrel against the Country; I hope they will
plant again the race of true Moors and Saracens in this damned Nation; four
such Giants will destroy them with two of the three Curses, Sword, and Famine;
I am sure Castile cannot feed them, nor fight with them without Auxiliaries; I
am resolved I Will fly this unlucky clime.


[Enter Rogero. Rog. There are some Gentlemen without desire to speak with you


Edwardo. Prithee call them in.


[Enter Don Pedro, Carlo, and Johanne. Ferdin. More mischief yet! what fart
blew them hither?


Pedro. Gentlemen, I come to inquire for a Sister; I am told she knows the way
to this House, and so shall I if not restored.


Edwardo. Have you lost a Sister, is it a great or little Sister?


Johanne. She was no Monster, Sir.


Ferdin. 'Twas strange, considering who claims her.


Pedro. This Injury will not pass thus; we shall find a way to take a serious
and a strict account from some of you.


Edwardo. Sir, there are none here but what are in the pot; We have no leisure
to think of you nor your losses; We have business and losses of our own; Our
Wives and two hundred thousand Crowns boiled to nothing, cozened and cheated
by a damned Mountebank; but the slave is in pickle for it.


Ferdin. Yes, Sir; it is we that are cozened the second and third time, fools
in grain, and stand fair to burnt or hanged too; Judge then whether we are in
stealing case; A pox on Bathing, I shall never love broth nor spoon-meat again;
Would any man have thought liquor would have been our Enemy?


Johanne. Come, Sir; let us lose no time, you see she is not here, and haste to
the Ambassadors; you may stay short, while I can inform my self.


[Exit Pedro, Johanne, and Carlo. Ferdin. Where is the Guardian?


Rogero. Gone, Sir, long since.


Edwardo. Gone? Hark, Fred; There is no dallying nor fooling in this case;
therefore let us haste, and pack up the money, and save our selves in the
Ambassadors House, before the Justice seize us; we shall never be Innocent if
they know we have that guilt about us; and let Rogero shut up all the doors,
and follow us when he has done.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Angellica, and Paulina. Angel. MY Heart's at ease since I saw the
mistake; and 'twas but Justice to let that seditious fool fall into that
mischief he designed for others; 'Twas he that embroiled us all; the
necessitous fool, to get a fleece from every man flock, played the woolf one
day, and the Shep-herd another.


Paulina. I was amazed at nothing more then to hear them brag that you would
join in the Murder of one you loved.


Angel. And I wonder at your Sisters Hatred.


Paulina. Sister? That Is a story I shall clear some other time.


Angel. You have reason, and we ought to consider our safety; for though we are
both innocent from the blood of that fool, yet we know how busy the Justice
will be to squeeze as many into the guilt as he can, either as Accessories, or
Actors in the crime; Therefore I Will take my leave of you, and retire to the
Venetian Embassadour's; where my people will, by this, expect me with what they
can save of value in my House.


Paulina. I believe I shall be safe under the English Arms, from whence (since
we have made this Friendship) you shall constantly hear from me.


Angel. Pray let me; and be so just to let him know how innocent I have been in
this design; and all my crimes were but so many loves of him.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. VII.
Enter Harrigo, Thomaso, Ferdinando, and Edwardo. Thom. ARe you serious?


Edw. I, by this unlucky day, undone for ever; not only lost the Birds but our
selves too; unless with these feathers we can make us wings to fly to our
safety, if you will not protect us from the Justice and their Guardian.


Har. That Guardian is a Jew, a Rogue, I know him, and he will undo you all; a
Bath say you, lost in a Bath!


Edw. You know what the Mountebank professed the other day; see, here are his
Papers, this is his Powder, and a sovereign one; I Would not give this Dose for
the best Diamond in Europe: now the secrets gone, do not taste it, unless you
mean to run mad for love of me; and I have vexations enough without the
addition of such a mischief. Travel, Quoth you? a month of such days as I have
past will give a man experience enough to be a Witch, if he be so unlucky as to
escape hanging.


Har. And what will thou do with that Powder?


Edw. I Will travel till I find some small Princess that pleases me, and give it
her; with a dose of this I can choose my woman through the world; and 'twere not
for that satisfaction this loss would kill me.


Ferd. Nay, By this hand, I Will betray him; he has a Plot upon the Angellica
with it; she is handsome and rich; and I heard him swear, even now, he thought
he should never thrive till he had married one of your seasoned Grass-widows.


Edw. By my troth, I had as live take her as a Cag'd Nymph, a mewed Maid from a
Grate in a Nunnery that acts what she can, and wishes the rest; whose
Maidenhead is a prisoner at the best: all this and more I am armed against;
and foresaw your mirth and scorn when I got her, and the joy now when you
should hear I had lost her: but I am resolved, if my Powder do not thrive, to
put half my stock in a venture, and away for the Indies, and live where these
stories were never heard of.


Thom. The Indies!


Edw. Yes, the Indies; where we are promised six black wives a piece, smooth
and comely beauties, naked truths, Eves, in the state of innocence, Girls that
will neigh and fight for my bed.


Thom. Bless the man! three couple of Moors in thy bed! they will hunt thee to
death.


Ferd. Hunt their hunt, we are resolved, Sir; six plump, smooth, pregnant
Girls a piece is the bargain, with flat-noses all, for convenience of kissing,
with brave swelled lips, Cupids Cushions; so soft and sweet, the Rogues dew is
sweet in the Dog Days; their very sweat Aromatique and Balsam all; upon these
we resolve to plant a Croyden Justice, and an Essex Captain of the tame bands;
and I warrant thee the seed will thrive.


Edw. Your Fourbisher, your Magellan, your Drake and Rawley; all consent your
Moors woman has no fellow in nature; she is your black Garden-mould, the same
rich earth Adam dug in, so full of nature and strength the Sun dwells in
her; and will send forth such Clusters of Boys and Girls, such straw, and such
an ear, so full, so clean, the Cradles will not hold the Barnes: our barren
cold red and white clay knows no such harvest; all the streams the Sun sucks
from the parched earth you will find in the woman there, as full and luscious
as the Greek Vine; and it is true pleasure to pluck a Girl there, so full of
juice she will fill the Press; and there women show their true virtue and their
use.


Har. Methinks Edwardo is an apt Scholar; and now you are leaving the world,
given over by Matrimony to a wedded Bed, even make your will, and entail your
Batchelors opinion on him; I would see this Testament signed, for I perceive
he is resolved to succeed you in the Wanderer; and 'twill not be an ill journey,
Sir, though I Am afraid it will be a long one if you travel till you lose the
Justice of Peace: consider upon the business till I return; I must be gone for
fear my stay may bring some misfortune to poor Paulina, who will suffer if I
provide not for her safety; and her kindness deserves all our care.


Thom. Dear Harrigo, find her, and use all possible means to bring her here.


Har. Leave that to me; but you must not fail to give her a present for old
kindness sake, since you resolve to see her no more.


Thom. I shall not need, there is one within will do it for me, who resolved it
as soon as I told her 'twas she that saved my life: and she now is as kind to
Paulina as I have been, and loves her for loving me; she longs to see her, and
hopes to persuade her into a Monastery.


Har. I Will be gone; but pray be you two private here till I inform my self how
your business stands with the Justice; and 'twill not be amiss to accuse the
Guardian of conspiracy, and try if you can fright him from the pursuit; I Will
ask counsel in the business.


[Exit Harrigo. Ferd. Well, Sir; how goes your business? better I hope then
ours.


Thom. I am married too, and settled, I believe, for a hundred years, or so; if
I fall not into a kettle.


Edw. Well, Sir; let the Kettle boil; and know her Brother is in pursuit of
you; he came to our house to inquire, Pox upon the sad hour, it is full of
unbidden guests I fear by this time; we durst not stay to eat our dinner; and
if you give us not some food and remedy for care, a bottle or two apiece to
chide sorrow, we are lost; all the foes of man arm against us.


Thom. I warrant you for meat; those days of affliction are over sure; a Wife
and no meat! 'twere sin as well as folly to beg single, and double too; no,
Ned; I always told you when ever I married I would be happy and honest. -- See
who comes here; Sweet heart, Enter Serulina and Calis. prithee, let me present
my widowed friends to you.


Serul. They are most welcome, and so are all that bear that title.


[They salute her. Ferd. What a delicate taste an honest woman's lips have above
a small sinners? I shall never relish a Whores again, I fear; I wonder what
Country my good fortune is fled to; I have neither Powder, Wife nor Whore, to
build upon; was ever Gentleman-traveller so out of Cash and Conversation as I
am? would I were at Paris, or the Hague, again; did I leave those places of
pleasure and quiet civil life to come to this where mischiefs only swarm; whose
very air is lousy, and that curse would destroy the Country but for another
curse that wars with it, that of the dust which flies so hot it would fire
powder as it passes; every sand is so many sparks in the air: yet here we walk
in this furnace without a miracle.


Thom. Nay, then I despair of thee; can one affliction make thee compare
Holland to Spain? Oh the Fish-pots and Butter of that Egypt without a River;
whose Mist of ignorance hangs upon them still, and though the English Olivers
rod be over them, yet their hearts are hardened against poor Cavaliers; I
thought this heat would have sweat out all the kindness thou suck'dst in with
Roterdam Beer: but I Am afraid 'twill stay as long as the gravel in the
Kidneys; the fruits of Hop's, Turnips, and Pickl'd-herrings which paves the
back.


Ferd. For all this Satyr, the Flesh and Fish is such as your Madrid has not
shown us the like in her lean Shambles and starved Markets, where the Priests
are fain to conjure for Fish, by throwing Tubfuls of Tripes into the water; and
then by virtue of a Bull by Ignatius's name, command that they be fish; and
they have faith enough to eat it afterward, and swear there is bones in it too,
transubstantiated Tripes: a true Papist Catholic would distinguish what fish
he eats with bread of yesterday; for there is nothing but the Wafer baked in
the City, and it is well they have this trick of fishing by miracle; for that
which comes naturally to the Market, those in the Zodiac are as fresh and
sweet, and lay less in the Sun then the Salmon we eat last; it walked like a
vision before us for twenty days upon a Mule; and yet past for fresh, even at
the Catholic Kings own board. You used to eat such at Woods in the Hague?


Thom. Who will deny Holland has Fish, or who can say they have Flesh? By this
light, their Flesh is Fish, and their Fowl fly-Turf; their Birds but feathered
Fish; and their Fish finn'd Mud: all you see, smell or taste, is Fish; it is
indeed so many Provinces of Fish-street.


Ferd. Yet I have seen you sigh and dye for one of these dishes of Milk;
Mademoiselle, what do you call her, Ned?


Thom. Skel-fish.


Ferd. Pish, Mademoiselle.


Thom. Van Knowles, Van Cates.


Ferd. Prithee leave fooling; Lord, Ned, you know her; it is the Ufrow Van --


Thom. Stoff, or Cabillio?


Ferd. The Here Van --


Thom. Forman, Skipper, Crves and Buord?


Ferd. Nay, then you are resolved.


Thom. By this hand, I have named all the great Names and Families in the
Country, except the Royal Orange; which they have so squeezed with a clinch,
they shall be sure to have my curse.


Ferd. Yet last year they were so fair, so white, so smooth, so proper; I have
seen you frown and sigh at the sight; the grand Mistress shall know what a
Knight she has of you.


Thom. One Swallow makes no Summer; though it is confessed the flesh is white,
and such as if I would eat a Girl it should be a Dutch-girle, a North Holland
child, it is pure Vitello, Mungany, or Capon de Lecho, as white and sweet as
either; and when it is weaned, the Pigs, her Foster Brothers, that sucked with
her, are as good as she; In earnest, Madam, a Rotterdams Pig, taken from my
Hostesses own breast; do remember, Ned, when we stole the Sowesbaby out of
the Cradle where the kind Nurse had hid it? 'twas cruel Ned that killed it: the
Neighbors ran together at the cry; and as if we had killed her first born, it
put all the house in mourning, till Sack and Sugar allayed the grief.


Edw. I remember 'twas at the Saint John's head, and it proved the purest Babe
of grace; it would have tempted a Jew as it lay in the dish; old Satan of the
Disser, and a Scot his Host, in spite of Disser, which is Will Murrey, L.
Disser. Will Crofts, T. Killig. Jack Denham. Moses fell to the Roast.


Ferd. 'Twas where we met Ambassador Will, and Resident Tom, with M. Sheriffs
Secretary, John the Poet with the Nose; all Gondiberts dire Foes; from Poland
laden with the spoils of what do you lack, Sir; and all the Scotch Pedlars
Packs on their backs, Sir.


Serul. I am pleased to find you all in so good humor; and would bear my part
were my Brother and you friends in your heart.


Thom. The Ambassador sent a civil Message to him; and had an Answer both kind
and serious, and is now gone himself to speak with him; and I believe all will
end in Comedy, since Co^nelio's mischief is not mortal; this story of the Baths
will make fit mirth for a Wedding. -- Harrigo, haste thou found her?


[Enter Har. Har. Yes, she is without, but ashamed, and afraid both; to see your
Lady; shall I fetch her in?


Serul. Yes, pray Don Harrigo, I long to see her.


Thom. No, I Will do it my self; for there is nothing of shame belongs to the
kindness of yesterday; the obligations of to day bear their own date; and
faults hereafter are crimes to you; what is past is upon mine own score.


Enter Harrigo, and Paulina; Thomaso meets her, and leads her to Seralina; she
bows to her, Serulina kisses her, and holds her in her arms. Serul. Come, no
more tears; I would not have you stain my wedding day with your griefs; it is
ominous to weep on Hymen's Altar; pray be not sad.


Paul. There is a guilt and shame, as well as sadness in these tears; and I
must hope for nothing but certain misery from your joys; your virtue may smile,
you have all the causes joy can bring you; in birth happy, in love and fortune
blessed, and in innocence, which crowns the rest. Yet heaven witness, I envy not
your youth her peace; for though I cannot be innocent my self, I am not so
wicked but I can adore both her and virtue in the breasts of others; nor do I
lament a grief that has surpised me; it is long since my heart discovered his;
and they are fond women, who stained with our crimes can hope to weep gallant
men into such madness as to leave the blessings the fair and virtuous Serulina
brings, to blush their lives with us.


Serul. Pray cease this grief, and know my heart has no severe thoughts; I can
see your good and oversee your error, which I know has many arguments to plead;
and if heartily repented leaves your heart as innocent as if it had never been
acted.


Paul. Custom, impious custom, is guilty of all my sins, by being the original
of all my crimes; whose depraved liberty not only tolerates, but encourages
those follies whose guilt I blush before such a virtue as the fair and innocent
Serulina; who has not only honor, but mercy too. Other women may be chaste,
but they are so rigid and so cruel to our faults; and their counsels so full of
whips and stings, it rather incenses and hardens then reclaims a heart; nor
does their ill nature care to make a convert amongst us, so they may have the
vanity to make a Satyr upon us; but here I find the Balsam of true innocence;
which is not so proud, or vain in her own blessed condition, as sollicitous to
preserve and redeem others: and here I see the true stock of honor, which in
your generous breast has diviner forms and fruits then we can know or imagine
in our sick state; yet I dare boast never to have broke the Laws she prescribed
to our sex, faithful, kind, constant and obedient to cur Lovers, concerned only
in their good, never betraying or abandoning their trust.


Serul. I swear there are charms in her tongue, her very griefs are bewitching;
what would her mirth and kindness do? how graceful, how delightful, when her
sadness is thus lovely, thus catching; infectious grief has made me sad in
spite of this days joy.


Thom. Though this fault be folly in strict sense; yet you see we have
sometimes some reason to love these Girls; and I am confident I Will never want
that excuse; you shall always find a handsome witty cause of my sin at least.


Serul. Have you no thoughts of retiring, now? methinks, in this handsome
sorrow you should have a sense of your condition, such as might prompt you to
the abandoning this world; and listen to all those Angels that summon the
heart: hark how they call; see where virtue stands, and beckens thee to come!
prithee, dear Paulina, go, and spend some of that youth and beauty with her,
try but the difference; what a peace and calm thy mind will feel, there is no
thorns nor dangers; thy quiet mind fortune and death it self despising: Oh,
that thou could be so early wise; what Jewel would I not give to see thee
become my penitent! and once in the Magdalenes, what joy it would be to me to
converse with such beauty, and such goodness, in the glory of a repentance!
your friend too shall visit you; dear Paulina, consider what I say, and look
back upon those dangers both of rocks and seas thou daily venturest in this
little barque, how ill guided, and worse manned, thy youth must be to struggle
with those storms and tempests which the world threatens thy beauty having no
compass nor star to steer by.


Paul. The Magdalenes, Madam; though I bow to your goodness, yet I perceive
your Ladyship knows not the place: I was bred sometime amongst 'em, and from my
knowledge of their customs take leave to say it; when I retire from the world
it shall not be into a Nunnery, for I am resolved to be honest when ever I
profess it; a Nunnery will only add a dissimulation and facriledge to my fault;
and it is less sin and shame to yield to the flatteries of young men then the
lust and force of old women; I speak a known truth of their too common crimes;
young strange women there shall suffer more pollution and rapes then in sacked
Cities.


Thom. The Magdalenes, my heart! why, if I would breed a Thais or another Lais,
or put Ovid again to School to learn a new art of love, I would send him to
study at the grate of the Convertines, where Aretine should be made an ass, and
blush the publishing his dull postures, compared to the ingenious lust that is
practiced in their cells.


Paul. My own house is far from chaste, but it is a Church, compared to theirs;
whose crimes have such blackness in them persons of your honor can neither
imagine, nor believe.


Thom. How can the world expect better from such multiplied devils in a nest
assembled by want, or condemned by the Law for some horrid crime? the most
innocent enter in passion, or drove by the despair of some discontent; and
though diverse causes bring them, all are forced; no one whom reason, honor, or
conscience guides, which makes them when they have recovered the anger, fear
and despair that threw them in, their minds turn to the old vomit; for their
hearts are slaves still to the same lusts, and burn with the same desires,
whose fires are increased with the thoughts of past faults, which they are so
far from repenting, as with double sin they act them over again, while the
spirit of lust plays two parts alone, the lover and the loved, till what was
fornication in their house becomes Sodomy in their Cell; two or three pill'd
sins Nunns wear, it is not honor, nor conscience binds; double grates can only
keep them from breaking of their vows; and were not the hangman of more terror
then the Confesser, you should see what swarms their hives would send forth.


Edw. I would you would leave this subject, and think of dinner, and take your
convert with you.


Serul. I would she were my convert, I would not only dine with her, but fast
for her, in hopes of such a blessing.


Paul. Truly, Madam; I Am resolved, at least to change the place, if not my
life, to avoid all occasions of being a further trouble to you and your
fortune; for since we are both struck with one Dart, the Angellica and my self
are designed for Italy, to seek a remedy by absence; she only begs you will
forgive her sending your Letter to Don Pedro, it being the only crime you can
accuse her of; and by this journey avoid the trouble of seeing what can only be
our afflictions.


Thom. There is nothing of anger, but much of kindness due to both: and since
you resolve upon that journey, I am confident you will find them both a kind
and civil Nation; and here is a Lover begs you will wear this Ring in memory of
her and your kindness yesterday. The Angellica shall have her thousand crowns
again, 'twas the first money I ever got by the sex; and I cannot but wonder at
their narrow minds, as well as their fortunes that can be so poorly spirited as
to design farther then the kindness of a woman. I have bought many in my time,
but never yet either asked or got more of a woman then her flesh. What you will
do, Madam, I know not.


Serul. Where I give my faith and friendship I shall never refuse my fortune;
and I wonder as much at them who can give their persons and deny their goods,
as you do at those who prostitute themselves for money.


Paul. Madam, I shall wear this favor to my grave; for I perceive it is a debt
I owe your goodness; and if your husband does not change his nature you will
not repent your kindness: for Don Thomaso had always a heart greater then his
fortune; and his presents still held proportion with his love, rather then with
his money.


Serul. I will not afflict you farther, but wish you a happy journey; and will
still hope better resolutions then you promise; for it is impossible good nature
should be wilfully and resolvedly wicked: it is true, Nature has her weakness,
and vanity or want may sometimes counsel us against our hearts; and therefore,
when ever you can resolve, here am I that will remove those difficulties; and
as long as I have any fortune you shall not have that excuse, to become as fit
for my love as the kind Paulina is for my my pity: Come, you must dine with us.


Paul. I should gladly receive the honor, Madam, if I durst avow my being here.


Thom. Come, no fears; thy innocence shall be as public as thy kindness; and
as long as I have friends, or fortune, they shall both protect thee.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Don Pedro, and Carlo. Pedro. DId you see my Sister?


Carlo. No, Sir; she desired to be excused till the Ambassador had spoken with
you.


Ped. What answer had you from him?


Carlo. He confessed they were married, and was highly satisfied with the
civility of your Message; and bid me assure you all the satisfaction you could
expect in honor; and that he would immediately wait upon you himself; his
Coach was ready when I came out; and I saw him pass the Piazza now; it would
not be amiss you were in readiness to receive him.


Pedro. Call Johanne, and get the people in readiness.


Carlo. There is no struggling in this case, Sir; she being of years to choose;
'twas a mischief might have been prevented; but it is not to be redeemed.


[Exeurt. ACT. V. SCEN. IX.
Enter Harrigo, Edwardo, Ferdinando, and Paulina. Har. YOu must excuse us, we
cannot stay, but we will be with you in a minute; we expect the Ambassadors
return; Don Pedro is coming with him to make a peace between him and Thomaso;
when that business is over, we will find you; in the mean time, dear Paulina, I Will
leave you Mistress of my Chamber; and Gentlemen, look you be civil to this Lady.


[Exit Harrigo. Edw. Faith, Paulina, I am thinking it is but a folly for us to
part, being of one mind; for this is no place for the Edwardos neither; the air
does not agree with me; especially now they have got the trick of beating and
couzening me, I shall never be safe; and home I Am resolved not to go, for I
have seen the new Catechism; and though I can lay hold of sin by as lively a
resolution as any, yet wickedness is so ill dressed, so stolen, and so oppressed;
sin does not savor in that cold air as in this hot climate; the Cooks and
Sauce are better here, though the sin and flesh be the same; and now they have
spoiled Wed-lock too; for unless a Wench can steal a man, and run away with
him, she must lie alone.


Ferd. Faith, Child, having heard your resolutions we are resolved (if you and
the Angellica like our humors) to bear you company into Italy; look you
Paulina, we have not lost all; though the Birds be flown, there are some
thousands of Pistols yet, and Jewels, to a sum large enough (I warrant you) to
maintain a Soldiers life, which in honor must not be long, for fear of the
Proverb: A gray Soldier.


Edw. Is it a match? shall we remove the Scene to Italy, and swear Comrades?
Fred and I have a mind to wander with such Planets: young and kind
Constellations cannot choose but have good influence upon mirth: dare you
venture your self in our Spears! I Will undertake to prevail with the Angellica.


Paul. If she consent, I Will agree, else I cannot; for I am already obliged to
her and her company.


Ferd. If it be a bargain, Ned shall give us a Supper at parting; I long to see
Italy, and taste the description the Rogue uses to make of it, such Wine, such
Women, such Music; and then his heart fires a volley of sighs to their memory;
and then a Carnival, such as would make a man curse his lot that fell on this
side the Hills, as if 'twere out of the bounds of Gods blessings: at thy
supper, Ned, he shall repeat our lesson; put him but in the humor, and 'twill
be both counsel and comfort.


Edw. My supper! no Fred, no more fuppers; I prithee do not so much as mention
meat in Madrid, there is a curse follows it; I Will not eat again upon mine own
score while I am in it; 'twould make a man swear a fast, to think upon the ill
luck has followed my feasts; and makes me resolve to commit that kind of fault
no more; if ever I fill a woman's belly at that end again, let them play
Lucetta's part; I find feasts and banquets are follies of a high rate, Fred:
and when a man has laid out his money that way, what return does it yield? Fah,
it stinks to name it; and woe be to that bottle of Sack I lay my hands on
first; he shall pay for all these griefs.


Ferd. And my sorrows are as ready to do you reason as any thirsty sinner in
Madrid; Come child, be merry, and learn of us to despise sorrow; we will make thy
journey short, and so laugh over these old stories.


Paul. I shall not be the saddest in the company, Sir, since I find others have
their crosses too: Fellows in misery make the burden light; it is the single
loan grief in jolly troops that to all is heavy still, and wounds both the seer
and the seen.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. X.
Enter Pedro, Thomaso, and Carlo. Pedro. It Is past, Sir, and forgot; the name
of Brother has wiped all other titles from my heart but that of friend, which
shall be faithfully preserved for you; I know you have honor, and that will
make you use her like your self; and still remember how she has preferred your
friendship before either her Family or her Fortune; pray let me see her, Sir.


Thom. Prithee, Harrigo, wait upon her in, and desire the company to follow,
it is late; and we'll to dinner; this had been a merry day if my friends had not
lost their Brides; is there no possibility to get them delivered to the
protection of their Husbands? it is the State, not they are guilty to permit
such witchcraft to be practiced in the City.


Pedro. That will rest in the breast of the inquisidor, who must be dealt with
for a sum of money; who, else, I fear will make their portions as great a crime
as the Bathes have been. -- Sister, I wish Enter Serulina and all the company,
Don Pedro goes and saltes his Sister. you all clear and perfect joy, such as
your kindest thoughts have promised; and, dear Serulina, I conjure you not to
mistake my past severity; 'twas neither want of value or kindness for either,
but a desire to have seen you married into a Family which you know might have
given us both advantage: but since it is your fortune to fix upon this
Gentleman, with all my soul I wish there may be no change in your fortune, but
live and dye happy in one another Friendship; And I hope she will not be the
less welcome to you when a Brother and a servant thus presents her, the Reward
of your first Generous Action: The Portion I shall see with all diligence paid;
and it is now the season and Q for mirth, that I may have some share in your
Joys, 'twill, I hope, be neither unseasonable nor unreasonable to expect you
should relinquish to me Angellica, who, upon my credit, had no hand nor
interest in the Murder designd this day.


Thomaso. I am confident she had not; and though her kindness may want
discretion, yet she wants not good Nature; and I shall not only relinquish,
but use all my power with her to admit Don Pedro, and only him; for by
Serulina's Faith I vow to be as faithful to her Friendship now, as ever I was
to my humor before.


Paulina. Your desires will come too late; for I know the Angellica's
Resolutions are fixed upon a return to Venice; and I am resolved to bear her
company.


Ferdin. Yes faith, and we are all of a Troop if we can escape the Justice;
Nothing but Witchcraft and Murder stays us; would Rogero were returned, that
we might know our doom.


Pedro. Is this serious? Or does the Angellica say this to Alarm my Heart with
her departure?


Edwardo. Yes faith, Sir; We are all for Italy if the Hangman do not lie in
the way; and merrily we will spend the chippings of the Monsters; here is as
much left of Sir Mammons hopes as would cure the Itch in a hot Country.


Pedro. And what shall I do alone in an empty house? How say you, Carlo, shall
you and I make up the Covey? Shall we be welcome, Paulina?


Paulina. I am certain, Sir, you will be most welcome to all the Company; and a
year or two well spent abroad will bury all the wild stories we leave behind;
which is the chief cause makes me resolve upon the Journey.


Pedro. Sister, you were yesterday all my care, and now Don Thomaso has blown
that fear over; Faith take the house into your Protection too; for Carlo and I
am resolved to spend a year or two in Italy upon this occasion; The General
once offered me a command in Millain; if I like the people and the place, I Will
take it; if not, it is a Journey of Pleasure; the season is good, and the
Company better.


Thomaso. Sir, I am now allied to you; and there are many reasons, besides the
kindness to your person, would make me wish your stay; yet all interest laid
aside, it is not only my opinion, but my desire you should take this
Resolution; and if you be not as highly satisfied with the journey, the people,
and the place, as any you have yet seen, I Will forfeit the charge.


Pedro. I am resolved; and now, Serulina, all cause of Jealousy being past
betwixt us, be freely and clearly kind to your Brother, who here vows to my
dear Sister all that her Heart can expect from one that loves and values her;
and to give you one Argument to believe it, look you choose me a wife against I
come home.


Enter Rogero. Thomaso. How now, Rogero, what news?


Rogero. All is well, Sir; The Justices came immediately as you went out, and
have seized all the goods they found. But those Prodigies in the Baths has made
them fly the House; Four such Giants, Sir Amadis, nor the Palmerins ever
encountered; The German guards are now in Arms to seize them, Scarramucha is
come out a Lady, as big again as Don Edwardo's; And there is a Lady come forth
Scarramucha, a Giant amongst Giants; She does so wonder at her Beard and
Breeches, for she has Helena's old Whores Soul in a man's Body; 'twas sport to
see the wonder, and what a start she gave at the Ammunition of her own
Breeches. The Mountebank keeps his own Features, but in a horrid form; and
threatens black destruction to you all: His wife too is one of the loveliest
forms and perfect symmetry that such a Monster can present to the judging eye;
Celia in Youth and Beauty, such as when her charming Hand and Voice led Rome in
Chains; Yet she is still frighted with the power of that Charm that first
enslaved her, and would hide or fly the Anger and the Love of him who now with
frowns and severe looks threatens all; They quickly made the Inquisidors leave
the House; which gave me occasion to tell them you were Travelers, guilty
only in the trying a public experiment; Men that had not a sold to lose, poor
cashiered Cavalliers; whom their Guardian had cozened of their Portions, and
I Would undertake, for a piece of money, should quit your Interest to them; upon
which they seized the Guardian, and expect Don Harrigo to treat your Interest;
You are sure he is in the Galleys for his Life, and his Estate confiscate to the
Church; Your wives will be Prisoners during Life; for to lie with them is held
Copulation with the Devil.


Ferdin. The sum in hand, did not the Guardian tell of that, nor require
Restitution?


Rogero. Not a word; he durst not mention that for fear of confessing my
accusation; which has named him as a party that conspired with the Witch.


Edwardo. Ha! not only free, but hopes of more money; Prithee let Harrigo
treat the Consolation; I will not have above a hundred thousand Crowns; it is
more then a Soldier of our party ought to possess, unless he will eat alone;
for where a Devil shall we find two more to make up our mess?


Ferdin. While we feed upon this Air, I have a Mind to a real dinner; for I
am a thirsty and a hungry sinner.


Thomaso. Love has his Famine too and Thirst, that drinks the Blood, while the
sighing Heart becomes his Food. But we a more propitious Deity have found;
which with smiling Fates, and full Joys, our Loves has crowned; And now,
Madam, all Fears and Tyranny of the Boy must be remembered only as the salt and
seasoning of this Joy; Whilst cheerful Hymen's Nuptial Treasures invites to new
and surprising pleasures; Such, as I in all my curious search could never find;
Embraces that are as chaste as kind: And I conjure you all, where ere you go,
proclaim what I shall still adore; The Virtue of this Star, bright Serulina,
whose Friendship thus has fixed the Wanderer.


[Exeunt. FINIS.
THE FIRST PART OF Bellamira her Dream: OR, THE Love of Shadows. A
TRAGI-COMEDY, The Scene NAPLES and SICILY.

Written in VENICE, BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady MARY VILLIERS DUCHESS OF RICHMOND and LENOX.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

The Names of the Actors:
The King of Naples and Sicily. Ortho, Brother of the King, slain in a Battle.
Leopoldo, Prince of Sicily and Naples. Almanzor, Prince of Spain. Roderigo, His
Lieutenant General. Bellamira, Sister to Leopoldo. Fidelia, A Lady of the
Court. Pollidor, Two Foresters. Phillora his Sister, Ravack, A banished Lord,
of dead Ortho's party. Nigro, Three Lords of Ortho's party, in Arms in Gaietta.
Clytus, Cleon, Palantus, General of the Horse to the King of Sicily and Naples.
Philemon, An old Lord at Court. A Satyr, In Love with Phillora. Areus, A Moor,
Slave to Leopoldo. Juba, A Moor, Friend to Arcus, Both Prisoners. Cadess, his
Sister. Soldiers and Servants, such as the Scene Requires.
Bellamira 's habit, when disguised, some Antic handsome Property.

Pollidor, Phillora, and Ravack, must be habited like Foresters, part Hunters,
part Shepherds habit; neither Rich nor Plain, but proper all, of different
Colors; For the two young ones, gray and blue, hair Color, white and some
silver; Phillora must have a piece of the Lions Skin in her habit; Ravack must
have a very white Curled head and Beard of Hair.

The Satyr must have a Call of Silk and Silver, and the Wool of Phelice made
into a kind of scrip on one side, and the Horns of Phelice gilt tied to the
ends of it.

Arcus must be in a Noble habit, Rich, and his Person black, being a Moor.

THE FIRST PART OF Bellamira her Dream: OR, THE Love of Shadows.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter Nigro, Ravack, Cleon, and Attendants. Nigro. It Is for certain, the
people at last have found a head, to whom Clytus is joined; and I fear will
follow the Revenge with as little mercy as the King showed his brother, our
dead Master, the Royal Ortho; whose invasion though we neither counseled, nor
assisted, yet such is the fate of Courts, when the People Arm against their
Princes; which we have sadly proved, who now suffer that punishment which was
meant to the Authors of that unnatural War.


Rav. Is the Spanish Prince arrived at Naples? is there a ground for that
report?


Nig. Most certain; led on by Clytus, Their descent in Sicily found no
resistance; the people were so generally disaffected with the present
Government they willingly consented to put themselves under the prince's
protection; This news has awaked the King, till then lost in security; and now
too late he finds the fire he despised has taken hold of his Palace. The prince
Leopoldo is absent too; A person of that Piety and Virtue, but that he is the
cloud that shadows our young King, and unjustly possesses his right, I could
join with the world in worship of him; and it was indeed his Interest, joined
with his noble Sisters, which these late years has kept the people quiet; But
the prince and Palantus being absent in these late disorders, our Friends have
taken hold of the occasion, and prevailed so far, that the people are now Armed
in the Name of our long lost prince; which hope, joined with their hatred of
the present Government, has begot a danger. The King cannot resist, but it is
thought he will be forced to leave Naples, and seek a safety in Capua, that
place in my Opinion being fittest to make his general Rendevouz. This news was
the cause of my sending for you, that you might avoy'd the present danger which
the prince Leopoldo and Palantus his Army may bring, who are now upon their
march toward Naples, and must pass through your Forest, where your abode,
during these troubles, will be most unsafe; and to prevent a mischief, pray let
me counsel your self, and the Children, to retire hither this Evening. Where
did you leave them?


Rav. A hunting, in which they both delight; Books, and that, are their great
diversion; and I am glad to find their Affections so Innocent, and minds so
ready still to take fire at any great Example they meet in Story: I left them
this morning in chase of a wild Bore; nor is Phillora less masculine in her
Spirit then P^llidor, but far from cruel, or Barbarous; I have wondered to see
her give such wounds, and then lament them; she has indeed overcome all the
Niceties of her Sex, and yet retains the softness of her Nature; and though she
loves to be one still in all our Sports, yet a modest, innocent, and most
gentle assuredness attends all her Actions.


Nig. Nature and Sex are but materials that custom works upon; and both Sexes
are Effeminate, or Warlike, as they are bred; -- but no more of this: time is
too precious; Now or Never we must regain our Country, Prince and Liberty;
Clytus, our Friend, is already joined with the Spanish Prince, and Commands in
Naples; The Castles are in his hands, declared for the survying heirs of the
dead Ortho, and with his our Forces shall this day join; and if the gods have
enough revenged that rash Act of our unfortunate Master, We, the remnant of his
friends, that this sixteen years have suffered all kinds of Calamities for his
fault, may yet hope to return to our Country. In the mean time, Cleon, let
some diligent spy follow the Princes Army, and learn (if it be possible) his
intentions, and observe his motions, numbers, and Affections of his Soldiers.


Rav. That my tame Satyr shall do; he is crafty, and seems simple, armed with
his Club he shall mingle with them; he is acquainted too with all the Fasts of
the Forest, secret paths and Caves, and can, in spite of their swiftest
horses, make a retreat; the poor wretch dotes upon my Girl; and if she will but
promise to sing, or play to him, there is no danger, for her sake, he will not
attempt; but I must return e're they miss me.


Nig. Farewell, the Gods guide our honest intents; it is not for Revenge, but
justice, that we strike.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter the King, Phillemon, and Attendants. King. PHillemon, are those returned
we sent to mingle themselves with the multitude, to try, if 'twere possible to
learn the cause of their taking Arms so suddenly.


Phill. Some, Sir, are returned, all report the same substance in different
language, great oppression, no Justice done upon complaint; But the great cause
is, the pretended pity they ought to have upon their Countrymen, whose long
miseries they publicly lament, whilst others proclaim the joyful news, that
their young prince Genorio lives, who long since was mourned, as part of his
Fathers ruin, whose Injuries to your Majesty, though they were of the highest
nature, yet being a Brother, I could have wished they had not found so severe a
Justice.


King. He fell not by any Act of Cruelty that we ought to blush for. -- War,
that War which he most unjustly waged, as 'twas his crime, proved his
punishment too. Sicily was the Conquest of our Father; In which I served him,
and with my Blood entitled my self to that Crown which, at his death, was by
my Fathers will conferred upon me; Naples was my Brothers birthright; yet the
gods witness with me, neither my wishes nor commands were guilty of his or his
Childrens death, which to this hour my soul laments; And if the kinder fates
have preserved them, as they pretend; May all miseries find me, and pursue me
to my Posterity, if I shall not with joy carry these gray hairs to Sicily, and
deliver Naples into their hands, being the undoubted right of their Father.


Phill. This Piety, Sir, I am confident had long since produced a happy Peace,
could their Party have given faith to it; but their guilt, and doubt of such a
goodness has now bred this Civil War; which the desperate condition of their
banished Nobility I fear will make use of. Clytus is certainly with them, and
now Commands the Castles where he has declared the young King Genorio, and his
Sister, the Princess, Phidamira living, with which Joy the people are possessed;
and your Majesty must look upon that Joy as your Enemy; For I cannot believe
the report true, though I confess I wish it; it is but a pretense, to set the
people against your Majesty, and gain a power to work your ruin; to prevent
which, my Counsel is, that your Majesty immediately proclaim Genorio King, and
pardon to all if they can produce him, and require a cessation of Arms till the
people be satisfied, whether your Majesty or their Intentions be most
Ingenuous, in restoring the young King to his Right.


Enter Arcus with a Paper which he gives the King. King. Arcus, what news? Thy
looks are full of trouble; How do thou find the people inclined?


Arcus. To the ruin, Sir, of your self and Family; they call the Prince and
Princess Dissemblers, and Betrayers of their Trust, your Majesty Usurper,
Tyrant, and Murderer of your Brother and his Children. Pardon, Sir, this blunt
relation; my gratitude for the freedom I have found makes me unwilling to
flatter your Majesty into a Ruin.


King. How does this agree with Clytus his proclaiming their Prince Genorio
King?


Arcus. Alas, Sir, Reason, Justice, nor Honor, you must not look for in this
Beast the Multitude; it is all Back and Belly, no Breast, no room for a Heart;
All Slave when commanded; All Lust when they have power; they are full of Rage
and Wine; Treason and Novelty are the things they worwip: A Slave of the same
Gally where I was Prisoner gave me this Paper; it is a Declaration the Spaniards
and Confederates have dispersed, wherein the Cause and Resolution of this War
is most maliciously set down, and I fear finds too much faith among the
people; they have intelligence too abroad; some (when I was there) came from
Capua, that assured them they had no time to lose, for the Prince Leopoldo was
upon his March, and would within two days be in sight of the City, upon which
they purposed immediately to attempt the Palace; In short, my fear for your
Majesty apprehends the worst that Malice and Treason can act upon your self and
royal Family.


Phil. Therefore consider, Sir, whether your strength either in the place or
number of your Friends, be able to resist this Torrent till the Prince can come
to give you aid; and if not, take counsel with your safety, and make retreat to
Aversa, it is in the way to Capua, whither your friends shall have private order
to repair; it is in the Princes way too, whose coming is much sooner than they
feared.


Arcus. Your Majesty's safety has no time to spare; this night you must prepare
for Flight or Defense; I have those in readiness shall deliver your Orders for
either as it shall be resolved.


King. What to resolve I know not; My heart scorns to apprehend these Villains;
yet when I consider what Stakes they throw for, how little they can lose, and
what they may win, who knows how Fortune may assist the daring of such
Villains? My dear Bellamira, and Leopoldo too, their Fates are woven in this
Thread of mine, else they should find, old as I am I have not lost one grain of
that courage that gave me conquest in my youth. Prithee find my Bellamira, she
must this night prepare to depart with me. I dare not venture to leave her
here; All her Guards of Beauty, Greatness, or Virtue, are but idle nothings
when they meet the barbarous force of Treason in a raging Multitude: Have you
seen her lately, Philemon?


Phil. Yes Sit, but so afflicted since the Invasion of the Spaniard, and Revolt
of Sicily, she has scarce eat or slept, and with pain endures the conversation
of her Friends; her mind and fears are still bent upon her Dream, the thought
of which she now trembles at, and apprehends it as a prophetic Vision sent by
the Gods to us to denounce these miseries.


King. 'Twas odd, but my innocence makes me secure; and yet I dare neither
believe nor despise it; for though Dreams be the common Issue of Sleep, and are
in relation to the thoughts we have been most affected with the day before, or
take their Births from the Humors that are most predominant in our
Constitutions, yet men may reasonably and piously believe the Gods both do and
have by those strange ways sometimes darkly foretold their Designs; which makes
me neither believe nor contemn all Dreams. -- But no more of this, the night
and Bellamira, if habited like her sex, will be unsafe and incommode; therefore
desire her to make use of a Disguise, and for my sake cheerfully to endure this
first difficulty of our adverse fortune; her Jewels may be useful too, if she
can convey them with her: this and my blessing, good Philemon. Come Arcus, you
must to my Son this night, and acquaint him with our Resolutions, and that the
Rendezvous will be at Aversa; whose strength and provisions I dare rely upon as
well as the faith of him that commands.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Bellamira, and Fidelia in her Chamber. Bellam. WHat thinks Fidelia, were
my fears vain or no? Is it not visible the Gods in their care foretold our
ills? Is not the Stranger landed, and does not the Dust fly in our faces? 'Twas
too true an Exposition the good Hermit made of my Dream, who told us, that
kicking the Sand at us would prove a dangerous Rebellion in the People. O
Fidelia, my soul is full of horror, yet all mine own miseries do not at all
deject me; but for my Father, his loss, I must confess, brings a weight of
sadness I cannot bear.


Fidelia. To deny your cause of grief will but make your anger join, and give
new wounds to your mind; that fatal Dream I have not dared to read, my nature
is too superstitious; yet my curiosity would fain know what Stars rule your
Highness fortune, to which mine is tied, and by a nearer interest, Madam, than
your goodness yet imagines.


Bell. No, Fidelia, though (I confess) thy modest hiding of a Passion has been
very discreet, yet all the shadows thou could interpose have not obscured it
so, but my grief and kindness have both seen it; and though I cannot be happy
my self, yet it is my joy in the midst of these afflictions I have a power left
to give thee some peace of mind; turn not away, I will not put thee to blush
the rest; only thus much, live assured, if I can serve thee, thou shall be
happy in the wished friendship of thy Palantus; and that thou may give faith
to what I say, at thy leisure read this Paper -- It Is Bellamira gives her a
Paper. my Dream expounded; in that thou will find my Fate; and I confess with
a clear soul, and as much innocence as the sleeps of Children, I love that
fatal figure, that something without a name, that kind nothing is all the
business of my mind; In my sleep he rescued me, me thoughts he saved my honor
in a time of danger when my heart was desperate; and though a Dream the fear
has still dwelt here, and a kindness for him, which makes me prefer him before
all but honor; cease to wonder, for that shadow is all my conversation, all my
joy, and all my misery; Is it not a strange Passion that the Gods have sent me
for one I never saw but in my Dream, the similitude of nothing? yet this
advantage we have of others, we are secured from jealousy; for as Fate has hid
him from my eye, so a kind power has set me free from the envy or fear his
love may bring; by night he makes his visits still; like the Egyptian Apis in a
Dream he comes; the soft-foot'd God of Sleep is only Witness to our Love.


Fid. Since your Highness has been pleased to break this silence, giving
thousand joys I never hoped for, take the secret of my heart; it is Love, Madam,
so much more than I can master, it is more than I can tell, and that makes me
fear such a Present as Palantus his Love, when he shall find only a Shadow
for his Rival, may gain an easier Victory than your Highness fears; nor do I
blame Palantus for loving your Highness, it is his greatest virtue to do it; and
my crime to tell you so; because I know though it is an honor to have you
there, yet it is the business of his heart to hide it; and ere I can have his
friendship, his faith must be blasted; for Inconstancy is the first step to any
possibility of my being happy; yet he has ever paid me a Civility; and though I
cannot boast his love, yet he has made me believe he was not displeased that I
love him.


Bell. Come, dry thy eyes, and calm thy breast; for though he should prove
unkind I Will be faithful still; and if Palantus will hope to act any thing
pleasing in my eye, he must pursue his friendship to Fidelia; for I believe,
with the most excellent Bellessa, that Faith and Constancy are so much lovelier
in both Sexes, than any other Beauty that I should expect from a gallant Woman;
she should sooner spoil her face, than break her faith; and this I shall tell
him; who if he be the gallant Palantus: the world esteems him, he knows all
that Beauty can hope for; nay, all it aspires to is but to create a faith, and
bind the heart it loves; and when Beauty and Love have done their best they
make but one constant Friendship. Nay, Fidelia, how many fair faces do stories
mention that could not make one constant Love, though it has been still the
business of Youth and Beauty?


Fid. Those Ages, Madam, wanted the divine Bellamira's mind to finish that
great work, whose Friendship will be the envy of the whole world, and may it
never want the pity you have showed me; and as your Scholar I shall pursue
Palantus with a modest heart, and teach him the virtue of a faithful Lover, a
mystery known but to few men.


Bellam. Faith is such a strange good, it is neither valuable nor communicable
beyond two; I mean the Faith of Love; a galiant man cannot be twice faithful;
who would be twice, was never once a Lover.


Fid. Why are so many Women pleased, then, to gain a servant that was another?


Bellam. Such women are fit for the Friendship of such of men, and knows not
what a nothing they have won; for instead of a Friendship she only gains a
dead carcass of one that might have been a Lover; And such women, Fidelia, are
guiltier then the men, who must be either foolish or wicked; For Honor is deaf
to their prayers, and blind to their tears; who can say nothing that ought to
prevail where there is Virtue.


Fid. Unless it be to plead the power of her Beauty that has made him break his
faith to another; quitting Empire there for chains else where.


Bellam. I tell thee, Fidelia, such a wretch that durst hope a reward from me
for such a crime, I should look upon him as one that threw dirt upon my Fame,
and my scorn should tell him so; for he who has impudence enough to plead that
guilt for merit, I shall believe, will never care to be innocent.


Fid. Oh, Madam, let me kneel to you; And though I cannot accuse Palantus of
broken Faith, yet his dissembled pity makes me beg when he bows before this
shrine, and pleads rewards from your Breast, for scarrs received in others
service: O let your Justice revenge me upon him and in the afflictions of your
frowns, teach him to feel those pains he inflicts upon others.


Bellam. Rise, Fidelia, and believe Palantus can never deserve this; he knows
me too well to venture his Passions beyond his thoughts; and I will rather be
unjust to him, then prove unkind to thee; and when thy griefs have let thee
collect thy thoughts, this secret I gave thee even now, must remove all thy
feats; for know, I have a guest here lodged by Fate, and so proud he will dwell
alone and reign sole Monarch of this Breast; And trust me, gentle Fidelia, I am
proud too, and scorn a part or corner of a Heart; and he, who ere he be that
will be mine, must bring an entire Friendship no divided breast, a Province will
not satisfy me; It Is a solitary Heart that affects crowds of Lovers; In love
alone is best company, absolute or nothing in a Heart, if I be one.


Fid. Those that err having such a guide must fall unpitied; O Madam, did I
hope this sad day such joy as this? No, no, this change of my condition
confirms me in the uncertainty they build upon that trust to Fortune, who
afraid to be thought she loves any one thing long, made me fear she had now
designd my Ruin; whom she so long indulged with the Friendship of two such
persons as your Highness and Palantus, to show 'twas she, not Virtue raised
me; I cannot yet pretend to the least of your Highness favors, being but the
youngest child of Love and Fortune; and can plead but from your pity no
interest, nor no inheritance in eithers blessings.


Bellam. Fortune nor Love shall make me forsake thee; and for Love, though I
find his venom in my Mind, yet this truth I dare proclaim, that god has no
partial customs to difference his Children by. Love has not elder Rights, all
are his Heirs that Love with Faith and Honor: This strange madness that
afflicts my Mind, call it what you will, Love or madness, to dote upon a
shadow, though it has depth and stream enough to bear me with it; Yet all this
Tempest in my Mind has raised no Billows there; no faulty desires, nor
dangerous vanity waits upon my Love: This shadow of one, is all men to me; like
wealth contracted into Jewels, so I bear the precious load here. -- See who One
knocks. Enter Philemon. knocks. -- What news, my Lord, from my Brother? His
absence at this time was most unfortunate; He has interest with the people;
But Fate rules all; are the people in a Body still?


Phil. Yes, Madam, and I can give little hope of better days, till the sword
decide the difference; The Prince and Palantus are upon their March this way,
but the dissorders are such we dare not attend his coming; for the King is
informed that the people will this night force the Palace, how easy it will be
to do it I will not counsel the King to make a trial especially when we
consider the consequence; His guards, though faithful, are too few to conquer,
and too many to sacrifice; Therefore the King has resolved with them to make
his retreat this Evening to Aversa, whose strength and affections he dares rely
upon, it is in the way the Prince must march; to whom notice is already gone,
and private instructions to those that are faithful in this Calamity, to make
that their Rendezvous.


Bellam. The Gods are still with us; and to dispute their Actions; were to
incense them, our obedience prevails more then complaints. What are his
Majesty's Commands to me? How shall I dispose of my self in these disorders?


Phil. The King, whose chief fear and trouble is your Highness safety, desires
your Company this night with him in some disguise, to prevent any accident; to
which your Person (as your self) may be subject; habited like a boy, he thinks
will be best he knows; it will seem strange to your Highness to change your
Sex; but his command and necessity will be excuse for both.


Bellam. My obedience shall in all things possible serve his will; A man's
habit! I have none, you must provide it, who shall go with me? Has the King
appointed any?


Fidel. In this, and all difficulties, my Life and Fortune shall be proud to
bear a part; And though I know I shall blush to see my self in that habit; yet
to bear a share in your Highnesses Fortune is an Honor I shall always covet.


Bellam. Welcome, Dear Fidelia; may thy kindness to me be as succesful, as I
prophecy thy Love will be; We now begin to tread that path, which though it be
full of thorns and horror, yet it leads Fidelia to Love and Honor.


ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Pollidor from hunting, and some part of the Quarry in his hand; The
Scene must be a fine Land-skip, and a Cave must be in the Scene. Pollidor. THe
Woods are full of armed men; Troops of gallant youths pass by me without
regard; Me-thoughts a scorn flew from every generous Heart and sparkling Eye,
to see such sloth and degenerate youth lie hid in this peaceful shape of mine,
when all the world is in Arms; And my Heart tells me, it were as easy to
circumvent them, as a Lion; and as little danger to kill their Tyrant Prince,
as to strike a Boar with this trusty spear; Leopoldo, he is their General;
They say his Father killed our king, murdered our Princes, and banished my
Father, who has often bid me hate him; And now 'twere easy with a well aimed
Arrow to lay his Pride upon the earth in the height of all his glories; such a
quarry would make a Hunts-man proud, and find matter fit for story; But down,
down all thoughts of my Revenge till he bids strike who knows why and when it is
fit; till then, be quiet, all the troubles of my Heart be gone; and here let
Pollidor rest contented in this Cave, where thou were bred and born; Here we
live unknown, un-envied, and as free from danger as the glory of this world;
This Cave none will fight for sure; 'twas the Habitation of a Satyr, and he
has given us leave to possess it; it is the Charity of a kind of Beast, whose
Love to my Sister is beyond the faith of men, and strange as any accident in
our Fortune; She sent him home from hunting with the Venison we killed; and
under the notion of serving her the poor Beast is to all of us a Servant.


He goes into the Cave to seek his Sister, and Father, and Satyr, finds none,
and returns presently. [The Scene must represent a Cave] Enters as from the
Cave. There Is no body within, yet all things are in order, and all absent; I
cannot but wonder where they should be thus late. -- Oh, here Enter Satyr
comes one can resolve me. How now, where is my Sister, and your Master?


Satyr. For the bright Maid, she is gazing, like one that were planet-struck,
upon those new kind of men that fill the Woods; I never saw a Mind so soon
reconciled to her fears; at first sight she shrunk, and leaned to me till she
blushed, and then bent her brows and bow too, and then gazed again; They
laughed to see her in this disorder, but she pursues them still, without regard
to my cries or prayers; and walks as if her Mind were grown greater from the
sight: And though my business calls me hither, I was loath to leave her, for
fear they should hurt her; Prithee, good Master, seek her, and chide her home,
you will find her by the great plains side; where the sacred Oak with the
Trophies stands.


Pol. Well, I Will seek her; and if my Father returns and ask for me, tell him
whither I am gone


Exit Pollidor. Satyr. I love them not, yet I dare not hurt them; for my Love
says, she shall die if they be hurt, else I would poison them, I know a root
will do it; But I love the Maid, so sweet a Flower never decked Pan's Garland;
her Voice charms the wildest Breast, and her touch cures all wounds but those
of the Mind. This Cave was mine, by Birth mine, Ages we have lived in it; 'Twas
Pan's gift of old, yet I gave it to my Love but to smile upon me; My Sire was
worshipped in these woods, and lies buried under yon Altar; I cry sometimes
when I miss him; seven tedious That Altar must be expressed in the Scene.
winters have I waited, in hope they would give me the Maid; so long though a
child she has seduced my Mind: There is a hidden power in her Eyes, that makes
me fear and love to see her; I cannot live out of her sight; and yet Famine is
not so insupportable as to see and not enjoy her. This bottle they drink of,
it is a precious liquor; and when I converse with it it makes me bold, and
therefore it is forbidden me; I Will taste it though, and fill it up at the Brook;
I can sleep too in spite of Love, when my Mind is charmed with this.


ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Almanzor, Roderigo, Clytus, and Soldiers to fill the Scene. Almonzor.
FRom Gaietta we are assured of a considerable force to Join with us to morrow;
And it is believd we shall find the King about the Forest; for the Prince and he
are met; and what number, Clytus, do you judge their Army to be now they are
united?


Clytus. The Scouts speak of many thousands more then the King expected, or I
believed would follow his Fortune; but all makes not two thirds of our present
Army, besides those of Gaietta, which will this night lodge in the Forest.


Almanzor. Was it for certain, the Princess Bellamira fled in Boys Habit, as
was reported?


Clytus. For certain; and I confess I cannot but lament her part in this
Calamity; for she has ever born a Mind full of Honor, and upon all occasions
been ready to assist them that misfortunes made fit for her Charity.


Roderigo. But she gave an unhandsome answer to my Prince, whose Love in a
profer'd Marriage (mentioned by chance by a friend, as a means to compose the
present troubles, in Policy as well well as Civility) might have found a
handsomer denial then the upbraids of Traitor and Usurper.


Almanzor speaks aside. Observe him, Roderigo.


Clytus. Ha! does your mind run that way? is that the fair pretense of
restoring our lost Princes? this I doubted before, but it was too late to
prevent it.


Alman. Her pride may fall into my power, and then I shall give an answer like
her message; till then let us intend our business, which a woman shall never be
with Almanzor.


Aside to Roderigo. Roderigo, a word. -- Now you find the Declaration was well
designed, and before they shall find a power to disprove the truth whether
their Prince be in our power or no, I will make these Traitors cut themselves.
This Clytus is a villain, and begins to grow cold, he likes not the marriage
with the Princess; therefore strike that string no more. -- Clytus, how do the
people take the news of their young Kings safety?


Clytus. With joy, Sir; and with impatient longing they expect the sight; and
it is my opinion 'twill be the best way to produce him this day, and present him
to the Army; if we should delay their expectations, perhaps we may lose their
affections and their faith too; and then we have only armed and drawn together
a multitude that may, for their revenge, join with the enemy; who when he shall
hear of their discontents will not neglect to play the best of his Game; it is
therefore again my counsel to lose no time, but produce the King.


Alman. It is his own desire not to be discovered till things be settled, at
least till the Castles and strong places be surrendered, for the better security
of his person.


Roder. Besides, it is now most dangerous to produce him; his enemies and
Fathers murderers being in arms, and ready to dispute his title by a day of
Battle; in which if he miscarry he is not only lost in this, but in all future
hopes of a revenge: but if Gaietta will receive him, and a Garrison for his
safety, or you Clytus give up the Castles in Naples for his use; then the
Prince shall upon his word and honor produce your King; else, till the Battle
be over, without breach of faith, he cannot expose his friend to such a visible
ruin.


Clyt. If the people will be satisfied with this, I am; Sir, you know by the
contract, Naples was to be in my command, which I possessed in right of my
Master; Sicily (as 'twas agreed) was resigned to you; and if I refuse, now, to
deliver the Castles of Naples, it is not to keep out my King that makes me do
it, but to be sure who shall be my King when I have done it; for it is no
question, Sir, when you have the strength of the Kingdom in your hands, and an
Army master of the Field, it is most easy to show who shall be King of the
Country; but if you are a Prince in soul as well as fortune, you will scorn to
deceive our trust; and if there be foul play in your heart, small and
despicable as our Force are, we shall yet with that venture to call you Enemy.


Enter a Soldier. Alman. How now? what is the news?


Sold. The party that pursued the King last night are beaten in, and the
commanded men that were sent to the Pass at Capua are cut off by a party of the
Kings, who now appears upon the hills, where he possesses the places to his
most advantage; and the Officers expect your Highness Orders.


Alman. Come Clytus, let no jealousy nor fear afflict thee; but take the word
of a Prince, I shall be fair and real in all things. Every man to his command;
and (if it be possible) join with those of Gaietta; I confess I did not expect
to be called to the Battle, 'twas my fear they would fly us; and, but that I
believe their despair rather then courage makes them seek us, 'twould startle
me; but here let us part like fellows in arms, and men of one interest,
faithfully act our parts. (Genorio King) that is the word; and if a misfortune
find us, let Mola be the R^ndevouz, from whence we may retreat to Gaietta.


[Exit Almanzor. Roder. I never feared an enemy before, nor till now doubted a
day of Battle: these traitors that are joined to us, methinks I see a curse
even in their looks; how can the gods fight for treason? would they were all
sunk.


Clytus. This I feared; but to prevent it was not possible; that the young King
lives may be truth, but that he is either in his power or knowledge, I fear is
as false as he is; but I am now too far engaged; else he should find Clytus
drew his sword upon another account then to make Almanzor King.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Phillora alone, she looks upon the ground, and then starts into speech.
Phil. AN Army! -- I never saw so glorious a sight before. -- There is a
beauteous horror in it, Their very looks command fate; where dares there be any
thing so bold, as to declare it self an enemy to such a body, if the soul be
answerable to the limbs? sure, Armies are the pride of nature, and her enemies
too. There is a strange sweetness in their Music; yet their Trumpets curdles
my blood, and my heart's grown too great for my breast; this Cottage grows too
narrow for my mind.


Enter Ravack and Pollidor. Rav. See where she is.


Phil. Oh Father, I have seen the Army; it is the most bewitching sight the Sun
e're showed my eyes; there is at once a beauty and a terror in it, and makes me
love and envy those that command such things; how came you to leave being a
Soldier? methinks death only should have made a separation 'twixt you and
such a body; it moves with such a Majesty I was afraid at first; but now the
awe is not unpleasing, my fear is turned into wonder and admiration; did
Pollidor imagine it such a thing? this is the first my Brother ever saw.


Pollid. It Is so, Phillora; but I have read of many.


Phil. So have I, dully and coldly described; of their Battles too ill fought
and worse painted in story, presented still by their fears, or partiality of
some weak Historian, who delivers them still in their crimes and miseries, like
love known only by the scars, while the crafty happy ones (as they say)
jealous of their wealth and envyed blessings, conceal their coveted happiness;
and methinks we might do something worth story in this approaching day, that
foretells so much honor to them that dare meet this storm; and I know not what
it is that prompts me, but my heart longs to see what fate attends this Army;
will my Brother go?


Rav. When thou shall know, gentle Phillora, who commands this Army; what
Tyranny, Oppression, Usurpation it protects; and that no hand there but wars
against the gods, thou will then hate and loathe them which thou now admirest,
who guard that great ill man that destroyed his Brother, killed his Children,
and now usurps his throne, to revenge which the people are armed, and now has
forced him to defend his ill-got greatness; to side with whom is no less then
to war with heaven: but these as too distant and general ills I will not
oppose. But when thou shall call to mind thy Fathers banishment, withering here
under his oppression; thy self and Pollidor buried in these obscure Woods, that
owe to the world a better account of their days then this sollitude can pay,
you will then find other thoughts; yet I am pleased to see this impatiency in
thy mind; but the time is not yet ripe, in which upon a just and honest cause,
your swords and minds will have use of your best resolutions to bear your
parts. The business is laid, and in Gaietta our Scene lies; but till these
troops are past pray, let us retire and lie close till our friends, which are
their enemies, appear; and then we'll join, to their destruction. The Prince
Leopold I hear commands the Army.


Phil. Is it not our King, and the Prince, you speak of, Sir?


Ravack. Yes, but Murder and Usurpation has made him so.


Phil. And may we fight against him? sure it is a strange justice you would seem
to put in execution; sure such crimes were not appointed to punish crimes; do
you believe it such a fault in him to defend himself against a Brother, then
turned enemy? and no sin in us to arm against our King, whose succession is
undoubted now his Brother is dead, fallen under a ruin he made himself; for I
have heard you say, he was slain in Battle; why did you then defend him no
better? it is vain to think what heaven thought not just then in the person of
the King (who you would have me believe thus wicked) should punish their own
act in the person of the innocent Prince: but suppose the King as guilty as you
would make him; what has the Prince done, then a Child? why do you war with
him? whose virtue neither your rage nor hatred can deny; for to my self you
have often given him divine honor; Oh, Sir, your silence is more noble then
your hate; and lest I may be seduced to lose my loyalty, or my duty, in this
dispute, I Will retire.


Rav. This is a language I cannot but wonder at, from Phillora; have the
injuries of a Father no greater place? is all my care and love paid with this
unjust sense of my misery?


Phillora. Sir, those grounds you laid of truth and piety in my heart when I
was young, that seed bears this fruit; would you have me to obey your passion,
hate my King, and prefer your anger before all the gods you made me bow too?
and not only wish, but join in the ruin of the Prince, who your soul knows has
no guilty share in the least of our misfortunes? you know, Sir, there can be no
interest but honor that moves me to say this, for the Prince is one I never
saw.


Pollid. What crimes must he act ere you believe him guilty? go, court with
your youth and beauty those armed troops which you thus dote upon, follow till
your dishonor has made you a quarrel; there are those will not ask twice the
pleasures they can force.


Phil. This from Pollidor, for desiring to be worth his love! I rather expected
to have found that fire which age has quenched in our father, should have
inflamed thy generous breast to have joined with me in the search of honor;
methinks thou should be ashamed to look on, and see these Armies bleed, and
with a revenge thou dare not take.


Pollid. You are angry, Phillora; you would not thus mistake my kindness else.


Phil. My anger is to see Pollidor can consent, with shame, to lie hid in this
glorious day of danger, and endure this private life, and thus sleep away thy
days, when honor is upon the wing, and Armies striving to catch her; who
hovers over the world, searching only some glorious front to light upon; does
fear or pale envy hold thee back? if thou think thy self a gallanter man
then the Prince, prove thy fate upon him; it is womanish to shoot at him with
wishes, or hope to blast his youth with curses; if my words wrong thee lead the
way, give me the lie in that motion; or blushing follow me; while a Girl leads
Pollidor to arms and honor.


Pollid. Needs Phillora more Arguments that I love her! if she does, let her
read this patience.


Rav. What means this fury? will you expose your self to dangers, only to be
talked of? what honor can you hope in this attempt? come Phillora, let us
retreat, and upon our knees make our war; an old man and a maid must find
their ends in prayer.


Phil. I find other thoughts fire my mind; Fortune thy coy Deity I will
worship; and if thou smilest I Will build thee Altars; if not, when I am old, and
my mind grown heavy, then I Will listen to those dull Customs that our
thoughtless Sex obey, which perhaps will lead me to the quiet privacy of this
place; but I have yet too much fire, Sir, to be enclosed by Custom, or Pale
fears. Woman, and all those nice follies, and shaking heart, that use to
possess our soft Sex, as things unknown and unpractised, I put off with my
Coats; and thus, as I was wont to search the Game, so will I hunt my fortune;
The spoilers of thy herds I have often made my prey: A Bore or a Lion I start
not at, you have taught me know they were created my Inferiors; and with these
spears we have not only made them our sport, but our food too; That I am a
woman is no fault of mine, which Custom (a second and better Nature) has, (I
thank you) redeemed, by giving me great thoughts, and weeding out, by your
philosophy, all the little low affections that would choke our minds, and
learned me to despise all the fond false Doctrine that cunning men would
insinuate into us, designing all our Sex their Slaves.


Pol. Your anger, Phillora, comes in still, to justify all your errors; yet
give me leave to say your Anger's more naked then any other passion; for angry
women, like drunken men, are neither to be valued, nor punished; which
privilege e're I would plead, I Will suffer the penalty of any crime both those
faults are subject to.


Phil. No, Pollidor, it is not anger, but my reason that speaks this; my eyes
and heart are open, and the things I see those I speak; Interest nor hope of
any flattery shall bind my tongue; Tell not me our Sex cannot modestly be
angry, and that a maid enraged is an uncomely sight; that wounds add not to her
beauty either given or received, We must only frown, forsooth, or lament our
Injuries. Hence with all those Impostures, and such whose folly or faint souls
will be subject to this Doctrine; while the several passions of your Rage or
Lust impose upon us, who like your chained slaves must not only submit our
selves and honors, but our Reason too, referring all our griefs and Injuries
to the justice of the gods; which when Pollidor sees Phillora suffer, let him
and all mankind despise me, and stamp slave upon my forehead. -- Honor, thou
Diety of both Sexes, Thou male and female virtue, let thy power look friendly
on my youth; Guide my feet this day to follow my heart in the paths thou
leadest, and I will have -- A glorious life, or else a handsome grave.


Pol. Will you leave us then, and thus throw behind you all the kindness of a
Father and a Brother? has the place no tie upon your grateful Nature? has my
love and conversation (besides a Brothers Interest in your blood) gained no
place in Phillora's heart?


Phil. Yes, yes, ever dear Pollidor, they have, they have; and know, I leave
not this place, because my fond will arrects a change, nor am I ungrateful to
this place in which thou taught'st me those rules of Love and Honor, whose
great Examples (though yet no Lover) I now begin to imitate; and Pollidor shall
find me ready to pay all those debts when Love and Honor calls; and for this
dear Cave, this beloved Cell, thus I take a sad and kind Farewell; with tears I
part from thee; and for the blessed protection we have found in thy


our retreat to this hill, from whence we fled yesterday, must breed some doubt
of the cause; for it must seem strange to find themselves sought by those men
to day which fled them last night; Besides, your Highness knows, Their Army is
composed of diverse Interests, which will make them jealous of each other; and
reasonably enough apprehend we have some intelligence in their Army, which time
can only satisfy, and may join to them the doubtful part, which expect but
the fortune of a day, to declare for the Conqueror; We can hope no more then we
are; every day will increase them, both in number and repute; therefore my
counsel is, to offer them Battle, while we are in lust, and hope of victory;
delay will but abate the Soldiers hearts, and then it is easy to master the
Limbs.


Leop. I confess, you have reason; and Arcus shall return my sense of it to the
King, and desire him to send my Sister, and the Baggage to Capua, there to
attend our success.


Palan. What says your Letters?


Leop. They mention some disorders among the Rebels in Naples; But this fatal
Paper makes their Army dangerous; it is my Sisters dream expounded by the old
Hermit, it is sent me by Fidelia; there read her letter, thou will find
something that concerns thee, whilst I rest me here.


(Palantus reads the Dream, the prince lies down.) The Dream. Palan. Your
Highness walk by the Seaside in a quiet Evening.
Signifies, the peace and security drawing to an end will be
Interrupted by the unconstancy of the People; For the Evening
Signifies the conclusion of a happiness.
And the cloud that landed a Knight in Foreign habit, who
Kicked up the sand in your Faces, in a dangerous proportion;
Signifies a foreign Invasion, which discontents will
Countenance; for Raising the dust is raising the people, whose
Hieroglyphique Sand and dust are, Flying in your Faces, is
Rebellion, which knows no bound, nor respect;
Your being angry, and not able to revenge the injuries,
Foretells this Rebellion will be powerful.
The flying from the Dust, and loss of the King, in it;
My fears apprehend his loss in this Rebellion;
Your succor in a wood, where shepherds beat down the dust, with boughs.
Signifies a happy relief in the faith and loyalty of the Country
People. Trees, being the Hieroglyphique of Loyalty.
And the extravagant desires of the Shepherds, who importune the
Prince and your Highness to the marrying of two Trees, affirming
Else that the dust and danger would return again,
Signifies, that by some Miraculous manner your Highness
Must fix the peoples hearts.

Enter the Satyr wounded, an Arrow sticking in his Arm, he is amazed when he
sees them, and looks with fear upon Arcus. Leop. How now! what do thou seek!
who gave thee this wound? why this fear and wonder?


[He kneels and holds the prince. Satyr. Seed of gods, or the god of War
himself, what e're thou be, Thus I adore thee, thus I implore thy aid; tell
me but where thy Altars stand, I Will haste and fetch a Lamb, and sacrifice him
to thee, my great deliverer.


Leop. Rise poor wretch, and cease to fear, or worship; there is neither due
here; We are mortal as thou art; yet if any Injury threaten thee, we will
protect thee; how the poor wretch trembles! prithee, Palantus, help to draw the
Arrow; how came you by this Shot?


Satyr. From a fair and cruel Foe, Divinest, A maid of heavenly Form, brighter
then the Evening Star, lovely as the Syrinx our great gods Paramour, straight
as young hazel wands, or the Cornel Darts by Diana thrown; and far the Nymph
out-shines all her train.


Leop. Well, and what of her? The poor thing loves.


Satyr. Love? yes, yes, love, so they call my pain; it is a grief grows here --
Beloved of -- gods, here, I sucked the Venom at my Eyes; and my old Master says
'twill never be cured.


Leop. And is it troublesome, your pain?


Satyr. Troublesome? The Plague or Famine, or the wild Wolfs tooth, wounds not
like it; My mind is all afire. -- Great, and blessed, did thy happy soul never
feel the thirst that beauty breeds?


Leop. Never; and I wonder how thou come thus miserable; by my life,
Palantus, he tells me more of Love and his power then some Poets feign.


Satyr. Never Love? Why what do you do all day? how do you spend your thoughts?
My very Dreams are Love, my Sinews shrink when she frowns; sure she is a Witch,
there is such Magic in her Eyes; My flock I Will pawn against a Dog, you will
like and love her too, it is such a Divine form; it is not thy Army, nor thy Arms
can guard thee from her.


Leop. Do thou know her? what is she?


Sat. Yes, yes, in this wood she lives, and has done from her mothers breast;
her father and her brother are my masters (but I serve none but her,) My Sire
gave them his Cave to live in, we were bred together, and yet unkind she seeks
to destroy me.


Leop. Who are her Father and her brother?


Satyr. Strange men, and hold strange Opinions, of Names and Places, of pains
for ever, Divinest, and talk of Gods, and their rods, above Pan and his
punishments; which wild things too they threaten, of being nothing, Master,
and yet last ever, and call all that I desire, by nature taught, a fault.


Leop. What urged her to wound you thus?


Satyr. I found her sleeping in yonder Grove, and would have stolen a kiss;
seven Summers here have I worn this wastful fire in my suffering breast without
a hope of rest, and yet she threw me from her, called me Beast, and bent her
Bow; yet I have seen her kiss her Brother's Dog a thousand times.


Pal. I swear she is very unreasonable to despise thee, and be so kind to a Dog.


Satyr. But I hanged him for it.


Pal. 'T was wisely done to remove your Rival; but you forget your wound, does
it not smart?


Satyr. The unkindness does, and she is ungrateful too; for would I have sought
a Maid amongst our own kind, she that has the curledst Horns and crooked'st
Thighs would have been proud of me; for, despised as I am, there is no subject
of our Master Pan can hunt, climb, or outrun me, none surer with his Bow or
Dart, none feller with his Club, or bolder in his heart, allied to Pan; my
breast too is broad, smoother hoofs, nor wealthier fleece clothes no Satyr's
things; these unshorn Curls from my birth I wear, they cut theirs (Master) that
are poor; these gilded Horns were hers too, the first fruits of her brow, an
earlier Musen none casts than she, and thousands wait upon her smile; but
she will have none but me, that pine for this cruel scorn.


Leop. Has she a Father and a Brother, say you?


Satyr. Yes, great Master, and here they live, converse with none; sure some
sad misfortune or great guilt hangs upon them, for they are always sad.


Leop. How do they spend their time?


Satyr. They read and hunt, I taught them: we have this day slain a Bore and a
Lion, divine Phillora wears the Spoil: Their Father too is old, and gray as
Winter, but stout as young Lions, wise as Oracles, pious too as Pan's Priest;
he has been injured, he says, by a King of men; I hear him talk of mighty
things -- But hark, I hear her Horn, with that she calls her Brother; I dare
not see her A Horn ^indes. eyes, I can charm all rage but hers: Fool that I
was, I taught her to resist my Philtres; and now if you protect not I am lost,
her heart threatens destruction.


Leop. Step behind, let me meet your danger.


Enter Phillora with her Bow bent pursuing the Satyr. Phil. This way I Am sure
he took, he cannot fly far, my Arrow found him; for by his lustful blood I have
track'd him to this place -- I see the Villain.


She levels her Bow at the Satyr, but spying Leopoldo gazes upon him, and
stands in the posture, and all the Company seems amazed, the Satyr creeps out
from behind Leopoldo, and looks in the face of one, and then of the other.
Satyr. How they gaze upon each other! thus did I look, thus wonder, and then
grew sick in my mi^^^^ her eyes are fixed, she minds me not; I Will seek my
safety first* and then dispute my Crime.


[He cuts her Bowe-string, which makes her collect her self. Phil. Ha! do you
glory in this wile? but know, it is only deferring of thy doom.


Leop. Gentle Maid, may we know the reason of this War?


Satyr. Naught, great Master, but my loving her.


Leop. If that be a Crime, where have you seen that dull thing that either
could or would be innocent? By all the diverse troubles of my mind, one sight
of that divine form has surpised a strength here that never feared a woman's
power till now -- Here Points to his heart. fair one, where never power of
beauty dwelt before.


Phil. Ha! Why do I gaze thus? -- What have I seen? -- Is it a God or a Man? --
Such a Figure my eyes never saw before -- How far he out-shines my Brother! --
The Pride and Opinion of my self too, those withered Leaves I feel fall from my
heart -- There Is no such Glass as perfect Excellency in others for Pride to see
and hate her self in -- O that I had been born blind, or could tear these
Traitors out that thus have robbed me of my content and peace of mind, to both
which Farewell for ever -- What is it that stops me? Something calls me back,
my fond heart would She offers to go out and stops at the Door, and then
proceeds. gaze again. Do, do, and be fit for pity, drink deep of that delicious
Poison, so are you past remedy; yet if you bet ler me fly and inflame the
world; Love and Desire, your winged fire here I feel, yet glory not in my
ruin; for it is but a poor Shepherdess breast, and no wonder if a God oppress
it.


Exit Phillora. Leop. She is gone, and all joys go with her.


Satyr. And all my fears; yet I love even that anger in her eyes.


Pal. 'Twas a strange accident, who can this Maid be? it is some delusion sure.


Arcus. The Prince is troubled; pray Sir, leave your wonder, and strive to
divert your thoughts: This figure calls to mind the Shepherd in the Princesses
Dream, the Sex only differs.


Pal. There Is more than ordinary accident in this; See how his eyes are fixed.
I Will speak to him; Sir, Sir, your Highnesses mind is so intent upon this Girl
you do not hear the Trumpet, Sir, whose call tells us, Something like Danger
threatens; something worthy your presence, and your thought calls away.


Leop. Did thou see her Palantus? The Arcadian Nymphs that boast their sable
eyes, white-wristed Juno, Venus, or the Goddess that Woods affects, no nor the
Virgin-Deity, she that bears both Shield and Spear, and has eyes that farther
wound, yet all their united Graces (though we bow to them) outshine not this
Flower of the Wood; And thou God of hearts stop this Fate, either call back or
bless thy flying Dart; cure mine, or touch her heart. -- Come hither, do thou
know this Maid, and the place of her abode?


Satyr. Yes, yes, I know thy pain too, feared of men; there is a Fever in thy
breast, a fire that all the Herbs in the Wood cannot cure, nor Streams of
these Meadows quench.


Leop. I must find this Maid though thousand Difficulties oppose; it is the
very Figure in my Sisters Dream. -- O Bellamira, thy prophetic soul has
foreseen all our Troubles both of mind and body.


Pal. Pray, Sir, forget not the business that now stays for us, two Armies in
Battalia, two Kingdoms in dispute, your Fathers safety, your Life and Honor,
all at stake; will you throw all these by to follow a fantasy, the shadow of
a shadow, one like to nothing, seen in another Dream? Me thinks these Dangers
and Duty which are at hand should remove all those light thoughts from your
heart; Pardon this freedom, Sir, it is my affection speaks.


Leop. Prithee Peace, Father and Sister are empty names, Virtue and Honor, and
all the Gods must fly Leopoldo, or make my way fit to the enjoying this lovely
Maid: My soul is sick, I know not of what Disease, but sudden and deadly as the
Plague; The Infection struck me, Honor and Virtue be still Leopoldo's Guides,
and cease to take pleasure in opposing his happiness with your difficulties;
it is not the distance else between a Crown and a Shepherd shall divide us.


Satyr. Art thou a Prince?


Leop. Yes, and one, if thou can serve in my love, will make thee happy; my
soul longs to enjoy the friendship of this lovely Maid.


Satyr. Enjoy her? She will not be touched, Heavens, Fire, and Time, will be
touched and stayed as soon as she, if she thought you imagined such a hope.


Leop. Thou mistak'st me, I dare as soon attempt my Fathers life as stain her
chaste bosom with any faulty desires.


Satyr. Away Dissembler, I see thy aim; thou a Prince? It Is false; Where Is the
virtue that set thee above a world of men? Thou art the Satyr, sure; though
thou have cast thy Horns and Hoofs thou art more a Beast than I. Fool that I
was, did I kneel to thee, Abuser of the Gods; Most ingrate, did they give thee
this form and power to betray men, and pollute Virgins? Defend me! thou Wretch,
would thou make me accessory to the abusing of the thing I love better than
my soul, or thou love thy self?


Pal. Hold, fond Beast, hold, and be gone; your honest ignorance, Sir,
defends you.


Satyr. And so it shall do still against such impious Greatness; if I durst but
see my Love I Would home, and tell her what a Villain a Prince may be. Arcus stops
him as he departs.

The Satyr looks upon Arcus the Moor as amazed at him, and gives him no answer.




Arcus. Why in such haste? I Will ease you of your Club; Have you found a remedy
for your arm yet? -- This strange Accident amazes all my thoughts; This Wretch
too, to find such a noble anger upon a thought of force being offered to his
Love: There Is nothing in this day but miracle; something, sure, great and high
as the persons designed in this Tragedy, the Gods are busy to deliver to the
world; for it is no common birth that Nature and Nations thus labors with,
which makes me with patience bear those throws that afflict my heart, whose
desperate love, though a lo ser of all those hopes I had at stake, makes me
resolved silently to look on, and see this Game played.


Leop. Prithee, Arcus, let our Rival go; and when thou see the maid tell her,
if I outlive this day I Will find her, and doubt not my love shall be less
commanded then I would my self be obeyed; here, bind his arm in this Scarf,
Arcus; and then haste to my Sister, tell her she must instantly for Capua; and
assure the King I He gives him a scarf to bind upon the Satyr 's arms. will not
fail to make good this hill. -- Love and arms that have so often met, smile on
your Priest that has seen what my soul can never forget.


[Exeunt Leopoldo and Arcus. Satyr. If my heart can judge she loves this Gay
Man, then she will be glad of this Scarf, I Will give it her and she shall forgive
me; when I can please her my heart rejoices; but she never thinks of poor
little me but to grieve my heart. As he speaks and goes out he licks his arms.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Bellamira alone. Bellam. THis strange chance that Arcus relates makes me
fear some sudden issue of my Dream; he describes a Maid, whose beauty took my
Brother in an hour when his heart was most opposite to love; and by the habit
and the place only her sex differs; for his description most lively paints that
shadow which my Dream has thus long enjoyed; ye gods, if it be your will in
Riddles still to wrap your secrets, we mortals can only say Amen. But why do I
let this lesser thought fill my breast; when Countries ruin and the death of
my dear Father (the great part of my fear, or ought to be) past by unmourn'd?
sure there is a reason for this fault; this weakness has its cause; something
that my mind does yield to, prevails; yet I find not my Reason overcome, though
there is something in this gentle fear I know not what to call it: I never yet
felt love by what I observe of him in others; yet I begin to fear he is knocking
at my breast, and would fain get in; sure it is he, for I was never till now so
near being a Lover as the fear of it. But I must still these noises in my
thoughts; for a Virgins innocence is so coy, so jealous, and so gentle too, she
need not take the pains to beat it from her heart; she may think that and her
peace away. Therefore, Bellamira, wisely in time correct thy thoughts, and
suffer them not to play with this dangerous god, lest the sport prove earnest,
lest the child thou play'st with grows too strong for Reason; and from innocent
thoughts becomes unruly passions. Fidelia, though she knows all but my fears,
yet I now begin to blush, because there is something like my Love, whilst
'twas Enter Fidelia. in shadows only; I was confident, there being nothing in
Nature to accuse me but this, though a Virgin like my self, yet it is something
now that my passion builds upon; and that newness, though no fault, is yet
unconquered in my mind; and I cannot yet tell her this new stranger thought,
though she know all the other secrets of my heart.


Fid. Arcus says, since he left the Prince he saw a Shepherd in age and clothes
so like the Maid, that he believes it must be her Brother; and from this sight
concludes your safeties near; for why should we find the evil part, and not the
good prove true, of that fatal Dream?


Bellamira. Ha! what coldness is this? -- What trembling? -- What paleness?
this confusion of mind, what means it? -- This joy and fear, this mingled
nameless passion, of all passions composed. -- What art thou, or what would
thou be? -- Why this violence on a Maids heart? -- Be but honor, and wear what
danger, what form, thou will command, and I Will obey thee.


Fid. She Is strangely troubled; I never saw her thus before: Madam, has my news
displeased you?


Bellamira, No, no, Fidelia; my heart has troubles which thy joys to find some
ease for me has overseen, whilst the greatest and saddest part of that fatal
Dream; the King, Fidelia, the good, the kind, the valiant old King, my friend
and Father, must in this dust be lost; remember that; what joy then can a
safety bring when we cannot hope our victory at a less rate then his precious
life?


Fid. Your pardon, Madam; the Princes love, and strange passage of the Satyr,
your interest, and hope of future good, made me forget that piety and pity was
due to the King.


Bellam. Prithee, Fidelia, love, but do not pity us; for my part, though their
ruin threaten, yet I despise a pity; nor is it due to my fortune; for I am not
miserable so ordinary a way, as to be relieved with so cheap a remedy; and were
the King safe thou should find me resolved, though not contented; and other
joy then that resolution I cannot promise to my self; yet if I could be
satisfied with such joys as affect others, I might esteem my self blessed; But my
mind, Fidelia, is too severe to be taken with such shallow happiness as I see
most women pursue, who affect the noise and vanity of the world, whose bubbles
deceive and slave the most of women.


[Enter Arcus. Fidelia. See, Madam, here is Arcus; let him now describe the
Maid, whose beauty he said was equal to all that ever his eye saw.


Arcus. Pardon me, Madam; my heart and reason make one exception.


Bellam. Arcus is kind to beauty, and where ere he meets admires it; but what
does the noble Arcus think is beauty? if his eyes choose what is valued in his
Country, there is nothing amongst us he can approve of.


Arcus. 'Twas our curse to be born in that Country, Madam; and that slavery
which at first I lamented, I now rejoice in as the means to make me able to
distinguish between good and bad; for beauty, it is my contrary, what is not
like me is beautiful; this is the shame and brand of nature; the curse of an
incensed deity lives in our black.


Bellam. You Are cruel to the color; and I rather think, like divine Bellessa,
beauty, afraid of injuries, or in revenge of that inconstancy she has found in
men, has thrown off red and white; and to live safe from the vanity and
perjury of both sexes has made this retreat into black for her security.


Arcus. Madam, the story of our change is common; and the Poet tells whose
curse we bear in our faces; no such reason as your Highness in your goodness
imagines, whose charity would persuade us we might yet find acceptance when we
loved; but it is too sad a truth, that for the sin of one coy Daphne all our
Nation mourns; that froward Girl incensed Apollo's rage, and in revenge of her
scorn thus he brands us all, lest our Country should again boast a face, that
he might love; yet this good I find from my black; all people boldly praise
me; and it is such an impossibility to believe any body can love it, that even
your Highness will venture to defend it, and safely may; for 'twill beget no
man's jealousy nor woman's envy.


Fidelia. But if Arcus will find the Prince, and tell him how fain his Sister
would see him before the Battle, and certainly inform himself whether these two
Shepherds are really in nature, or only walking Dreams.


Bellamira. Bellamira will owe him more then praise, or thanks can pay.


Arcus. 'Twas his Highness Order I should expect him here, yet I shall not fail
to obey your command, though betwixt this and the Prince the enemy has placed a
Guard which I must pass through; for to go about I fear will be too long for
your Highness to expect my return.


Bellamira. No, it is enough, we will expect his coming; I did not know there was a
danger in the Pass; nor will we venture Ar-Arcus, whose faith shall be reserved
for greater trusts then to be thrown away upon this common one; if I doubted
his heart or love to my Brother, he should go; and I Would prefer my curiosity
before him; but to let Arcus see I value his faith, I shall still preserve him
as he has done it.


Arcus. Madam, now I beg upon my knees your commands; and either you doubt my
heart or faith, whose readiness to serve you you shall find as constant as my
color; my life and freedom I value only as the gift of your generous Brother;
and your goodness has made me such a continued happiness, and so far above my
merit, I am fain to trust to the report of others ere I can believe I was ever
miserable; my birth in my Country I am not ashamed of, though I am of my
fortune; to redeem which, if your Highness shall fear to command or expose me,
I shall rather think you doubt, me then that you have any fears for me. For
know, Madam, I cannot be satisfied, nor count my self a grateful receiver of
this freedom, but when I expose that and my self to serve you.


Bellam. When I have a danger worthy of him he shall be sure to find the trust,
and my prayers with it: but since my Brother desires it, whose love has sent
him about me, pray expect him here; for this Letter says, you and old Philemon
must accompany us to Capua; and should you miscarry, our sex and ignorance of
the place may throw us into many dangers. -- Sure there is more in this man
then his humble heart yet shows: such guests as honor, faith and courage would
not lodge in so mean a Cottage as a private slave, unless benighted, or to
avoid storms. Good heaven, what fortune do we see dealt to some men, as if
justice had no power nor voice in heaven! -- Well, Arcus, if we live to see
this storm blown over, I shall very unwillingly be denied a better knowledge of
your fortune; for it is not this cloud, nor this night that hangs upon thy
forehead; nor those chains thou lately putt'st off can hide thy mind; it still
shows something too great for those misfortunes to pretend to.


Arcus. Heaven hide his mercies when I hide a thought from the divine
Bellamira; my story, Madam, when your Highness has leisure to wonder at the
averseness of fortune, and would allay your own joys, then you shall know it:
for that is a story has tasted of all kind of changes; and my miseries shall
serve for your diversion, Madam; in which nothing lies heavier upon my heart
then the loss of a friend; which since my being a slave in Cyprus I could never
hear of; and by me you may learn what custom can; do for my heart has of late
been so beaten with afflictions they are grown natural to me.


[Enter Leopoldo and Palantus to them. Bellam. See, see; Arcus, who is come to
decide the difference? Oh, my Brother! what new strange misery is this! Arcus
has filled my heart with fear and wonder; the truth of my dream makes me
tremble too, with the apprehension of the Kings danger.


Leop. O Bellamira, my distracted soul is grown weary of this habitation; the
new and many strokes that fortune has given of late makes me even turn coward,
and yield to her malice; methinks all she can do, or virtue hope for, is not
worth the dispute; I would I had lost all she aims at so I were dead, or in
some place forgotten and unknown to any but the gods.


Bellam. I will not compare my griefs with my Brother's; but sure if I did
you would pity me, and not add your troubles to them; I hear you have seen a Maid
in the Woods, and such a beauty as the Court never showed you; and I have got a
Lover too, I was sending now to acquaint you with the person, and his
propositions. I can conclude this war without a stroke, at least the Spanish
Prince tells me so: it is only marrying him, and quitting my Father; and dear
Leopoldo; this is all I am to do, and I shall prove how much he loves me even
in this my desperate estate.


Leop. This from the false usurper? what answer sent you back?


Bellam. I bad the Messenger return him, I never saw that man I would marry,
nor any one whose company I preferred before my Brothers; but if there were a
necessity, and my choice free, the meanest Gentleman in all his Army that wore
a sword, and had not lost his honor, my soul would prefer before him, even in
this height of all his pride and power, that could believe my heart so
degenerate to let it self be embraced by the destroyer of my Country, and
murderer of my Family.


Leop. Spoke like my Sister, I never hated an enemy before; had love or
ambition fairly armed his men, or desire to have got fame upon us, such a
choice honor would have pleaded for; and I could have fought with him, and
loved him too: but this treacherous pride and covetousness are too low things
and too mean instruments for the gods to use, even when they have decreed a
Monarchs ruin. Thunder, Famine, Sword or Pestilence, are nobler far; sure we
shall blush at our fall from this mean hand. -- See, Fidelia's engaged, let us
leave her; I have something to tell thee ere I part; it is a new secret,
Bellamira; but the richest of my heart.


[Exeunt Leopoldo and Bellamira. Fidelia. You Will find nothing but truth in
what I have said; that she loves, or at least fears so, is as certain as that
she cannot love you, which Love and Fortune both has sent to afflict you in
revenge of that scorn you have paid my friendship.


Palan. The figure of something seen in a Dream! the shadow of a shadow! this
is a fate as aerie as mine own, as hopeless, Nobody, or a Shepherd! as
impossible are her desires as mine; this being as much below her merit, as
she is above mine.


Fidelia, aside. Who knows their fate? their desperate passions make mine
possible; I know it is not common nor scarce honorable in Maids to woo; yet,
methinks, I may tell him that I love, if there be no more ill in the word then
my desires or thoughts aim at; I am sure I may with innocence enough, and when
I have told him so, if I lose a grain, or grow less in any one good, if I pluck
one beauty from a Virgins mind, let howlings find me, and may my crimes in sad
repentance unpitied fall in showers upon my cheeks; therefore armed with my
innocence I am resolved to prove fate further; for to the virtuous and the
fairly daring Fortune still holds out unlooked for success; and if mine be like
my love, it must prove better then my hopes.


Palan. You are sad, Fidelia; is the Prince ready to depart?


Fidel. Will you not go in and resolve your self? I know there is one from whom
you will take a most unwilling leave.


Palan. Alas, Fidelia, there needs no circumvention to know all the secrets of
my heart; ask and take them, for the gentle Fidelia mistakes her friend, if she
thinks I have any wish that has a blush attending it; nor did I ever hide my
desires from her, but in kindness, being loath to let her see a sight might
trouble her.


[He turns about. Fidel. I cannot speak to him, my heart's too big to beg for
love. -- Farewell, Palantus; live and love all, but -- ('twill not out.) She
offers to go away, he calls her back.


Palan. Stay, gentle maid; it is true I love, I will not lie to thee, nor dare I
tell her whom I love; that truth, yet my wishes as no less innocent, then my
hopes desperate; and I wear the fire here, Fidelia, without a fault, and shall
do till I am earth; Yet my own despaires wound me not so much as Fidelia's,
when I consider her and Fate; and if thou will have patience thou shall see me
revenge thee on my self, decreed to such a misery as will not let me take the
pleasure of making thee happy, nor my self; Yet I conjure thee, Fidelia, strive
with thy Passion; and now thou know my Heart, let us smile some time when we
meet each other; a sullen sad Love looks as if it mourned some past sin, or
struggled yet to conquer some ill design.


Fid. Malice and jealous Lovers make more serious search then death; and what I
told you even now was my fears rather then my wishes in thy Fortune; for know,
my Heart is too full of Friendship for Palantus to wish against him: And
farther, though I know all his desires are designed rewards for another, and
thou would see thy wishes enjoyed by one thou can not question, (being
Rivaled by a shadow,) yet I cannot blame thy Love; For Bellamira is an
Excellence fit for Heaven to covet: Nor does Palantus rejoice in those
Excellencies more then I, though her graces are to me as so many Enemies. Thus
Fidelia, though despised, will preserve her self fit for better Fortunes, by
bearing this with Honor.


Palantus. Sure there cannot be such a punishment in store for loving Bellamira
as thy kind fears apprehend; And since we have touched this string, whose harsh
sound I have long avoided for thy sake; Yet give me leave to say, Heaven and my
Friend can witness, I never made any vows to Fidelia; what I have done for her,
let the gods prove propitious to them and make us happy yet. And therefore, in
Justice, you cannot call me unconstant, or abuser of your Love. Gratitude (if
it were not too like vanity to say so) is all I ever could pay to thee; Not
that I would not have given more, but 'twas all I had left; This fatal fire
sent for my punishment, I fear, is either Child or Parent of that little god;
for till then, I never knew or scarce believed there was such a power; nor did
your own Heart desire a return of Love more then I have longed to give it you;
For I know, Honor in all the heights of excellency produces nothing more
glorious then a handsome Friendship: Other Virtues have him in pieces, but
entire Honor is in the perfect Love of two; which since we cannot enjoy as we
wish, yet you cannot accuse me of a crime which you have confessed your self;
Gentle Fidelia, though not at the same Altar, yet I bow to the same power that
leads thee in chains; nor will I be so barbarous as to employ thy Love to
advance my wishes with Bellamira, nor fear from thee such injustice as to do
ill Offices: Let our Friendship pity each other, and while we love with Honor
leave the rest to Fate; and thou shall find, though Love be binld, since he has
brought us to this precipice, (I prophecy) he will lend us his wings to save us.


Fid. See, see, my Friend, how pleasing Truth is; when thou dissemblest even
now, and hid'st thy Love; Thy words came out unwillingly, and their harsh
sounds were forced through thy teeth, as if thy Tongue had haled them to suffer
for some crime they had committed: But now there is Music in them; and though
the Tune be sad, yet it is well set; and our Souls sometimes affects the serious
and the grave, as well as the jolly triumphant noise of victory; And since
Palantus values my Friendship, and looks with pity upon my sufferings, my Soul
is at peace; for can he do this and not love? What is that but Love? Give me
this, and take all the world besides: My Soul has not another wish in store,
but that my Friend may find his, and I a pardon for a fault he shall not know
until I have redeemed it; The Princess Bellamira too shall beg it for me.


Palantus. What fault can you be guilty of to me that needs a Mediator? Is
there a power beyond our Faith with each other? Come, Fidelia, though our parts
be hard, yet we have a fair field to act in, and if friends looking on^ and I
miss my part, prompt me Love, and Fidelia's Heart.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Pollidor, Ravack, and the Satyr wounded; Pollidor and Ravack seem to be
full of troubles, the Satyr fawnes upon the old man and speaks. Satyr. I Will
drink no more of this poisoned Juice; it is full of madness, Rage, and Lust; I
lost my Reason and my legs too, and but darkly; yet remember what I did; good
Master, calm her Mind, and make my peace, I dare not see her else.


Ravack. 'Twas the Prince Leopoldo, sure; he says they called him Prince, the
accident is full of mystery; The gods laugh still at the wisest actions men
design without them.


Satyr. Yes, yes, Leopoldo, and Prince, so they called him; I thought he would
have wronged my Love; if he had, lame as I am, my club should have pash'd his
skull.


Pollidor. The Prince, men say, is gallant; My Father that hates them all for's
Masters sake, yet calls him the just Leopoldo: And valiant all the world
delivers him; sure he cannot then do a base Action; Yet his sudden passion may
want reason to counsel him; and listening to his blood and power, who knows how
that may prompt him to seek his end upon a Shep-herds Daughter? I Will find
Phillora, and from her know all the Truth; Her wonder and silence makes me fear
she loves.


Ravack. She gazed, he says, and stood dumb; then changed color, and with
fixed eyes lost her self in thoughts, till he cut her bow-string undiscerned.
Come let us find her.


Polidlor. Sir, my thoughts upon this accident have been working long, but what
to wish or fear, I know not; They have both Honor, and that secures me from
the apprehension of a great misfortune; though my Reason cannot hope the least
happiness from their passion.


Ravack. Let Us lose no time in finding her, nor take notice, when she comes,
that we have heard of this accident; get her things made up, and we will away
to Gaietta; she is too modest to say she loves him; and we must be so discreet
as not to see she is troubled, when she is once in Gaietta, the object being
removed; she will not forget him; it is the first gay sight she has seen, and
that works upon her fancy: But she has youth enough to outgrow greater blows
then this; Yet I confess, my Heart, since my Master dyed, never felt such
divided thoughts as this passage has begot; let us haste and find them.


Satyr. I Will stand the forked lightning sooner then meet her now she is
displeased; my flesh trembles to remember she was angry; either let her forgive
me, or I Will be gone; I Will serve you no more if she frowns; It Is for her sake I
am a slave, my Soul has pleasure in obeying her. -- See where she comes, hide
me, earth, from that anger that fills her Mind; I Will not let you go till she
forgives me.


Enter Phillora. Phillora sad. They bowed to him and called him Prince; Ye
gods, what need has he of such Additions? But Fortune will be Fortune still,
lavish to some, and niggard to others, disposing her blessings like her blind
self; What need had that Person (his moderation and his parts) of Titles, as if
those virtues were not enough to give him rule over the world.


Ravak. Phillora, come, dispatch; we have staid here till it is late; for you
know we have a long walk to Gaietta.


Pollidor. How came you so incensed against your poor Lover? Fie, Phillora,
could you be so displeased with a poor creature who knows no better then to be
happy when he can? One not born subject to the Laws of Honor as we are. Nature
was his Parent and his Mistress, she teaches no other Lessons; and yet, for
your sake, he has bound in strict chains his blood and desires, and a thousand
times hazarded his Life to meet your dangers; And could you be so cruel to
intend his death for one fault? Overcome with wine too? Come, pray let me make
his peace. -- Come hither. He calls him.


Satyr. I dare not till she forgives me, and calls me hers again.


Phillora. Forgive thee? yes, with all my Soul I forgive thee, and beg thy
pardon, poor thing; How full of fear he is of me that had forgot him?


Pollidor. I pray dress his arm.


Phillora. I shall, Dear Pollidor, and then I have other wounds to cure; First,
let me see this, so. -- Go fetch me some of the pot of Balsam thy Father taught
us to make; Here, prithee take this Bow and Quiver; I Will give them thee for
being so ready to execute She looks upon his Arm my Anger upon my poor Lover,
and burn them if thou will.


Satyr. Do, and I Will give thee this Scarf, the Prince gave it me.


Phil. The Princes Scarf? did he give it thee?


Satyr. Yes, Divinest. But what care I for him, or it, but to please Gives her
the Scarf. thee? take it, and forgive me -- All the gods bless thee, fair and
gentle; may all that wrong thee bleed like me, In heart too, and find my
wounded mind; Shall we go, this night, for Gaietta, Master, I Will put up the
Pyes we made; But I Will destroy the bag that holds my enemy, that baneful
Liquor; I Will spend all my Arrows on that damned skin, and let his blood out as
fast as he did mine.


Pol. And when you have done haste to yonder hill, and diligently observe which
way those Troops bend their march that pass the wood; as soon as you return
we will be gone; come Phillora; you are sad, he is not dangerously hurt.


Phil. I am glad I mist my aim; And I would there were no more danger in my
wounds, then I wish, or fear, in his.


Pol. Your wounds, Sister, where are you wounded?


Phil. Come nearer, Pollidor, thou art my brother, my dear brother, She sighs
and weeps. Aside. until this hour, the only sharer with this good old man, in
all the wishes and joys of my heart; this morning I had no wish, no hope, no
joy, beyond us three; Your good was all I prayed for then. But --


Pol. But? What dear Phillora? -- Ye gods! it is too true, I fear what the poor
Satyr said, he knew by himself She was in Love, and having felt the sickness
confidently describes the disease; how Nature and Honor strive in her wounded
Breast! but I must not seem to indulge her passion, there being no possibility
she should be happy; Nor can I, if I would be angry with her; My Counsel I Will
give her gently, and use a Brothers Interest to prevail. -- Let not Phillora
wonder at my silence when she weeps; Tears and Sighs, in thy Fortune, cannot
pass by me, but with pain and amazement, what ails my Sister, why does she
hide her Eyes?


Phil. Oh that I had been blind this day, then I had not seen that god walking
amongst mortal men; his Eyes, Pollidor, wound like the Pestilence; here, here
it struck me, I cannot bear the pain, nor would not willingly be cured. -- It Is
either Love, or death, or both; For both bear darts, and sometimes death has
(they say) used loves Bow; if ever, now he has borrowed it; for I find a
strange sadness here, sadness even to death, Pollidor.


Pol. Oh poor Phillora, this news flew before thee, but we hoped thy wounds
were not so dangerous, nor their pains so great, as to make thee cry out for
help; do thou know, who it is whose eyes have poisoned all thy peace?


Phil. The man I know not, But excellent, sure, above the rest; his looks
appeared as if he had some great place in General Fame; Prince they called him
too, and like Mars he moved. -- In his looks you might have read him a King of
men.


Pol. But when Phillora knows this is that Prince Leopoldo she has heard my
Father so often mention, she will then remember what hatred is due to him, and
not heap sorrow upon her Fathers head by loving his Enemy.


Phillora. Leopoldo? was it the Prince Leopoldo? then I am miserable not that
he deserves our hate, for my soul tells me; he has no guilty share in our
misfortunes; Did my Father know him when he reviled him? could Pollidor know
and curse Leopoldo? sure you never saw him, did you?


Pol. Never I, nor wish not, but to take my Revenge upon him.


Phil. That Is not kindly answered, and I dare swear now thou never saw him,
else his looks would have reconciled thee; it is not possible such a Noble
Countenance should have an Enemy in thy breast; it is it self too generous; If
this be the Prince Leopoldo believe the choice my heart has made; it is my first
Election, find him out, make acquaintance with him; if then thou can find in
thy soul to hate him I Will never see him more, But rather die then not comply
with my Brothers wishes. Oh Pollidor, see and know him, and thou will find a
prodigal Star reigned at his birth; prince and power are Crutches fit for
wicked men to lean upon, whse lame souls will fall without such helps; his very
looks Command; Thou will find great things writ in his Eyes, and he must be a
Prince wheresoever he will but deign to Reign.


Phil. I find your weakness has yielded too far for me to have a power over
your passion: yet if you do love him, you ought not to hate me, nor expose my
Honor rashly; But no more now, it is late, and we must haste to Gaietta.


Phil. To Gaietta?


Pol. Yes, to Gaietta, our safety and our business calls us thither, change of
Faces too, may make you forget him.


Phil. No, Pollidor, I have no such waxen heart; I confess I am wounded, the
Venom of a Lovers Eye has stung my heart; I know too, it is the common remedy,
to decline the Object; but I scorn to be healed that Common way; let the
Scorpion cure the Scorpions poison; had I never seen the Prince, Not to see him
were good counsel; but having seen him, who can behold any other object? my
mind carries his figure here; I must blind my reason too, e're I can lose the
sight of that bright Star of Honor who now beckens us to come. -- Hark, now he
calls, now fly to him and Honor, they have but one habitation; Follow me,
dear Pollidor, The Trumpet sounds. Follow, and learn by him how to conquer with
perfect honor, and from me to be overcome by Leopoldo, with no less glory. To
stay here, and have our Virtues chained up in Solitude, shows but a passive
virtue, only the Courage of Slaves and Beasts; and they will exceed us too in
such a tame Courage that glories only in what they can endure. The great trial
of great hearts is seen in both Fortunes; who stoops to either Fate of Prince
or Slave is not perfect; come, and see the Prince laboring himself like the
god of War through these dangers; opposing their Treason with surprising
glories; see every look speaks; whose every motion has more grace and Beauty,
and binds me more then his Face; Yet his words were full of Love; and though I
will not say I deserve it, Yet I am confident I have all that honor could
give, in so short a warning; and I will not doubt but my Love has credit with
his Heart, for greater sums then Phillora desires of Fate, to make her happy.
Follow, and be witness of this Truth; see him only, if you then condemn me,
I Will yield.


Pollidor. Stay Sister, Phillora, I am past my reason; whither She offers to go
out. will you go? will you thrust your youth into the dangers of the licentious
Soldiers? retire, only for this day, into our peaceful Cave, where we will,
with my Fathers Counsel, resolve what is to be done in this Extremity.


Phil. Have I not been buried all my life here, and beg but one day to live?
give me but this day, and here interr me again.


Rav. Phillora, I have with grief and amazement heard thee, and now shall cease
to wonder that our counsel cannot prevail, since you have thus thrown off the
modesty of your Sex; For this confident avowing of your Love is so immodest,
that I fear your Phillora will give sooner then he asks; That I love thee
Heaven witness; and that I am not deaf to Love Thy Mother (whose Ghost will
scorn thee,) witness for me; nor does thy youth know that God. It Is true Love,
of it self, is innocent, and the gods have given it for a tie amongst men, and
it is the greatest Blessing, even to the happy'st Fortunes; A Beauty in the best
minds, if not corrupted. Else That, as all good things in Excess, are ill.
Consider then what it is you attempt. A Prince, and your Fathers Enemy; One By
the Stars set out of your reach; If Honor then be your guide, what can you
expect to be (but what I abhor to name?) Are you not born private issue? A
Shepherds Daughter? can that condition hope any thing but to become some vile
thing, despised by him, before enjoyed, and by all, after? Have you a reason to
urge against this? if not, let my truth find place.


Phillora. Scorn me? The Gods we both bow to will revenge me then. A Shepherds
daughter? A Herds-mans Child? the banished Issue of a poor Forester? What if
this be so? yet we bow to the same Altars, Worship the same gods, and draw the
same free Air; does he scorn all his Subjects? if not, why me? I ask him
nothing; is it a fault to love my Prince? If it be, it is no general Crime;
Witness the sad Cause of these Wars; and if my Father did not lend a more
Partial ear to his Anger then to my Love he would not now Command me to hate
my Prince, nor longer cherish that only crime that stains his Story; That low
passion makes us miserable; or can you doubt me so fallen from virtue, so
abandoned by all the gods, as to forsake all their Sacred Rules, to become a
prostitute, or such a Child as to give up all their rights to the first
Temptations of my heart? Oh, Sir, reserve your censure till I have played my
Part in this unfinished Story, and you shall find I build not my happiness on
any other grounds but those of honor; And if the Prince prove Master of all
those Excellencies I believe in him, they shall be no Argument to make me
wicked; but if he prove short of those virtues, you shall find me scorn him,
and pity my self; and if his virtues have no power to tempt me, I am certain
his vices shall not; It Is the Diety in the Prince, not the Man, Phillora stoops
to; and when my Father, or dear Pollidor, can bring such an Argument against my
Love, as to show me Prince Leopoldo acting one thought less then his part, less
then a Prince, you shall see Phillora prompt him, and Act something more then
woman.


Pollidor. Could I be confirmed he loves, my fears, I confess, would vanish for
there is no such guard to honor; as perfect Love.


Phil. I am sure I love, and that shall save me; and I hope he loves; for why
should he flatter me? By your own ill rule, if his heart were as wicked, as you
would have me believe him, sure he had power enough, he needed no such
darkness, as a pretended Love to act a mischief in.


Pol. Poor girl, If all that had said, or swore it, had been Lovers, or the
half of those that have sealed it with their Oaths, tears, or bloods, our
Stories, Phillora, would not have been so full of the mischiefs of that God
whose barbarous fires have thrown ruin and destruction into that peace that
inhabits amongst the gods themselves.


Rav. Nay, of all the herd, The talking Lover, Sir, should find least Faith;
the angry and the jealous Lover are to be preferred before him; and 'twas a
great truth of him that said, it is with Lovers as with those that work in
Tapestry; they see not the piece until it be done; so he that can describe his
pussion, and tell how much, the why, the where, and the when he loved, and what
throws and pains his heart felt, is awaked from his Dream, he could not else
make a description of a way he never traveled; and he that has trod loves
paths once exactly, may be a good guide to another Passion, but never good
Lover himself; after such a Journey.


Pollidor. When I shall love, give me a Maid with a Virgin passion, and
ignorance in Love; that sets out at the Eye, and rests in the heart; Your
talking Lover, that strives to gain Love by the Ear, aims at low pleasures,
impatient of deserving great ones, and loses his Arrows; Where there is Honor,
Love needs no such guide as the tongue, to find out Love; nor company, to tell
his story to; Love and a Lover are to each other all the world; they cannot be
alone, their thoughts are able to people the world.


Phillora. Oh, gentle Pollidor, talk on, chide me thus, and I Will be silent; how
came you to know this great mystery of Love?


Pollidor. For thee, Phillora, I have felt a passion, equal to all that Poets
feign, and yet never felt one uneasy thought till this hour.


Phil. O my Brother! dearer yet than my self; this kindness has tied thee to my
soul, preferred before all but the Prince, second to none but Leopoldo O turn
not away from me, but hear the truth I speak: If what I utter be not Reason,
yet it is Love: a Virgins first and chaste passion for a most excellent object
now in danger, pursued by treason, and bleeding for the faults of others: O let
me do something to help him. I see that smile, now your heart laughs at me;
it is true, I draw a weak Bow, but Love will guide the Arrow: I know I hunt all
this while impossible things, yet for my peace of mind let me beg, Pollidor
will be so kind as to follow me this day; what though I lose my self in some
handsome high Attempts, should thy Sister die, there would be Fame, though no
Victory; and if I live there will be time enough to return hither, and in this
private life lament my ambitious passion, and here learn to level my thoughts
at something low as my fortune.


Pol. It Is then too late to counsel; Reason I see has lost his force; All I
have to say is, Have you any kindness left, by which I conjure thee, for my
sake, defer this business but this day.


Phil. No more, for Charity no more; I grant you have reason, but I am mad;
Alas, you sue to me as if I had power over my self; Find the Reason I have
lost, and restore it, and Pollidor shall find me the same governable tame
Phillora I was yesterday. But as it is, you may as soon expect I should sleep
when I am bidden, or leave to remember Pollidor. I know I am mad, and must
plead that Madness, which now must instead of Reason prevail with thee: In
desperate Diseases, and with mortal wounds, where nothing can do good, nothing
can do hurt: I am that person, so sick, so wounded. Thy Sister has at her eyes
drank mortal Poison: Here in my heart I bear the wounds Apollo himself
complained he could not cure; since then in Art and Nature there rests no hope,
I conjure thee in kindness let me again drink the pleasing Venom in, and
refuse not to thy unfortunate Sister (since she cannot live happily) the
satisfaction only of choosing this way to die.


[He embraces him. Pol. Dry thy eyes, and far, far away be that sad hour; Look
up Phillora, thou have overcome me; Reason, Safety, and Revenge, all but
Honor, I freely give to thy Passion, and with a Brothers tender heart I Will
serve thee. Ye Gods, what Fruit this fatal bitter Root will bring I know not;
I Am sure it is planted in our richest ground. Come, lead the way, and since Love
thus lays violent hands upon our hearts, and will force us in this public day
to play our parts, let us obey his Messengers, and thou shall find how dear
Phillora is to me, whose Peace I Will hunt through the world with faith and truth
to Fame or Death.


Phil. And if thou find'st thy Sister made like the common frame of women, in
whom a sickly weak honor inhabits, such as want the counsel of Friends, or the
poor remedy of Spies, to preserve fit for thy love, let my Brother despise me
for ever.


Pol. I am confirmed, and thus will seek our fortunes in this day with minds
prepared for all kind of chances. And you Monarchs of the World, Fame and
Honor, what though we bring no Troops of armed men to court you, yet look down
with justice upon our actions, and ye shall find we have not lost one grain of
that virtue the Gods were pleased to give us.


Phil. My soul takes fire at thy words; and though Pollidor be no Prince, but a
kind of Plant bred and nourished in the Woods, yet I have seen him act what
the best of Princes need not blush to imitate; and I prophecy, though he now
begins to build without materials, Fortune will supply him; and Princes looking
on shall wonder why Pollidor was a Shepherd, and their People wish him a Prince
seeing him act such things as we sacrifice to in others; then shall the story
of kind Pollidor out-last his Marble, and die only with the world.


[Exeunt Pollidor and Phillora. Rav. It Is in vain to resist this Passion; yet
if the Prince's love prove noble, greater and weightier interest than they
imagine may yet hang upon this day; but the time is so distracted, and so
short, I cannot listen to the call of those things that concern us most; for
they are gone, and I must follow; Love and Innocence protect them.


ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Nigro, Cleon, and their Company of Soldiers in Gaietta. Nigro. RAvack's
stay makes me apprehend some danger, the Armies are both in the Woods, and my
fears are more for him and those dear Pledges of Fortune; should they miscarry,
all our faith would find but a sad conclusion; Clytus too confirms my
jealousies of the Spanish Prince, that he means some foul play, by his desiring
to marry with the Princess Bellamira; his first confidence to promise the
People to produce their long lost and supposed dead Prince begot my fears; but
'twas no time then to discover the falsehood of that Promise, because it did our
business; for it armed the People,, and shall finish our work too; for before
they can be undeceived, or question the truth of that Promise, we'll have
played our Game; for if we overcome Leopoldo their anger's nothing; if Leopoldo
overcome us, that nor all the world shall win me to survive that day. Cleon, we
must keep a strong Guard this night; and leave order, if Ravack comes, though
it be late, that he be let into the Ports, let the Galleys ly loose; and feed
your men well, that we may be ready upon all occasions that are presented; I
fear the Spaniard, but we must not seem to mistrrst him; yet let all the
Officers know Clytus is the person they are to follow, if he and the Prince of
Spain dispute; give this intelligence your self, it is not safe to trust it to
a common Messenger, lest our fears wrong the Prince.


Cleon. I shall obey, our Forces are this Evening joined with Clytus, it is a
brave Body; and trust me, the King's looks with a mind not less daring; it is
true, their number is not so great as ours, yet their virtues may be equal; for
the Gentry fills his Troops, and such whose Fortunes depend upon the Court; in
that lies their odds; and 'twas in my opinion no policy to to take away their
Retreat to Capua, 'twill but beget a desperate Charge; for now their flight can
promise no safety; many will do more in such a necessity than Honor would have
prompted them to.


Nigro. It Is too late to give that Counsel now, but let us be ready to do our
parts when Fortune calls; our Rests are up too, and to Justice I yield my part
who knows my heart is honest.


ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Almanzor, and Roderigo, Clytus meets them at the other Door. Alman.
CLytus welcome; Are your Troops joined with those of Gaietta?


Clytus. Yes, Sir, and we have already received a Visit from the Enemy, we have
taken some Prisoners that assure us that the King, Prince, and Princess, are
all in the Army.


Alm. Why then we shall do all our work at once; I hate delays, let Fortune
give me my Answer quickly, whether a Monarch or a Slave; -- If my Stars have in
this Fate this Crown, This day it is Aside. mine; if not, there is a hope lost.


Clytus. If you could produce the person of our King, my prophetic soul tells
me the day were ours; such a signal Victory would make all their hearts turn
Coward; the justice and vengeance they must expect from his injuries would
wound farther and deeper than either Sword or Spear.


Alm. Make it safe by Conquest for him, and my life to gage I Will bring him to
you; but if his Friends will not give one blow for his safety, I fear he will
not be persuaded to trust their jealousy; but this is wide of our business --
Roderigo!


[He whispers. Clytus. It Is so, do, whisper, the Gods hear you, still I have
acquainted Nigro with my fears, and he, I Am certain, will not be circumvented;
it is for our own interest we fight as well as yours, ere we see the King, else
you should stand alone for Clytus.


Rod. This though it be policy, Sir, is neither honest nor gallant; besides, I
cannot be such a Fool as to believe Clytus durst say these things, but that he
is sure of his Army, who you see has possessed yon Hill, and stand in a manner
divided from us: Take heed how you anger him lest you tempt him to be wise and
honest; it is easily done; but standing still, or joining with the King, or if
he will look on, he is secure in the advantage of the place, and may laugh at us
that must labor for him; and when we have destroyed each other, how easy
'twill be for him to give Laws to both we shall quickly find. It Is my counsel
to dissemble still; it is true, one blow with this Dagger does it; but what good
can you derive from that mischief? when the Battel's over; if you can strike
him securely it may signify something, but till then let us bear him fairly:
it is late, and the King's men are advanced already, and we must not let them
take such courage as 'twill give them to find us unwilling to fight.


Alm. Come, Clytus, every one to his charge.


Clytus. I fear no Enemies; if my Friends be true, I Will look to my Enemy my
self; and I Will have a care of false Friends too; Roderigo, I shall, and yet
I Will fight well to day.


[Exit Clytus. Rod. See, Sir, my fears are true, upon my life he is jealous;
something and quickly must be thought upon, and wisely too, either to confirm
him, or remove him hence; but Fortune, if that Trumpet sounds what I believe,
it will perhaps take the work into her own hands, and we may see the Traitor
fall in his own snare -- Hark, Sir, it is a Charge.


[The Trumpet sounds. Alm. Away then, Give the Word round, Command all to march.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Leopoldo, Palantus, and Arcus. Leop. FArewell Palantus: this day is set
to decide our hopes or fears; Love be thou propitious, and I shall not fear the
rest; the King has his ancient virtue still, his courage, and will command the
Battle himself; my Charge lies this way, let us embrace and part, and this day
strike, to be always free from such a danger as this false pretense which now
has armed these Traitors.


Pal. Pray Sir, let Arcus attend the Princess in her journey to Capua, Philemon
is old; and though his courage be great it is but ill guarded; if I might attend
that service he should not have that envied Office.


[Aside. Arcus. Nor would thou grant it me, if thou knew'st my mind, -- I
shall not fail to wait upon her Highness; but I believe till Asids. those
Troops of Clytus be forced from yonder Hill, it will not be safe for us to
pass, for we are still subject to his parties; and we must expect he will not
let us pass free unspoke with; and if once we be taken it is a great blow to
your Highness affairs, as appears by the Spaniards Propositions of Marriage; for
though he promise to give a King, his business is to get a Queen, and by that
Interest of Blood ally his success unto the Crown; which Curse Heaven with thy
Fires forbid, or give Arcus leave with his Dagger to remove.


Leop. Hark, they receive the Charge; Away, our Place and Interest is first
this day, and Honor tells us it ought to be so in danger too.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Almanzor, and Roderigo, both wounded, and their Swords drawn. Alman.
URge them: how Roderigo? the aged King acts wonders above man; how the stubborn
rock broke our charge; he has many wounds, and in revenge of them his men
fight, such resolution I never saw among so few men.


Roder. How I abhor that traitor Clytus, that could so barbarously charge his
King!


Alman. He is a villain, but his hand's useful in this work; haste to him and
second him in his charge; I Will once more prove the Princes temper; he has a
name in Arms, and I long to grapple with him.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter the old King wounded, leaning upon Palantus, with their Swords drawn.
King. NO, no more, Palantus, it is enough, Fate has run his circle; here my
greatness begun, and here it ends; in a Battle, I set out King, and in a Battle
end; the sword gave me my honor, and to the sword I have again surrendered it:
and I prithee tell my Son, if he survive the day, and fortune smile, which yet
I despair not, (for his virtue must meet greater dangers then these) command
him to search out the truth of the Spaniards declarations; and if he can find
my Nephew, let him restore the Crown; it had been my voluntary act, had not
that traitor Clytus crushed all our intentions; the rest were beaten, I saw
them stagger; their Officers and Prince retreated, till Clytus false and stout
with wicked troops of our own Countrymen charged us, fools and wicked that
could not in such an act believe how great a sin their valor was.


Palan. Oh, Sir, do not take such hasty leave from your poor and miserable
friends; what shall we do when you are gone?


King. Thy faith, Palantus, will redeem to story the long lost gratitude of
Favorites; and it is one joy to me I never was deceived where I trusted; I find
a blindness that foretells the way I am to go: farewell, be happy for thy
kindness to thy old Master, who without trouble dies, embraced by the arms of
him whom he loved; thy faith was always welcome, but in death most precious;
and I prithee fail not to give my blessing to my dear Bellamira, whose dream is
made good in this my fall; and to let thee see all thy care did not hide from
my eyes thy modest passion for Bellamira, here from my dying hands take this
Legacy; I have worn it as a relick many a day, love it as well as I did, and
death can only part ye; could I have loved her less, or consented to see her
acting of a deed I could not justify, long since thou had had my consent to
have been happy; but she was ever my dear Bellamira; and I know Palantus though
he loved, yet his mind had honor too, and would not see her go less to
satisfy his passion. But it grows late, and I find my blood waste apace. --
Hark, we are pursued; save thy self, leave me, faithful Palantus.


[A noise of follow, follow. Palan. Oh, Sir! do not bid me believe you love me,
and command me this, at least not wish I should obey you: this treasure of The
King faints and lies down. my life I keep as my soul, and but this shadow have
no friend: could you refuse to drink of this fatal cup that treason and murder
have prepared, at the rate of my life I Would buy your place. But see, while I
talk, death is making his pale unwelcome visit in my Masters noble heart, the
seat of a thousand virtues. -- Oh! he The King swoons. is gone, set for ever in
this cloud; this object and this loneness how dismal it is! none but death and I
at a Kings Tragedy; but it is just, I had his trust alone, alone his love, his
favor, without a Rival, but not without a Nations envy; here I Will stay, here
the Conqueror shall find his victory had not power to make me fly to save a
short loathed life, and lose my place in story. -- Ye gods, He lies down and
weeps upon the King, and embraces him. that see these wounds, arm all your
vengeful hands, and strike the traitors quick into the earth that thus have
brought his sacred head with violence to the grave; may their torn Carcasses
never find a grave; see, see this reverend head that you have spared; the
double tie of King, and old, found no reverence, nor his gray hairs protection;
no friends had they here that had in heaven no enemies; such was his piety that
treason and murder were fain to arm against him, to second time, that great
enemy of man and nature, who could not alone destroy this sacred Pile, whose
ruins I shall not have power to mourn, unless I can save these relics from
the malice of those traitors that pursue us; I Will take off his robe and mine
own too; and if I can pass for some private Soldier I Will escape with my load.


He strips off the Kings and his own upper garments and throws them into the
Wood, and covers the body with Soldiers coats, and is pursued by the enemy; he
bestrides the dead body of the King, until Almanzor and Roderigo come in and
take him. Alman. Who are you? disarm, and bind him.


Palan. We must ask that of you; the day has given you power to appoint us
fates.


Alman. What is he you defended?


Palan. One that an hour since would have fought with thee, or any man alive;
'twas my Father; may thine again never bless his Lies down by the King. eyes
with a sight of thee, whose ambition has set his in blood.


Alman. Thy faith shall plead for thee, though thy curses has struck me more
then any danger I ere saw. Roderigo, behold a great example of faith and
fortune; how pious that young man looks in his wounds, and how lovely in his
sorrow!


Roder. And how black we look that caused them! my soul abhors my part of this
conquest, I never pitied an enemy before: indeed we never met a gallant one
till now; and had not their own swords fought against them, we had not stood
here now to mourn their sufferings; how I hate that traitor Clytus! he called
me in the Battle, and bad me witness what he did for his young King. Villain,
some old curse will find thee for it.


Alman. Well, what is next to be done? the Prince stands still, and Palantus's
Troops are rallied.


Roder. 'Twas a gallant fellow their Chief; I saw him charge to second the
King, when Clytus broke him, but since he was not seen.


Enter a Soldier. Sold. Sir, the Officers expect you; Clytus is pressed by
the Prince, and calls for horse to second him.


Alman. Away with him to my Quarter, let him receive no injury. Points to
Palantus.


[Exeunt Almanzor and Roderigo. Sold. Come, friend, shall we be jogging? you
have a kind enemy you see.


Palan. His humanity has won me strangely; if I live to see the Princess she
shall know how handsomely he gave his character, both of the King and Prince.
His general too is a brave fellow; with what scorn and hatred he mentioned that
traitor Clytus, the cause of all these miseries; that villain laid this Scene
of war and death.


Sold. Come dispatch, dispatch.


Palan. Witness heaven, how unwillingly I part from this dear load; and friend,
if thou will return and give this old man a grave, and but tell me where you
lay his body, poor as I am in fortune, I shall find something to reward such
piety.


1 Sold. When you are safe we'll talk of that.


2. Let Us go through the wood upon the left hand, and there we shall have time
to examine his Pockets.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Phillora, Pollidor, Ravack, and Satyr, all wounded. Phil. This way, this
way, Pollidor, I see the storm bonds; all their wicked force is bent to destroy
the best of men. She offers to go out.


Rav. Hold, Phillora.


Pollid. Will you yet retreat, and not with idle passion fondly pursue a lost
man? you see the day is lost, you see the gods the juster side have taken, the
enemy has all in chase; and if we stay we must expect the same fate that
follows their impiety; it is ridiculous, this love, that thus with madness you
pursue; can you imagine it possible that these swords can redeem the day? you
see in kindness to your grief we have given up our Reason, and our revenge;
and, for your sake, struck even against our hearts, and all that kindness
begets but a wilfulness in you.


Phil. I find my Brother has but dissembled then, and Pollidor has no sense of
the pain he never felt, nor kindness for Phillora; he could not else thus
harshly rub her wounded mind: but take heed this despised power thou now
contemnest, does not in vengeance arm some unequal dart against thee; this
mornings Sun found my breast as free as thine, proud too as my Brother, both of
my form and liberty, and at as high a rate I prize my freedom; yet one sight of
his eyes has burnt them all to ashes; and I prophecy those several virtues
that now lie idle in your breast, shall but make love a triumph when those
torches of thy eyes shall take fire from that star, to whose beauty fate and
love have decreed thy pain.


Ravack. Alas, Phillora, here is none that chides thy passion; counsel we may;
we only tell thee, Love and Honor were born twins, and will endure neither
separation nor competitors; you must not divide those friends, together they
act great and glorious things; the mind that possesses them is scarce mortal,
but if you separate that cordial, you will find too late, Love is but the poison;
excellent in medicine when prepared and allayed with honor, and but prepares
the way; it is good, Phillora, at opening the door to let the Treacle in; so
much of the venom Love is good as serves to fire the mind with great thoughts;
but honor (child) must direct his feet; he will neither find else, nor know
his home.


Phil. Oh, be not thus cruel, Sir, to wound me with your reason; my sick eyes
cannot see the light; have mercy upon me, and let me go.


Pollid. You must not go; it is kindness to be cruel: your passion grows to
madness; and it is folly, not friendship, to listen to your prayers; you must
not pass.


Phil. I shall force my way either through thine, or my own heart.


Pollid. Come, pass here; make thy way through my heart, or and it made by
grief, ungrateful and unkind Phillora, to see all my love and care thrown
behind thee, like the despised things of the world; go, Phillora, follow thy
passion, give to a stranger, offer to the pride of one that perhaps will not
accept thy present, that love, for nothing which thou would not pay unto a
Brother: but when thou returnest here thou shall find me dead; for know I will
not outlive thy honor: go wretched Maid, give that innocence which thou shall
never find again; that innocence for which, this day, thou stood'st the envy of
thy time, and wilt hereafter fall below a common pity, cruel, blind, ungrateful
and unkind Phillora.


Phil. Oh Pollidor, Pollidor, thou have struck me to the soul; ungrateful, and
unkind! any thing but that, that was cruelly urged, witness my broken heart, to
which thy unkind kindness has given its mortal wounds: farewell, Pollidor; be
thou happy though I might not. --


[She swoons and falls down: the Satyr seems much troubled. Rav. She is not
well, she looks pale; Phillora, dear Phillora, look up; see thy Brother in
tears, beg thy pardon; it is the heavens fights in this passion, and their wills
must not be disputed; speak kindly to her and heal her mind.


Pollid. Alas, Sir, how easy it is for me to speak kindly, heaven knows that
sees my heart; Phillora, Sister, unlucky Maid, once more pardon the harsh
expressions of a Brothers grief, whose love and kindness mistook the way to
express it self; all my design was to have recommended reason as a companion
for thy love, for love alone is but a passion, and a blind one; Dear Phillora,
much care and pains goes to make him a virtue, and then honor must be his
parent, and his issue too; this is all I had to say, and this I would fain
should have been reason; but thy love shall prevail hereafter; and dear
Phillora cease now to be sad, and angry with thy Brother, or to believe me so
barbarous as to dispute against that god of passion, but as I fear him thy
enemy: -- Or think me such a stranger to thy heart as to doubt Phillora's
honor; what I have said was only to prompt thy mind, which I found this day so
busy obeying of thy love, I was afraid, during this civil war in thy mind,
some watchful enemy passion might surprise that strength which I am confident
no assault, or siege can win.


Phil. Ever loved, but never dearer to my heart then now! Oh, let me rest upon
thy breast, and hide my blushes there! yet my soul covets no faulty thing; it is
no whisphers, nr midnights darkness that I seek; no corner to tell my story in;
no guilt hangs upon my heart, my mind and desires are as bright as the days
guide, as public as Leopoldo's name, I dare avow my love of him; shall we
because the gods frown add misery to those which they afflict, who, we know,
suffer for others crimes? and join with treason to wound the man my soul
admires? no Brother, he is my Prince; and let heaven speak to him in thunder,
while I obey and follow him to his Grave, or throne; whiles my heart weeps over
the one, but never envy him the least glory of the other.


Enter the Satyr. Satyr. There are armed men entered the Wood; haste, dear
Mistress, and follow me, or we are lost. The Princes party flies in every
place; the enemy pursues us close.


Phillora. The gods protect the Prince.


[Exeunt Pollidor and Phillora. Enter Ravack, with a Helmet full of water. Rav.
Here I left her, there is the Satyr; where is my Daughter?


Satyr. Now gone into the Woods.


Rav. What makes you stay behind, what is it you gaze on?


Satyr. A man lies a dying here in the bush, he groans and stirs still.


Rav. A man, where?


[Ravack looks upon him very earnestly. Satyr. Come, leave him, prithee Master,
he is but ill company now, and going a worse journey; and if we stay, perhaps,
we may be sent upon the same errand.


Rav. Is there any life? help, hold up his head, he breathes and stirs; it is
long since I saw this face, yet there are lines in it my memory He looks upon
his hand, and finds his signet. retains, it is he. -- This confirms me, Heaven I
accept this offer; sure some great work is designed in this chance; I Will bear
him to our Cave, but first I Will take off his Ring for fear the enemy meet us;
come, help to take him up. -- Little have thou deserved this charity from me;
but I Will not upbraid thy ashes; if I can recover him of his wounds we will find a
way to make him useful to us, at least secure him for hindering our designs.


Satyr. Carry him to the Cave; and if he be a friend let me alone to cure him.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Palantus bound in the Wood, with two Soldiers whispering together.
Palan. I Do not like these villains whispering, they have made me leave the
road; sure they design some mischief in this wood; should I seem to fear, that
might encourage them in their villainy. -- How now, What whisp'ring's this?


1. Sold. What we have done already is more than we can answer; let us search
his pockets, and deliver him to the guard at the foot of the Hill. They lay
hold upon him and pull out his purse.


Palantus. Villains, this violence shall cost you dear.


2. Sold. Ha! This is no small bird, such feathers few of your kind wear.


1. Sold. Search farther; Here Is a Jewel too, and papers, those we shall not
use.


Palantus. If they find my picture too I Am lost, my Soul cannot endure that
separation; What would you have more, have you not taken all already? -- Hell
take your loathed Souls.


2. Sold. Oh, this is it; A picture, what have we here? Golden Houses for
shadows? He resists, and they throw him down. -- They search his breast and
find the picture, he kicks and bites all the while.


Palantus. It Is so, a picture only, after all the rest of your Injuries,
restore but that and I Will freely forgive you; take the case too, only the
picture again; if you have any humanity you will not deny it; it is to you of no
use, but to me the dearest jewel of my life; It Is of a friend, whose Memory I
adore; set any rate upon it and I Will purchase it; it is your own Interest I
propose.


1. Sold. Keep our counsel and you shall have it, upon our words we'll restore
it; But if you tell any Tales, or complain to the General of this visitation of
your pockets, then down goes Dagon, nothing saves your Saint; here she shall
lie safe till we find you a man of your word; till then, take a civil leave of
her, and let us be gone.


Palantus. Without you will restore it I Will not stir one step.


2. Sold. Come, come; if you consent to go in all together, we'll afford you
the cutting into quarters, and do it at four.


Palantus. Villains, you will dearly repent this Insolence. -- Pray, (and
heartily) I get not my hands loose; 'twill be sad to some of you ever if I be
free.


1. Sold. Come, fret and curse at home, till we repent.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Leopold, and Arcus, wounded. Leopoldo. OH Arcus, 'twas she, there is
nothing like her; She is an original, I saw her and the poor Satyr too;
laboring in our cause, she acts above a mortal power; My Hearts a fire till I
know her Fortune; she had the scarf on I gave the Satyr; My Father and Palantus
are both wounded, and both missing; Haste and try, if possible, in this general
mischief, to save some remnant of our family: Find my Sister, conjure her to
haste to Capua, and there ship for Rome; whither (if I can reach my ends) I Will
with diligence repair.


Arcus. Alas, Sir, I fear she is lost, and so will you be too if you thus
pursue your passion; Consider, Sir, how many thousand lives and fortunes hang
upon your precious days.


Leop. Lost! Heaven sleeps not sure, nor will so negligently part with such a
Jewel; And Nature, kind Nature, that has care even of Plants, and waits so
diligently upon every Season, think thou, Arcus, she would mind a Bird or
Tree and neglect these? No, no, she would sooner spare the Sun, the Pride of her
workmanship, then suffer such a blow; 'twould wound her deeper then her
opposites of Sword, Plague, and Famine, though waited on by death; Hark, we are
pursued; some brave Enemy that would bring a gallant Revenge, or a handsome
death, would make me smile upon my Fortune; But I talk, and thou art here
still, my Sister will be lost; Fly, Arcus, fly, ere it be too late to counsel
her.


Arcus. Alas, Sir, what sullen Starr rules you? Why would you have me leave
you? Why do you choose to fall alone? Do you think I am of so low a spirit, or
so base as to leave my Prince in danger, and seek my own safety? Go, and I Will
follow you throughout all the world; but if I leave you, Heaven curse me.


Leop. We are all lost then; for I am resolved to find this Maid ere I think of
safety; I saw her enter this wood. Oh, Arcus, it is a strange wonder of her Sex;
It Is a gallant Mind dwells in that private Breast, and blessed is he shall find a
Friendship there, yet my Love shall cut-vie his; For he that is her equal, is
mercenary, and proposes to himself her for his reward, which I cannot without
injuring her or Leopoldo; which ere I will do, thou shall see me fly where my
despaires will carry me, and converse with Beasts or Trees, envying the life of
Plants, whilst I despise my own.


Arcus. Oh Sir, let me beg once in my days to be believed; and lest my fears
prove fatal, by her whose fair eyes you love best I beg you will at lest quit
this habit and your order, and for a time strike sail to fortune in this storm;
you will sink a brave vessel else, and lose a noble fraught.


Leop. How? And fall a private man? Pluck from my self my Honor? No, Arcus,
thou shall see me frown, and meet the worst of Fortunes; For I dare die, as
well as live a Prince; And here, with all the Triurnio, and glorious
distinctions of a Prince, thou shall see me fall a crowned sacrifice to Love
and Fortune.


Arcus. Sir, Wisdom as well as Courage is allowed us in all our accidents of
this life; and to be wilful in our miseries upbraids the gods, and looks as if
we would glorify our selves: Besides, if you desire to be capable of enjoying
her own wishes in this habit, and like your self, it is impossible. Leopoldo,
This day was your happiness; But Leopoldo now can promise nothing but
misfortunes; your misery is the desire of all men. The busy Ambition of the
Enemy hunts nothing but the greatness of the Prince; In which time a private
man may escape; Besides, the the Maid will sooner listen to your words when you
stand in a level with her, then when she sees such a desperate height as is
betwixt her and her Princes Love.


Leop. Ha! What have thou said? It Is Truth he urges, and I submit to thy Reason
in hopes to find it succesfull; -- Thus I consent to a disguise, which this
public Character cannot wear. -- Pulls off his Order. Here, Arcus, take this
envied Character from my afflicted Breast; This shows how dangerous these
distinctions of Honor are, and how vain men are that seek them. -- Poor and
safe; could greatness believe that truth! how happy might we be whose sad
experience I now must prove? Would I could lose my self to all the world, but
thee Bellamira, and this Maid.


Arcus. Come, Sir; who knows but this stooping a little to Fortune may make her
kind, and take it for satisfaction for all the scorns your Virtue has thrown
upon her; trusting still to Justice, and aspiring to that title rather then the
fortunate Leopoldo: Hark, Sir, the noise draws this way; in this woods
thickness we may hide our selves, and let the danger pass.


Leop. Lead the way, but with how ill a will I yield to Fortune, the gods
witness; Love, it is thy power more then any argument of fear or hope prevails
with me.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. VII.
Enter Ravack and Phillora. Ravack. It Is sure a party of the Enemy that pursues
us, but these woods are thick, and we are now near home.


Phil. 'Twas the Prince, I know his clothes; His royal slave was with him too,
a mark not to be mistaken.


Rav. If the Satyr overtook him he is then retired to our Cave, to enjoy the
welcome news of the Kings safety, which if his age denies not, I can promise.


Phil. How fain I would believe the Prince safe too in this time of penurious
hope! that he lived, were all I would ask: Alas, I saw him fall amongst his
enemies; and since that sad hour can give my heart no news of his safety; I
would fain speak with him, and tell him only how innocent and faithful a
passion my heart labors with. Could he then be so barbarous as to scorn me?


Enter from the Wood Arcus and Leopoldo. Leop. No, no, gentle Maid; Heaven (if
thy rage have a curse yet left in store) throw it upon me if I scorn thee.


Phil. It Is the Prince; and thus upon my knees I fall to him, in virtue,
courage and all that is excellent, a Prince; all but these miseries are his own:
Oh Sir, that you are safe is all my joy; and let not the Prince be angry to
find a fond Girl hunt his greatness, who begins to fear her self his evil
Angel; you were never happy since I saw you.


Leop. Fair and dear; what interest in this days chance engaged your virgin
hand? why do thou not fly before our misfortunes crush thee?


Phil. Oh Sir; gods and men will fight your cause, and all that have heard of
Leopoldo (but this band of wicked ones) would dye for you; and if my life could
save a hair of that generous head, I Would dye as quietly as little birds in their
Nests; for I shall never find a joy but in serving you; and it is one great
blessing we have saved the King.


Leop. The King!


Rav. By the appointment of the gods, I hope, he fell into my hands, faint and
full of wounds, known by this signet upon his finger; for it is long since my
age left wandering in the splendid paths of Courts; he is now in our Cave, where
he is safe and private; and I hope a blessing in his cure; and if your Highness
will vouchsafe to put your royal head under that humble roof till this storm be
over, we shall think our selves blessed in the occasion.


Leop. No more, no more; my life and all that ever was precious I value less
then this news; in spite of mischief I grow happy, since I have found a faith
here; for I heard your discourse even now, the joy it gave me may your soul
never wish in vain; may I not know your name?


Phil. Phillora, Sir, I am called; Daughter to this good old man; here in these
woods I had my birth and abode; I have a Brother too, dear as mine eyes; he is
now bleeding in your Highness cause, ambitious to be in wounds, allied to your
miseries; heaven bless him when he fights your Battles, and curse them that
fight against you.


Arcus. It Is the prettiest and the gallantest innocence that ever my eyes saw;
ye gods, such another excellency but my bright Mistress sure the earth shows
not; how my heart pities the disparity of her birth, that forbids them to equal
the gods in happiness!


Leop. Gentle Phillora, is there no hope to find your love has charity for my
passion, as well as value for some other object?


Phil. Find the means, Sir, to satisfy that question; let the Prince and
honor search it, and if I deny, at the rate of my life, to purchase it, let no
mercy find me.


Leop. Oh Phillora, name not those tyrants, honor and opinion, that still
persecutes mankind, and impose their severe laws upon our hearts; what have
Lovers to do with them, or they with us? we will love beyond their Rules, and
suffer beyond their examples, till there be nothing left for us to imitate; and
then we will our selves become examples; and to love like us shall be the next
ages rule; and Phillora, all ages wonder. -- Yet, methinks, in midst of my
despairs honor holds out a light, which though it be afar off, it guides me to
something that I may hope.


Phil. Hope, Sir! why not? all that is honorable; and your virtue will
overcome the rest of fate; there is nothing lays such violent hands upon
generous minds as to see a Lover despair of being happy: and this doubtful
looking upon your wishes, whatever they be, shall make me give sooner then the
greatest Argument your vanity can propose; there is a kind of Magic in the eye
of a languishing despair, that good nature cannot see without pity, and yields
sooner to it then presumptuous confidence, or force.


Leop. Yet force has been successful, and many have outlived it.


Phil. None, where there was honor.


Leop. Will you then deny the fame of those maids that lust and force have
injured?


Phil. If they outlive it unmindful of a just revenge, I shall.


Leop. Would you be so cruel to kill the man should thus speak his passion,
when this Idol, honor, you adore, has stopped all other possible ways to his
desire?


Arcus. Ha! 'twas not well urged.


[Aside. Rav. If this be serious, I have yet a power to save her honor.


Phil. Do you doubt it, Sir? would I live famed here, or dye to Aside. become a
star in heaven? so sure I would kill all that is mortal, if this spear could
reach him.


Leop. Why, it is not for fear of the gods then that you are honest? for, sure,
murder is worse then rape, and in this you declare there is something you
prefer to them. Suppose I should now by the advantage I could find abuse this
opportunity, would you kill me?


Phil. The gods forbid; no, Sir, when I find the Prince start back from virtue,
and so far quit his own Rules of goodness, that have gained him the surname of
Just, and for my sake become a Ravisher, I shall quickly let him see how I hate
such a tempter; for when I find my innocence too weak to defend my honor I
shall at least find honor enough to defend my innocence; and I will always dye
worthy your love, Sir, when you shall refuse to let me live so; nor is death
faulty then, but like a friend to virtue, finding oppressed arms in her defense;
and strikes, not to destroy Phillora, but to rescue her honor.


Leop. Upon my soul thou would, thou excellent and single in thy goodness;
come near old man, and record my vows, that if thy Daughter be but gently born,
here I Will fix my heart; either hers or never woman's, so heaven and earth assist
me.


Phil. Oh hold, Sir, call back that vow; be still my Prince, while I follow and
admire you as far as fame finds faith, or passage; but to be yours will make me
blush for ever, and the guilt will always deject me.


Leop. By my love, by beauty, innocence, and all that is fair, by truth it self,
or Phillora (which is all these) I swear, thy honor and my vow I Will most
religiously preserve; and if my life be blessed by thy embraces, thou shall
command more in that day then I would beg now; do not doubt my faith nor your
power, which nothing but your fears can lessen.


Rav. The gods say, Amen.


Phil. Rather all the gods forbid such Hymen's should attend your blessed day;
let me first sink forgotten into my little grave, ere I become the subject of
such a curse.


Leop. Is this Phillora's friendship?


Phil. Do I refuse this for want of love? no, Sir, when that comes in question
my life is ready to clear the doubt; I know I have nor birth, nor parts to
pretend a fellowship to Crowns; the sin and guilt of such an act would sink me
lower then your passion has done you; let me be still your subject with my
innocence; let your Reason love me as well as your passion, lest I lose your
love and your value both; for in unequal Hymen's beauty will find but a short
reign. For Princes grow ashamed of their faults; and the gods protect me from
such misery as your deposed love.


Leop. Will Phillora thus cruelly punish my love? thus, for fear of a possible
ill, to make me certainly miserable?


Phil. Alas, Sir; my love in all its kindness speaks to you; and when you
forget your self you ought to be punished for that act more then for your
crimes to others. I am sure I shall be severer far when you offend so then when
you injure me; for witness heaven, Leopoldo is still most precious in my eyes.
Oh, Sir; rather haste to repair the ruins of this day; you were never
overcome, till now, and sink faster amongst your friends then in the Battle;
and I that would dye to serve you, in this command you would make me the
destroyer of my Prince.


Leop. It Is resolved, I will be thine, or else a single life fate shall not
deny me.


Rav. Ye gods, what do I hear and see? my glad heart is big with joy.


Arcus. I hear a noise of weapons.


[A noise in the Wood. Phil. Alas, Sir, we have talked away our safety; I fear
new dangers, or separation, worse then death.


Rav. Yet if we can regain the wood, I Will guide you to my Cave.


Leopoldo. Oh Phillora, it is in vain, they are upon us.


Enter three or four Soldiers, and set upon them, and, after the Soldiers the
Spanish Prince: the Spanish party drives the rest off the Stage. Alman. Yield
thee, wretch, or this bold attempt shall cost Enter Almanzor.

Leopoldo looks about.

They fight, Almanzor is wounded.

Leopoldo wounds him, and in the close disarms and throws him.

thee dear; thy safety is in yielding.


Leop. It Is he, and we are alone; heaven, thou art kind.


Alman. The villain has wounded me again; such a courage in a wretch, and of a
beaten party, I never found.


Leop. There, take your length on that earth your ambition thought to enslave;
see how one handful of it has checked that in all thy glory; my heart has not
malice nor baseness enough to strike thee upon thee ground, nor leisure to
consider thy fate, until I have found my dear Phillora; sure these woods have
paid his debt.


[Exit Leopoldo. Enter Roderigo, and Soldiers. Roder. These woods are so
thick, and the Rogues fly like deer in them; it is in vain to pursue 'em, where
left you the Prince?


1. Sold. I saw him not, Sir.


2. Sold. Nor I.


Roder. Nor you? ye dogs, where did you leave him?


Sold. We saw him not, Sir, since we left the party.


Alman. Roderigo, here, thy hand, prithee.


Roder. Ha! wounded, and upon the ground!


Alman. My hurts are slight, by chance of war only; and it was a gallant
fellow, who ere he be, that gave them.


Rod. Beat all the woods and plains, he cannot escape; what was he?


Alman. Seek him, but upon your lives wrong him not; it is but a private person;
but I dare say, a bolder soul tried not his fate this day.


Enter Soldiers, bringing the Prince Leopoldo bound. Sold. This is he, Sir;
we knew him by your Highness sword.


Alman. It Is so, use him kindly, and carry him to my quarters. If thy Prince
had fought thus well this day he had not been missing now in Battle.


Leop. My Prince fought better then the proudest of you; my Prince stood the
last danger of the field, and scorns to fly; he is either dead, or worse, in
chains; nor can you boast your victory, which you ow to our own swords; 'twas
Clytus, not Almanzor, beat Leopoldo.


Roder. Away with him to the Quarters.


Sold. We'll through the woods again, and try what ballast he bears in his
breeches.


Roder. Make haste, and meet us at the hill by the wood side.


[Exeunt omnes. Partis primae Finis.
THE SECOND PART OF Bellamira her Dream: OR, THE Love of Shadows. A
TRAGI-COMEDY, The Scene NAPLES and SICILY.

Written in VENICE, BY THOMAS KILLIGREW.

DEDICATED TO THE Lady ANN VILLIERS COUNTESS OF SUSSEX.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Blew Anchor, in the lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

The Names of the Actors:
The King of Naples and Sicily. Ortho, Brother of the King, slain in a Battle.
Leopoldo, Prince of Sicily and Naples. Almanzor, Prince of Spain. Roderigo, His
Lieutenant General. Bellamira, Sister to Leopoldo. Fidelia, A Lady of the
Court. Pollidor, Two Foresters. Phillora his Sister, Ravack, A banished Lord,
of dead Ortho's party. Nigro, Three Lords of Ortho's party, in Arms in Gaietta.
Clytus, Cleon, Palantus, General of the Horse to the King of Sicily and Naples.
Philemon, An old Lord at Court. A Satyr, In Love with Phillora. Arcus, A Moor,
Slave to Leopoldo. Juba, A Moor, Friend to Arcus, Both Prisoners. Cadess, his
Sister. Soldiers and Servants, such as the Scene Requires.
THE SECOND PART OF Bellamira her Dream: OR, THE Love of Shadows.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter two Soldiers, with Leopoldo bound. 1. Sold. NO Mutiny Friend, the Day
being ours, our Swords have given us Title to all you have.


2. Sold. Your Throat is mine too, and be still while he geld your Pocket, or
I shall spoil your Drinking.


Leop. Can you answer this to your Officer? He commanded you to see me safe to
his Tent, else no such base hands as yours should have had power to have bound
me.


1. Sold. Come Sir; these hands are as proper to pick your Pocket as the best
in the Army, What Is here? A Chain, by my faith, The Soldiers plucks a chain
out of his pocket, and puts it about his neck. and Gold too.


2. Sold. Do You hear, Brother, no pocketing; lay all down, fair play, and when
we have done, divide.


1. Sold. Yes, yes, what is that? A Jewel? Is It right?


2. Sold. If it prove false we'll have his -- in the room; this was no small
Fool.


1. And his Ransom will be no Bauble, and let me alone to use him ill enough to
make him hasten it.


Leop. Let me go, and I Will pay it, to either, and by all the Gods swear secrecy.


2. Sold. Ha! hum!


1. Sold. What is it he says?


2. Sold. Something that carries reason if we durst trust him.


1. Sold. D' ye hear? either trust him and let him go, or cut his Throat; for
if he lives to see the Prince, he will tell what he has lost; and then we must
not only restore all, but put fair for hanging.


2. Sold. And 'twould be a sad business to change this Gold chain for a
halter; My Friend, turn to the Tree and pray, for I am resolved not to lose one
link of this chain for your span of days; How fine my Girl will be when she
has it on!


1. Sold. Just as fine as mine, 'twill burn your fingers else; that as the
rest must be divided.


2. Sold. No, no, it is pity to spoil it; take you his Clothes in
consideration of half; Come Friend, dispatch this matter.


Leop. Villain, will thou rob me and murder me too? Take heed, thy wants may
plead for the one, but no excuse will save thee The Soldier holds his sword
against his Breast.

He catches hold of the chain.

They strive for the chain.

from that vengeance that sees thee if thou shall act the other; The Blood thou
shed'st in the heat of battle may find some excuse, as drawn from an Enemy,
though Treason brought thee there.


2. Sold. Nay, nay, no sentences; Pray, if you can, or die, overseen, and say
you were fairly advised; 'twill be so, indeed it will; I cannot afford it
cheaper, will you dispach?


Leop. Villain!


1. Sold. Yet 'ere you do it, I shall make bold with this. -- (Half is my
right, and I Will have it.)


2. Sold. It may be so, but I shall see you prove that right ere I quit it.


Leop. Hell that gave a Mind to men full of Avarice, and corrupted Souls, Lust
for wealth, send Discord the fruit of that cursed metal to fill their Hearts.


1. Sold. Let it go. The first Soldier strikes, they fight.

He slips down his hands, gets the dagger out, and cuts the strings that binds
them.




2. Sold. I will not.


Leop. So, so, that blow will be revenged, I hope; I have a weapon in my boot,
could I come but to use it; I might gain my freedom by this strife. -- It Is
done, now I am free; But 'ere it is known, let me get within reach of them;
Hold, as you are Soldiers, hold, do not strive for trifles at the rate of
lives too.


2. Sold. Stand you off, or I shall spoil your expectation; You had hope a
good from this, but you are cozened: keep off, or I shall find a spare thrust
shall do your business.


Leop. For wishing your good?


2. Sold. A pox on your Charity and your baubles; I would you been both hanged
when I met with you; the Rogue has hurt me.


Leop. If that Villain scapes me I am strangely cozened.


1. Sold. I am wounded too, will you divide yet? And not let him laugh at
both; he is like to be our Heir and Executor if we agree not.


2. Sold. I am content; We are Friends, and thou shall have half; Here Is my
Hand, and let us dispatch him. -- Oh, he has killed me.


While they embrace, the Prince stabs the second Soldier, and takes his sword,
he falls. The first Soldier sets upon the Prince, they fight; the Soldier
falls, his perriwig drops off. Leop. Ye gods, that thus have armed in defense
of my Innocence, to you I acknowledge this strange deliverance; I am free, but
whither to go to keep that liberty, you that miraculously have sent it direct
me too; I would find Phillora, but I know not where to seek her known and
pursued in this habit, though not for the Prince, yet as an Enemy, will be
dangerous. -- ha! see what fate presents in this Extremity; it is a Perriwig,
why not use it, and change habits with this Soldier, and so attempt to pass as
one of them? it must be so, my wounds will be my excuse too, for being behind
my Fellows; Thus, like an Enemy to my self I Will prove a Friend, and from these
bitter flowers this honey gather; and by Fortune made equal to my love, safely
enjoy the conversation of that maid, in this private habit, which was refused
as Prince, when fortune frowned. -- I start not at this misery at all; nor will
I He strips the Soldier, and carries the Clothes off the stage; the Picture
Palantus had lost drops out of the Soldiers pocket unseen of the Prince.
upbray'd the gods for these afflictions, it is the common fate of the best of
Princes; no story but is filled with these blots of Treason, and the certain
Vengeance that pursues 'em; And who e're he be that will venture into the
troubled Seas that Empire Sails in must set out with a mind resolved for all
fortunes; Princes are but men, and when they have resolved wisely let them Act
with Honor, and leave the rest to Fate.


[Exit. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Bellamira, Fidelia, Arcus, and Philemon. Bell. GOod heaven, what a day
was this! My soul trembles to retain the sadness in my thoughts; the cries and
groans still fill my Ears, The wounds and death that lies in thousand places
are still before my eyes; The horror of so many kinds of Entrances for death
makes my soul sad, to think any man can be proud of conquest when they consider
at what a Rate of misery and Cruelty it is purchased; Oh Fidelia, the sad means
and Lamentations that the deceived hopes will breed from the fate of this day!
-- slaughter yet flying over the Field, waited on by death, who visits the
Innocent, the Coward and the valiant, none can refuse him. Yet nothing is
fuller of wonder then mine own part, who, this day, the thought of a friends
danger would have begot a tear from, yet now am forced to tread upon the blood,
and suck in at my Nostrils the souls of wretched men, whose last thick breath
has filled the Air.


Fidel. Pray, Madam, cease to weep, and employ all your patience to resist the
violence of this storm; your Innocence will save us all.


Bell. Oh Fidelia, This horror, nor the diverse dangers of the times, is the
load my soul shrinks under; it is the loss of my Royal Father, and poor
Leopoldo, that bows me to the Earth; yet, in midst of these miseries and fears
my eyes abuse me, if I saw not this day in the battle that fatal Figure my
dreams have thus long conversed withal.


Fidel. 'Twas sure the same the Prince met this morning.


Bellamira. No, no, I saw her too; this was not unlike her, in habit, I confess
I have labored with my grief, and the weakness of my Sex, thus far, to see if
fate would guide me once more to his sight.


Phil. I pray be pleased, Madam, to repose here, whilst Arcus and myself see
what horse those were that entered the wood.


[Exeunt Arcus and Philemon. Fidel. If there be in nature such a blessing as
you imagine, I shall yet smile; for my heart tells me his sight concludes our
miseries; yet what can be stranger then the things we have seen and suffered
this day? how our fears have reconciled us even to this habit!


Bell. We have not leisure to consider those lesser things now; Yesterday I
should have blushed to let Fidelia see what is now exposed to the view of
dommon men; Behold the power of Parents, whose command hides all, and my
obedience is as modest as my Coats; but when I consider my mind, and what fate
imposes upon me, thus to pursue a flying shadow, ye gods behold, and pity a
Virgin wooing, and a Virgin armed; stranger things then these no maidens
fortunes know; Yet if I should see him, I can do any thing sooner then tell him
that I love (and that too I fear) sooner then leave to do so.


Fidel. From one that has felt the same sting pray take a little counsel, and
resolve not what you will do, or say, until you see him; for to hope to be
wise, thus far before, in business of Love, is Madness; The heart only prepares
love a perfect well-come; They are too much themselves that can speak sense; at
such a time your worst Lover will tell his Tale best.


Bell. No more, no more, it is a Riddle, all; The wise man is not sure to read
it, nor is it impossible to the Fool.


Fidel. I am yet afraid we are not safe: for the Enemy pursues us in all
places, and therefore let us retreat into this wood; yet whither should we fly
but from our selves, that carry our griefs along with us?


Bell. This sword too, if all feared it as I do, though by mine own side,
Repehtance cannot make this day so Innocent as my fears would have preserved
it; Behold ye powers, A maid, whose feeble prayers could not reach your throne,
thus upbraids ye; and as a more powerful weapon draws her Sword; your anger
thus has armed our Sex, which has still been taught, Maids can so little glory
gain in fights, that they can scarce be modestly angry.


Fidel. Treacherous and Injurious men give us a dispensation; and nothing is
more lawful nor modest then those wounds a Virgin gives in defense of her
Honor.


Bell. Alas, Fidelia, armed women have as far out-shot their mark as cowardly
men fall short of theirs; fighting women can add so little to their Fame
themselves, that it is scarce for their honor to be sought for; and if men
cannot add to women's fame by fighting, (which is their Idol virtue,) sure we
catch at Shadows when we draw their Swords: and to speak really, that woman's
honor that must be held by a Sword is not worth a Swords cure; For who has
once been doubted may be innocent, but never fully cleared; for such a doubt,
if it does not stain, yet it dies the minds of the best friends; Men,
reasonable enough, fear there was something called, some looks or words, some
motion, that becken'd him to come, and made her subject to the boldness of that
Sex; some negligence that bad him hope a Surprise, e're the boldest durst
attempt such a fort as a modest mind; if there had not been some intelligence
within, or at least the guards of virtue sleeping, they durst not (I say) hope;
And this is my guilt, who, in my sleeps, have given up that mind and heart to a
shadow, in my Dreams, that waking defended it self against the world; and now
the Conqueror insults.


Fidel. Oh Madam, leave to repine at a Fate you cannot change; but calmly obey
the gods; your virtue was not wont to dispute their wills; Remember, Madam, you
have much to expect from heaven e're They sit upon the ground. you can reap
your wishes; and obedience is the only welcome price Mortals can pay.


Bell. Sure I am not stubborn, Fidelia; Obedience is all I plead; for I am so
far from refusing what they command, that thou see I follow a shadow because
they sent it; and I believe all these desires but so many calls, so many
becknings to come, which I shall cheerfully Obey; I know there must be some
divine providence shut up in that Figure, some hidden secret some knot in fate
that heaven has appointed my mortal hand to untie; It cannot be they should
pick me out of a Nation only to make me miserable; No, no Fidelia, it is but to
make our joys taste the sweeter, that they pass them through these difficulties
and fears.


Fidel. Now I prophecy we shall be happy; and give me leave to say, your
former doubts have been one cause of these sufferings; for to doubt their power
or mercy is the great sin; for when men dare confine the gods to the capacities
of their narrow minds then they cleave the Air with Thunder, and in some high
Example speak their Anger; hark, I hear a noise of weapons, we have talked away
our safety.


Enter Arcus and Philemon, pursued by the Enemy. Arcus. Haste, haste, Madam, or
we are lost; this cursed color of mine is known to be one that fought on the
princes side to day; This brand of shame, not only sent to be my curse, but
yours; fly, and I Will kill my self, and let them believe I died of wounds in the
battle, it is only me, me that they pursue, and what wretch is he, would live,
when he might die, to serve?


He turns his Sword as if he would fall upon it. Bell. Hold, Arcus, thy faith
shall live to be admired, as I have a life and Honor, if thou lay'st the least
violent hands upon thy self, here I Will stay, and expect the worst of Fortune.


Arcus. Fly then, for Heavens sake.


Bell. We have lost the way, and know not where to go.


Phil. Enter this wood, Madam, that though we find not the Prince we may not
lose each other.


Bell. Innocence! where is thy home? Alas, she has none! Innocence as restless
is as her Servants, sent upon Journyes, as Fortune, or Oppression pleases; no
certain place assigned her, They wander still over the Earth; Courts and
Temples are but Inns to virtue, where she lodges for a Night, but early next
day she must be gone.


Fidel. It Is sad, the while, when the Palaces of Princes, nor Empire (beyond
which the ambitious Sword aspires not) cannot terminate her wandering steps, nor
the Temples Sacred Odours breathe air pure enough for her to live in. But these
sad contemplations are not proper now; leave them, Madam, and seek a safety,
for fear of worse evils then we have yet met.


Bell. Heaven I obey, and but follow, where thou lead'st the way.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Almanzor, Roderigo and Soldiers, in pursuit of Bellamira, Fidelia,
Arcus, and Philemon. Alman. PUrsue them, Roderigo, they hide in every Bush,
victory and smiling Fortune beckens us to come.


Roder. It Is a sullen kind of Courage that despair and anger gives 'em; they
have defended themselves to this place, with a strange daring, and a kind of
miracle in success.


Alman. It Is but this desperate handful that remains.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Pollidor, Phillora, and the Satyr. Phil. IT is the Princes party that
disputes the hill, I saw the slave, I cannot be mistaken dear Pollidor, I know
the Moor; my Imagination, nor my Love, which so often you have upbraided, cannot
change colors, Pollider.


Poll. See my Reason, Blood, All I have freely given to your Passion; Follow
thy Fate; for since my Father's satisfied, I shall without dispute obey you;
though his news surprise me, being not apt to believe the Prince though he
offered marriage; but heaven has time to punish and reward. -- hark, I hear the
noise of weapons, step into this Wood, and see what it means. Noise of weapons
within.


Enter Bellamira and Fidelia with their Swords drawn, Philemon and Arcus making
their Retreat. Fid. Fly, Madam.


Bell. O whither, Fidelia?


Enter Pollidor and Phillora, and sides with the Princes party, and meet
Bellamira and Fidelia. Phil. See, see the Slave I spoke of, and certain they
must be Friends to the Prince.


[Among the Trees. Pol. The odds makes the rest our Enemies, and honor calls
Swords to their party. Stand, What are you?


Bell. We are two that would fain be Friends to thy Fortune what ere it be. O
Fidelia, this is the same fatal Figure again.


Pol. The Word?


Bell. Bellamira.


Pol. Pass that way while we endeavor your safety here.


Exeunt Bellamira and Fidelia. Phil. How they tremble! their fears ly heavy
upon them; some secret bosom-sin which they are loath to part with makes the
fear of death worse than death.


Pollidor and Phillora take part with Arcus, and beat the Enemy. Enter
Bellamira and Fidelia. Bell. This way, Fidelia; it is the Deity that in visions
made his visits here, I cannot be mistaken, Love and Fate have stamped the
Figure in my virgin-minde, let us follow and tell him so.


Fid. Stay, Madam, Whither will your distracted griefs transport you? if you be
discovered you are lost for ever; your Honor too calls you back; when Women
pursue how full of blushes are the most innocent actions?


Bell. But if he goes ere I speak to him my soul will wither still in the fear
that this should be a Dream too. O Fidelia, it is a cruel Fate that forces me
to these precipices; Is there no possibility to be happy, but we must lose some
grains of our value? Has Honor no Holy Days? Is her service all toil of mind
and body, no reward? Are Chains and Slavery the sole marks she desires to be
known by? All Sting, all Thorns, no Roses, no Flowers, no Honey? Why should Man
endowed with a reasonable mind sacrifice to such an Enemy for such shadows as
these?


Fid. Alas, Madam, is this a time to dispute the power and will of Heaven? Let
us seek a safety first before new dangers find us.


Bell. No, Fidelia, I fear no new danger; could I find a cure for this old
wound I would despise all the Conqueror, either with Sword or Chains could
bring; Why should his youth by fate be made so fit for my love, and then be set
so far out of my reach? See how he hunts for honor, how greedy of my dangers,
only as they are glories; for he knows not me; his gentle Sister too faithful
by his side without fear of wounds seeks them with more fury than we tremble at
the thought, and gives the lie to all that we have said this day, giving and
receiving wounds; Yet a Virgin, in whom no stains nor blush can dwell; What
would these two have been? What stories would they have made if Fate had set
them free, unfettered into the world! What parts would they have acted, had not
these Minds been hedged in and confined with private births! Had not that cloud
hung over 'em, who could have beheld the brightness of that Virtue which shines
through their humble Fortune? And since my Dreams were not safe from his shadow
only, what would the real Figure do? Oh Fidelia!


Fidel. Why these tears? Why this grief, when you ought to rejoice? This day
has removed a seven years doubt, the fears of an Age are blown over in this one
object; That 'twas a shadow is now removed; there rests only fitness now to
complete your happiness; Heretofore you were to wish a being to your Love; now
when your great Heart can descend to meet a private virtue your may be happy.
Remember, Madam, your Dream, and how strange a cure was appointed to heal this
troubled Age, the marrying of a Tree; and see the sacred plants, the health and
wealth of the Forest, designed for that great work.


Bellam. To Love and Fate I bow; and what they shall appoint most readily I
shall submit to.


Fidel. The night will suddenly join in our security; This way, Madam, we must
expect the faithful Arcus.


[Exeunt ACT. I. SCEN. V.
Enter Pollidor from the Rescue of Bellamira. Poll. THis Girls passion makes my
life a burden to me; but for love of her that is dearer than my self this Sword
should with a kind wound release me, that I should see her dote upon the Son
of him that ruined us, my self too hunting their dangers, and in our blood
write our selves Friends to what we hate -- What have we here? a poor youth
slain, and a Picture by him, of his He finds the Picture, the Soldiers body
lies by the Stage-side till n^w. Mistress sure; what may be miserable is still
so; I never yet knew that blind froward, humoursom Deity; Fortune omit a
mischief that lay in her power; this Wretch that had but one thing dear to him,
and was no doubt precious himself in the eyes of somebody. See how early her
malice has found her youth, and cut him off in his first dangers; while to me
she has this day afforded a miraculous He takes the Picture and looks upon it,
and at the sight of it is amazed. Victory only to vex me; had I been unwilling
or afraid to die she would have sought death for me; but finding me weary of
life she aids me still against my wishes that has no business here -- Ha! What
does my eyes behold? I dream sure -- Ye Gods What is your will? Why this
strange way to new miseries? What kind of Curse is this you have sent me? it is
the sacred Figure sure of some Deity profaned and ravished by this Wretch,
whose Sacrilege has from Heaven met a punishment -- O speak, speak, divine
Spirit, command me and I Will revenge thee. 'I will not speak, it is some
Witchcraft sure -- I Will fly and call help from Heaven -- What is it that pulls
me back? I feel something oppress my breast, He throws the Picture down: and
offers to out. my thoughts grow too great and powerful for Reason to command:
This Disorder is not unlike Phillora's love, thus she described him. O thou art
a Prophetess, I fain would go, but without this strange new acquaintance my
heart says no.


He stoops, takes up the Picture, and gazes on it. Enter Phillora. Phil. 'Twas
the same my heart told me, I knew the Moor; O Pollidor, this was fortunate; to
rescue the Princes Friends, he minds me not. Pollidor, Brother, what is that
his eyes are fixed upon? a Picture -- Pollidor, Brother! Heaven, what ails he?
It Is a Picture, and of a lively form, divinely graced. Do, start, and sigh, and
She looks upon the Picture. change color; that paleness shows the fright and
allarm his heart has taken at those eyes: Heavens you are just; and Love, if
ever a virgins heart given freely to thy power found grace, be propitious to my
prayers, and feed the flame thou have kindled in his frozen breast, till thy
great name has filled his mind, and sick with love let him taste that bitter
Cup he made me drink so deep of, insensible of the pain he never felt -- So,
so, does your heart grow too big for your breast, while your ears are deaf, and
your eyes blind Pollidor sighs. to all other objects? Yes, yes, talk on,
she will hear thee as thoudidst me. So, so, now thy mind has business of it is
own -- Pollidor, what, talking to thy self? She lays hold on him.


Pol. Phillora, Sister.


He throws the Picture down, and looks on his Sword. Phillora takes it up and
hold it. Phil. Never cast this from you, in vain thou think to be rid of it;
a cunning and a great Master has graved it with a powerful hand in thy heart,
try thy Philosophy now, forget her, Pollidor; See what Lethe can prevail; haste
to Ga^etta; try if some new Figure, some fresh object can relieve thy mind;
Does Pollidor now begin to find there was something like Reason I said to day;
O Pollidor, I was thy wonder to day, but thou will be mine to morrow, and thy
own for ever.


Pol. Enough, enough, Phillora, unless thy heart hunt revenge; remember 'twas
but mistaken kindness; I then was a stranger to love, and therefore ought to be
forgiven if I mistook thy passion; but what can thou plead, after having made
acquaintance with the God, if thou despise his Priest? Have but patience, and
thou shall reap all thy revenge, and with innocence of thy heart be pleased
with it, and see thy Brother miserable even to pity.


Phil. No, Pollidor, it is far from me to seek Revenge against thee; yet I must
confess I cannot be sorry to see thee a Lover, 'twill polish thy heart; 'twas
too harsh, too severe before, a knotty roughness hid much of that beauty which
now will shine when this passion shall illustrate it; Love will weed thy mind,
and prune all that barbarous wildness that wanted sense for others pains; and
thenthy awaked honor and armed thoughts will defend Love and thee against the
world, and make thee, if it were possible, more welcome to Phillora.


Pol. Come near Phillora; Does not thy heart find a decay of my love? Have
thou not mist, this hour, the diligent mind that was employed, solicitous for
thy good only?


Phil. Not I, me thinks Pollidor is as kind as ever, and much more lovely in
this passion than in all the reason thou were so proud of.


Pol. Why then I fear, -- she, this divine figure remains alone He takes the
Picture from Phillora. still, though my heart be gone to find her alone, as
when the dead, cold hand of her murdered Lover held her, and none but I,
(wretched I) feel this fatal change; sure there is Magic in it, how could itbe
made? my mind is tied to it, no other thoughts can find a place; hunger and
thirst I feel not but what the drought of longing love begets, and that (I
fear) will lick up all the warm blood that circles my heart.


Phil. No more, no more; let us first attend our safety, and at leisure seek a
remedy for this ill, the Enemy pursues us close.


Pol. Tell not me of safety, an Enemy at my foot is not so pleasing a sight as
this; though it be full of despair, it is a poisonous fire, Phillora, that is
crept in at my eyes, it burns here, and the pain is beyond that which Poets
describe Lust, Ambition, or Famine by. Yet my vain heart would fain promise it
self something of happiness and pleasure from this strange thing. Victory nor
Conquest is not half so welcome to my heart as this object; no such music as
the harmony of this face; it has smoothed my brow, and calmed my heart; all
forms of past affection, either of love or hate, are cancelled, all the
impressions of former joy or anger one sight of this has destroyed; those eyes
have even melted my soul, and Pollidor lies ready to receive what form she will
impose.


Phil. The Gods have heard my prayers since Pollidor is become a Lover, and I
shall now hope my words will again be Reason.


Pol. I love thee, Phillora, but thou art not half so handsome as this; Prithee
do not leave me, lest I forget thee and my self too: for all the world will
vanish from my mind beholding this; I have already lost my anger, and can
forgive Leopoldo and the King, so she will but smile. O that the divine hand that
framed thee had but given thee a tongue too; it is all thou want to beget a
worship, yet we'll carry it home, and set it upon Diana's Altar.


Phil. All but Sacrilege I Will join in; take heed, Pollidor, how you incense
the greater Deity; remember how the youthful God has revenged himself,
remember; I say, and tremble.


Pollid. It cannot be they should be true gods; flies play with 'em and worms
destroy them; when they fall we are fain to raise them; I cannot worship my own
creature, it is a contradiction to make my god; but suppose what thou believe,
would Pallas, Uenus, Juno, Minerva, or the rest of that glorious number, affect
such odd poor forms as we adore at home, and give to a mortal this divine
frame? See, see if there be not mercy in her eyes, calm peace in that brow,
innocence and justice in those fair hands; is there grace that men could wish,
or women envy, that grows not in this face; is it not one it self, or rather
all the Graces? and therefore kneel. -- Thou They kneel and worship. art a
Virgin Phillora, here lay thy hand upon this Virgin turfe, which never crooked
Plow deflowred, and by you chaste spring, whose sacred streams with fruitful
embraces circles you flowery Meads, never to worship any other of her sex, nor
shall any but our selves have leave to sacrifice, lest we pollute her shrine
with common vows, which I know will displease her, for she cannot be thus
excellent but she must be particular, and constant too; for constancy and
particularity show the minds chastity; every froward Girl taught by custom can
keep her body chaste, but the mind is seldom so: vanity, Phillora, has a
thousand ways to tempt a woman's mind, and nothing like love and honor guard it.


Phil. Should I now be as deaf to your reason as you were to mine, and deny all
those truths of Love and Honor; what could Pollidor say when he should see me
dote upon another face, and forget the Prince?


Pollid. I Would say a woman that out-lives her love has outlived her honor, and
is from that minute to be esteemed but as her carcass, and the moving figure of
such a perjured woman but the shadow of what she was, which some licensed Demon
has usurped to dispatch his business here on earth in; and such a looseness
stains both the fame and figure, the guilt will cast such a poisonous stench
that ages cannot waste it; like treason it taints the blood, the grave cannot
hide the deformity; a broken heart will out-last the Marble or the Epitaph.


Phil. From thee I Will learn to love, be thou my guide; while thy great heart
leads the way, who follows thee and Love can never stray.


Pollid, No Phillora, if I dye ere I see the substance of this shadow, I
conjure thee bury me in this fatal place; and on my Tomb engrave my fate, that
the world may know here was enterr'd the betwitch'd Forester; this was he that
equaled Echo, and rivaled Narcissus, unless that goddess (who ere she were)
that listened to Pigmaleons tears, would now look down on wretched Pollidor, and
lend a life to this beloved shadow; Love let it be thy act, then find thy eyes,
that with one sight of her I might pay thy bounty; but then take heed thy
youthful deity does not become my Rival, as she has done the gods in worship.


Enter Leopoldo in his disguise, and finds Pollidor and Phillora upon the
place. Leop. This deliverance had all the favorable gods to friend; my
disguise will hide me from the curious eye of all, since it is too poor and low
to call the search of jealousy or envy upon me; but to think of saving my self
till I know what fortune is befallen Phillora is a thought I cannot let enter
my heart, possessed with care and fear for her. -- Ha! it is she; what sight is
this? a man in her arms! She is leaning upon her Brother, and looking upon a
picture, Leopoldo discovers her. they are kind too: see she leans upon his
breast; I Will strike the villain to the earth. -- Sure it is some Phantasme: she
refused my love when 'twas accompanied with the offers of sacred Hymen; and yet
my soul tells me it is not possible there should be such a curse designed me as
to love a false heart; they are blinded, sure, with their passion, else they
could not choose but see me; stay, he speaks to her; I Will observe, but fatally,
if she be false; which my heart trembles to believe.


Phil. Oh my Pollidor, keep it as the treasure of thy life; it is a jewel I
would not part with for the world, the gods have sent it, keep it and love it;
and now pursue thy fate, and heaven witness how much I love and pity Pollidor.


Leop. Ha! my heart! what do I hear and see?


Pollid. Keep it? yes, as I would my Reason or my Soul; this shall be my
Buckler against all but thy fair self, whose friendship I Will prefer before
Empire; and if thou smilest Fortune has no sting: these two lessons I have
quickly learned, Phillora, the unfortunate, and the Lover; and they are two
parts, if thou frown, that I must act for ever. -- Love, thy Army would be
numerous, could thou All the while he looks upon the picture. to the world
show this Commission; our passion must be happy for the matter and the end is
noble, though the subject be yet a mystery.


Leop. It Is her picture, she has given it him; my soul is on fire; and though I
cannot hope to enjoy my love, my revenge is still in my power.


He goes behind them, and snatches the picture from Pollidor; Pollidor strikes
him with his sword. Pollid. Villain, restore it; restore it upon thy life, and
quickly. Phillora parts 'em


Phil. What art thou? why do thou commit this outrage? who sent thee? why
do thou pursue him, and not regard my words?


Pollid. Let me kill the villain.


Leop. The villain will not be killed, Sir.


Phil. Hold, fond wretch; though that Jewel be by him prized above his life,
consider what a vain thing it is in thee for a shadow thou know not thus to
sacrifice thy self, and hazard the becoming one amongst the shadows; why do
thou frown upon him, and look with rage on one thou know not? what, is it
for avarice thou would have it? deliver it, and take a better value then thy
poor hopes can promise.


Phil. Dear Phillora, cease to sue to the villain, let me come; Death, do
thou think I shall not win when I play this game; where will thou venture my
sword if I lose her?


Phil. I do not doubt thy success, but it is base for both of us to destroy him;
and my love for Phollidor is such, I will not see him hazard that rich heart
against a common sword.


Leop. False and cruel.


Phil. Besides, it is some poor Soldier of the enemy, whose wants have engaged
him, and for a reward he will restore it.


Leop. No, fond Girl; I Will give thee my part of the earth first, and the short
span of days the gods have left here I Will waste ere that villain shall boast
his victory over my Master that sent me hither.


Phil. Thy Master? who is thy Master? who sent thee?


Leop. Love and Fortune, blind Guides I fear.


Phil. What Is thy business hither; for heavens sake unriddle thy anger, speak;
what would thou have?


Pollid. And speak quickly.


Leop. From the Prince Leopoldo, who now lies weeping out his drops of life in
red tears on yonder hill; and even with his last breath mourns the loss of
thee, if thou be'st Phillora, calling on thy name; for love of whom, slowly and
unwillingly, he becomes a star, that art giving away thy self into another
arms.


Phil. The Prince Leopoldo dye! oh where! guide my desperate feet to that sad
place, and thou shall see how vain his fears are by the haste this heart will
make to meet him; for charities sake, for the Princes sake, upon my knees I
beg, restore his Picture, and let us go.


Leop. What should I believe?


Phil. What villain gave the Prince his wounds? could he look upon him and
strike?


Leop. False and fair have a thousand ways to kill; and there is more danger to
Leopoldo in those eyes then in his sword; whose frowns nor anger have any
terror, it is an idle rage; and thy passion only dangerous to thy self.


Pollid. Death, shall I be injured and despised too? sure I am not so weak an
enemy as to be beat with words?


They fight and are both wounded, yet she does all she can to part'em; in the
mean time Almanzor and Roderigo come in with their companies, and seize on both
Pollidor and Phillora. Phil. Oh my fate, Fortune I defy thee now; do thou
grudge me the mourning for the Prince?


Pollid. Dog, treacherous dog, this odds made thee so brave.


1 Sold. See, Sir, here are two of those that rescued the Princess Bellamira,
who in boys habit we surprised, together with Arcus the Moor.


Alman. And what are these?


Pollid. We are nothing, at least not worth telling now, ask thy self what we
are; foolish fortune has given thee the power of disposing fools we are that
might have looked on and would not, and now pay for playing others Cards.


Phil. It Is yet my joy I served the Prince, and saved his Sister; and know,
Tyrant, if my faithful heart could redeem him, I could know no misery after it.


Roder. What is he there?


Pollid. A villain, one of thy own train; but had not her fond pity saved him,
I had paid his score.


Leop. You took one prisoner before from me; but ere you get loose your self
you shall pay both scores.


Alman. Roderigo, did ever see a more graceful couple; there is something of
greatness in their looks I have not seen in persons of their rank. Prithee
answer me calmly; what ye are this habit speaks you are no Soldiers.


Pollid. The unhappy issue of one chaste bed, the children of a poor Forester
bred and born in these woods, led to this fatal day by chance, and kindness to
this luckless Girl, who till this hour has always been all my care; but love,
curious love has found my mind business of its own.


Leopoldo, aside. Ha! what do I hear, Brother to my Love, and I wretched
villain have ruined them.


Roder. Convey them safe to Capua.


Leop. Yes, Sir; we'll see them safe, I warrant you. -- Something I must do
like an enemy until I can prove a friend, this day's full of fate. -- Come Sir,
will you march? -- Had not my jealousy blinded me I might have seen a Brother
in his face, and the fatal figure in my Sisters Dream.


[Exeunt Pollidor, Phillora, Leopoldo, and two Soldiers Manent Almanzor,
Roderigo, other Officers and Soldiers of his party: Clytus and his Officers
stand on the other side of the Stage, and Clytus looks sullenly. Alman. At last
the cloud's dispersed; and now we may see clear, free and round about a full
victory, such a sullen game I never played, and had they been of one mind, this
had proved a black day.


Roder. How I abhor the very victory treason brings us!


Alman. If Bellamira had not escaped, the whole work had here found an end; but
if that scornful fair one fall into my hands she shall see how I can act her
part, whom my anger and revenge pursues more now then my love did heretofore.


Roder. Your Highness is in passion, else this anger to a Lady of her birth and
virtue is so unlike the rest of your character, I am confident you would not
own it; for to me she stands much greater in esteem for that answer, then if
she had shrunk with her fears and Leopoldo returns. sudden change of fortune,
and should have listened to your propositions; for consider her part that was
born Daughter to a King, now subject to an invading enemy, the destroyer of her
Father, ruiner of her Country, to receive from him in the height of displeasure
and anguish of her mind a proposition seconded by force of arms; it had been
strange if she should have sent a better answer.


Almanzor. All these Arguments are against her; for she saw my kindness such,
as when she was fallen into my power I offered from being a Subject to make her
a Queen.


Clytus. Subject? Sir, that is beyond your contract to make any of this Nation
your Subjects.


Almanzor. Is it beyond the sword, Clytus? I know no other Law nor Contract.


Clytus. Yes; and now in your greatest glory I dare tell you so; And know,
there is not a man amongst us, but will fall upon those swords you owe this
victory to, ere yield themselves your Subjects; You will find Naples scorns to
acknowledge any other King then their own: And here, in the name of all those
that sent me, whose Loyalty sixteen years banishment and oppression could not
weary, no nor the virtue of those most generous Princes Bellamira, and
Leopoldo; whose miseries though we lament, yet they had not power to seduce our
Loyalties; therefore do not hope to fright us into slavery.


Roderigo. Clytus, you are in Passion, and too sudden with the Prince, and
your fears most unreasonable.


Clytus. That. Your answer will clear; Know, in the Name of them whose General
I here stand, I again require performance of conditions. In the first place,
the delivery of all prisoners into my hands; Then, that this night our young
King be produced and crowned; which Ceremony being past, your Highness will
please to Command your Army to retire toward Calabria; where, with all
convenience which we shall provide, they may pass for Sicily; and according to
conditions leave to us our King and the quiet possession of all those
Dominions, that belonged to his Royal Father, the unfortunate Ortho; Sicily
being by us abandoned to your Highness as 'twas agreed; though I confess my
Heart bleeds to think our ills had no other remedy, nor this diseased State
could admit of no gentler cure then the hewing off these branches, as Leopoldo
and Bellamira, from the royal stock to save the Tree.


Almanzor. Clytus, I have stood silent long, and wonder rather then Patience
bred that Attention to this new kind of Language from you. Where Is the
Oppression, Treason, and Tyranny; The wrongs to gods and men; where is the
usurper against whom your Flattery and dejected looks and folded Arms? These
postures and these words were Clytus his, when he sought my aid; Clytus, there,
strove to persuade we were appointed by Heaven the scourge of these mischiefs,
and made it appear that Fate had named me in a Dream seven years since to your
scornful Princess; In which I was pointed at, and the whole success of this
war most Prophetically foreseen; How often has thy Flattery called me that
stranger that she saw land in that calm Evening; This, that foreign habit that
kicked up the dust in their faces? And see the King and Prince, all lost in
that dust, the disaffected people. And now I know my strength, and see your
Hearts, I will not march one foot farther, until the Princes and Castles are
delivered to me as rewards of this victory; Nor shall you see your King till I
think fit to trust you, lest he find you as false as I have done; which I shall
be yet able to punish in your greatest Pride and strength; For the Prisoners,
poor and contemptible as they are, (for I know only of two Shep-herds) yet
since demanded thus unhandsomely, not one hair of their heads shall be
delivered; nor dares Clytus fetch them.


Clytus. Either produce the King, and perform the Articles you swore to, or we
shall find a power will be too strong for perjury.


Almanzor. Perjury! They both lay hold on their swords, but are parted by
company.


Clytus. Yes, Perjury. -- Death, have we refused the Brother of our King, to be
usurped over and governed by a stranger? No, Leopoldo, if any stranger must be
our Fate, thy Starr shall guide us; whose noble Breast, this day, I robbed of
his honored Order, and forced like a private Soldier to fight for his safety;
yet then, had not thy odds rescued thee, or his noble Mind given a protection,
thy proud Heart had found a Justice some worse Nature must pay; 'Twas he that
gave thee thy Life; that Life thou so insultest with over the ruins of his
Father, which (slave and Villain as I was, to join in laying those sad loads of
grief upon his great Heart) I Will redeem, or die in the attempt, if you delay
this night to produce the King. Your Answer.


Almanzor. It Is here, double Traitor; here in this sword, and in Almanzor and
Clytus draw. the field, I Will make thee read it when it is written in thy blood.


Clytus. That Traitor, though Truth, shall cost thee dear; Perjured Prince. --
March.


[Exit Clytus and his party. Leopoldo. Heaven, thy Hand still! Clytus, my Soul
forgives thee; Honest and gallant; and what I thought crime is but virtue in
thee, and loyalty to thy Master; and I Will find a way to tell thee so if thou
persist: This quarrel may give us power to strike once more for our Revenge; --
Almanzor's full of thoughts; this quarrel must be fatal, they have both too
much Courage to bear such injuries as these.


Roderigo. Now, Sir, has your passion had the full swinge are you deep enough
in dangers? Have you Enemies enough? If not, we had best seek for more.


Almanzor. It Is better to know, then doubt of a foe; I saw him false from the
first hour he had possession of the Castle; this is but pretense; A few
wretched Prisoners, only a pretense to pick a quarrel now the work's done; It
was my curse to trust a Traitor; yet if we had not mist the Princes the Castles
had been no losses.


Roderigo. Sir, it is now no time to talk of why-nots; this night we must expect
some attempt from them, their business is done, the King is slain, the Prince
too, for ought we know, his Clothes and order being found upon the ground; the
people too are armed in their defense, and expect we should produce their King;
which abused hope We cannot expect they should forgive; and we are to believe
this party that have defended themselves thus long against the King will never
yield to our power by any argument but the Sword: Besides, you may gather from
Clytus what the rest intend, whose Forces are drawn apart toward Naples, and
those of Gaietta remain still upon the pass; and can if we oppress them, upon
occasion, retreat or join when it is to ruin us.


Almanzor. What Is to be done then? I am all rage; The Villain Clytus has robbed
me of all my hopes.


Roderigo. You must resolve to fight with one of them this Evening, whilst
divided, else to morrow 'twill be a double business; if not, march immediately
to Capua, secure the Harbor, and this night dispatch a Galley for Sicily for
supplies, and therein send the prisoners; for I believe them of more worth then
they appear, by the earnest demand of Clytus.


Almanzor. Give order then, that we may be ready to march. Fortune, if thou
smil'st upon this Action I shall yet have time enough to make ready a Revenge
for the Villain Clytus; whose falsehood in a fatal hour has thrown me from all
my hopes of Love and victory. As Leopoldo goes out, be meets a Soldier coming
in haste and stops.


Leopoldus. This Clytus shall know.


Almanzor. How now, the news!


Soldier. Sir, pursuing the Enemy in the wood I have lodged some persons of
quality; who, by their lamentations for the King and Prince Leopoldo, I know
must be of that party; Two of them are remarkable, a Satyr and a Moor.


Almanzor. Speak softly, it is they. The Princess Bellamira, I know by that Moor;
Roderigo take a choice party and let us fly to this remedy: Fortune, I no
sooner called upon thy name, but thy kind Deity has sent a medicine for my
Mind, a cure for all my ills; Lead the way, and for this chance thy reward
shall exceed thy hopes; Come, Roderigo, now we may smile again; Bellamira will
weigh down the scales, and make our Revenge full.


Roderigo. A few will do it, the quieter the better, for this wood is full of
paths and caves, and there is no hunting of them unless we could do it by the
scent like dogs.


[Exeunt all but Leopoldo. Leopoldo. Sure some sullen star pursues this girl;
I Will follow too, and make it sad to some.


[Exit Leopoldo. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Nigro, Ravack, Clytus, Cleon, and Soldiers. Nigro. 'TWas done like
Clytus, and tomorrow we'll second thy words; let the men be well fed to night,
and a Donative distributed for this days service.


Ravack. My Children, Clytus, had they many wounds?


Clytus. No, nor any dangerous; oppressed with multitude we took them, and they
are now his Prisoners; But this night, I fear, they will be sent away, and the
rather that I was earnest for their delivery; And I believe we are deceived all
this while; for I am confident the delivery or discovery of our young King is
beyond his power, and only a pretense to engage the people.


Nigro. No matter, that pretense has done our work, and now


Ravack. Calmly, Clytus, and resolved let us proceed: now we have the game in
our hands take heed of rashness or security, which may be as dangerous as his
despair; let us in, and resolve with the King what we shall do, and to whom,
e're ye go, let me present you both; his pardon and blessing will prosper the
work. Kings are their Countries Parents, and heaven never blessed that people
whom a good King cursed.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
(A Scene representing a Cave.) Enter Bellamira, Fidelia, Philemon, Arcus, and
Satyr. Arc. MAdam, we will look out, if you please, and see what we can learn
abroad.


[Exeunt Arcus and Philemon. Satyr. She Is lost, she is lost, I Will eat no more;
a curse on all their heads that fetched us from our quiet home. -- Let me go,
what Fidelia holds him. are you to me, or I to you, I loathe your hated sights,
it is your mischiefs we mourn, my dear Mistress lived quiet here till your
impious visit; Innocence, peace, and Love filled every Circle of the Moon till
you and mischief came and robbed us of our peace; Wounded in mind and body, my
Love, and her gentle Brother, rage like Dogs, by the Suns poison stung, and
robbed of Reason, hunt out your dangers, and Death, I fear; and I that have but
these poor Rags of Nature, See how I am torn with following you; -- Hell on
both your causes I have lost my love, and know not where to seek her, but here
in my wounded mind; my heart has her still; would she had never stayed beyond
this fold; if she die I Will starve my self, I will, and poison you; I will, by
Pan I will, you shall not outlive my Love.


[Enter Arcus. Arcus. Quick and silently into the Cave, for there are some
entered the Wood; what they are I know not.


Satyr. I Will not go in, but stay and tell them where you are, unless you give
me my love, or show me where you have hid her, that I may worship her grave.


Arcus. She Is not dead, man, she is in the Woods only, and to morrow we shall
find 'em.


Satyr. To morrow? why it is not night yet; Cramps and Aches find me, and the
Murrain eat my Flocks, if I will eat or sleep till I find her; all Night, and
not know where my Love is?


Arcus. Go in then, and defend these people who thou know she loves, for
she will die if they be hurt.


Satyr. Shall we seek her when we have done? I Will not strike a Dog else.


Arcus. See they come, defend this pass, and then we will seek her.


[Enter into the Cave Bellamira and Fidelia. Enter Almanzor, Roderigo and
Soldiers, and set upon them; while Arcus and the Satyr are engaged, they force
Philemon, and get into the Cave; The Satyr and the Soldier fight, the Satyr
gets him down. Satyr. Yield, and let me bind thee, or I Will pash thy Scull.


The Soldier thrusts at him while he speaks, and hurts him; he kills the
Soldier, and takes his Sword. Arc. So, so, follow me, and save the Princess;
what, art thou lame?


Satyr. The Rogue has hurt me with this foolish thing; a Bee's sting is worse,
and yet I am lame.


He looks upon the Sword, and pricks himself with it, and starts. Exeunt Arcus
and Satyr. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Bellamira, and Fidelia, prisoners to the Soldiers that discovered where
they were. Soul. NO resistance, but patiently expect what the prince commands,
or you are dead.


Bell. What Prince, Villain? Either be a friend, or enemy; give us our Freedom,
or with thy Sword perfect that Treachery thou have begun with the worst of
mischiefs; Kill us, any thing rather then be subject to the impious rage of
that insolent Conqueror.


Enter Leopoldo, in his disguise. Soul. Ha, Comrade! where is the Prince? here
are two of the birds I promised him, the rest are flown.


(Leopoldo looks about him.) Leop. They are so, Traitor, that thus art armed
with success; stare not, but defend thy self; Fly, Madam, to any safety; if
this service prove successful, thank me hereafter; if not conceal me, what
e're you see me do.


[Exeunt Bellamira and Fidelia. Soul. Madam? It Is the Princess Bellamira, sure.
-- Villain, thou wilt live to repent this Act.


Leop. Thou shall not, if I miss not my aim.


(They fight, and Leopoldo kills him.) Soul. Hold, it is enough; my faults are
powerful, and Treason alone is weak, I am lost.


(He dies.) Leop. This wretch had given up all our hopes to the Invador, had
not my fate been above him.


Enter Almanzor. Alman. Soldier, which way went Roderigo?


Leop. That way in pursuit of the Enemy, -- Why not, in this disguise, strike
him dead and secure all? why not? because it is base, and unworthy of Leopoldo;
treachery has no Argument strong enough to justify it, success cannot do it;
I Will follow him, defy him, and as Leopoldo take a full revenge, or give him a
perfect victory, As Almanzor goes out he meets the Soldiers bringing
Bellamira. -- Nay, then I strive against my Stars; Yield, Leopoldo, stoop to
Fortune, War no longer against that froward Diety, bent to thy ruin; poor
Bellamira, something I must do, and by appearing still a violent enemy may gain
a power to serve her; Sir, do you not know this Prisoner? it is the Princess
Bellamira, the same that the Shepherds took from us.


Alman. It Is not possible, this the modest Princess, fighting in Breeches? sure
it is one of her Pages.


Bell. What I am is as heaven appoints, who has delivered me over to your
barbarous power; what I was this morning is now no argument, since they are
pleased to withdraw their blessings; yet in all conditions I can despise the
insolent Almanzor, prince only in power, slave of Fortune, blessed by chance,
like her undeserving children, who claim neither by virtue nor merit what they
hold.


Alman. You are angry now, and I laugh; and since you would not be a Queen, try
if you can avoid being a Slave; and all those graces of that Magic form which
once I loved, all those Flowers of Youth and Beauty my hate shall look on, and
see wither in a scorned servitude, under an envious and cruel Mistress, who
will make my love to thee as great an affliction as thy scorn has rendered it
my heart; for she loves as violently as thou hate, to whose revenge I Will give
my interest up.


Bell. The same impious barbarous Almanzor still, upon whose power I Will look
with scorn, it cannot be long lived; thou art too wicked to be long our Rod;
for thy threats, they move me no more then thy promises; Thou know I would
not sell my honor for the first, nor be frighted from it by the last; for
know, when I will be free, (which yet I will not be) it is not all thy guards
can keep me; and to heighten thy rage, know, it is no cold frozen Nature, no
aversion to Loves gentle passion, makes me despise thee; For never Virgins
breast had more love in it, that had no more honor then Bellamira; and I
rejoice to suffer for thy Rival, and he shall know it, that thy envious soul
may gnaw thy heart, which, if thou love, 'twill do, when thou shall see me
die for him that is overcome, and despise thee though a Conqueror.


Alman. Away with her to the Castle, and upon your lives secure her, I shall
have my time too; what success, Roderigo? Enter Roderigo.


Exit Bellamira, and the Soldiers pulling her. Roder. It Is in vain to hunt
them; that Satyr and the Moor are a pair of Devils, stout, and subtle; I Will not
undertake such another chase, for their skins; they are all flown, but whither
I know not; only one boy, I left him crying and shaking in a bush.


Alm. That Boy we have, and with him all our hopes; that in Boys habit was the
scornful Bellamira; and now Clytus, and his insolent Abettors will stoop again,
if my heart can be brought to reconcile it self to her, whose injurious words
have again enraged it so that Ambition, Love, nor Interest can scarce make me
dissemble my hatred of her.


Rod. If you be certain it is the Princess, away with her this night, or with
the morning Flood, for Sicily, together with the rest of your Prisoners; leave
me to make good Capua until I hear from you; besides, when you and they are
gone, they must treat; for to fight signifies nothing; for if they beat us
(which is uncertain too) yet they advance not to their end; for Leopoldo being
dead, and she next Heir, dissemble, flatter, swear you love, any thing to
appease her mind, marry her and confirm your Conquest.


Alman. It Is resolved this night privately we'll depart, and in the interim
order the affairs here to your direction. -- Dissimulation be thou my Friend
while I banish hence this idle passion Love, and make room for the more noble
Ambition, thou Guide of Princes, Love, that precious nothing, that dear I know
not what, that makes us find a difference between a Mistress and other women.
Farewell for ever blind unbodied Boy, that is proud to become both Poison and
Medicine to the mind, the wounder and the wound, where he can find a faith;
else an indifferent common cheap companion for all (but Death) from King to
Beggar; -- Points to his heart. Here he would have imposed Laws, here threatened
Darts, unless I would fondly have worshipped him. Fool, that were made the
Slave of Nature! and so thou shall still be to Almanzor when ere thou dare
appear charmed by my scorn, and this thy perfect Character; till thou have
tamed her mind, and till hers be kind, in spite of all thy Power or Art,
Ambition or Revenge, not Love shall fill my heart.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
[And the only one of this Act.] Enter Leopoldo, solus. Leop. TOo late I find
my Error, poisoned with a dangerous passion, Jealousy, foolishly seeking what
it would not find; the Curse of all the Gods are wrapped in his black thoughts,
that yields to that Enemy of man, a Curse both in the Root and Fruit: First he
blinded my Reason, against which Reason he made me doubt my Love; Then my eyes,
which else must have seen a Brother in his face, and in this cloud made me lose
my self; and then to find a new doubt, another misery. This Picture Picture of
my Sister found by him, lost by I know not who, but given by somebody; I would
not doubt Bellamira, yet I am sure it is hers; neither she nor my eyes are
disguised; there is some mystery as well as fate abroad to day; I Will have
patience until I speak with her, nor will I be discovered until I be satisfied
whose this Picture is. But see how my divided mind forgets her business, and
talks away that little time that rests for their safety; for ere I can pursue
my Design, and return from Clytus his Quarter, (whose faith I now admire and
forgive) 'twill be too late to use his friendship; for the Prince is resolved
with his Prisoners this night to escape for Sicily; nor is there a way left to
prevent this mischief, unless I take advantage of that trust that this Disguise
has given me, and privately arm my friends, so to surprise the Guard and escape
to Clytus his Quarter: this is our last and desperate hope, and this I must put
in execution after the enjoying of some few minutes happiness, thus unknown
informing my self of that dear knowledge my heart labors withal, and this
benefit my misery will afford me; for being thus levelled by fortune I may be
just to that excellence my better days could neither enjoy nor reward without
blushing; such and so cruel are the Laws we our selves are bound to; and though
we can give Laws to others, we are yet Slaves to custom and opinion, condemned
to starve our minds upon the barren heart of some person only great in birth,
and forbid to taste the full blessings this poor Maid is blessed with -- Here
they are within this place, the darkness will assist my Design, in hearing
unseen what they say; and when I will I can by the benefit of this light
discover my self.


[He turns his dark Lanthorn. The Scene opens and discovers Prison, where
Pollidor and Phillora appear next the Stage chained to a Ring fastened to the
ground upon the other side of the Prison, and in a darker part of the Sco^e
lies Palantus chained behind them in the dark, Bellamira chained, and afar off
in prospective other Prisoners and dead Carcases. Phil. Good Heaven, do I
lament any thing of Prison? Is not all the World Prison now, and a Prison equal
to a Throne when he is gone? O Pollidor, he is dead, lost for ever, for ever,
that is the great wound Death gives; let that thought excuse my immoderate
grief, and awake the guilt that has long slept in thy vengeful mind: Thy
Prince is fallen, dead, neglected, and unmourn'd, and thy heart afflicts it
self for a Picture, the lost shadow of thou know not what, while the best of
Princes without a tear from thy eye fills the number, and is by treacherous
odds become a shadow: O ye Gods, why should mankind, wretched mankind, desire
to stay after him, and wither out some few Ages here; why should the World
out-last that gallant Prince, whose death has left it but a Carcass?


Pol. Your passion only tells you he is dead, for none saw him fall; it is
only in your fears he is lost, and most unjustly you accuse me now of hate; for
though I loved not the name of Leopoldo, yet Heaven witness I now adore the man.


Phil. Prithee peace, and let me love once, and but once; even Pollidor can
deceive my heart when the Prince is concerned. Dissembler, my fears and thy
wishes are built upon the same unlucky ground -- See, fond Youth, see the royal
distinction of the brave Leopoldo from other men, behold his ancient Order, the
Chain too She shows his Order. I saw him wear this day; but where is the sacred
breast, upon which as upon holiest Altars these consecrated Relics hung? O
Pollidor, Pollidor, that Shrine Murder and Treason have ruined, and with
profane hands thrown down a Temple built by and dedicated to all the Gods,


Pol. All the Gods forbid.


Phil. Now you and my Father may smile, your hatred has found a malicious power
to join with your wishes; try if all your Sacrifices or penitent prayers can
make such a Prince, but I am certain thou have lost a Friend; for do not think
it possible I can be flattered to outlive him? and though I cannot hate thee,
I can hardly forgive thy hatred to the Prince, whom I shall make haste to
follow; Thou art but gone before to prepare the way; nor will I stay here but
to dispatch thy business upon earth, and then Pollidor thou shall see me
follow; but I talk too much, until it be time to justify to the world how
much I loved; here I will mourn my loss till I can find a handsome when, and
glorious how to follow.


Pol. When that time appears, Pollidor will quit himself of this unkind
thought, and thou shall find me ambitious to have it said, I fell in
Leopoldo's cause.


Phil. Such a Monument, (though I love my Brother) I would live to see thee
raise thy self and the great Leopoldo: And if thou dy'st as handsomely for him
as I would have lived faithful to him, who pities thee, or weeps upon thy
Grave, are no Friends to either: but these are words, and he is dead. Ye Gods,
who would have lost so glorious an Enemy? 'T was worth thy care to have
preserved him, though thou did not love him thou should have kept him for a
Pattern, his Virtues were worth thy Love and Envy; though he were bornn to thy
Hate; Now thou have yielded to his fortune; for though Leopoldo be dead and
fallen under thy wish, not under thy sword, a gallant man would not have lost
such an occasion to have made himself known in his own Revenge: now the world
will say, My Brother hated a Prince he could neither love, imitate, nor
overcome.


Leop. Heaven, can I hear this and not relieve her? I must interrupt this
grief, it is most unjust to let them be miserable for me that am the happiest
man that ever Fortune struck at and mist, How I scorn her poor malice! Prouder
of these two Friends than all those airy gifts she has called back.


Bell. Who these should be I cannot imagine; that so confidently avow their love
and hate to my Brother; if it be dissembled it is done to the life; it is some
cunning highly wicked, or else the kindest that our party has this day ruined.


Pal. What Picture's that they rave of? This discourse confounds my thoughts; a
Brother and a Sister; by their discourse she loves the Prince too: I will not
yet be known, perhaps they will be free, and I may know more by chance than by
question what that Picture is, the loss of mine makes these Chains heavy.


Leop. Madam, start not, I beseech you, nor despise the Proposition Leopoldo
steps to his Sister. I shall make for your safety, because you see me poor.


Bell. Sure thou art mistaken, do thou not see thy Error?


Leop. When it is to serve you, Madam, my confidence I hope will find your
pardon, else, miserable as I am, I would die sooner than betray the divine
Bellamira.


Bell. Speak softly then what it is you design.


Leop. First be pleased to know 'twas I redeemed your Highness, the Soldier
that desired to be concealed, which service I should not remember but to beget
your faith. Know the Tyrant boasts your captivity, and vows such miseries as
shall make you proud of his embraces ere he will embrace them; this waked my
heart; and could my single revenge have served you, upon the place I had struck
him to the earth.


Bell. Sure I dream, whence comes this gentle sound? and how came so much
humanity to get a power in this barbarous place, where Lust, Force, and Treason
reigns! How came thy charity to get admittance hither!


Leop. Leave to wonder, Madam, and give faith to m^, for our time's short, and
it is not every hour I can serve you in: This night you must prepare to follow
my directions, and attempt your escape; for you are with the morning tide
designed for Sicily, where you must prepare to suffer what the Conqueror shall
impose.


Bell. Wonder not, I prithee, at my want of faith; I have been so little
acquainted with civil language since I came into his power that yours amazes
me; I have this day received nothing but Injuries from Men and Elements,
abandoned by all, and treated as the scandal and infamy of our Sex, like some
Vagabond that had strayed from Honor and Virtue.


Leop. Give me leave to remove even the greatest of your griefs; the King and
Prince live, I speak a truth as great as your joy; Palantus too is safe, and
your fellow Prisoner here, and those two you heard discourse even now are
Friends to whom your Highness owes much; they are yet but private virtues, but
the world shall know them.


Bell. Thou art my good Angel sure; May I know who thou art? Certainly I will
not betray thee.


Leop. Hereafter, Madam, you shall; let but this night pass, and trust me, and
Heaven curse me if I betray you.


Bell. He sighs, sure he has been miserable himself he is so sensible of mine,
and now some heavy grief hangs upon his heart; I am curious to know what kind
of misery can make this poor Soldier sad.


Leop. What kind of misery? alas, Madam, miseries have not one sting I have not
felt, and her bitterest roots are now my food. -- Nature cannot be disguised,
though my body be.


[He weeps. Bellam. He weeps; what are the miseries that thus wound thy soul?
for tears are her blood; did thou ever love unfortunately?


Leop. Never, Madam.


Bellam. Can thou have wit, courage, kind Nature, and a soft soul, and yet
not love? it is strange that Love and Honor should be strangers; without love
all thy virtues are not thine, they are but Lodgers, Inmate excellencies, and
may be seduced, if not allied to thy heart by Love; therefore leave to hide thy
mind and fortune from me; which I know must have something greater in it then
thy words or condition speaks; dare you venture your life rather then your
grief?


Leop. Take all the secrets of my heart, I love.


Bellam. How by instinct I found his grief! humanity and civility but guide to
Love, whose paths all that have honor tread.


Leop. Once, and but once, Madam; and therefore I may say I loved; though my
eyes have much beauty seen written in her best characters, yet in all my days I
was never pleased with more then one story of that fair volumn, and my griefs
are now the fear I should lose the Book ere I have read it out; for I have but
newly begun the History of her face; but I lose time when it is most precious,
because it is yours; for know, Madam, I must retire to the Guard, of which I am
one, but it is to serve you; as soon as I have contrived your safety I shall
give your Highness notice; in the mean time I Will discover, by this light, who
are your fellow prisoners; but pray be pleased to conceal your self till I give
the sign. --


Leopoldo walks from Bellamira toward the rest of the prisoners. Bellam. Sure
this soul's mistaken; it cannot be such a princely mind should be hid and
buried in a Cottage, nor fate let so much honor grow so near the earth, while
a Prince declines beneath the mean wretch, and becomes a slave to his
passion, and submits to the worst of ills, a barbarous lust, a sin that shame
and repentance attend here, and horror hereafter. --


Leopoldo opens his dark-lanthorn, they all know and gaze upon him. Pollidor.
Ha! it is he, the same Villain that snatched my Picture.


Phil. His hated sight brings back my anger; oh that I were free, to revenge
the Prince upon thy sinful head.


Bellam. Good gods, what do I see, protect me heaven; it is the same figure, my
heart fails me, the Shepherdess is there too; Oh Fate, Fate, there is no
resisting thy decrees.


Palan. Thanks for this friendly light, now I shall know the Authors of that
discourse my soul so much listened to; Ha! it is the young Shepherdess, I Will
speak to her, I Am sure she is a friend. Fellows in misery, and friends to
Leopold, such I know you are by your discourse, and to such the name of
Palantus is not unknown; and gentle Maid, by all thy heart loves best I conjure
you tell me what Picture it is you lament the loss of; for I, wretched I, have
this day in battle lost all my soul doted upon; for my royal Master and his
noble Family are this day ruined, and in this misery I have lost the jewel of
my heart; 'twas a Legacy my Master gave me with his dying hands; 'twas a little
Picture, but of the greatest virtue living, if heaven have spared her.


Pollid. Palantus nor his Master I know not, nor his Picture; but if 'twere
that I found to day in the Wood, heaven and earth should meet e're I Would part
with it to any hand, but death's; his cold Commission should only force it.


Palan. It Is rudely answered, yet if there were no other difficulty in
regaining it then thy barbarous mind can oppose.


Pollid. You promise your self too fast the victory over him that would
complain neither of you nor fortune, if he lost it when the sword could win it.


Palan. Prithee, who art thou that talk thus in chains?


Pollid. One that neither knows nor fears thee; one that will neither do nor
take an injury.


Palan. Prithee, who art thou?


Pollid. No more nor less then thou art, an honest man.


Phil. I Will inform thee what he is; we are two Plants that grew together from
the same root in these peaceful Woods; we are two that till this day never saw
an enemy; but who can be friends to those that hate the Prince, whose cause
drew our swords? and though we be crushed thus with thy Masters ruin; yet I
wish there were no more danger in either of your fortunes then you two will
bring upon each other. For know, Palantus, thy faith to thy dead Master is
admired by all; but none values it more then Phillora, a name yet a stranger to
thee and the world, being sprung this day in blood; know it is the same
unfortunate Girl thou saw this day in the Forest; and this whom thou
threatnest is my Brother; what he and I have done this day to appear friends to
those royal names, Leopoldo and Bellamira, is not unknown, though yet never
blessed with one sight of them but in their miseries, which are but the ashes of
his greatness; let not then a shadow divide such friends; though my Brother
love the Picture, yet he has justice as well as love.


Palan. Gentle Maid, forgive the passion my love and misery begot; and to you,
Sir, the ignorance of whom I answered will excuse the wildness of my words;
pray let us calmly inquire by what accident your Brother came to find and lose
that Picture, by which I can easily collect whether it be mine or no.


Phil. Pray describe yours, that will inform us.


Palan. Mine was in a box of gold, enameled with Phillamorte and black (the
sad colors that are worn by me forlorn) the Cipher two xx crossed, within a
figure of an armed Pallas; the hair brown, the forehead calm and full of peace;
Juno's eyes, fair and full of mercy; but I want Poetry to express her beauty,
to which the gods have give a mind equal to all she bows to.


Phil. It Is the same my Brother found in the Wood, and that barbarous person
there snatched it from him; and e're we could regain it again the enemy
surpised us.


Palan. Which is he?


Pollidor. That, there he stands; but if ere I get a freedom I Will make thee
repent it at as sad a rate as I lament the loss now.


Palan. Villain, restore my Picture, or thou wilt find my chains too weak to hold
me from thy throat; it is the same, now I see him I know the Perriwig and
clothes.


Leop. You wrong me, I never took it from you, nor ever saw you before.


Palan. Villain and Traitor, thou lie; and were I loose I Would make thee
acknowledge it in thy hearts blood; I would I could look the slave dead.


Leop. You are angry, and I must laugh at it; look here is the Picture you have
lost; I have it and I will keep it.


Palan. Thou dare as soon drink poison; and as safe either of you may do it
when I am free.


Phil. No more of this rage; cease to injure a man you know not, and despise
not a man you have never proved; your loves are nobler far then your hatreds
can be; your love has a gallant cause, your hatred a mere imagined one; for a
painted Card the curious thieft of an Artist's eye; besides, we know Pallantus
dares as much as any man; and therefore he should not talk; and all honest men
dare any thing that is just; and he that will more then is just is a bolder man
then Pollidor.


Leop. Excellent Maid.


Palan. Forgive me gentle Maid, and I have done; and now I turn to thee, and
calmly I conjure thee by a Soldiers honor, give it the person thou took'st it
from.


Leop. Neither of your two threats nor prayers shall force it from me; yet such
a power those eyes have over me, that you shall command it for one kiss of your
fair hand; dispose of it as you please; and let me stand the fury of their
displeasure.


Phil. Gentle Soldier, give it to my Brother; thou took'st it from him, and
with it all his peace of mind; justice is on his side, for I saw thee snatch it
from him.


[Leopoldo kisses her hand, and gives her the picture. Leop. There, dispose of
it as you please.


Palan. Oh, for an hours freedom, and a sword to dispute this right.


Leop. You shall have both, Sir; and be ashamed of your threats too ere long;
fear not, I have laid up your lie for you.


Pollid. It Is the same; look Phillora, here is our better Angel come again; so,
now I defy Fortune and all her falsehood; frown on, here is my peace which I Will
not give for all thy smiles; how I love my eyes now, better then I did my hands
before! they faithfully held their hold, while these like cowards let thee go;
it is the noblest sense of any, and informs the knowing soul, makes acquaintance
betwixt us and the great works of heaven, and obliges our hearts more then all
the rest; see how it feasts my mind with these thin colors only! how graceful
too the eye is! what it borrows the tongue and heart pays; how just and
innocent the eye is! it never wrongs in conversation, nor withers one flower in
this Garden; she fills her self, and yet leaves no one beauty less for her
delight: Now, Phillora, my soul feeds upon this divine object, and yet neither
stains nor begets a blush; but, oh my fears! who can this be? that thought lies
heavy upon my soul, and when it is known how to be won; were she to be fought
for, I would not doubt my fate; but this gentle sex must be persuaded and
flatte^'d from their freedom; and for me, a rude Woodman, bred in these
Forests, where shall I find soft words to speak my griefs, and rock her gentle
mind a sleep; while her soul listens to the story of my Love and misery; rough
as my life I fear she will think my nature too, and tremble at the thought of our
conversation, and fly my embraces.


Phil. No, Pollidor, these are not thy faults; Pollidor was never barbarous,
rough and cruel are not Pollidor's crimes; that that stains thy heart was want
of love; who else might promise to himself success in all that honor can be
engaged in: be therefore a Lover, and that powerful deity will teach thee how
to conquer all those doubts.


Pollid. Be a Lover! how like a young Lover thou speak! can all that would
be Lovers? no Phillora, Love puts nothing to the question that God moves in
commands; why else does this shadow bind me? which I can thus throw from me;
but how can I remove that that is figured in my mind? no, no; I may snarle and
be angry, like a Wolf in the toil, but it is too late; the Hunter's come, and I
am now his prey; yet if I could but know who I love, and see it possible to be
believed how much I love, I should not repine at the price I pay for her faith:
But alas! I catch at air, and my love is spent on shadows; and when I find it
more real I fear my despair must increase too; for if she be mortal she is some
eminent person sure, and where shall I compass proud titles to heap upon her,
to raise her name above the people, to please her vanity, when they shall
wonder and reverence as she passes by? where is that wealth and jewels whose
envied worth and charming beauty may affect and emulate her bright eyes? had I
a Scepter, whose power (like Leopoldo) I might throw at her feet, and like him
to Phillora by such a service speak my love, then I might hope: but alas! all I
have to plead is love; and all I can do for her is to love her; and what is
that to her? when I shall urge it, she will say, who does not? what then is my
love in order to my happiness, till she loves too, but idle air, lost and
forgot like the found that breathed it?


Phil. What is love? why, it is sent thy punishment; a revenge that his Deity
has taken for being so cruel to my passion; and see if thou have not already
forgotten my griefs, negligent of the misery I suffer for fear of the Princes
danger, only mindful of thy own pleasure; and can thou (unkind) hope I should
join in thy loy, while thou art so negligent of my sadness? no Pollidor, first
thou shall taste my grief; what if she be dead thou love?


Pollid. Ha! what have thou said?


Phil. Dead, as Leopoldo, fallen under some wicked hatred. Suppose murder and
treason tearing in pieces that noble form, and Pollidor looking on, held back
by a Sisters envy only; what thinks Pollidor, could my reason hold him? could
he be persuaded to look on, and not draw his sword to rescue her? thou art
silent now, this was thy Sisters case to day, when thou, unkind, refused'st to
lend a hand, or suffer me to go to serve the Prince; and see how the gods have
revenged my quarrel; and thou that could not be persuaded to love the best of
things, Leopoldo, now dot'st upon the least of things, a shadow of thou know
not whom, who perhaps is dead for love of another.


Pollid. Dead! oh Phillora, that doubt has struck me to the soul; pale horror
fills my mind; the tapers of my eyes grow dark; struck with that fear they grow
drowsy. -- If thou be'st He looks on the picture when he speaks. dead may the
clouds grow hard, and the seasons be shufled again into Chaos, and destroy the
seeds of nature; if thou be'st dead let the spring no more prove a common
cradle, but with false conception become their fatal tomb.


Phil. Who this should be that thus in shadows walks, and wounds the hearts of
men, I cannot guess that know none but my self of all our sex; nor will not
doubt my Brothers fortune if she grow not without the reach of honor; but if
thy star be placed in a region as high as mine, then we'll sigh, and mourn, and
dye, and leave to the world the sad story of our Tragedy.


Pollid. Alas Phillora, death is the only thing that an honest man ought not to
fear; nor did I ever apprehend him; but in the persons of them I loved their
dangers make him dreadful; it is not these chains, nor thus to be lost in a
crowd, or buried in a dungeon, frights me; it is fear of this and thy fate that
wounds me; for I am certain we cannot dye forgotten, we are not worse then
Plants. Shall I believe Phillora and Pollidor can when they perish become less
then Herbs and Roots? they by dying lose neither kind nor virtue; nay the
ashes of some things my Father says are medicinable; and death sure cannot so
quench fame or virtue, but some that have virtuous minds will preserve our
story, whose fortune will find pity, though there be few to imitate.


Phillora. Yet my Soul is sick with thoughts that we must languish and wither
here, then die oppressed in the dark, and go I know not whither; and if not
forgotten our selves, yet ignorant of what Fates our Friends suffer; These,
Pollidor, are the bitter wounds that strike before death, and wound deeper then
death it self.


Bellamira. It Is he, but how to believe him or Fate I know not; one of the two
deceive me; seven years I have loved his shadow, and now no sooner find him but
he is lost beyond redemption; his shadow nor his obscure birth are not so
impossible to my Fate, She speaks to her self. as his Love of another; can it
be that I should be so cursed, to dote upon a man below me, and be despised
too? Heavens make him worthy of my Love, or me worthy of your care.


Pollidor. No, Phillora, all other thoughts have given place to this great one;
this dear object of mine Eyes and Heart I cannot part with, nor divide from my
Mind; Phillora was, but this is now her business; A thousand kisses I Will give
each day to this pale shrine, He kisses the Picture. while Love and Grief will
lend me life.


Palantus. Hold, as thou have Honor, hold; and profane not that picture with
thy Lips; all but that I can suffer, till kinder Fate will give me leave to
dispute my right.


Pollidor. Not kiss it for fear of thee? Yes, and die upon it. Kisses it again.


Palantus. You will, wretch? I shall make thee live to know that Princess is to
be kneeled to, and not be approached but with sacrifice of thy life; For know,
(to thy despair) it is the Princess Bellamira's picture that thy lustful Lips
have thus profaned.


Bellamira aside. Ha! what says he? my Picture!


Palantus. Does your Soul shrink at the name of her? Wretch, Phillora and
Pollidor gaze upon the Picture. when thou shall see her Eyes thy Heart will
turn to ashes for this Insolence; and thy proud thoughts find an humbler Altar
to offer thy saucy flames at then thy Princess Breast.


Phillora. The Princess Bellamira! Oh Pollidor, our Fates are akin still; and
it is my joy we fell from a height fit for Princes to aspire unto: Great and
noble (though unhappy) were our Loves; But if she be that gallant person Fame
speaks her, how came you by her Picture? Palantus is her Subject as well as
Pollidor, and all such are set at equal distances in Honor; Any thing that is a
Gentleman is as near this hope as Palantus; Did she give you this Picture?


Palantus. She give it me! no, fond Girl; she has a Soul of another temper, it is
a Jewel of a double value as it is hers; the greatest wealth of my Heart that
never loved ought but her, though I never yet durst tell her so: But with care
and fear kept diligent watch to hide my passion, as thy fond Brother has done
to publish his.


Phillora. If she did not give it, by what right can you pretend to it more
then my Brother?


Palantus. By my Royal Masters Bounty; who this day when he fell in my arms
(full of age and wounds) from his Breast he plucked that Jewel and gave it me,
with his commands to wear it as his last favor, a present fit for my hopes,
that never durst aim at more then her shadow, too well acquainted with her
generous Mind; whose royal branches will never bear such low fruit as my Love
that was born her slave. Her Brother too, (to whom thou have avowed hate) my
God-like Master; A Prince whose great Soul has still been my pattern, and I
must die ere I can imitate; whose kindness still kept me warm in my Royal
Masters bosom, and honored me with his trusts too; His Mind never stayn'd
with jealous thoughts of my greatness with the King, which are the great ties
upon my Heart, not to abuse their favor as the ungrateful, ambitious
pretentions of a slave; But here my Breast has worn in secret that fire whose
grief was known only to one as unhappy as my self, whom I lament no less then
I love the other. -- He speaks to Leopoldo as a Soldier Enemy. And now I beg
from thee, for that royal families sake, be so just to thy King and Princess,
as to redeem from that rude hand those sacred relics; See how he has stained
it with his hot breath! Thy hands are loose; or but release mine, and I Will tear
the figure from his Heart too. Good gods, I always kneeled to it, and had thy
Soul been filled with Honor thou would sooner have kissed the Plague then
have profaned it thus.


Pollidor. It Is Truth he says, my Heart condemns me. Here, Soldier, prithee
carry it to him, not for fear of thee, but her; Pollidor is sad and full of
thoughts all this while such reverence and such fear as we pay the gods her
name has bred here, which is the truest Valor: And here I confess my self a
young and ignorant Lover, take it and forgive me; take it and be a friend to
him that will dote upon thee for loving that Princess with so much more
gallantry then himself; Yet you nor she ought to be angry with me for not
finding a way I never trod before; The is the first time I ever saw any thing
better my self; we are two, a Brother and a Sister, that have loved each other
with as much Innocence and Passion as you can boast; and yet we kiss when we
love most. Leopoldo gives Palantus the picture.


Palantus. Now can I scarce resolve to take it, his Heart has high sense of
Honor; How rude, and how calm, in one minute! would I had some of that power
again that I lost this day but to serve thee with, that all the world might
wonder at the Friendship of us Rivals in a desperate Love.


Pollidor. Oh Phillora, thou sett'st out first, but I shall overtake thee, if
not overrun thee; for my Heart is wounded, I hope, to death, with this new
kind of grief.


Palantus. If we outlive this misfortune thou shall be my friend; the Brother
that lay in the same womb with me shall not be preferred before thee.


Bellamira. Heaven! thy hand is working, and as invincibly as fatally.


Phillora. Oh Pollidor, dear as my Souls bliss, leave to stab my Heart with
these desperate groans; Look up, or else farewell; do not think to go and leave
me behind; We are both miserable, the same cause too, and all our joys were of
kin; we are allied in our miseries too, and we will die Brother and Sister; I
am now collected, and can chide that passion that accused thee even now, and
thus kiss those Eyes whose dear light is my Hearts fire; Oh Pollidor, thy tears
have mortal poison in them, Farewell; The gods call, and by a thousand ways
becken us to come; and to refuse their summons would look rude in us that have
Honor and Peace of Mind gone before to make our way. Oh Pollidor, we must
part, forced by a sullen Fate, and broken heart; Love, and the Prince, give
fatal wounds.


[She swoons. Pollid. Phillora! Sister! Oh ye gods, spare this poor Girl, and
take a stubborn heart; Oh, she is gone! help, as you have charity, some water,
fetch some water.


Leop. Heaven, and all good things forbid this early mourning for such virtue
in the bud; unkind frost, to nip so soon the fairest Rose that Nature ever
boasted. Art, thy Envy has destroyed her, because thou could not imitate her
Excellency. She breathes; Oh look up, gentle Phillora, and hear thy Prince
conjure thy Soul; if Love be her errand, bid her stay; Leopoldo, thy Leopoldo
calls her back; for if thou dyest thou have lost thy way, and to find Leopoldo,
stay.


Pollid. Bellam. Palant. Leopoldo!


Leopoldo. Yes, Shep-herd, Leopoldo. Leopoldo discovers himself.


Phillora. Leopoldo! Sure I heard that name; that voice had a power to call me
from my Grave; But why does Pollidor abuse his Sister, does he take delight to
see her miserable?


Leopoldo. Hence all thoughts of low fears, this cloud I thus disperse; See,
Gentle Maid, behold thy Leopoldo. -- Oh thou strangely Excellent, above the
merit or weak faith of dull men; whose Leopoldo puts off his Soldiers clothes.
story will make past Histories blush, and shrink their narrow fame into
nothing, when thy faith and excellency is known; And I blush to think how much
I owe thy Virtue, and how little Fortune has left me to pay thee with.


Phillora. It Is he, it is the Prince; Oh let me kneel to you, Sir; why does your
noble heart thus stoop to save a piece of earth, whose infection you ought to
shun?


Leopoldo. See, kind Fortune has thrown me down from that greatness that
divided us last, only to make me capable of thy Friendship now; And when I
wish my self greater then Phillora, may Treason find me; Here is perfect
happiness, this is full joy; for what is joy (gentle Maid) but hope stripped
from our fears, that hung like rags upon them and darkened their Beauties?


Bellamira. My Brother! Then the gods are careful of poor Bellamira.


Leopoldo. If my Love be welcome here, but thy safety I have no wish in store.


Phillora. Welcome, Sir, as winters sun, or summers shade, welcome as your own
wishes, welcome as your safety to my Heart, that loves and feared you were
betrayed; Oh give me leave to kneel, and in silence at your feet weep out our
joys which are so surprising I want words to express, and am fain to use these
Emblems of grief (my tears) to utter it.


Pal. The prince Leopoldo; good heaven where was my mind!


Leop. From your Brother I beg forgiveness, for taking his picture; jealous, I
confess, he had too much Interest in the Excellent Phillora; for finding her in
his Arms, the sight blinded me so I could not discern the Brother in his face;
Thus love is pleased to Triumph still in afflicting our minds with unreasonable
hopes, sometimes, and other some with as idle fears. And now, Pallantus, can
you accuse me for having robbed you of your Picture? but I can reconcile all;
for I believe the same Soldiers that took me robbed you, and in the wood
spoiled me of such Jewels as I had about me, for which they quarreled in the
division; The advantage I took hold of, and slew them, and then took one of
their habits to save my self, and serve my friends, which you are; who I must
now acquaint with the happy news; the King lives, found and known most
miraculously by your Father the old Forester, who knew his Signet upon his
finger; the rest Points to Pollidor. of our friends, I hope, are escaped; for I
hear of no other Prisoners but our selves. -- And by this my Sister, I hope,
believes I am a Steps to his Sister. Lover; however I know she is dear
Bellamira.


Omnes. The Princess Bellamira! is she a prisoner too?


Leop. Dear Bellamira, hide not thy face; let us resolve like our selves, and
Act those decrees with honor, and leave the rest to the gods; for we see how
little we can command our own, or rule others fortunes.


Bell. This was the Shepherd that rescued me, and saved my brother.


(Leopoldo looses his Sister, and brings her toward the Company.) Pol. It Is
the Princess; then, oh, be dumb, for ever dumb, since thy guilty tongue has
betrayed thy heart. -- Yes, Madam, 'twas my fortune, and the only grace that
she ever showed me, when she gave me power to save the Prince; and if she will
let me die for your Highness, I have all my wishes.


Bell. I pray, Sir, quarrel not with Fortune; methinks you owe her much, and
are still likely to be in her debt for more.


The prince looses all their chains; Phillora goes to the princess, and kneels.
Phil. Oh, Madam, upon my knees I fall, and beg a pardon for our unreasonable
hatred, which our Ignorance was only guilty of.


Bell. Kneel not to me, gentle Phillora, whose friendly heart has Justice to
all our kindness; and if I can live to pay my score to this Company, I shall
then die endebted only to the gods, whose mercy will take our Faith for further
Sums.


Phil. Softly, I pray, lest the busy ear of Jealous mischief (watchful to our
destruction) catch this dear Secret.


Leop. Pray let me deliver to your Love and Care this Jewel of my life; for
know, Bellamira, I have vowed, (and it is written in Heaven, and here I again
confirm it,) Never to marry any but this Maid; and if fate frown upon that, a
strange curse find me if ever I quit my freedom.


Phil. Oh hold, Sir, call back that rash vow, and be still worth the love and
envy of all the world.


Leop. If Phillora says I am happy my joys are current; her stamp only can make
them so, that is my vow; for I will purchase thee at the rate of all things but
my Honor.


Phillora. Why do you vow so rashly, Sir? before you have called your Reason to
counsel? my heart is so much yours it will not consent you wrong your self; and
I am so proud of my Innocence, and real Love to your Highness, that I must not
consent to that vow; For though I am the private Issue of a poor Forester, yet
my heart's too proud to Love every common Virtue; nor is it every Prince that I
could love, nor do I find my mind so subject to the vanity of our Sex, as to be
pleased with their loving me; therefore be pleased to live my Prince, or I
shall die your handmaid, and show my love was greater then my ambition, which
few women arrive at in Story.


Bell. No more of this kind war now, for heavens sake; Put on your disguise,
for fear we be all lost in your discovery.


Leop. I shall obey, and so must you, Bellamira; Do you not find something like
your dream, Sister? -- Methinks there is so much fate in these accidents, that
we war with heaven when we dispute them; See thy vision revealed; are we not
all saved by these Foresters? the King lost and found, and these two Cedars of
the Forest, whose fate heaven only knows?


Palantus kneels, and offers Bellamira the picture. Pal. Upon my knees, Madam,
I restore this jewel; The grief and distraction my soul was in wounded this day
with thousand miseries, will plead, I hope, a pardon for the fault my Tongue
has made in discovery of a Saucy passion; yet I could wish the whole Kingdom
were as guilty as Pallantus, their love would have been less dangerous then
their hate.


Bell. No, Pallantus, if it be dear to thee, keep it; and value that, as I
shall do thy Friendship; for I have long known thy heart, and shall trust thee
hereafter with the Secrets of mine; my father has found thou art faithful, and
grateful; And all the gods so bless me as I love thee for it, with all that
thou can hope, or I can in honor give; and if I have Interest in Pallantus
he will obey me; What it is I command him Fidelia shall tell him; till then I am
silent, and her love shall speak the rest.


Pall. Madam, I have much pretense to love; but I shall doubt it, and not hope
your reward, when I shall refuse a ready obedience to all your Commands.


Leop. Farewell, Phillora, our safety calls me, pray be silent here, when I am
gone, for they are jealous of me already; this night if possible we will make
our escape to Clytus his quarter, of whose heart and faith I am fully
satisfied; The keys are now in my power; and in the dead of night I Will call ye:
The word shall be, Phillora.


Omnes. All the gods protect the Prince.


[Exit Leopoldus. Pollidor. What do they mean by his figure in a Dream, and
point at me, and talk of her Love? sure I dream; when I have seen the worst of
Fortunes, 'Twill always be in my power to die; there is none so wretched but she
can afford him a grave; her Eyes are fixed upon me.


Bell. Why does my heart tremble at the sight of him I thus long have desired
to see? why should I apprehend this hour as dangerous? Yet I feel a pain
without a name, a power not known; it is less or more then Love, Yet not arrived
at guilt; it is neither fear, nor desire; why should I blush then to own the Joy
and kindness I have for him?


ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
The Scene shuts, and Leopoldo comes in (alone.) Leopoldo. HOw vain and
Insolent is man, that dares call these the weaker Sex! when we consider the
Actions of Virtuous Women, the thousand dangers and difficulties they must pass
through e're they arrive at that great name; what patience, what courage, what
reservedness, what silence, what modesty, how quick of sight, sometimes to
apprehend approaching dangers, to shun them, and again not seeming to see such
as meet them in the face, their checkings and forbidings of Nature, denying,
when she calls loudest, and most pleasing to their sense when she prompts them
to be women; Yet we see them many times, in pure sense of their Honor, deaf,
and dumb, and lame, even when wealth, dignity, and beauty, becken unto them to
come; all these, and thousand difficulties more, almost impossible to our sense
(that have taken up a liberty to Act the contrary) they daily perform, with a
watchful diligent virtue, whose generous minds have imposed these Laws upon
themselves, and now those Laws must be obeyed before they can command a fair
name; while vain men assume a Diety, and believe, if they have Courage they can
with their Swords build themselves Trophies. In short, from these Excellent
sufferers within I may conclude, nature, and all good things ought to be
committed by destiny to the care of that soft Sex, who, till they love, and
give themselves away to men, can do nothing little.


[Exit Leopoldus. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Arcus, Phidelia, Filemon, and Satyr with provisions upon his back. Phil.
SO, so, lay down the provisions here; come, Madam, let us retire into this
Rock, until the tide serves, then we shall be called; for we have agreed with
an old Fisherman, an acquaintance of the Satyrs, who for his Masters sake will
safely convey us to some port that is free from the Conquerours power; but we
must lie close till then, for the Enemy are already in the Town, but the height
of the Cliffs, when we have the night to friend, will secure us; under whose
protection we must make our escape, and leave the rest to Fortune.


Satyr. I Will go too, I Will not stay, until I find my gentle Mistress; a curse
fall on his head has frighted my love from her home; the plague of Ambition and
cross love torment him day and night; may his Eyes never shut till I have blessed
mine with a sight of her; I fear she is hurt, my heart aches so; this busy
trouble of my mind was never so unruly as now; it makes me sick, my Spirits
grow weary, I faint to death, a cold sweat and sadness is all over my breast.


Arcus. How lively this poor wretch describes my pain! But die Arcus, and all
the world, e're she knows I have a thought of Love; yet all my resolution
cannot keep me from repining at my fortune, made by nature so opposite to what
I love, and as if designed for miseries her heart is by fate given to a shadow
in a Dream; My first cross lost a friend, dear as my Eyes, whose kindness and
faith but speak that love which his modest Sister could neither tell nor hide:
together our miseries found us, but to this day I could never know his Fortune,
being, by different lots, become the slaves of different Masters, and my heart
apprehends his death; our Country else would ere this have discovered him, our
color in this nation, making us as public as odious; A gallant and a faithful
Servant 'twas as ever prince made a Friendship with; and had not our miseries
struck us in the spring of our design, something worth story might have
befallen us; Curious to see the world our youths ventured into dangers; to
which slavery was our first step; but my fate was not to be satisfied with one
Captivity; not miserable enough she thought, while only my body was in chains,
and therefore sent these that gall my mind; Love, blind partial Love will have
me his prisoner too, only to show the variety of his slaves; Why else did he
throw away a dart upon me, where there is no possibility of being any thing but
his slave? But I am resolved neither my condition nor passion shall be known,
but in my Epitaph; and there, by a silent Lover, I Will stand distinguished from
the crowd of Rivals, which my heart only emulates in worship; but see the fate
of men, the least deserving is most successful; And barbarous Almanzor by an
impious conquest has power to revenge himself, and insult over the miseries of
that Princess; But I am still a wretch to talk while she is in chains; Yet if I
outlive her, let base and ungrateful be writ upon my name; This night I Will
find the proud Conqueror, and print a thousand wounds upon his breast, or fall
a Martyr to those great names, Leopoldo and Bellamira, which, though they were
guests too great for my sad heart to contain, yet their loss is death.


Fidel. Alas, Arcus, we have all the same interest in this general grief; This
grief and common Calamities (like the infected Air) wounds all, to whose
dangers I must add a wound of mine own, and the cure grows still more
desperate; I have lost my friend, the kind and faithful Pallantus is fallen;
and I must fear, though I cannot know, his misery, the uncertainty of whose ill
wounds deeper then any danger that can threaten my self.


Phil. No more of this imagined danger; but retire, and wisely attend our own
safeties, that we may preserve our selves till we know what fortune has
befallen our great Master; which we cannot hope, unless this Night we make our
escape; within we may resolve what to do.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter Almanzor, with his servants only. Alman. SEnd for Roderigo, put all
things in readiness, it is resolved this morning tide I Will be gone, and with me
bear the scornful cause of my affliction; That blind foolish boy is neither won
by reason, Interest, nor flattery, and set without my Swords reach; he is not
to be bribed nor won by sacrifice neither, like his friend fortune; some way I
must find to reconcile my self to that fond Diety, or all my hopes are lost.


[Enter Roderigo. Alman. Roderigo, I am thinking. --


Roder. Of Love, Sir, I know you were.


Alman. Of Love, yes of Love, and sent for --


Roder. Me, to inform your Highness of his humor; faith, Sir, I know him as
little as you reverence him; his kinsman, and his mother, I have practiced, (a
Bottle, and a Girl) these kind friends I can serve you in; for the other young
Gentleman, he spoils conversation, and affects corners, either to kiss or cry
in; I hope your Highness is not inclined to that Idle humor; pray will you let
me hear you sigh; upon my Conscience you will make but an ill Lover; I dare
as soon undertake to hedge the Eagle in, as you win the Princess; yet they say
there are as many and certain ways to win a woman, and as many holes into her
heart as there are upon her -- Basta. -- But believe me, Sir, there is one, if
you can hit it, is worth them all.


Alman. This is a kind of knowledge, Roderigo, that few are ignorant in; but
yet let the god despise me if I fear either of them; and though Poets and
Lovers still conspire to beget a terror in our hearts, yet my reason tells me,
even from those lamentable Stories that make love seem so dangerous, that we
most unjusty blame Love when it is the Lover that is in fault; for Love is not in
himself our Enemy; Love is as wholesome and as natural a passion as any that
affects the heart; and only corrupted loves are dangerous; Love and Wine may
both be poisoned; should we therefore curse the Vine? No, it is Love, wounded
with Jealousy and Inconstancy, or Infected with disdain; Love set too high, or
too low, by birth or Nature opposed, which, thus set out of her reach, or so
low in the Earth that Honor cannot stoop to gather her blessings; or else at
such a height that even Hope loses his Leap, and the noble Fruit hangs still to
tempt us: or a worse Curse than all these, which is my fate, to love a scornful
Maid that loves another: these are the true grounds of Lovers miseries, and
their Errors are falsely laid upon Love, and all our stubborness called his
Crimes, when we, not Love, are blind, who is indeed the gentle Ty of all
Mankind, though he be made many times the most innocent Root of many
mischiefs, and would be all Honey still but that our Reason gives him a sting;
Reason, Roderigo, which Chain the Gods, have thrown upon us; for we no sooner
covet and know what would please us, but we find it still forbidden; and from
this Root (this Reason) all the foregoing miseries are derived; kind Nature
else would be obeyed, and all these troubles pass without a thought or grief.
But to our business, which I Am sure, Love shall never be with Almanzor.


Rod. Yet 'twould be fit to be civil, and either send or go your self to the
Prison, you have handsome cause enough to yield you an Excuse; dissemble your
past anger, being in the heat of battle, incensed by her scorn, whose sharp
language and your wounds smarting made you speak and act beyond your Reason:
Come Sir, when you can win two Crowns with a few fair words never refuse to
play at any gamc Fortune proposes: besides, I have observed it, Women sooner
forgive faults done to them, than those they do to others; for their shame is
more than their anger can be; and it is easier flattering their weakness into
pity than ripening their Reason into Justice or Discretion: The left-side is
predominant in them still: could I love one Woman better than another, (which I
am so far from believing Virtue, that I think I ought to be beaten for it) if I
did not with your game win any Woman I Would never command Men again. Death, what
Cards would you have to play if these lose? A young handsome General, a Prince,
and Conqueror, that has wit and courage, and yet be strangled in an
Apronstring! sigh and let a Smock smother me! They shall bury me under the
Gallows when I die of that Disease; No faith, if any of them be too hard for me
it shall be in Bed, and there let them use me as they please; I care not
whether I win or lose in their arms, and he that desires more of Love than such
a kindness is mad: when I embrace her if she smile and do speak like a Lover,
let her heart be as busy as she pleases, and make any other happy till I miss
her company. I do not remember I ever sighed, yet I think I have had my share
of Women, but I would not be so miserable as to remember any of their faces for
a Kingdom, for then I might be subject to Constancy, a Disease harder to be
cured than the Pox; Constancy is really a weak-stomack'd Lover: My heart
digests a Mistress presently, and hungers for another; thirsts and enjoys her
without any thought of Constancy and Remembrance; but the last is as dangerous
as if my Supper should ly in my belly always, where should my Dinner go? If
ever your fine Arguments persuade me to be one of your one Meals men, you shall
geld me; give me an appetite every meal in the day, and kind hearts to feed
on, Wit and Beauty will find a Cook, and we'll make our Sauce our selves.


Alm. This Doctrine I am no Heretic in, Roderigo; yet I believe you will allow
a man may love one Dish better than another, and so far I am a Lover.


Rod. Fast and get a stomach, Sir; then all that is young and kind is fair and
pleasing; so far I am happy though no Lover.


Enter to them Leopoldo, and another Soldier. Sold. All things are in
readiness for your Highness departure, and we only stay for your direction.


Rod. I Will wait upon your Highness to the Prison.


Alm. Is all ready?


Sold. Yes, Sir, but it is somewhat of the darkest to put to Sea, within two
hours the Moon will rise; and being not streightn'd in our time, I shall
counsel your Highness to stay a little; two hours of the Ebb carries us out of
all dangers.


Alm. When it is time call at my Quarters; Come, Roderigo, within we'll resolve
of this new business, Love.


[Exeunt omnes except Leopoldo. Leop. This I feared; but how to prevent it,
something as speedy as their mischief must be thought of.


Exit Leopoldo. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
The Scene of the Prison is discovered, and the Prisoners in it. Bellam. WHy
this sadness now when our great griefs and fears are over? Why thus
ingratefully in silence do we receive blessings we scarce could hope for? when
all our Fates both of Love and Hate were doubtful, none were sad; the great and
general calamity past without concern, Pollidor and Palantus with all their
Faith and Loyalty could find room for Love and Anger; and now when our losses
are repaired they sigh and droop for shadows.


Phil. And Pollidor that never knew Love, Fear, nor Grief, but mine, till this
Figure filled his breast, now when he should sacrifice droops and hangs his
head like Flowers oppressed with showers; now when kinder Fate has unriddl'd all
our doubts beyond our hopes, dispersing all those mists we must have wandered
in, by the bright eyes of the divine Bellamira. Fie Pollidor, can thou be
sorry for any honor the Gods have heaped upon thy Mistress? Thy sadness now is
self-love, and shows her Excellence is too great a Guest to lodge in thy narrow
heart. Fond Man, would thou be happier than to love and be beloved by such a
person; a begging Lover with her alms is richer than those that triumph in the
spoils and embraces of another Queen.


Bell. I see our passions, Phillora, are the innocent thoughts of pure minds;
we love Honor and Virtue only; and when they are in safety we know no fears:
these men have Designs and farther ends in their desires than their blushings
dare declare, else our joys must have found theirs.


Phil. It Is too great a truth, Madam, I can prove it in my self; for my
condition is equally miserable to theirs; Are not my youth and hopes equal to
Pollidor's? Are not my dangers great as yours? Is not my stake as great and
rich as any that now distrusts their fortune? Is there not the same distance
betwixt me and my happiness that you tremble at? Yet I smile, because I know I
desire no unreasonable thing; all my wishes are to see these Princes happy.


Bell. Can you hear this and not blush to find two Maids prompt you to find
your resolution? We that are esteemed the weak Sex, that Shadows have led in
Chains, I that have suffered under a desperate Love without groaning or crying
out for help, seven tedious Winters afflicted with a Figure in a Dream, and
till this day never saw the thing I loved, yet now it is met it shall not make
me guilty of a blush for any action, though I know there be a Fate and future
Prophecy wrapped in this Cloud (which thou art) and even my own wishes have
something in them which I can fear; but Bellamira will die rather than stain her
story; and if Pollidor and Palantus have that honor they pretend they will
cease to afflict our minds with their sadness, and patiently expect that Birth
Heaven and Nations have thus labored to bring forth.


Pal. Thus at your feet I fall, struck more by this Virtue now, than by your
Beauty heretofore: Oye Gods, the divine Bellamira's miseries but set her off,
and upbraid your justice that could neglect such a mind when they had taken
pains to make it. And now be pleased to know my silence was no guilty fear of
my own misfortunes, but revolving in my mind your fatal Dream, whose every
particular is explained, which makes me wonder who this Youth can be whom Fate
has marked out for the Envy of Mankind, though Nature have conspired against
him, and set him as far from the reach of his happiness as there is distance
between a Cottage and a Crown; yet see, Madam, if sadness have not seized his
heart, destined to lodge the greatest Guest that ever yet possessed the mind of
man, Bellamira's love.


Phil. Sure Pollidor has not so poor a spirit as to be sad for himself; I
should hate him more than I love him now if I believed his heart could be so
narrow as to wish his own happiness at such a rate as profaning of this
Princess; add for less thou can not hope to purchase her: Let not this grieve
Pollidor, but resolve to follow thy Sister still. Remember 'twas she that led
thee to this degree of Honor: Remember how, contrary to Nature, Sex, and
Custom, inspired by the Deity of Love, I laid violent hands upon thy heart,
and forced thee to receive those glories thou now art proud of, in spite of
that low mean hatred of a gallant Prince which would have held thee back: Look
upon these wounds, there is a beauty in them, and a grace even in these scars,
such as no Virgin can excel with all the art of dress; and I glory more for
having received them for these Princes, then in any my revenge gave this day
upon our enemy.


Pollid. Certainly, when your Highness shall consider my part, 'twill not
appear strange that my mind is possessed with wonder; and then I hope my
silence will find your pardon: I would I had lost my Reason with my hopes; that
enemy Reason that informed my soul, and made me aspire that happiness; the loss
of which she now presents with horror to my mind. Yet, know all the world,
Pollidor can neither repent, dissemble, nor tame his love, though he can dye
when a less cause then your Highness displeasure calls; but will not be hired
to live at a less rate then your pardon. And Phillora may call to mind
something consonant to this fatal Dream; does she not remember how in our most
innocent days, the Dreams our distracted sleeps have had? what honors and what
worship has been paid us from crowds of unknown faces? which compared with this
waking Dream seem to revive, though darkly and afar off, something from those
nothings; and these thoughts begot that guilty silence which displeased my
Sister. But though Phillora can chide my silence now, I fear she will shortly
find her heart subject to thoughts too, whose strange kind of fortune is like
troubled waters now, and the storm is yet in her streams; but when it is settled,
honor and quiet of mind will divide thy heart; for though she thinks now her
heart will desire nothing but leave to love the Prince; know, Phillora, those
roots that are in the spring contented to send forth a bud, their sollicitous
natures are busy still to nourish them; such is thy heart now Love but buds in
it, and it will break to see that after all thy care that flower thou dotest on
should hang upon another bosom; and all thy sweets and graces wither in that
shadow; and while thou dy'st to make a handsome story, some one less excellent,
but more fortunate, surfeit on those sweets thou pinest for; then thou will
find how vain and idle a good pity is, and that fruit (if they love) poor and
virtuous Phillora may reap; for pity is a good that is still attended with
misery, dear bought, being never purchased at less rates then ruin; and they
may be happy that can pity, but the wretched are still their subject; now thou
hang'st thy head, blasted with this sad truth; and now thy soul is awakned I
defy thy heart to be at peace.


Bellam. Alas, Phillora, ignorant of the dangers we were in made us laugh in
this storm; and those waves which we were pleased with to see toss our Barque,
threaten destruction to us, unpracticed in that dangerous element, which
Pollidor, like a Pilot, wisely apprehends, and arms against the known ill,
whose dangers I dare not now behold: something above Reason must secure our
Reason, else sadness and despair must find us all.


Phil. Madam, I have heard all, and shall conclude, as to play a Game that must
be lost, is childish; so to throw up all Cards that agree not with our wishes,
shows covetousness and impatience; we do not always play for gain, sometime
company and pastime engage us; and I am resolved such fates as are dealt me
I Will receive; and show how much I am above that fortune that opposes me; and if
I cannot be happy, yet (against my miseries) I have this remedy, I dare dye;
that pale guest needs but little invitation; especially to those that care not
to live, nothing is so easy, nor so pleasing A prisoner within the Cave, cries
for help. as to dye: and we, Pollidor, that are but beggars at this feast, may
go when we will without taking leave, or being missed.


[A prisoner within the Cave cries for help. Prisoner within. Help, help for
charity.


Bellam. Whence came that cry for help?


Prisoner. As you have charity help the wretched; oh my fate! must I look on
and see his dear limbs torn, and not have power to help him?


Bellam. What strange misery is that that stands in need of our help to relieve
him, that are our selves laden with misfortunes?


Phil. Heaven bless the Prince from use of such a succor; hark, whence came
the cry? sure 'twas from above; I fear the Prince may be discovered in his
design of our safety; if so, lasie slow death, in spite of thy envy, I Will find
a way to meet the Prince, and hasten thy visit hither.


Prisoner. Are you all deaf to our miseries? have the wretched no sense of
others misery? are your hearts hardened to our sufferings, who beg nothing but
the mercy of a speedy death?


Pollid. It Is in the Cave; some other prisoners, sure, I Will take a light and
see in what our charity can serve them.


Palan. Hold, I hear the Prison door open, and that light comes this way; be
silent and observe, lest some unlooked for danger happen.


Pollid. It Is about the hour the Prince bad us expect him.


The door opens, Enter the Prince Leopoldo seeming somewhat sad. Bellam. Some
new calamity, I read it in thy eyes, Leopoldo; speak, what fate must we expect?


Leop. The time's too short to execute my design, for now at this instant the
Guards are coming to fetch you forth; and this night you must away for Sicily,
in company of the Tyrant, whose designs my heart dreads to think of, which e're
he shall execute I am resolved, though I sacrifice my life, I Will strike him to
the earth; this must suddenly be done, unless we can surprise the Guards, and
thus in the dead of night make an escape; see, here are Weapons for all. --
Thus armed and thus unexpected, who knows what success may attend the justice
and resolution of this action? He gives them all weapons. Phillora is the Word;
Here then let us embrace, as friends and fellows in a great calamity, whose sad
estates admits no cure but this desperate attempt.


Phil. The gods, and Prince Leopoldo's fortunes guide us.


Prisoner. Oh the misery of men, fallen below the pity even of They embrace one
another. the wretched themselves!


Leop. What voice was that?


Palan. It Is some wretch in the Dungeon; just as your Highness opened the door
he called for help, and your coming put us off from inquiring what it meant.


Leopoldo takes the Candle and Lanthorn, and his Dagger in his hand, goes to
him, discovers in the Scene with his light carcasses of dead men, and other
prisoners chained upon the ground; and at the appearance of the light some
Foxes run away. Leop. Alas, alas! how cruel are men to men! See, if the very
beasts do not prey upon the living members of the wetched.


Prisoner. Sir, your habit speaks you a Soldier, and since you are Master of
those great blessings, Arms and Freedom, be merciful to the wretched, who only
beg some charitable wounds to relieve them; I hope you will not find your sword
the power for such an alms. See, Sir, two of many, two in number, one in blood
and misery, the dearer part of my soul, all that the Plague and Famine has left
to finish such sad fates as a cruel enemy shall impose, despised and forgotten,
neither worth his cruelty nor his care, unless your sword relieve us; and yet
our crimes are only our Nation. --


[They are Moors. Leop. Your color speaks you strangers; and your miseries
have begot a pity, which I have time only to relieve, but not to inform my
self of; what were those that run away? Here he releases the prisoners.


Prisoner. Foxes, who daily haunt this place, and will scarce expect while we
are dead, but grown bold upon our afflictions prey upon the living; yonder lies
my friend oppressed with sickness whose words they despise; nor could all our
threats nor cries prevail; slavery has so defaced the image of the gods in
miserable man, that the creatures have lost the respect and reverence due to
him; dull captivity has given such strange allay to that rich metal that man
was at first coined in, that we are not current among beasts.


Leop. Sir, we are prisoners too; and now upon forcing our freedoms a sword and
liberty I can give; and if you will take your fortune with us you shall be
welcome.


Prisoner. When I have afforded this charity to my friend I shall most readily
join in any design, to be revenged on this barbarous enemy.


Leop. One of those keys I believe will open his locks; and while you perform
that charity I Will satisfy my self concerning those Foxes. -- How should they
come hither? surely there is a way out, else how could they come in? I Will see
the issue of this chance. --


[The prisoner runs to his Sister and releases her. Sister-prisoner. Oh
Brother, what new blessing's this that gives thee to my Arms, what means this
freedom? will they at last be kind, and let us dye?


Brother-prisoner. No, gentle Sister, a better star guides us; and far from
hence be those sad rites of Funeral, till we have taken some revenge upon that
barbarous power under which we have thus long suffered.


[Bellamira and the rest come to them. Bellam. Sir, your goodness I hope will
excuse our tardy visit, when you shall know we are under the same slavery, and
but this hour released from our chains.


Bother-prisoner. Our gratitude, not our excuse is due; and all my past
miseries you have buried in this great blessing, and I shall at last be free,
or dye revenging the injuries this poor Girl has suffered, the only precious
part of my soul; whose youth has been persecuted with the worst of ills that
Love or Fortune could threaten, and all for loving a gallant man; whose noble
heart I know would bleed could he but fear the miseries she suffers for him,
though he be her Prince. This ambitious passion has made her taste many a
bitter thought: Her color makes this story strange to your ears, and this
black makes it look like a fable, when we say we love; though here be the sad
example of that little god, great in power; whose dart has fired her private
mind, and the saucy flame aspires her Prince's breast; yet she is nobly born,
and what was my blessing proved her misery; for had not I been blessed with his
friendship she had not never been miserable with the sight of him; this as a
secret her troubled mind concealed till the Prince was lost at the fatal battle
of Carthage; since which misery I have wasted my days in slavery, and by chance
met this poor Girl, hunting through diverse miseries a peaceful grave, seduced
by a Witch, who ignorant of her sex, being asked her fortune, bad her seek her
happiness in the hand of a white woman, strange and impossible.


Sister-prisoner. I am very faint, yet my heart divines some blessing from the
sight of those fair eyes. --


[To Phillora. Bellam. How my soul shakes to hear this poor Maids misery! and
my pity would fain believe, amongst us, she might find that blessing that seems
most desperate in her fortunes. Palantus, pray give her something to drink. --
And be not dejected with thoughts of past ills; you are now amongst a company
that dare vie with your most desperate thoughts; and yet will not doubt the
rewards due to their innocence.


Phil. Her fortune is so like my own I cannot but love her, I grow concerned
too in her miseries.


Sister-prisoner. My thanks is due to all; but the joy and wonder of this hour
has made me neglet the payment, which I shall do in prayers to all the gods,
that ye may never know the use of such a kindness, by having tasted those sad
calamities that wound my mind.


Palan. Be quiet and resolved; for I hear some noise at the Prison door; which
way went the Prince? let us retire, for they are now shutting of the door.


ACT. V. SCEN. I.
The Scene of the Prison shuts. Enter as out of a Cave, by the Seaside,
frighted, the Satyr and Fidelia, Arcus and Philemon. Saty. EIther my Eyes
deceived me, or they were foxes; I saw them leap.


Arcus. Foxes, fool? whence should they come?


Phil. Why from their burrow among the Rocks, forced with hunger to seek their
prey; finding us in their way, what is more natural for those beasts then to
force through us? Let us return and see if we can find any sign of their
passage.


Arcus. How easy it is to give fire to fear! Our late danger makes us apprehend
every noise. Hark, it is something scrapes within. -- See, see, the furrs hang
upon the Rocks still; how contemptible a thing this fear is!


They no sooner enter the grot, (which must be made in prospective to present a
Cave by the Seaside,) but they hear one knock within. Arcus takes the light,
and goes toward the hole, and finds the Foxes furrs upon the Rock. Fidel. How
long are the hours that sorrow loves! Time passes like a thought when we are
happy; But Oh, how tedious will my She looks toward the hole where the foxes
came out, and spies a light.

He lays his ear to the hole, and beckens them to come to him.

grief make the few days I have to live! Ha! it is fire, some star sure; Arcus,
do you see that light?


Arcus. It Is something strange, but what Heaven knows; A light in the earth! Be
not amazed, collect your selves; If our fears be true, what is there in fortune
left for fear? Hark, I hear a noise too, listen. -- Do you not hear a noise and
strokes? It Is some Witchcraft sure. -- It Is a man, I hear his voice, and his
words have reason; I Will speak to it what e're it be. -- Ho! within, what art
thou? how came thou to this cave? what seek'st thou in this place of misery?
Leopoldo within, this way they went, and I do see the stars or Moon light, and
that murmur must be the breach of the Sea.


Leop. I Will answer it. -- A wretched Prisoner whom the merciless Enemy has
exposed in chains to the rage of wild Beasts; What e're thou art, for charity
give some relief to the wretched, by informing our miseries where thou art, for
thy light has deceived me pursuing of those Beasts that would have devoured us;
I hoped to have found a passage this way, which now is desperate.


Arcus. Hark, sure I know that voice.


Le. And I that sound, or else my miseries deceive me. Arcus! Arcus


Arcus. Prince Leopoldo!


Leopoldo. The same; struck with wonder and amazed, what are we next to expect
from Fate? Are we all Prisoners then?


Arcus. No, Royal Sir; we are in freedom yet, though their nets are pitched
about us; Help, help, Philemon, to remove these stones, and force a passage
here.


[They pluck stone after stone away, till the Prince comes out. things my Heart
can wish, glad to find my Love approved by so great a Mistress in the School of
Honor; By whose name I vow to the gentle Cadesse an eternal Faith, and Hymen
shall witness my Vow.


Omnes. All the gods say Amen.


Bellam. We must be gone, but whither, oh whither! Sad Fate! that must be gone,
but knows not where to find a safety!


Leopol. Not whither? Yes, to Gaietta, where faithful Clytus resides; Wonder
not that I call him faithful, time will unriddle all; and (I hope) my Sister
will not refuse to trust those that I esteem faithful, until we gain Gaietta;
Love and Bellamira's Fortune shall guide us.


Bellam. I submit, and where Leopoldo trusts will not ask a why; and if Clytus
be faithful, and we escape, let us hereafter no more throw the scandal of blind
guides on Love and Fortune; but freely deliver our selves to their protectior.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Clytus, Ravack, Cleon, Soldiers and Seamen, supposed aboard their
Galley. Cleon. COmmand them pique their Oars, and let her drive with the Tide,
lest the quietness of the night discover us with the noise; the Moon is risen
too.


Seamen. Sir, The boat that came from the Town is put under the Cliff, and
there we saw lights.


Cleon. Give order to hide ours, lest they betray us as theirs have done them.


Seamen. Ours are hid.


Clytus. We have the wind and tide to friend, she cannot to sea but we must
meet her; if she fall into the Bay, the other Galleys are ready to oppose her;
Come, Sir, let us look out, it is a fine Evening.


Ravack. It Is so, and if our honest intentions find their gods, I hope to see a
glorious day in Naples.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Almanzor, Roderigo, and Soldiers. Almanzor. ROderigo, if you can think
of any thing to be added to your Commission or Instructions, send after me and
it shall be confirmed.


Roderigo. At present I can think of nothing; for till your Highness and the
purchase be arrived in Sicily, (which is indeed the root of all your business)
all other thoughts are idle; and pray, Sir, let me prevail with your passion
this night to treat them civilly, and make excuses to the Princess for your
past neglects; Confess you know the debts are great you must pay er'e she can
believe you a Lover; and if you prevail not with her Heart, consider how
miserable you must be though you should force her to a Marriage, when you must
sleep in the bosom of an oppressed incensed princess that looks upon you as the
Murderer of her father, brother, and destroyer of her Country; Which, with
that soft gentle passionate Sex is a grief above all the rest; her heart must
tell her 'twas prince Almanzor, that destroyer of the man she loved, to your
face, the anguish of soul threw out that secret knowledge which upon my life
the person himself could never win from her; but distracted with her
affliction, or anger, to spite your heart, has given you a secret her bosom
friend never was partaker of.


Alman. It Is reason all thou urgest, and I confess my self a beast when my
passion rules me; but I will now endeavor to redeem my fault.


Roder. Sir, your Civility, If it does not get you a wife, yet it will oblige
her, and make her your friend; 'twill be no small advantage to your success;
and having her in your power, it may diverse ways advance your affairs in
Sicily; Her love and passion for another, with the right she has to the Crown,
and Interest in the people, you may by compounding her freedom secure your
Conquest in Sieily; think on it, Sir, and let not passion for a woman seduce
you; and Remember Kingdoms, Sir, are scarce, and there are many chapmen, and
women are common, and grow every where; let us be wise men, Sir, and when we
cannot do what we would, do what we can.


Alm. How now, where is your fellow, that we sent for?


[En. Sold. Sold. And please your Highness, we cannot find him; it is not
above an hour since he went into the prison, whose doors are still locked, and
the key in the Inward side.


Alman. Did you knock?


Sold. Yes, Sir, but no body would answer.


Roder. Death! not answer, Sir, let us force the doors.


They all go out toward the doors of the prison, which they force open; They
all draw their Swords, and with Torches in their hands enter the prison, which
is the same Scene where Bellamira and the prisoners lay. Roder. Here Is the
nest, but the Birds are fled.


Alman. Haste to the guard, command no person whatsoever pass without my order,
let them seize all.


Sold. Perhaps, Sir, they are hid; for it is not possible they should be gone,
and the door shut.


Alman. Search, Villains, 'twill concern you, for your lives are at stake.


Sold. Your Highness found us upon our duties, the doors shut, we cannot
answer for a prison.


Roder. What Path is this? it is full of the new steps of many feet; let us
follow these signs, see whither it leads.


They follow, and the Scene shuts, and they come all out with their Torches at
the hole of the Cave where the princes came out. Alman. Here they have escaped,
but it is certain this pass was found by chance; and being so lately gone cannot
be far from hence; search the Rocks hereabouts, they are but three men,
unarmed, and two women; let us lose no time, Roderigo, but divide, and call if
you see any body; this Accident has destroyed all our hopes; fool, fool, too
late thou find the punishment of thy barbarous rage.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Leopoldo, Pollidor, Pallantus, Arcus, Cadesse, Bellamira, Phillora, and
the other Moor. Leop. IS it far, we must go?


Arcus. No, Sir, the Boat Rides under you Cliff.


Enter to them the Satyr and Philemon. Philem. Haste, haste aboard, or we are
all lost; a party of armed men pursues us, I saw them and their lights Issue
from the Cave.


Leop. To the Boat then dear Bellamira, and with thee take these our friends,
and dearest pledges of our lives; Philemon, by all thy past kindness I conjure
thee, take it not unkindly that I desire thy age to retire with these to a
place of safety.


Bell. I Will not stir unless Phillora will be my Guard.


Poll. Gentle Phillora, let me once prevail, and now wait upon the princess
Bellamira while I with Faith and Duty follow the brave Leopoldo.


Phillora. I obey, and scorn to doubt that fate, that the prince, and Pollidors
swords strike, to defend.


Leop. Away, away, I hear their noise; when we are engaged lie off from the
Shore; if we be fortunate we'll call you back; The word shall be Victory and
Phillora.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Almanzor, Roderigo, and their Company. Roder. COurage, Sir, it must be
they, they fly us; it is impossible they should have means to escape.


Alman. Let Us pursue them close then.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Clytus, Ravack, Cleon, and Seamen. Cleon. THose lights a shore must be
they; they have now doubled the Point, the Boat too is but a small Fisherman.


Clytus. I counted them by their lights, they are not above a dozen in number;
let us land a small party upon this Point, and it is impossible they should
escape us, for we are now betwixt them and their Boat, which I have commanded
the Galley to surprise.


Rav. I am of Clytus his opinion, and that it be executed with diligence.


Cleon. I Will command the Boat ashore then.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. VII.
Enter Leopoldo, Pollidor, Pallantus, Arcus, and the Moor prisoner. Leop.
STand, and make good this pass, by this, our Friends are secured; and let us
make them find the danger of pursuing a Lion to his Den.


Enter to them three Soldiers, Almanzor and Roderigo. Alman. See Roderigo,
here they are.


Leop. Ha! Almanzor! nay, then the Fates are kind.


Pol. Is there no more of you? Fools, what made you venture upon even terms? do
you think our Innocence, and the Princess Bellamira's cause, is no odds?


Roder. Ha, how the devil came they Armed?


Leop. Hence this disguise. -- Shall stories say Leopoldo feared to be known
when Fate set him, Man to man, to dispute Fortunes with Almanzor? no Tyrant,
see Leopoldo.


Almanzor and Roderigo. Ha! Leopoldo.


Whilst Leopoldo throws off his Soldiers Coat, and makes himself known,
Pollidor speaks. Pol. Yes, Almanzor; but see a Saucy Wood-man, that will strike
the fairest Deer in the herd, or fall at his foot.


[Poll. and Alman. fight. Roder. And the best is best cheap.


He fights with Leopoldo, and the rest man to man; Pollidor wounds Almanzor,
and cries, that for Bellamira. -- and that. And kills him. Alman. O! and this
last sigh for Bellamira.


[He dies. [Leopoldo disarms Roderigo, and he falls too. Leo. Ly thou there.


Rod. To fall under Leopoldo, though it be ill luck, it is no shame; your chance
is good.


Leop. And so is Roderigo's; and let him thank this Disguise for his Life,
under whose protection this day I safely heard him speak like a Man of Honor,
which has made me forget he was an Enemy -- Hold, every man hold. Let us not
use our Advantage with cruelty, while I embrace the noble Pollidor, and
congratulate with Princely Pyrrhus our strange delivery.


Pyrrhus. Though nothing be welcomer than the Princely embraces of Leopoldo,
yet let us remember how dear these pawns are which yet are exposed to Fortune;
and when they are safe let us rejoice as Winners.


Enter to them Ravack, Clytus, Cleon, Bellamira, Fidelia, Phillora, Cadesse,
Philemon, and the Satyr; they being all together, Ravack discovers to all the
Company who Pollidor and Phillora were. Pollidor. Ha! the Princess taken! this
my Soul apprehended: See Sir how busy mischief has been, and prepare to redeem
the Princess.


[Pollidor offers to fight with Clytus, and Ravack appears. Ravack. Hold,
Pollidor, while I to Prince Leopoldo discover a Secret which will seem strange
and full of wonder; yet witness Heaven, I shall deliver nothing but a happy
Truth, a Truth that has already found the wish and faith of the persons most
concerned; and to gain the speedier credit with your Highness, be pleased to
receive this Signet from your Royal Father, who impatiently expects your
Highness at Gaietta; the Princess and this joyful Company are already
satisfied with my news which I shall begin with throwing at your feet the old
Ravack.


Leopoldo. Ha! Ravack alive!


Ravack. A Name sometimes well known to Palantus, who here presents to your
embraces our King, and your Kinsman, the young Genorio, Son to the unfortunate
Ortho, whom cross Fate has thus long hid in the person of the gallant Pollidor.
A Secret not less to him than to your Highness, for which upon my knees I beg
his pardon.


Leopoldo. Is this my Royal Kinsman?


[He runs to Genorio and embraces him. Pollidor. What do I hear?


Ravack. Be not amazed at this new Truth; for it was by the counsel of your
Friends we concealed your Birth and Quality, which I should have discovered
could I have promised my self your safety.


Pollidor. Have I lost the dear Phillora by this knowledge, Is not she my
Sister still?


Ravack. Yes, Royal Sir, Phillora is a Branch from the same great Stock -- And
what change this knowledge may bring her Fortune we must consult your Highness
breast; my heart flatters He turns to Leopoldo. it self with hopes of happy
Hymen's.


Leopoldo. Then the Gods have been careful of poor Leopoldo, whose heart
Phillora knows was resolved (at the price of all things, but my Honor) to have
purchased her friendship; and I will not now be so faulty to her as to fear her
faith.


Phillora. If sullen Fate had robbed the noble mind of the great Leopoldo of
all those Royal Dignities that distinguished him from common men (as Fortune
threatened once this day, acting her worst to destroy him) yet my Soul witness I
should have torn from my head all those unlook'd-for Glories she has heaped
upon me, to have repaired the Prince, from whom I beg that Hymen now I refused,
and defy the World (being Leopoldo's) to make me miserable or faulty.


Leopoldo. To Gaietta, and there let the Gods see us possess the blessing they
have prepared for us; but first let me embrace the faithful and kind Ravack,
who as a Father shall ever be loved and reverenced by us; and to you, Sir,
though once an Enemy, thus I open my arms; no Excuses, Clytus, this habit gave
a sufficient satisfaction, in which as a private Soldier I heard thy dispute
with that unhappy Prince, by whose discourse I can witness Clytus his faith to
his Prince, which has reconciled me to all his Errors.


Clytus. Your goodness, Sir, has bound my heart for ever; I confess 'twas a
blind zeal I followed my Master's interest with; and my faithful heart has
found this great blessing for his reward.


[He runs and kneels to Genorio. Leopold. Bellamira, thy Hand Bellamira; Is
there so much of Pollidor remaining in Genorio, as still to desire to change a
Sister? If there be, let Bellamira strive to out-vy Phillora in Love and Faith,
and thus become one Root again, while the different Branches bear the same
Fruit, Love and Friendship.


[They all four embrace. Pollidor. Sure, it is not believed I should find words
to express my joys; this is a blessing I must thus approach upon my knees, and
shall always possess as Servant to Bellamira.


[He kneels to Bellamira. Bellamira. Your knee, Sir, but teaches me what I owe
the King, nor will I allow you have a greater share in this joy than I: this
blessed discovery has cleared us of all the guilt that stained our Family,
while the precious blood of your self and Phillora lay upon our name. This
Storm has happily waked me from a fatal Dream, and now is settling into
Innocence and Peace. Heaven witness how dear the name of Genorio was ever to
me; and since the kinder Fates have made him and Pollidor all one, my heart has
nothing left me to wish: Now I can rejoice when I call to mind the doubtful
hopes Genorio (as Pollidor) lately pursued; and I hope this confession that I
believed Pollidor loved will satisfy Genorio; he that desires more Arguments
of my Love than a Faith of his must die unsatisfi'd by Bellamira; for I can tell
it all the World sooner than Pollidor, and hide it too from all but him; what
is the rest of Fortune that should make Pollidor thus sad?


Pollidor. My silence, Madam, is neither sad nor dullness, but a busy mind,
confused and surpised with joy of un-imaginable blessings, in which the Crown
was the least part. They were the thoughts of the divine Bellamira that drew my
Reason into my self, that I might with an humble thankful heart contemplate
the great Giver and the glorious Gift. Can you believe, Madam, your Friendship
is to be possessed with less than distracting joys? At this time to be deaf and
dumb speaks Love best, and my ambitious heart whispers there is a hope in this
change that I may outlive my despairs.


Bellamira. No more of Fear, Sir; for know, I do not hide my joys, curious to
conceal them or my thoughts from Pollidor; but because I fear 'twould look like
Dissimulation to tell him how happy this day has made me; and now I beg he will
let me conceal my joy for my own sake, as I did my grief this day in tenderness
of Pollidor, whose griefs were then the afflictions of my heart.


Pollidor, Vanity and folly would only ask more than your great heart freely
gives: Know, Madam, when I have wasted my life in gratitude my last breath
shall be my last thanks, if I possess such a blessing as to be yours for ever.


Palantus and Fidelia are all this while talking together, and Leopoldo and
Phillora; Leopoldo kisses Phillora 's hand. Leopoldo. By this, and by this
Phillora, I conjure thee no more of doubt nor fear. Heaven and Earth are
reconciled, and we shall stand the marks of their blessings here.


Phillora. With you, Sir, there is fullness of joy; and I shall be forced to use
all the virtue Heaven has sent me to receive this blessing of Leopoldo's
friendship; therefore cease to ask any thing of Phillora that has nothing left
in her heart to give but your self again, and when unkind you will rob me of
that I will die to make me a passage through my heart, for nothing but death can
force that dear name from thence.


Leop. No more, no more; this kind strife and emulation in your love will make
us waste a happy age together. Palantus kneels to Bellamira.


Pal. From your hands, Madam, with joy I receive and give this faith, and I
doubt not but Fidelia will approve my faith the better, for having seen it
tried by despair, and approved by so great a Judge in Love as the divine
Bellamira.


Fid. Nor shall I think my heart less brave for being folded in those arms your
Highness refused, nor esteem the love and friendship of Palantus worse for
having been worn by so brave a Princess.


Bell. This, Palantus, is that I had to beg; and now I conjure thee by all that
love and gallantry thou have been so diligent to show the world, pay here thy
vows to friendship, and I shall be happy by being able to make my dear Fidelia
so.


Pal. Madam, my love was always obedient, but here is no occasion to show it;
and now I lament the virtues of the sad and kind Fidelia which give me no room
to express your power. Fidelia has a Beauty and a Virtue to be sought after at
the price of Kingdoms, and hazard of all that is most dear to man, and it is to
injure her to receive her as courtesy from her who knows my soul had always a
value and kindness for her; and truth still dwelt in my heart; for since I
would not ly to thee that loved, but plainly told I loved another, be confident
I shall never ly hereafter; and now I have said that here before the Gods of
Gratitude and Truth, in the presence of this Princess, I vow a faithful
friendship to the gentle Fidelia.


Bell. Your hand, Fidelia; this days misery shall beget to morrows joy and
wonder.


Arcus. These strange unlook'd-for blessings, like Dreams of troubled minds,
are so far beyond our hopes they can scarce find our faiths: See, Madam, the
first change of Fortune was of this your Servant; you will laugh, Madam, and
scorn, when you shall know Arcus was one of your Train, and those eyes made me
forget my Love, till the miseries and kindness of this Maid strangely struck my
heart; and I beg the Honor to let our Hymen's Torch be lighted at your blessed
fire; the black is but the shadow of a beauteous soul, and secures us from
Rivals in our Loves.


Rav. Until your Highness has seen the King I beg we may defer the rest of
this story, where there are many Friends that long to pay their duty here;
you will be pleased, Sir, to give Clytus your Commission to publish this joyful
news to the Army?


Pal. Why this Ceremony to me? If I be your King, I command you live still like
a Father with me; and may Heaven frown upon me when I forget the affection of a
Son. O Phillora! this day is thine, and (if we outlive it) our peaceful Cell
we'll to a Temple turn; but where is our Friend the Satyr?


Phillora. Fled, with Joy, to bear these tidings to the King.


Leop. Let not our Joys rob us of our Humanity toward these, the Enemies of
our peace, since fortune used them as the means to the happy discovery.
Pallantus, let that unfortunate prince be taken up, and his body embalmed, and
mourned, as becomes his birth; his miseries were his own seeking, no fault of
ours; To you, Roderigo, the body shall be delivered; and to let you taste part
of our Joys, in this your misery, you shall have fair leave, and all things
fit, to make your retreat; provided you withdraw your Forces out of Sicily, and
quit all you pretend to there; to this, I hope, Prince Genorio will agree.


Roder. This generosity is like the Character the world gives of great
Leopoldo; and he shall find his humanity has overcome more then his Sword; and
from such an Enemy We shall not be ashamed to have received Conditions, nor
fail to Magnify the just Leopoldo.


Leop. This Charity being done, we may safely review our happyness, mine has
his Center here. Lead the way, Clytus, to the Temple; there let us finish those
blessings that the Sword has but begun.


Pollidor. And since such blessings from our Dreams we see;
And that I still may happy be,
Let Bellamira Dream for me.

FINIS.
CLARICILLA, A TRAGI-COMEDY, The Scene SICILY.

Written by THOMAS KILLIGREW, IN ROME.

DEDICATED To His Dear SISTER THE Lady SHANNON.

LONDON: Printed by J. M. for Andrew Crook, at the Sign of the Green Dragon in
St Paul's Churchyard. 1663.

The Names of the Actors:
The King of Sicily. Appius, the Prince of Calabria. Melintus, A Lover of
Claricilla. and Philemon, both Sons to the Kings Brother. Timillus, Friend to
Melintus. Silvander, the Usurper, in love with Claricilla. Manlius, and
Tullius, Two Pirates disguised, of Silvander's party. Seleucus, a Lord, and
Favorite to the King, in love with Claricilla. Carillus, his Friend. Ravack, a
Slave, but a great man of Sicily. Jacomo, Servant to Melintus. Claricilla, the
Princess. Olinda, her Maid. Attendants.
CLARICILLA, A TRAGI-COMEDY,
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter King, Appius, Seleucus, and Attendants. King. SEleucus, you know the
soul of our Design lies in the speedy and silent execution of the Plot; let us
not then presume in their security till we fall in our own; but go, and when
they have begirt the place give us notice, that with our Charge they may at
once fear and feel their danger, and by us be clothed in Ruin ere they know
whose Livery they wear -- This, if Fortune be kind, Exit Seleuc. must be; for
where Justice and she strike in what corner of the Earth can Victory hide her
self, and that youthful hand not find her?


[Turning to Appius. Appius. I should blush at this, if there needed more
Arguments to confirm I shall be victorious than the reward proposed; for had
the Gods intended the far-fam'd Claricilla's Virtues a Reward for Treason they
would not then have left her Virtue such a Guard, whose power has stood
amongst Traitors when yours fell upon the faith that bore it.


King. You oblige me, Sir, and this goodness makes me beg you would be pleased
to let me once again call to your memory some particulars of that tedious story
which so often in my miseries I recounted to your Highness: This Traitor
Silvander having by my love gained an interest, and by my smiles climbed over
the Heads of all his Fellows in the strength of that trust grew too powerful
for me, and in a Battle (where my cause only struck) our Forces being not half
the Traitors number we lost the day, to which Theft, not Conquest, was joined
the Murder of my Brother and loss both of my Crown and Daughter.


Appius. That fault the Gods will punish; but his usurpation of the Princess,
and intended Rape which in a forced Marriage he labors, are those that blow my
rage.


King. It Is true, it has always been his aim, but his Love, by Heaven appointed
for his punishment and our Guard, has given her a constant power over him,
which we have so directed that she has prevailed with him to quit his greatest
strength, and retreat with her to this private Villa, where now he remains
attended only with some few Troops of Horse: This opportunity we owe her
piety, that has put it in our power to strike for our Revenge and Right again.


Enter Seleucus. Seleuc. Arm, Sir, and behold how in the obedience to your
commands they are lost; Ruin in silence like Growth steals upon them; they are
now empal'd, and destruction hovers yet undiscovered to the Prey; but defer
not, for Night makes haste away, and the Cause has such a Glory cast about the
Soldier that it forces Day, and Victory in their resolution waits but your
Command to send her forth.


King. Sir, pray be pleased to give these Iost men their Dooms; the Signal's
yours.


Appius. It Is an Honor, and I accept it -- And thus I give it, Follow me. He
draws his Sword.


[Exit Appius. King. And that Soldier that refuses such a Signal, let his
weighty fears sink him where he stands. Come, Seleucus. Exit King.


Seleuc. Come, Seleucus had not wont to be the Word upon a Charge; O Love, thy
power has disarmed me, or rather Envy has disarmed my Love; could it be else
that I should stand thus unspirited in Claricilla's cause, while others gild
their Swords in her revenge? it could not be -- Hark, how eagerly they pursue
my A Charge wishin. misery; cruel Honor too puts in, and tells me, I lose my
interest in her, unless by giving wounds I pull on mine own by making way for
this Prince's hopes.


[Exit. ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Melintus, Timillus, and Jacomo. Melintus. COme, Timillus, let us haste
to the Charge, lest our Friends believe Fear declined our Peace; and we are
early enough, if we succeed, to let them see we have brought the wishes of
Friends.


Tim. Faith, if we do not succeed we shall find we came too soon, I am sure I
shall; In an overthrow I am certain to get my share; when I live to want an
Enemy my Friends shall knock me of the head; for I thank my Fates, Fortune has
been as bountiful of her mischiefs to me as an Enemy could wish, and that is but
a hard condition, you will say, for a man that cannot ask rewards when he does
well.


Melint. Mention not that here where reward grows within thy reach in every
daring forehead; and if Timillus dares not gather them he must go without 'em;
jests brings none of the swords harvest home.


Timil. You are ever thus snappish till I am angry, and then I fight to my own
ruin not mine enemies; one would think you might allow a man his humor, and
not be forced to fight your quarrel, but he must fight your way too.


Melin. Prithee no more, leave this discourse and follow me.


[Exit Melintus. Timil. And what will thou do, Jacomo?


Jac. Who I? I Will follow my Master.


Timil. No prithee, let us be friends, choose some other place, for I Am
resolved to keep that my self till I am beaten from it.


Jac. You Are merry, Sir, but I have seen them clawed ere now that have taken it;
but I hope you will find better fortune.


Timil. A pox of Fortune, she has no such thing as good or bad belongs to her;
follow me and if we gain the day I Will give her thee.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Claricilla and Olinda. Olinda. FLy, Madam, and leave 'em, for these
enemies bring our freedom.


Clar. Be constant heaven.


[Exeunt. Enter Silvander wounded, and sees Claricilla fly to his enemies.
Silvand. What, ho Claricilla, gentle Claricilla, do thou fly me too? nay
then I Am lost indeed; thou might have had mercy, though no love, and
preserved me for thine own sake; for in this fall of mine thou have a hand in
ruining thine own Temple; nor can thou after this ingratitude be termed the
just, however the fair Claricilla. -- No, since Claricilla's cruel I will not
stir a foot that Within, fly, fly. leads from danger, nor vainly attempt to
escape the hand of heaven, unless I could hide me from his eye too. -- What art
thou that wear'st such death about thee, and look as if thou came to Enter
Melintus wounded. put off thy habit here?


Melin. It Is not you I look for, -- It Is something that shot He saw Claricilla
in her flight. from heaven before me; she appeared like innocence her self,
striking in her own cause; saw you not that star, did she not in her descent
pass this way? -- He minds me not.


[Melint. offers to go away. Silvand. It Is so; this youth but saw her, and he is
overcome. -- Stay, what ere thou art, that once again I may see thy face, and
read the story which Love and Anger appears so mingled in. -- Now, By all our
gods, it is nobly writ; and had I met it when I commanded fortune, I would have
studied thee, and by obligations have grafted thee my friend; but since that
power is gone, by this -- and my name, I command thee be my Priest, know
Silvander the unfortunate calls thee back. He draws his sword.


Melin. Silvander! Oh ye gods! what power ye give to treason? Aside. that name
has dispersed the cloud that passion threw betwixt him and the revenge a
Fathers murder called -- Unfortunate as wicked; what fate ruled thee thus to
call me back!


Silv. Prithee youth, no noise; I was a traitor, but true to Love. A King, and
yet his power commanded me; and could my love to Claricilla have consented to
have worn such a Jewel in less then a Crown, or been satisfied to have seen her
whom I preferred before the gods stand second to any; thou in all thy wounds and
faith which thus adorn thee, should not have out-shin'd me this day in
loyalty.


Melin. Love and Treason mixed! know, though thou have proved thy self a cunning
Chemist in attempting to destroy that noble body; yet I have that here shall in
spite of all thy adulterate mixtures restore and fix it: Guard thee.


Silvand. Prithee threaten not, for though I prophecy thou bring'st my
winding sheet, yet thou shall see my smiles in scorns wreathe it about me; and
yet I mean not to fall unlike a Soldier, nor be buried without my Rights about
me, my sword upon my breast thus: and therefore guard thee. He draws his sword.


Melin. Guard me! it is the office of the gods. -- To kill thee is to do the
execution, and the way as safe as that the Ministers of Justice tread: and were
it as noble as just, I would command thee hold thy neck out; but I scorn such
ways to my revenge; and therefore take an equal trial. -- Yield, and your
Person's safe; for 'twas against your cause, not you, I drew my sword, which
scorns They fight. to strike even Silvander upon the ground.


[Silvander wounded. Silvand. Hold, and ere this darkness has quite shadowed
me, hear my story; that as thou have punished my treason, thou may pity my
misfortune: and thus (when I am gone) report of me, Silvander bowed to a cruel
power, who when he had offered all that a Lovers thought could compass, and the
power of a King worn only to serve in when that power lessened, and my
offerings came to be in the heart, not hand, the way to his mercy was shut, and
my prayers because unperfum'd unheard, and I the offerer thus made the
sacrifice: Oh gentle youth, would any bow to such a power as flies us in our
miseries, or worship that image which thus falls upon her Priest.


[He dies. Melin. Unfortunate indeed, as all men are that build upon faults;
but I will not say I pity thee; for where a King once grew to sow pity is the
worst of changes.


[Exit. Enter Appius and Seleucus. Seleu. This way he went, Sir, if he be
mortal; but his stay's so short that we but seem to follow in the tract he
makes.


Appius. Let us lose no time then in overtaking him, that we may assist his
work.


Seleu. I will not fight a foot farther that way; if there be no enemies
backwards, I Will make some; God's Death, I Will not take Mars his leavings in the
field.


Appius. Come Seleucus, turn this fire the right way, and 'twill light thee to
find out honor.


Seleu. It has don't; but to day she is so busy in obeying one man's fortune
that my wounds are not current pay to purchase her.


Appius. We Are sure he is this way, for here is his mark; where ere he goes he
makes death his character; know you this that bears it?


Seleu. Know him? yes, this stroke killed not a traitor, but treason it self
fell here: this is Silvander, and he is gone. -- Envy, be not prophetic; his
aims beyond a Crown: it must be Claricilla then, ye gods! whither else tends
this youths flight, or what but she will satisfy; when a King cannot make his
quarry! this doubt makes me pursue him, though to a dangerous knowledge.


[Exeunt. ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Claricilla, Melintus following her. Clar. SUre this stranger knows me
not; he pursues me as if I were part of the enemy.


Melin. O stay; for know, since I have once again seen my fate I Will read it
what ere it be, it is written in so fair a book. -- See, unconfident of my arms
I beg your stay; he begs that dealt death as He kneels. often as wounds to his
opposers in your pursuit; your fears wrong me; he that dares fight with men
will not war with beauty; and this sword that has cut through so many fates,
this day, to find mine own, tremble not at it, for it has ever been the
servant of justice, not cruelty.


Clar. Sir, I know not guilt enough to beget a fear; yet if you mean me no
harm, why do you pursue me, and neglect the advantage Fortune throws upon your
daring youth? have you such choice of honors you scorn to stoop for this you
have ventured so far for? what dress would you wear? what beauties would your
youth put on to make it lovely, when those wounds a Crown and conquest cannot
satisfy? when your heart thinks these no harvest, where would your sword sow
your hazards to reap one more glorious?


Melin. Fair soul go on; and whilst you blame the effect, I Will read, the
cause, and thus look upon the conquest; Crown and reward I struck for, and if
ever I have triumph it must pass through those Arches in gentle smiles; and
whilst I enjoy this happiness, let the Crown and Victory pass by as the lesser
good. Nor would I give this sight to possess the blessings that attend them
both.


Clar. Heaven grant this fruit be from a noble stock, and yet it is safer 'twere
not; for I fear I am not proof against such virtues; 'twas the dress my
Melintus wore when he appeared most comely (nor need I doubt him) for never
honor grew where 'twas not sowed; Sir, you forget your wounds, they exact a
care.


Melin. No, fair one; I am now pouring Balm into them; and could I hope you
would afford this way of cure, it would be one health not to be healed. -- Why
do you turn away, and let my truths fall ere they reach your ears? is it your
fears that would remove She turns from him. you? let this truth secure you;
though I appear in this bloody dress, more like a Priest, yet know I am a
sacrifice, and that sacrifice which once was acceptable to you.


Clar. Sure I have heard that voice. -- Sir, for heavens sake, wound me not
with doubt, but tell me who you are.


Melin. Are there no lines in all this misery that you can call to mind? --
Nor the print of one joy left which you set there.


[He pulls a patch from his eyes, she le^ns on him and weeps. Clar. Oh yes!
there is.


Melin. O Claricilla! -- Soul of honor, why do you not in charity quit your
virtue, it is single here, that I may throw off my pain.


Clar. O Melintus, you must not wish it; Melintus can bravely suffer, he is a
Soldier, Loves Soldier, but Honors Leader; let me weep my soul into thy
noble breast; this payment I can make to none but to thy self; those tears that
were due to absence sadness paid thy memory; Oh let me rest upon thee, my joys
are too great a load to bear; and feel how the Melintus here beats to meet
Melintus there.


Melin. Oh ye gods, it is Paradise sure; the way was so ^gged that lead to it.


Clar. It Is a great power we serve; nor is it more seen in his punishment that
parted us, then in this reward; but let us not, my soul, unhandsomely, or
saucily, express our joys; it may displease those powers that have been thus
favorable; and my Melintus had not wont to sacrifice to himself and forget the
gods.


[She offers to go from him. Melin. Oh gentle Claricilla, remove not from me;
for you mistake the posture, the breast is Loves Altar, and the seat of
friendship; and for sacrifice, is not Claricilla a fuller offering in either
kind then a Cake or Spice? but I submit, for Melintus shall never know a reason
that contradicts Claricilla.


Clar. Yet let us remember what we owe to your safety; your wounds too (but
that I know Melintus ever placed dangers behind his Love) I should ere this
have prompted you to a care of.


Melin. For my wounds, the cause will heal 'em; to me you owe nothing for your
deliverance; your freedom grew here, and your enemies mistaking the place, in
search of my dangers, dug it out; and you shall find this truth in the
beauty of the scars they leave. Oh Claricilla, thy faith makes me smile through
all this blood; but hark, I fear we are pursued; this upon your fair hand, and
then let me hide my love and name under my disguise. He puts on his patch.


Clar. Good night, Melintus; for thou have now put out the light, and like Love
himself thou art blind, and thou art all I worship of that god.


[Enter Appius and Seleucus. Seleu. See where the Eagle stands, my fears were
true; the Princess in his hand too, he holds her like his prey in the foot. --
He takes her from him. Sir, though you fought well, this Lady will not prove
your reward, she cannot be a prisoner here, Sir.


Melin. What I did well was rewarded in the act; and for this Lady I am so far
from hoping she should be my prisoner, that I would have suffered all the
miseries of war ere struck one blow against her freedom.


[Seleucus turns slightly from Melintus. Seleu. Here is a Prince whose
youthful fire blown with desire to serve your Highness has through thousand
dangers, this day, courted your favor, and in his hand you will seem more aptly
worn.


Appius. Madam, though his friendship seem to direct, your highness has an
interest that commands here; and it is honor enough if you please to let me
kiss your hand.


Clar. Sir, civilities are always fruitful, and beget civilities, if they meet
with honor; which I hope shall not be wanting to give a a growth to what you
venture here.


Melin. Madam, I see it is not my opinion only, but this Lords too, that I am
unworthy of this honor.


Clar. If it be an honor, Sir, wear it; you first secured it. She gives him
her hand again.


Seleu. Will you make your hand the reward of Fortune then, and scatter your
favors so that they may be had for stooping? is that an honor due to the
first comer? if so, I grudge it not, for such favors and upon such ties he may
wear; else I should be loath to stoop to her that bows to him.


Clar. You are insolent.


Melin. Thus, Madam, be pleased to accept your due, and then give me leave to
exact mine. -- Sir, let not your interest here He turns to Seleucus. and the
opinion you have but a single enemy, make you presume to injure me, nor so
mistake my bounty as to think I have thrown my blood away in vanity; for though
I set no price upon my wounds, and contract not for killing of a Traitor, yet I
can tell whether I am bid fair or no when I have don't; and it is nobler far to
give a courtesy then sell it under. -- Do you smile? it may be Seleucus smiles
and turns. you have had good markets, and such weak chapmen for those few good
deeds you have done.


Seleu. Yes, but if thou were from this place I would make thee pay dear for
one which should on thy heart write, Thou were but my factor; and all the
honor thou art thus proud of but my store.


Melin. You promise to your self too fair; and noises fright only when we are
ignorant of the cause, and there is too much in thee to have a dangerous depth.


[Seleucus offers to strike. Appius. Hold, Seleucus, -- Sir, when you know his
good, you will pardon this ill, nor do I conceive it an injury to show by his
envy what value he sets upon your glories; and I make no doubt when his reason
has purged this choler from his honor, you will find him a healthy friend, and
his acquaintance not subject to these sickly passions; if he does, as of a
surety, command my faith to make this good.


Mel. Come, prithee leave thy fooling, and let me see it; I hope it is not
dangerous.


Tim. No, no, never fear it; this narrow Lane will never prove my Highway to
Heaven.


Mel. Prithee come away then, we shall be observed to be so long together.


Tim. Hang observers, for I am sure I never had any.


Exeunt. ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Manlius, and Tullius. Manlius. STrip those Slaves, and to the Bank chain
the Cowards; Slavery is no new thing to such as fear: and Tullius, loose the
Rhodian on the Star-board bank: Methinks that Fellow looks as if he were
unjustly yoked with his misery; in the heat of the sight I saw him shake his
Chain like a fierce Dog held from the Chase.


Tul. Sir.


Man. Urge me no more; Justice as well as Blood has an interest in the Revenge
I take; and that makes it healthy, though it may be that which Anger hunts
would taste as sweet.


Tul. Sir, your pardon; it is my ignorance in the cause of your displeasure made
me mediate for them.


Enter Philemon. Man. And because Tullius shall not think that Manlius would in
misery expect the compassion that he would not give you shall Philemon aside
Ha! Manlius. know why I refuse these my Contrymen in misery that mercy I
found from thee in mine.


Tul. Sir, not that I doubt you have one, but the desire to know it, makes me
beg you would relate the cause; Tullius can be but faithful when he has heard
it, and that I hope is not to be questioned now.


Man. Know then, in that day when Treason flew above Justice, and false
Silvander enriched by his Master's trust out-vy'd the noble King with his own
bounty, who too late found his love had not gained a Friend, but begot a
Traitor, 'twas in that day the brave Thisander fell. The interest I had in this
fault Heaven, I hope, has pardoned as well as punished; but to be short, our
party having gained the day, the Crown and Beauty that attended it, the fair
Claricilla fell into the hands of false Silvander, where her virtues by daily
seeing them dispersed the Cloud Ambition had set betwixt my Loyalty and me, and
then too late I repented what I had done; yet not willing to despair before I
had attempted something, I undertook an act, which if Heaven had smiled on,
might have redeemed my forfeit Honor; 'twas to heal the wounds I had made with
the blood of the surpised Traitor, whose fall I had decreed in the midst of
all his false glories.


Tullius. How came it, Justice was so absent in her own cause?


Man. His sins it seems were not ripe, nor this punishment that Heaven designed
him, which by I hope this is fully paid: But to the parcular; one night being
in the Princesses chamber contriving her escape, which we resolved should be
ere I gave the blow, a Guard seized me, and no cause given; I was sent unto my
ruin, as he designed, there your gratitude preserved me, I afterward learned
the occasion of my imprisonment; these men whom Fortune now has given into my
power urged the lust-burnt Traitor to a Rape upon the Princess, and with a
forced Marriage counseled him to confirm his Title, blowing in his eat that
there was love betwixt the Princess and me, which if his care removed not would
be a hindrance to his designs; from his guilt and jealousy grew that necessity
which made me receive the command my better fortunes gave your merit: And now
judge whether or no there be a justice in this punishment.


Tul. It Is visible they bow under a weight that justice has laid upon them,
and my Galley is both a Prison and a Sanctuary.


Phil. Is this Manlius, and the cause of his disgrace?


[Aside. Man. But see the Slave I have sent for, Tullius; Was he bought or
taken?


Tul. It Is one of that Ging defended the Rhodian when we lost so many men in
fight.


Man. I remember the story; but how came it he was left when you sold the rest?


Tul. They did not like the price; besides he was dogged, and that made me put
him to the Oar.


Man. Of what Country art thou, and thy name?


Phil. Of no Country, -- nor no name, in Chains; Slave is a being -- That what
has been is of no force against; else my Name and Country are not things to be
ashamed of.


Man. Yet if you think they have power to gain your freedom you are too blame
to keep 'em hid.


Phil. I have vowed never to discover either till I have my freedom, and I will
not break my vow.


Man. Why so dogged in your answer?


Phil. Why not? What is there in my fortune that needs fear a worse condition?
or what danger in a Slave worth your consideration what he says? If you dare a
venture good deed, give me credit for one and set me free.


Man. No, no, we must not be forced to a benefit. Tullius, command the Galley
to put from shore, and ly loose to night to be ready if there be occasion
offered, we will stay a shore to night and expect what issue this days trouble
has.


[Exeunt all but Philemon. Phil. Yes, I was of the Rhodian Ging, and chief,
though you know it not; and had our Seconds been men of souls and not made up
of fears, might have played your parts now. To what a miserable condition am I
fallen? The last Mart, because I was wounded, no body would buy me, the soul of
a Slave in their esteem not weighing down his limbs: Ye Gods, either send me
liberty or take your gifts again: Honor and her Issue, Courage, Justice,
Faithfulness, are of no use to me; Who would be judged by a Slave? Courage in
Chains, what can it hurt? or to be faithful, of what use when we are not
trusted? O my fate! Why was I born free? Had I been bred a Slave I could have
sung in Chains; nay, to have perished in them had been dying in my Calling; but
to fall from greatness, and without a fault be punished with the guilty! nay,
where the guilty escape! False Rhodes! my Curse kindle a fire within thee; the
freedom that my soul brought thither threw me into her dangers which their
Cowardice had made such certain ruin in their apprehension that not one
amongst them had man enough to look upon their fears; I then a God was held,
because I durst venture thus to become a Sacrifice.


ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Seleucus solus. Sell. YE Gods, by what ways or marks should men follow
what is good? when virtue it self does not always keep one path; when
Claricilla who has all I know of virtue shall quit the God-like attribute of
Truth, and the Guard which Innocence secures her from impious men with, and fly
for safety to an Excuse? She denied my visit at the price of a Ly, and at that
rate of sin bought a strangers company: Olinda assures me he is at this time
with her; but why do I thus without dangers bark against him, and let this Tree
without a Root, this Ly stand in my prospect? It shall not, I will see her; and
since she can so put off her Honor, as to ly for one man, who knows but she
may ly with two?


Exit. ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Melintus, and Claricilla. Mil. YOu have now heard all the passages of my
life since that sad day we parted to this joyful hour; which if poor Philemon
had lived to see, how happy had we three been!


Clar. Have you not heard of him since his loss at Rhodes? Do you believe him
dead?


Mel. My love makes me believe what I fear, for he had many wounds; besides, I
know his Ransom would have pleased the Conqueror better than his bonds, for
they were Pirates; but no more of this sad subject now.


Clar. O Melintus, grow not weary of mentioning a Friend; though it be sad,
it is just, and let that bear the weight; had Philemon lived to have seen me and
Melintus lost, we should have spent our days in your story ere suffered your
name to have past un-mention'd. Philemon, to his Friend a Lamb, and in such
softness he always wore his Lions heart; Philemon, whose youth had growth with
us, a Plant by the same hand set, a flower from our own stock, and all his
sweets akin to us; and we ought to be allied to his misfortunes too: but why do
I teach Melintus? it is boldly done to give Laws to him that is such a Master in
the rights of friendship.


[She weeps. Mel. To let you see I love Philemon, I do not grudge him that
precious dew; and gentle Claricilla, to witness my soul has one consent with
yours, See, I can bear you company in your own Sex.


Clar. O ye Gods! he weeps, Melintus weeps; What Agony must this noble Youth
feel when his Soul sweats such drops? Pardon me for thus stirring thy grief.


Mel. Do not think I left the subject because I was weary of the discourse, or
could enough mention Philemon, that durst be my Friend when 'twas certain
ruin; and now he is dead I break no trust to tell you the cause was a greater
tie than any effect it had. Know, Philemon was in love with Claricilla, and it
was with Claricilla and not himself; for when by my trust he found your
softness had received impression from my constant love, and you were pleased to
call me your Melintus, I became his too; and to serve us in our wishes was all
the Heaven he aimed at. And now (my Soul) you must either confess me unworthy,
or else grant, such daring courage, and such fearful love as Philemon
commanded, could never sink from the soul of Melintus.


Clar. Since Melintus has begun, take my confession too; know I saw it long
ago, and decreed rewards of friendship for the noble youth; but when 'twas
beyond my power to cure, it had been cruelty to have inquired the pain, and
therefore would not see what I pitied. And now you have all the secrets of my
heart; those of joy thy friendship multiplies, and those of grief; thus thou
divid'st the pains.


[Enter Olinda. Mel. O lay the whole weight here.


Ol. Madam, Seleucus upon earnest business, as he pretends, will see you.


Clar. How? will see me? Tell him --


Enter Seleucus and surprises them, Melintus is transported into rage. Seleuc.
Nothing, Madam, he knows too much already; and though my Anger, which Envy and
your Cause begot, was grown to such a destructive height that I could not rule
it till it found mine own ruin in your frown, yet a Soldiers envy is no sin;
nor ought his anger be punished by his friends, when he appears not in love
with his fault, nor seeks to justify it. This day I begged leave to crave your
pardon for my offense; and your Highness refused my visit, and made an Excuse
to admit this -- Madam, 'twill be He points in scorn to Melintus. no glory to
you that you could withstand the sieges which Silvander and my self laid
against you by many services, when it shall be known you were overcome by a
single one, and yielded at first sight to a stranger.


Clar. Seleucus, when I take you for my friend I Will take your counsel, and not
till then; for the services you urge they have been always dressed so in commands
that they appeared unbecoming.


Sell. Madam, you did not look with equal eyes upon them, else their passion
would have appeared their greatest beauty; and I never spoke Loves language
more than when I was least a Poet.


Clar. The love of Subjects to their Prince is duty; and those whom we pay we
do not thank; the Hireling ought to serve.


Sell. Madam, you speak as if I served for bread, and forget that Subjects are
Heavens servants; and it is the Gods that appoint us Kings, and I am doomed to
it. It Is that, not want that makes me a Subject, which condition your Highness
is not exempt from. But I wonder what mighty Prince this is that thus
vouchsafes to hide himself.


Clar. This insolence here?


Mel. Your pardon, Madam, it is my Q. your Sex cannot strike, and 'twas the
respect which this place claims made me stand his mark thus long-Now to you who
this second time have with scorn looked upon my temper when a calm has hid it.
Know in the best of all thy ills, thy love, thou art a Traitor; else thou durst
not hope this Princess would be food for servants; and though thy fawning on
thy Masters feet has been cherished so that thou have left the Crumbs there,
and are now set by him, snatching at his own dish.


Sell. This to me?


Mel. Yes, to thee whose pride has now but begun its leap, which I prophecy
will end at his throat; nor are such Dogs strange in this state. Remember
yesterday, when one of that hated breed fell unpitied.


Sell. Sure you take me for a Coward, you durst not urge me thus else.


Mel. No, Sir, that would secure you; nor do I believe, though you have many
faults, coward any of them.


Sell. I Will expect you in the garden then.


[Exit Seleucus. Mel. I Will follow you -- Madam, let not this threatened strom
fright you; your interest lies in the security of my innocence, which cannot
fall here.


Clar. O that Melintus would hear my Reasons for what I say ere accuse me for
having too much woman in my suit, and then I would tell him he must not fight,
at least not now.


Mel. Not fight? My honor is concerned.


Clar. And my honor is concerned; twill look like fighting for me; and I hope,
Melintus will not set that at stake against opinion, especially when his
courage is so far from being in question, it is become a Proverb. Besides,
though you conquer you are lost; you see his interest in my Father makes him
not look with justice on your merits; and to kill his creature may threaten
your own ruin, but these Arguments have their period in fears still; and
therefore I Will not urge the reasons they bring, as of force against the danger
that honor threatens.


Melin. And those that come not so attended are commands to Melintus, who
covets only to keep those beauties of his mind, that you may not be put to make
excuses for your love.


Clar. Then gently thus, let me prevail with you to appoint a farther day, to
determine this angry question, whilst I acquaint my Father with his ambitious
hopes, which he not dreams are levelled at me, and consequently the Crown; I Will
tell him of his insolence now, and at the Battle; then I will urge the late
treason, and bid him call to mind the dangers that Traitors hopes threatened,
which sprung from this root. I know 'twill startle his soul; and if it fail to
ruin him, yet 'twill take the edge o'th Kings faith off from what he says, and
with jealous eyes he will look upon his growing greatness; and when he is thus
shook, thus parted from the Cedar that shelters him, then let thy justice pour
a storm upon his head: And now by the power Melintus has given me I command
him deliver his honor for a time into my protection; this (if I have not
appeared too careless of mine own) you cannot deny me.


Melin. You have overcome me, take my honor which I have preserved through
thousand hazards, I freely give it you, and now rest secure I am yours for
ever; for my love and honor being gone, what remains is fit for nothing; I
will not meet this angry man; his insolence shall have justice on her side; and
I will give him cause to scorn me.


Clar. Melintus shoots his presents, and then they wound, not oblige; courtesies
done unwillingly is throwing the frozen into the fire, where too much heat
kills the charity, and proves but altering, not rescuing the danger.


Melin. Pardon, Madam, if you find me unvers'd in the way that leads to
dishonor; for though I submit to your reason, yet Seleucus nor the world (to
whom he will barely tell the fault) will know what argument withheld me.


Clar. Pray obey me once without dispute; and I hope this cloud is all that is
left of many that lowr'd upon our joys, and we shall see a clear evening yet to
crown our wishes. Farewell.


[Exeunt several ways. ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Seleucus. Seleu. HEnce Love, and thy pale dew of tears be gone; Revenge
and her beauteous purple, it is to thee I bow, Love cannot now reach my ends;
though at first I stalked with it, 'twas indeed a proper Nurse, and rocked the
Cradle while my designs were young; but now they walk alone waited on by my
resolutions and confident of my strength; I need not such her milky miracles,
to confirm my faith; nor ought the event (though ill) be laid to me; for to
dare speaks the great soul, not the success; since Prophets well seen in things
to come have been themselves o'retaken with an unknown doom; but stay, the
business now in hand requires my being present here. -- Now, Sir, you are
something slow in justifying, though quick in doing injuries; sure you Enter
Melintu. believe me the dog you called me, you would not have made me wait thus
else.


Melin. It Is true, injuries are things I am as slow to justify, as commit;
they are commonly the children of choler, and such bastard issue shame the
Parents; and if through weakness at any time I get them I hide them if I can
with satisfaction.


Seleu. Words are too near akin to heal words; your sword has a more certain
cure, and I repair to that, draw. -- Do you not understand the word? draw.


[Seleucus draws his sword. Melin. First hear me; that I came un-invited, and
now am going without taking leave, shows 'twas choice put me upon these
hazards, not necessity; and that I dare fight I have it written in my face,
here under my enemies hand, to witness; and such torn Ensigns tell the bearer
fled no dangers; let that satisfy it is not fear binds my hands, and yet I will
not fight.


Seleu. 'Twas the cause I see gave you fire; and I am ashamed to call that man
enemy which I must bid twice draw his sword, which do or I Will kill thee.


Melin. I tell thee I will not fight.


Seleu. You will not fight? By my life I Will kill thee then.


Melin. When I will not fight any body may do it; but when I will thou can
not; and once again I tell thee I will not fight, nor dare thou kill me.


Seleu. Not dare? why what have thou about thee that can protect thee from the
justice this brings?


Melin. Thou have that about thee that protects me; and though I hate thee yet
I can be just.


Seleu. Do me justice with your hand, your tongue has lost his power; draw your
sword, it is her proper emblem, or, By my anger, thou art lost; nor shall this
new kind of coward save thee; Turn, and do not tempt me, or, By him that rules
the day, I Will kill thy fame too with a cowards wound in thy back.


Melin. Thou dare not do it; I know thou will not take so little for thine
honor; it cost thee too dear to be sold so cheap as to take a naked life,
that is undefended, for it; thou see I am resolved not to fight to day; so
bound by a resolution that coward could not lose it, therefore in vain thou
tempt'st me.


Seleu. Why the devil did you take this resolution against me that long to
fight with you?


Melin. It Is but for a time.


Seleu. Will you then hereafter?


Melin. Yes, by all my hopes; and nothing but this resolution then in thee
shall protect one of us.


Seleu. Till this fit be over, then, I Will leave you.


[Exit. Melin. It Is strange, having both one business, our way should lie so
several, Claricilla, thy commands can put me into any form, that can bow me
thus.


ACT. II. SCEN. V.
Enter Seleucus and Carillus. Seleu. WAs the Prince in the garden when you left
him?


Car. Yes, my Lord; and he had newly parted with the King; he is this morning to
make his visit to the Princess; your Lordship is appointed by the King to
accompany him.


Seleu. You saw not Olinda since?


Car. No, my Lord.


Seleu. Go find her and tell her of this visit; bid her single her self from
the company, tell her I must speak with her this morning -- Claricilla will
think me very bold, to dare thus soon to press into Ezit Carillus. her
presence; but it is no matter; her thoughts have now no power to punish me that
have set my self free; nor will I again stand in fear of ought but that power
which does create cause as well as beget the fear; that power that made Fate to
be Fate, and yet his servant; there I will pay all that I have for fear; here
to tremble is to fear the Idol I my self have made.


[Exit ACT. II. SCEN. VI.
Enter Claricilla, and Olinda following her. Olinda. MAdam, the Prince is
without attended with Seleucus, and desires to kiss your Highness hand.


Clar. Wait him in; this Prince is in report a man of a noble soul, I guess his
business, and must with pain impose that which will sound what depth of honor
is in him. -- He comes. Enter Appius and Seleucus.


Appius. Now those clouds which thus long have hid your virtues, and that storm
is again blown over; so that your Highness begins to break like your self among
us; Appius is come, though unconfident in the success, laboring with ambitious
hopes to beg you will give the services of his life leave to wait upon your
happy days.


Clar. Ere your Highness proceed be pleased to hear a suit that I must blushing
make, and to your own ear only; and if you please to retire with me I shall
acquaint you with it.


Appius. Command me, Madam.


Seleu. Olinda, a word with you.


Olinda. This way then.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter Claricilla and Appius. Clar. SIR, 'twas his Counsel, thus, by a trust,
to oblige your Highness to be our friend, rather then by injuries (which has
been the common way of States) to decline your pretensions.


Appius. 'Twas charitably done not to let my hopes lead me too much astray; and
since it is to so gallant a Rival as Melintus, I shall without envy, though not
pain, lay down my hopes.


Enter Olinda, over-hearing their discourse. Clar. He Is now in Court, but yet
unknown; it is the stranger that yesterday made such way to my rescue; at first
I fled him that with such love pursued; for his disguise kept me ignorant who
it was; within I shall acquaint you with our design, and beg your counsel; and
sometime this night I would fain speak with him in the Garden.


Appius. I shall not fail to serve you.


[Exit. Olinda. The stranger! is he the man, and must you meet him in the
Garden this night? this shall to Seleucus; I Am sure of my pay, for I have my
reward already.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Seleucus. Seleu. I See it is neither so easy, nor so safe to be a
Villain, as I thought; it is true, wicked any fool may be; but to be a Villain
and Master in that Art, oh the baseness that we stoop to! the hated means, the
loathed subjects that with Chemists patience we must extract our ends through!
and when the work's done we have but whet the sword of Justice, and with our
own hands pulled down unpiti'd dooms. -- The thought strikes amazement into my
soul, which has not yet consented to my ills: What shall not I fall to, that
could consent, for the knowledge of a secret, to make my self the steps by
which a Whore climbed to her ambitious lust? the baseness of the act has
awaked my sleeping honor; and I Will be honest ere I Will again pay such a rate
for sin. No Love, 'its thy cruelty has begot this distraction in me. He lies
down on the ground.


Enter Olinda. Olinda. Ha! upon the ground? up, my Seleucus, up, I am yet
breathless; my Love in her descent has made such haste that it begot a fire in
the motion that had like to have burnt our Cupid's wings.


Seleu. What ailes thee? is it impudence, or distraction begets this boldness;
what is it that thou thus labour'st with, has it no name?


Olinda. It had a name, and 'twas called a secret whilst but by two known, and
Claricilla's secret; but it shall become a general knowledge, I overheard it
when she gave it to the Prince, and by this name, the only secret of her soul;
she is in love, and by honor engaged, Does that move you? when you know to
whom, your love will sacrifice her to your anger: It Is the st anger; and but
that her bashfulness could not name him aloud, I now might have told you who he
was, for she named him, and he is this night to meet her in the Garden; the
Prince is of their party too, and has promised to quit his pretension, and
only stays to serve her in her love; so there is but I faithful to Seleucus;
now, do I rave or no?


Sell. No, my Olinda; it is I that rave, and beg of one that lives upon another
alms.


Olind. Thus would I sacrifice the Gods should they scorn what I love.


Sell. Thou art my Goddess.


Olind. Will Seleucus then be just, and reward that faith that thus has flown
over those poisonous Plants, and from them with danger sucked this
honey-secret? Will he, I say, be just, and give me leave to unlade this
precious Dew in his gentle bosom, and there find my Hive when I return from
traveling in his service?


Sell. Thou shall have any thing, but be gone now, 'twill breed suspicion to be
seen with me alone: Art certain they are to meet to night?


Olind. Be gone! Seleucus, there was more discretion than love in that
Injunction. Urge me not to jealousy; for I that could betray a Mistress and a
Friend for love of thee, if injured, I would have thee know, for my revenge my
love shall go. But I hope better, and I obey.


[Exit Olinda. Sell. This the King shall know -- Yield at first blow! It Is
worshipping a stranger God, and a sin in honor though he were so -- But stay,
who are these? the Prince and the stranger. He, Enter Appius and Melintus. she
says, is of their party; as I could wish, I hope it shall ruin him too.


Mel. Be pleased to urge it as a thing you are displeased with, and that the
Princess made it her complaint, and desired your Highness would acquaint his
Majesty with it; and Sir, when you have completed this work which thus nobly
you have begun, and finished your creation, command us and our happiness as the
Creatures that owe their being to your favor.


Appius. Noble Melintus, when I have served you, 'twill but pay the expectation
your early faith gave me credit for.


Mel. Look, Seleucus! Sir, I hope his ears have not met our words. Your pardon,
Sir. I Will step off ere I am discovered; after I have this night waited on the
Princess in the Garden I shall in your Chamber acquaint you with all our
proceedings, and there hope to hear how the King entertains the complaint
against this great man; it is the first step to a Favourit's fall when the
Prince will hear complaints of him -- I kiss your hand.


[Exit Melintus. Sell. This Letter will make me seem not to have seen them;
Dissimulation do thou assist me, and I Will break as 'twere from a cloud of
thoughts; and chance that threw me into this way -- My Lord, the Prince,
whither so fast with your spoil? Methinks I see conquest in your eyes. How did
the Princess entertain your noble offer? Do you not find the path that leads
to her heart untrod by Lovers feet? Were not her Guard of blushes called to
defend her against your assault? Loves treaties, my Lord, are strangers to her
maiden ears.


Appius. Against impious men the Sanctuary is no Guard, else the reserved
modesty with the privilege of birth and beauty that wait upon the Princess
might have defended her against your saucy flames, which too late have aimed at
the top of thy Masters house; but that injury was not so great as this, that
thou durst think thy Poison would not break her Crystal, but with this
injurious hope believe she should conceal thy insolence, which I Will spread.


[Exit Appius. Sell. Ha! Is It come to this? either prevent this danger, or thou
art lost, Seleucus: The Prince is flying with my ruin to the King; Thanks yet
to his choler that thus has armed me. Passion is no deadly Weapon; we hear her
noise before she does the execution, and then we arm. Now, my brain, be ready
with excuses, thy woman's weapon, to defend me.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter King, Appius, and Attendants. King. IS it possible?


App. Sir, if you please but to go to your Daughters Chamber you shall yet
find the storm not laid which her anger raised, to think such a scorn should
be designed for her.


King. Some one go find Seleucus, and command him hither immediately; we'll
take him with us, and by all our Gods this poisonous ingratitude that swells
him thus ambitiously shall burst him.


[Within. Sell. I cannot stay, for I have earnest business with the King; Are
you sure he is not in the Lodgings? in your return you shall find me in the
Garden; if I meet him there -- Hold, Carillus, the Kings here.


[Enter Seleucus. King. Seleucus!


Sell. Sir, I have been this morning in search of you, I have a business for
your own ear only, let your Guard attend, Sir.


King. Yes, it shall stay. Noble Appius, your pardon, I Will meet you at my
Daughters.


[Exit Appius. Sell. This morning I have discovered --


King. So have I, that which thou shall rue, fond Wretch.


Sell. Sir!


King. Impudence, with what brow dare thou thus meet my fury? Think thou
to escape? Art thou again raising new Treasons ere the fire has consumed the
Sacrifice for our last delivery, again to put my preservation into the power of
a miracle only to relieve me? No, thou shall find thy ingratitude has
destroyed my mercy, and begot an anger that shall consume thee. Seize him.


[The Guard seize Seleucus. Sell. That you have the power of the Gods, and I am
subject to your Thunder, is confessed: but my innocence protect me; as yet I know
not the cause why it singles me out. It Is true, I came to see you dressed like
Jove, for now it is just you wear your Lightning, but not for me who have with
longing sought you to deliver the greatest service that ever yet my faith
pleaded reward for; but why you thus meet me in displeasure, Heaven strike me
if I can guess; nor do I believe I am guilty; for you proceed not with me as I
were a Delinquent, the worst of which are heard ere condemned: But I see you
repent your favors and desire my fall, which is the time I ought not to
outlive; and therefore by this wound I Will plead my faith and readiness to
serve.


[He offers to stab himself. King. Disarm him.


Sell. They cannot; but when I am gone you will hear a mischief my life might have
prevented.


King. Hold, or I shall conclude thy fear of deserved torture makes thee thus
by a sudden stroke execute thy self.


Sell. Fear? No, I fear butone more than a King trembles at, and that is the
Gods, and him; and to let your Majesty see I apprehend not Torture, thus I
throw away all dangers that my own act threatens; and now, Sir, be so just as
to let me know the cause of your anger e're it strikes.


King. Were not you this morning with my Daughter, and there made the
traitorous offer of your love?


Sell. Yes.


King. Yes! Dare thou avow it, and know how lately that danger threatened
our ruin in Silvander?


Sell. Will you be pleased to hear me? if I be guilty punish me; if not, give me
leave to tell you, a King can only cure such a wound as your suspicion, Sir,
has given my diligent faith, which has ever been watchful in your Majesty's
service.


King. Speak, let him loose.


Sell. Know, Sir, though I am amazed to find this news before me, I came now
from the Princess Chamber, drawn thither by an occasion; which if you please to
lend your ear to, I am confident you will say I had reason for what I did.


[They whisper, King. Can you prove this?


Sell. Can I prove it? Yes, Sir, I can prove it; but Jealousy is a Weed whose
Root lies so many ways that if once it take growth it is hardly dug out; and
this sad truth (if once suspected, and never confident) is fallen upon me, else
what I shall say would find a faith with you; but I desire not now to have my
words clear me; take but my counsel, and I shall give your Majesty the
satisfaction you desire; seem still to frown on me, and require not the
Princess company this night in the Court; the rest, Sir, in your ear. -- Will
this confirm you I am loyal, and by several They whisper. ways hunt your safety?


King. Come, Seleucus, this trouble shows thy loyalty; thou art my friend, and
shall ever have an interest here.


[Exeunt King and attendants. Manet Seleucus. Seleu. Yes, I will have an
interest in the Crown, whatever I have in thee; and now thou believ'st thou art
safe thy dangers but begin.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Tullius. Tull. It Is a brave clear night, and something may be attempted
Philemon asleep on the Stage.

He stumbles on Philemon.

from the Town, we must keep a strong watch to night. -- How now, who have were
here? rouse up, I say.


Phil. Who Is there? lie down, why do you kick me? ye gods! one would think this
bed were large enough; if the earth be not, where shall the wretched lie? that
thus you kick me out as if you wanted room?


Tull. Up I say, leave your snarling, you dog; sleeping in your watch?


Phil. If I am a dog, why should I be punished for obeying nature, the only
Deity that beasts bow to? if not, why am I refused the benefit of reason?


Tull. Are you grumbling? look to your duty; you will find you have use of other
thoughts else.


[Exit Tullius. Phil. Oh ye gods! why do you thus load a youth? I was not proud
when I was bowed to; nor ever with repinings did I bow to you; why then on my
freeborn soul do you lay the load of slavery, and thus let your justice sleep,
that she does not now guide my prayers; but suffers them to lose their way
'twixt heaven and my sufferings: which I have been so long acquainted with, that
I am now grown a kin unto my woes, allied unto my oar, where I have set, forced
to unwilling haste, sighing for my freedom, till through a thousand eyes I have
sweating wept my miseries: oh look down in time upon them, ere I yield to those
irreligious thoughts that tempt me to question my faith; for ye cannot blame me
if I grow weary of praying, when I find that mighty power that threw me here
want mercy to break the snare.


Enter Manlius and Tullius, bringing in a Slave that had stabbed the Captain.]
Man. Strike an Anchor through the body of the slave; he has not hurt you, I
hope.


Tull. No, h'as mist me.


Man. What urged the villain to this bold undertaking?


Tull. Unless the opportunity that the night afforded, and the neerness of the
Town made him attempt it for his freedom, I know not else.


Man. Look that to morrow early as the day the dog be sacrificed to the parting
shades, that their black may still be friendly to our deliverance; and do you
hear, let him be broke upon an Anchor, that, on Hopes Emblem, the wretch may
meet his despairing cross. -- When dogs thus fly at their Masters, it is just we
strangle them, neither their kind nor use considered; go, Tullius, let the
watch be set, and some good guard put into the wood to secure the Passage from
the Town.


Tull. It shall.


Man. Tullius, did the Pesant say the King was crowned again, and the Usurper
dead, and the Princess to be married to the stranger, Prince Appius, that came
in aid of the King; and that Seleucus has been in some disgrace to day?


Tull. So the fellow says, for certain.


Man. To morrow then we'll fit us with our disguise, and to Court we'll go; for
now virtue sits at Helm and holds the purse; gratitude will find some reward
for me that wished well to her power; for this night see the Galley at road,
and when the watch is set, to rest; and to morrow call at my Cabine.


Tull. I shall.


[Exit Tullius. Man. Lie you there, and let no body, without exception,
trouble, till I call, unless some dangers threaten, then give me notice. Speaks
to Philemon.


[Exit Manlius. Phil. Methinks, in that condemned slave I read mine own
fortune, whose cross fate has forfeited him to eternal bonds for stoutly
attempting his freedom; which if ever it comes within my power, here stands
another marked for sacrifice, if he fails in the attempt; for death frights not
me, nor binds the innocent, but comes to set them free; I cannot let it sink
with patience into my thoughts, I have not man enough, nor Religion to continue
an acquaintance with that virtue that says, endure: when I consider I was ^orn
a Prince by the consent of all, distinguished from a Chaos of common people,
created their head, and so stood the man of men, till this misfortune struck
me, in which I am not sure I shall have a burying place; for a slave can call
so little in this world his own, that the very earth he wears about him is not
his, nor can I command this handful, not this, not mine own clay: But lost like
yesterday; when my Masters Fiat comes, I fall and dissolve to the first Mass of
things. Lays his hand on his breast.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter Melintus, Claricilla, Olinda, and Timillus. Clar. SO, now leave us; and
if any body ask for me, say, I am laid to rest.


Olinda. I shall. -- And where you rest too.


[Exit. Melin. Dear Timillus, is Jacomo ready with the horses?


Timil. He is, and waits us at the Postern.


Melin. Let us not lose a minute then of this precious time; 'twill be a reward
for thy faith too, when they shall say Timillus had a hand in this great work:
prithee, let thy friendship secure the passage that leads from the Kings
lodgings.


Timil. So, now have I an honorable excuse to take cold with; it is a strange
bold venture he makes; and a confident virtue, that of hers, that dare trust
themselves in the hands of my opinion, when I am alone to guess how they mean
to employ this opportunity.


Melin. Madam, it is not the fear of my particular that makes me urge this sad
parting, but your interest which is joined to it; and when your Highness is
concerned, it is a civility to fear, and an obligation to doubt my joys; for
Claricilla knows despair is no sin in Loves Religion.


Clar. Let me not understand thee, nor let not reason bind up that you urge; oh
Melintus, it is the first time that ever I was grieved to hear thee in the
right; and you must pardon it; for though parting be the only way to confirm my
joy, I cannot consent at such a rate to buy my happiness.


Melin. Thus you increase the wished number of my bonds; the Prince until my
return will observe all your commands, and assist us in our escape, and by his
favor countenance the act; for Messina, if my Father commanded there in chief,
I could not hope a greater power then I am confident Pelius will allow your
worth when you arrive there; and e're this Moon has felt her change, I will
again attend you with the Galleys here.


Clar. Must you then be gone? and again with absence spi^ our loves into a
thread which is fastened to our fates; I hope that no distance may find the end;
say, must you go? must it needs be so?


Melin. I would there were not such a strict necessity, but that I might say,
no.


[She turns and looks on the Tree. Clar. Well, since it must be, resolved then,
but not contented, I submit unto my fate; and thou Lawrel-tree which so often
have been a witness of our sad parting, if within thy Barque the angry god has
with the trembling Virgin any of his passion hid, thou know what pain they
feel that with longing love follow their flying joys; and see, look, Melintus,
casting mine eye by chance, I have spied one of the witnesses of our infant
love; do you remember when we changed our characters, and with them printed our
faith on this yielding barque, 'twas then but a small scratch we gave; but now
like our miseries by time increased, it is in her tender side to a large wound
grown.


Melin. Why should we not for ever grow thus? why should She leans on his
breast. the gods with thunder part what themselves have joined? we that have
known but one wish, and to each others thoughts have parent been; why should
not we thus gazing sit, and tie with kind smiles soft fetters for the eyes? but
this cannot be; and therefore hear me pronounce mine own doom. Farewell, but
e're I obey this sad necessity let me on your fair hand print my faith, and
with holy vows bind my self to you for ever.


Clar. Oh hold, give me no contract, gentle Melintus; no ties but love; these
are bonds I scorn to throw on such who from mine eyes can go.


She lays her arms upon him. Enter Seleucus, betraying them to the King while
they are thus embracing. Seleu. Does this object satisfy, have I performed,
nor no?


[The King surprises them, and takes Claricilla away, Melintus sits in a maze.
King. Yes. Claricilla, this act, when thy story shall be written, will not
appear a kin unto the rest, that have had honor and duty still their guide,
and not thus lead astray by passion.


Clar. Sir, I must not be beaten from my strength here, though you frown; a
fault, I confess, but dishonor has no share in it.


King. Sir, you came a friend, and you are a stranger; nor will I while I
labor to punish commit a fault by being ungrateful; or break the laws of
hospitality, by laying hands upon you; only thus much, the injuries you have
done me and the Prince bid me tell you, if to morrows Sun set upon you within
my Court, his shades will bring yours upon you.


[Exeunt King, Claricilla, and Attendants. Seleu. Revenge, thou art prosperous,
and in my anger this is lost; Craft, be thou as friendly to my designs upon
that shallow Prince, and I alone stand fair for Claricilla still; I Will watch
how it works; oh how he will fume anon!


[Mel. is amazed, and lost in his rage a little while. Melin. The wounds that
amazement gives strike all our senses, and like lightning destroy without a
breach; and yet I see some food for, my Revenge; and whilst that fuel lasts
this flame shall not perish. Seleucus, come back, and let your friend stay.


Seleu. Carillus, stay; what, your fit is off then I perceive, and you can be
angry upon your own score, and fight when women are not by you.


Melin. Yes, thou shall find I can, fond man! and the flame that thou have
kindled in my breast I will husband so that it shall consume thee; and neither
hold it so high as to lose it in my choler, nor so low as to let patience tread
it out.


Seleu. Spare your threats; your words wound not; when I refuse to fight upon a
strange resolution then rant and rail, and I Will excuse it.


Mel. No, I am no Railer; I could wish thee rather a more glorious Enemy, on
whose name scandal of no kind had ever lighted; by my life I wish it, and that
thou were clear from this base act, whose weight has sunk all the honor that
swam in thy blood; and I am ashamed to think this necessity forces me to offer
one so lame in honor, and in passion blind, to the power I worship; for the
imperfect are not fit for sacrifice.


Sell. I hope you have none of those faults, but will become an Altar. Lead the
way, and you shall find Seleucus dares follow without being pulled to
slaughter.


Mel. Under the Woods side that borders on the Haven will be a fit place; it is
near the Town, and I believe free from company.


Sell. There I Will meet you then.


Tim. Hist, hist, to him. So, now they are come within my way ^laps his hands.
to put in: I am no good Talker; but when opinions are to be maintained thus, I
think I have as strong an Argument as another.


Excunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. VI.
Enter Claricilla and Olinda. Clar. HAste to Prince Appius, and desire him
immediately to do Exit Olinda me the honor to speak with me. O me most
miserable! this night has ruined me; my Fame which was like a Star, bright and
fixed in the Court till this sad hour; Treachery black Treachery in some body,
has made appear a Meteor; but if it portend my Melintus fall, my night at Court
is come too; and in that vast Element I Will shoot, and be no more remembered.


ACT. III. SCEN. VII.
Enter Melintus, Timillus, Seleucus and Carillus, severally. Tim. SEe, here
come two of the long-staff-men that struck so desperately under the Hedge to
night; I hope to apprehend one of them by virtue of this Warrant.


Mel. Bold and injurious Seleucus still.


Sell. Let your anger pass, and hear what I say, for this is the last talk I Will
have with thee what ere thou art; Know, since first thou crossed these eyes my
Jealousy and Envy have waited upon thee; and now I have gained my end; 'twas
to see whether Conquest grew upon thy Sword or no, when this (not used to lose)
should go forth thy Enemy and Rival; and therefore guard thee, and with thy
Sword only make reply.


Melin. It Is my wish, for words are not the weapons I fight with.


[They fight. Tim. Do you hear, Carillus, may not you and I fall to at this
feast before your Lord has supped?


Car. Yes, and be mine own Ca^ver too.


Tim. That I believe, for I ever took thee for a sawey Servingman.


Sell. I am lost.


[Seleucus wounded by Melintus. Mel. Does your load sink you? thy faults will
grow too heavy anon.


Sell. I know no fault but that I am unfortunate.


Car. Lie there Talker.


[Timillus falls. Tim. A pox upon thee, thou have don't.


Melin. Yield, or by my hopes in thy heart I Will write my Conquest.


[Seleucus falls. Sell. Strike, Dog; I Will perish ere I Will have so base a sin to
answer for.


[They struggle, and Carillus parts 'em, just as Melintus disarms Seleucus.
Car. Hold, or I Will write the same story here.


Mel. Ha! Timillus fallen? though it speaks his praise, my Friend calls for
revenge, and thus I bring it.


[They fight. Car. I fear no single arm.


Sell. Be prosperous, Carillus, and I will call thee Friend, the Saver Carillus
n^ounded, Seleucus sn^^^s. of my Fame -- 'twill not be. That wound has sent me
frowning to my home.


Tim. A pox of Fortune, have I escaped the Master so often to be served in thus,
like broken cold meat for the Serving-men? I find I cannot live, I begin to
have serious thoughts -- No, Faith, I am He strives t rise but ^a^not. gone. I
always feared such sober wounds as these; they are in such earnest I know
they will kill me, if they would endure a jest there were some hopes.


Car. Hold, if thou have honor, and tell me who thou art, that strik'st with
such a constant fortune.


[Melintus leaves Carillus and goes to Timillus. Mel. I have no leisure now --
O Timillus, speak to thy unfortunate Friend, whose acquaintance has never
brought thy faith to any thing but misery and dangers: How do? I hope thy
wounds are not mortal.


Tim. No, nor our troubles; would they were, that we might once see an end of
them -- But no more of this now. I hear a noise, and I know we shall be
pursued; therefore make haste Within Follow, follow. and fly.


Mel. For shame urge like thy self, if thou would have me take thy counsel;
bring my Friend into a danger, and leave him there? No, Timillus, we grew
Friends, and we will fall together


Tim. Leave me, and provide for thy safety, or by my life I Will betray thee, and
tell who thou art; nor will I, if thou stay'st, attempt the possibility of my
own cures. God's Death? because I could kill my Enemy, must I destroy my Friend?


Mel. Why thus passionate!


Tim. If Melintus loved me he would obey the passion of his Friend, and not
chide -- Hark, you will be taken, step into the Within Follow. Wood, and in
some Disguise you may come to Court.


Mel. Farewell, Timillus, I obey.


[Exit. Enter King, Appius, and Attendants. 1 Attend. This way they went, Sir,
and here lies one.


King. Seleucus slain?


Appius. And here lies Carillus.


King. Who Is the third?


Tim. A Bird of the same flight, that had worse luck than my fellows; for my
wings only broke, that I might live miserably, to make sport for the Fool that
laid the snare; Shall I never be so happy as to be knocked of the head when it is
to do me a courtesy?


King. The bodies are yet warm; bring them with all possible speed to the Town,
that no care may be wanting to save my Friend; bring him along too, he shall
find our love till he be well; I will not offer a ruin to my Friend; when
he is repaired he will scarce be a full satisfaction. Some other pursue the bold
Murderer; if he once come within my reach he shall find his Sword has no power
to protect him against that which my justice brings.


[They take up Timillus. Tim. So, thus much honor I am sure of; but how much
more I know not, do you my Friend?


2 Attend. No, Sir; and yet I think you will find what you deserve.


Tim. You Are courteous and liberal of your opinion, and therefore I will not be
sparing of mine; it may be I shall be honorably hanged for having a hand in
killing Seleucus.


2 Attend. It may be so.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Philemon presently after Tullius. Phil. WHat noise is this that thus
circles us? A noise within.


Tul. This noise is every where, and begirts us round; I Will go wake Manlius,
'twill be worth our care to search the cause.


Phil. Stand, who goes there?


Tul. I, Tullius; Have you waked the Captain?


Phil. No.


Tul. It Is time he were waked.


[He offers to go on, Philemon holds him. Phil. Hold.


Tul. How now!


Phil. 'Twas his command, that no man, without exception, should come to him
till he had notice, nor be called unless some danger threatened.


Tul. Did you not hear the noise?


Phil. Yes, but noise is no danger, nor will I call him.


Tul. You will not call him? Who am I that thou dare tempt me thus? Call him,
and call him quickly, or thou shall call thy last.


Phil. I serve but one Master, and him I will not call; nor shall you break his
rest while I can hinder it.


[Phil. stands in his way. Tul. Do not play with my anger; by all our Gods with
a wound I Will make my way; and it shall ly over thy belly (Slave) if thou
provok'st me.


Phil. Wounds are easily given to naked men; and thou will sooner bring 'em
than I fear 'em.


Tul. God's Death! braved by my Slave? Thus, Villain, and then I tread under my
feet thy scorned earth.


[Tullius draws. Phil. Help, Manlius, help.


[Phil. takes hold of Tullius Sword. Tul. Unloose thy hold, or by my vexed soul
I Will print Deaths cold Seal on thy Heart.


Phil. I will not loose it: O my Vow, to what strict Laws thou Tullius on the
ground, Phil. upon him. bind'st me; else here I would throw off my bonds, and
with thy own knife cut thy hated throat; Dog, thou art more a Slave than my
Chains can make me.


[While they are struggling, Enter Manlius, Man. Ha! what sudden cry was that
called for help? -- The Rhodian grapled? How Is this? and Tullius under? Let go,
or I Will part thee with death. Is this a posture for a Slave?


[Draws his Dagger Phil. No; if I would have been a Slave I had been safe, and
you it may be might have felt these wounds.


Man. Tullius, what mean these wounds?


Phil. Wounds are the food of Slaves, else I deserve not these for my faith;
but Loyalty is against kind in me, and therefore I am punished for obeying
your command, which was that no man without exception, should pass this way
till I had given you notice, which he would have done, and because I refused
him thus my faith's rewarded.


Man. Is this true?


Tul. In part it is; the Wood this night was full of noise, and I awaked with
the Alarm, would have given you notice, and he refused to let me pass, and
therefore --


Man. You would have killed him? -- Come, 'twas not well, such a piety as
faithfulness among Slaves is so scarce it ought to have been cherished not
punished. Every day by one act or other this Fellow begets my wonder, Honor
and Courage still striking in him -- Come hither; once again I command thee
tell me who He turns to Philemon. thou art, and by my life I Will set thee free.


Phil. I see you have honor, Sir, and therefore presume when you shall know I
am bound by a Vow never to disclose my self whilst I am in bonds, you will call
it Religion, not disobedience, when I refuse to tell.


Man. Will thou be faithful when thou art free?


Phil. I will be faithful though I am not free.


Man. Vow that, and I will immediately knock off thy Chains.


Phil. Arm but my hand, and set me free, and then I Will take a Vow; and having
sworn faith to thee all the earth's wealth shall He calls one to take off his
chains, and gives him a Dagger. not make me false.


Man. Here, by this I manumize thee; and if thou prov'st a Gentleman,
henceforth thou art my Friend, however thou art free.


Phil. And, Sir, since your pity has thus made my joys put off my fears that I
should have fell forgotten, and returned to my Mother Earth like her common
Issue -- Thus in thankfulness with eyes to Heaven bent, and a soul full of
gratitude, I vow a constant faith to virtue, and --


Enter Melintus, pursuing a Soldier, who cries help; Melintus kills and
disarms him. Mel. To what strange fate am I reserved, or by what sin have I
pulled down this Curse of a general hate that all paths I tread are armed
against me? Ha! more Enemies? Nay then, Melintus, yield, for it is visible thou
warr'st with Heaven.


[He spies'em. Man. What art thou that with such pains have to this place
hunted thy ruin, and thus with injurious wounds in the dead of night awaked
our anger?


Mel. Prithee go forward with thy injury; such another Charm will call back my
anger, and then I shall be safe; for it has ever yet been prosperous, though
that success made me unfortunate.


Man. Leave thus vaingloriously to urge your former success, for 'twill be no
ground now to build a future conquest on; and therefore yield thy Sword, and
quickly, before I command it and thy head; Know my power here rules even thy
fate.


Mel. Yield my Sword? By what other privilege do I hold my life among my
Enemies? Prithee look upon me, and if thou can read these Characters, they will
tell thee I was not born to yield; and though Mel. shows his wounds. thou art
the glorious Master of the sport, and I unfortunate by a cross fate am hunted
into the Toil where dangers on all sides begirt my innocence, yet with the Lion
I dare be angry with my bonds; and although I may become thy Prey yet I will
not be thy scorn.


Man. I Will dispute no longer; Seize him; if he resist, in his heart seal the
first stroke of thy freedom.


Phil. goes toward him, and knows him. Phil. Ha! Melintus!


Mel. He named me; What art thou that call'st me by my name? Ye Gods, is misery
so near akin that by instinct the wretched know me?


Man. How now! 'what do you muze on? Had you daring only while you were
unarmed?


Phil. No, 'twas a consideration of the baseness of the act, not fear, made me
stop, and the remembrance that I am free held me from staining that maiden
liberty the Gods have sent me with so base an act as to strike where there is
three to one: besides, his posture and his habit speak him a Gentleman, and his
misfortunes rather to be pitied than increased.


Mel. A help from Heaven if this be real.


Man. Slave, and ungrateful, thou shall find thou have too soonmention'd thy
freedom; Fool, only free in hope; and this act has but increased thy load of
chains. Curse thy self for thy increase of miseries shall make thee find
thou art more a slave then ever.


Phil. Do not deceive thy self; look there and here. -- And Points to chains,
and shows his Dagger. ere thou art lost in thine anger, hear this truth I
speak, he that is master of this and will become a slave must be a coward too;
and now I Am armed I scorn to ow my freedom to any but the gods.


Man. Death, dog do thou brave me with my courtesy? draw, They both draw
and run at! hilemon. Tullius, my thirsty rage will be quenched with nothing but
the slaves blood.


Melin. Heaven! for ought I know we are by thy direction thus cast two to two;
if not, I Am sure by honor we are -- here, take this sword.


[He runs in between'em, and gives Philemon the Soldiers sword. Phil. Now,
Tullius, thou shall see how mortal thy power is, which so like a god thou
wear'st among thy slaves. Revenge and freedom guide me to thy ruin; and you,
Sir, strike to prevent the use of such an opportunity; a vow forbids me to tell
you who I am -- Now the wound that thou basely gav'st me when I was bound
Speaks to Tullius. and naked shall be revenged.


Tull. I have but few words.


Man. I am your choice then.


Melin. As it happens. They fight, Tullius falls. Philemon leaves him, and runs
to Melintus and parts'em.


Tull. I am slain, and by my Slave bound for ever.


Man. Nay, then I Will smiling fall now I have my revenge; for I see thou were
born to be a slave, and all thy acts of honor were but distempers in thee; and
now thy nature is strong thou appear'st thy self a slave in thy soul; come,
what stays thee, I have a breast so clear it defies thy Poniard, Traitor.


Phil. No, I was born free, and Manlius's rage once over he will say he has
injured me: -- And, Sir, as I drew my sword against my Master when Honor bad
me; so when you shall seek To Melintus. to make me faulty, I am your enemy; and
therefore attempt no farther this man's danger, it is not safe.


Man. My wonder waits upon all this fellows acts.


Melin. What art thou that thus in less then a man hides more then a god?


Phil. What am I? a soul with her old clothes on, a slave with wounds and
crosses torn; and yet in better fortune I have known your face.


Melin. If thou have mercy in thee tell me who thou art.


Phil. Mark me well, do thou not see thy self here? not yet? -- Now I am sure
thou do in these Crystal drops; friendship will guide Melintus to know
Philemon. He weeps ^


Melin. Philemon! Oh ye gods! new weights to sink me!


Phil. Oh! it is a powerful rod that Melintus friendship strikes with; a
thousand miseries have smote upon this rock; but never any that made water
issue through till now.


Melin. Oh Philemon, Philemon, what cannot friendship do? it is from her living
springs this dew falls.


Man. Melintus and Philemon! good heaven, what change has begot this misery?
Oh noble Princes, upon my knees I beg, when Manlius kneels to Melintus and
Philemon. your surprised joys are over, you will shower a pardon upon unfortunate
Manlius.


Melin. Manlius! is this Manlius? he was Claricilla's friend.


Phil. It Is Manlius, and I hope a fair day will break from this bloody evening.


Melin. Your pardon, Sir, or here upon my breast return the wounds my rage
directed against yours.


Man. Repeat it not, Sir; you make me but call to mind my shame, which I must
ever blushing wear when I remember a slave could look further into honor then
my self.


Phil. Oh Melintus, I have a story for thee, that we shall weep out together.


Melin. When I look upon thee, I am distracted to think the gods would consent
thus to let their temples be ruined, and virtue always walk naked like truth's
Emblem, while better fates clothe the wicked.


Phil. Dear Melintus, let not the sense of my misfortunes urge a consideration
from thee at the rate of sin, nor dare those powers which I know thou fear.


Melin. I have done, noble youth; yet when I look upon thee, joy and amazement
will seize me, I have strange things to tell thee, but this nor time nor place.
-- Who is this that thus unfortunately met thy anger?


[Turns to Tullius that lies wounded by. Man. A stout and grateful fellow;
'twas the Captain that saved me when I was doomed to death by the Usurper,
Silvander, 'cause I designed Claricilla's freedom.


Melin. He stirs; heaven, I hope, will not let the guilt of one accidental
fault hang upon this evening to cross our joys.


Phil. I am sorry, since there dwelt such honor in him, that he proved my
enemy; this was the Pirate took me at Rhodes, in that unfortunate fight where
we were parted.


Man. Pray help him aboard my Galley, where we may all repose until to morrow;
and resolve what is to be done in this new change in Sicily.


Phil. Lay thy hands here, Melintus, for these bonds can only set Philemon free.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Appius and Claricilla. Clar. I Have done; passion can be a friend to
none, she is so unconstant; give her way, and she destroys her self; if I had
been so fortunate to have spoke with you last night, I had prevented this sad
chance; for I knew Melintus's anger would take a dangerous leap, when by
amazement he had contracted it.


Appius. If I could have feared such a danger, I should not have been so absent
with the remedy; but I am not satisfied how it was discovered by the King; yet
if civility had not prevented me ere now I had spoke my fears; and long since
said, beware of Olinda.


Clar. Olinda! she betray me! it cannot be, it is such a common fate I blush to
think it; I cannot fear a punishment that comes such a road way; and yet I Will
observe her: but pray what said Timillus, was Melintus wounded?


Appius. Not dangerous, some slight hurts he had, and upon our approach he
took covert in the Wood; Timillus says he is resolved in some disguise to
attempt to speak with you; and my counsel is to send some one that is trusty in
search of him.


Clar. I shall; and then if you please we'll walk into the Garden.


Appius. I Will wait upon you.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter Melintus, Philemon, Manlius, Ravack, all, but Manlius, in Slaves habits.
Phil. I Rejoice that this day has proved so fortunate as to bring your youth a
freedom with less sadness, then last nights storm threatened.


Rav. Sir, my safety is a debt I owe your watchful mercy, that thus amongst the
earliest of your joys could let your noble pity hunt for so lost a thing as
Ravack.


Melin. Now we are arrived we have no spare time to clothe truth fine,
therefore give my naked faith a hearing; I am confident you will not refuse to
take our fortunes in this design, whose innocence, though we are thus forced to
hide with the marks of guilt, and slaves habits, yet know there is so much
justice on our side, that though we fall in the attempt, and this haste prove
but running to embrace the stake, yet we shall in our stories be distinguished,
and live in the glorious shine which breaks from the Brows of Honors Martyrs.


Rav. I am but one, and I Will not say I shall be fortunate; but I am certain I
shall attempt any thing that may speak my gratitude.


Man. Give me leave to break this discourse; and since you are pleased to trust
me with this service let me not lose time; but while this expectation is in the
Court let me see whether I can walk unseen, or no; and because Seleucus danger
was only loss of blood, they will be more intent about him then if he had
fallen; I Will be gone, the day grows old, in the Garden you say it is likely I
shall find her, and the Prince is a young man, fair hair'd.


Melin. Yes.


Man. I am instructed.


[Exit Manlius. Phil. It Is the mind I see that binds or sets us free; for that
being satisfied we have made our fears our sports, and thus mask in our
miseries; but, by my life, the earnest they once were in makes me start to
think thee thus miserable in jest.


Melin. Philemon's love is more fortunate then Melintus; for it sinds kind ways
to express it self, while I unfortunate only wish and cry how fain I would
rejoice in the lasting knot, which we have thus triply tied: By blood, by love,
by miseries allied.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Manlius, Appius, and Claricilla. Man. THis place returns my forgotten
miseries, by calling to mind how happy once I was; but who are these?


Appius. Who Is that that walks there?


Clar. I know not, is he not of your acquaintance?


Appius. No, Madam; walk on, and mind him not.


[He follows' em. Clar. Who would the man speak with all?


Appius. What would you, friend? would you speak with the Princess?


Man. Yes, Sir; Madam, I am one that wants, but cannot beg; yet when I have put
off my blushes, be pleased to cast your eye upon a Soldiers scars, and pity a
Gentleman bowed by misfortunes, not faults, to this wretched lowness; if then
your bounty find not a charity, your pardon, and I am gone.


Clar. A Soldier is the god I worship, and to him I offer this charity. --
Here take all that at this time I have about me; pray, Gives him a purse. of
what Country are you?


Man. The name of Soldier is such a common Theme to beg with, and a disguise
so many cheat under, that I should not dare ask like my self, but that I can
show under the honored hands of those Commanders where I served, who and what
I am; and had it been my fortune to have met the brave Princess, Melintus, and
Philemon here, the service I once did them they would not have seen unrewarded.


Clar. Prithee softly; do thou know Melintus and Philemon? say, and be not
amazed I ask thus hastily; where did thou know them? gentle Soldier, speak.


Man. Yes, Madam, I do know 'em; and here under their hands I have to show the
service I did them, which if you please you may read.


[He delivers her Melintus 's Letter, she reads aside. Appius. Prithee has't
of late heard of Philemen, or can thou tell whether he be alive or no; or
can thou give any account of Melintus lately?


Clar. Oh yes, yes, he can; read there and satisfy your self. Oh noble
Manlius, where is Melintus, where is the Galley, where is Philemon? why do I
stay, cannot you guide me, will not you guide me, will not Prince Appius go? I
am resolved I will, and be miserable no longer here, where Religion,
Friendship, Duty, Love no harvest bring; all my endeavors here as vainly beat
the air, as the Impostors beads that fall without a Prayer; say, shall we go?
will you remove me from this place so full of danger, to my friends? look, he
writes to me to come, and shall I stay? no, no, Melintus, I obey; and were it
to shrink into the earth I Will meet thee, and no longer with my prayers protect
this ungrateful place from the punishment her treacheries call down. Let fools
like Beads-men to the Altar bow for others sins; I Will pay none but mine own
vows.


Appius. We must follow her, Sir, and within counsel or charm her passion.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. V. SCEN. IV.
Enter Seleucus, Surgeon, and Servants. Seleu. IS there no hope of Carillus
life?


Surg. No, my Lord.


Seleu. Will Timillus escape?


Surg. Yes, my Lord, his wounds were slight.


Seleu. But he shall not, nor shall fortune have power to add another sickly
week to his hated days, wait all without. -- My hopes are blasted, nor must I
expect ever to gain my ends by fair means from Claricilla, I have woond up her
hatred to so great height; and 'twere folly to hope a peace from a woman crossed
in her love; no, no, policy or force must gain the pleasure I am at. -- Who Is
He knocks. there?


[Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, the King.


[Enter the King. Seleu. Oh Sir, hide me from my shame, or my blushes will not
let me look upon you; the disgrace brands me with coward for ever, that I
should be overcome when nothing but a Traitor struck; a thing which ought to
have been the scorn, not fear of honest men when they are armed.


King. Quiet thy self, and be not troubled at such a scorned subject; I come to
tell thee ere this shame be over, while I can with justice frown, I would have
Claricilla married; and how to work our ends we'll now resolve.


[Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, there is a Seaman without desires to speak with
you; he says he has earnest business that concerns the State.


King. Admit him.


[Enter Manlius. Man. Diffimulation, thou that so often have been prosperous in
thy attempts upon the innocent, once let virtue owe thee for a service.


Seleu. What Is your business, Sir, that so hastily requires a hearing?


Man. Ha! the King! I must not know him; Sir, be pleased to command your
servants off, and I shall whisper a service shall claim a reward, which I will
not require till it be perfect.


Seleu. There needs no whisper here; for if it concern the Kingdom speak it to
the King.


Man. The King! thus low I beg your pardon, Sir; and then give me leave to ask
whether it be worth your care, or no, to have He kneels. in your power the
stranger that fought with my Lord Seleucus.


Seleu. softly.


King. Do thou know where he is? can thou direct my anger which way to
seize the Traitor? if thou can propose thine own reward, and take a Kings
word, thou shall have my power to effect it.


Man. Sir, I will not bargain; but in snort, thus; I have been faulty; and a
Pirat speaks the kind; but 'twas while the fault was in fashion here, and a
thief (Silvander) wore the Crown; your pardon for my past faults is the reward
I beg for this service; which if I were not confident I could do I were mad
thus to wake your anger with a deluded hope. But to the business; early this
morning there came to my Galley (which now rides in the haven) two strangers,
as they pretended, that had unfortunately in a duel slain one that had a near
relation to your Majesty, and by many arguments pleaded my protection; which at
first sight their miseries engaged me to, and I undertook to serve them: one of
them (the fair-hair'd-man) gave me a Letter to deliver to the Princess, from
whom he says I should have great rewards if I would be faithful; I undertook
it; and if this may procure my peace, when you please to command me, they are
dead.


Seleu. The Letter, prithee let us see the Letter; it is he for certain, but who
the second should be!


King. I cannot guess.


Seleu. Thy pardon, and a reward for thy faith, upon my life, thou shall
receive.


King. Have thou the Letter?


Man. Yes, Sir.


[He delivers the King the Letter. King. Ha! Melintus and Philemon, their hands
subscribed to this treason; see Seleucus, it is Melintus and Philemon that in
disguise have waited our destruction; the gods are just still, and now from the
height of all their impious darings have let them fall into our punishments;
look, they urge Claricilla to an escape by the assistance of this honest
Soldier; they assure her she may safely make it, and call all this treason
flying from slaughter; assist me, Seleucus, that I may invent some strange
torture to afflict their falsehoods.


Seleu. Is this possible?


Man. Work on, Mischief, till their rage has blinded them; that in the dark I
may the easier lead them to their ruin. Aside.


Seleu. Melintus and Philemon, it is no new danger, this; my rage distracts me;
and in the strength that anger lends me I can perform all you can require from
a sound and healthy friend; but do it quickly, Sir, before I am unbent; and
thus by her assistance reach their ruin.


King. It cannot be she should consent to my destruction.


Seleu. It cannot be! then he were a fool, and only sowed dangers, to reap
dangers; think you he would lose his heaven to place another there? no, it is
visible, he loves; and that has been the cause moved all his darings; and that
he loves the Princess, does that start you? call to mind the surprise in the
garden, what rage will that meeting fill your breast with, when you shall know
it is no aerie, hopless, single Love; no Cupid with one Wing that threatens now
as when Silvander struck, these have made the imperfect Boy a perfect god
betwixt 'em; and with return of eternal faith have given both wings and eyes,
and direct by their bold souls; what to do is now upon the wing, and flies with
more certain danger in your Court then death, or fire.


King. This is a dangerous truth; and if my Daughter consent to their desires,
they dye.


Seleu. To be secured of which, seal this Letter, and deliver it this honest
man; and let him deliver it to your Daughter, and urge her answer, which when
he has, let him return with it to your Majesty; this will guide your justice
which way to steer; and your anger shall only find the guilty; and the act
being just, consequently it is safe; for the guilty have no revenge to follow
their fall.


King. I am resolved, if she consent they fall; dispatch him with the Letter,
and let me have an answer at my Chamber.


Seleu. Sir, now you consent to be safe, be not troubled, but leave the rest to
me. -- Now to our business, I Will immediately Exit King. send a servant for a
woman of the Princess, my creature, from whom I have daily intelligence; she
shall get you an opportunity to deliver the Letter; her name's Olinda; and to
her I Will address you; to be false now is to be faithful.


Man. And that makes me so false; but stay, Sir; I have a mind to make you
indebted to me for a greater benefit then you dream on.


Seleu. Whither tend'st thou?


Man. To assure you I intend to be faithful, and to oblige my self; to make
which good I Will put my life into your hands; and if you dare obey my
directions, I Will propose away that with safety you may reach your revenge; a
Crown, and Claricilla.


Seleu. Claricilla! can thou propose a way to gain her? let but that appear,
through fire and water, opposed dangers, greater then cowards fears create I Will
fly to embrace it.


Man. Within I Will instruct you, and then I Will obey the Kings directions for the
Letter; which will be one step to advance our plot, and if it thrive, what I
shall be I Will leave to your own bosom to resolve.


Seleu. What thou shall be? why, thou shall be my bosom.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. V.
Enter Appius and Claricilla. Clar. I Wonder he stays so long; I am afraid his
reason will not prevail with my Father and Seleucus; and though I was by
strength of your argument persuaded to it, yet I am sorry I consented to let
them know it is Melintus whom they pursue, a name already subject to their hate:
but heaven I hope will direct all.


Appius. If I were not assured that Manlius were honest, I should not have
ventured thus to persuade you to discover where your health lies; but when I am
secure that those in whose power he is will with their lives protect him; and
his discovery is only a bait to draw his enemy into his power; I must again
desire you will with patience attend the issue of what is well designed,
however it may meet a cross.


[Enter Manlius. Man. Oh Madam, I am laden with joy; and the strangeness of the
burden makes me thus sink in the way; I have discovered who it is that betrays
you, it is Olinda; Seleucus made it his boast; but you must not yet take notice
of it, but seem to rely upon her faith as a means of your escape, which is
consented to by all, under a hope that they shall seize you and your friends
together; I cannot tell you all the particulars now; only thus much, our
designs have taken as I could wish; this Letter by their consent is returned to
you; had you seen the care your Father took that the violence the seal met
might not be perceived, you would have laughed; they expect your answer, and I
have promised to bring it immediately, which must be, that you will meet
Melintus this evening without delay, your woman only in company; and to be
received from the Garden-wall; this being dispatched I Will to the King and show
it him, and there make all sure; Sir, you must be pleased to mingle your self
in the presence; and there cheerfully accept any Proposition the King shall
make, which shall only be what we resolve on within; and then I Will to my boat,
and there in smiles pitch the bloody toyls, wherein we'll take these hunters,
and make them our prey.


Clar. Lose no time, for heaven's sake, it is a strange torture; do not you, nor
you, feel it? thus to be delaid in the path that leads to brave Melintus.


Man. Madam, we'll lose no time; be you ready to obey yours, and I Will strictly
observe my part; and I hope the next thing we discourse of will be the
sacrifice due to heaven, for our deliverance.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. VI.
Enter Melintus, Philemon, and Ravack. Melin. It Is about the time that Manlius
bid us expect his return; if we be so happy as to see Claricilla, what kind of
habit will thy joy wear? I am afraid mine will be clothed in a paleness, for I
cannot promise my self strength enough to bear such unexpected happiness.


Phil. Prithee think not of it, let it steal upon us; I find I have not man
enough to meet her without trembling; the very thought has struck a coldness
through my blood; and now you have told her that I love, I could easier dye for
her then speak to her; for though my love has none, yet I shall still have a
guilt about me when I but look or speak to her.


Melin. Dear Philemon, we believed thee lost when I told the story; and I did
it that thy friendship might live in her noble mention.


Phil. Sir, your pardon for that we entertain ourselves when you stand by, to
whom methinks Love should not be a stranger.


Rav. I have a story too, but this no time to tell it.


Man. Noble Princes, do 'you not find me strangely altered with the joy that
now possesses me? the Princess is well, and salutes you both, and the Prince
kisses your hand.


Mel. Prithee let us partake the joy; Will the virtuous Claricilla come? Say,
Have we an interest in this joy too?


Man. Yes, but I have a thousand things to tell you, which if you will attend
and follow my directions, we shall ere to morrow Sun see all our wishes
crowned; but let us in, for we lose time, the day will be too short to bound
our business in; and only thus much know, we but the metal bring, the Gods
will have the way, and form to our deliverance the work of their own hands.


Mel. Let us softly follow, and give thanks with hearts that upwards look; for
gratitude is to mercy both the Bait and Hook.


[Exeunt. ACT. V. SCEN. VII.
Enter Seleucus, Solus. Seleuc. THis Soldier was sent from Heaven I think to
take care of me, all things run so even that he takes in hand; the Princess
has consented, the King I have persuaded to go in person and surprise her, the
Prince too will bear them company, and what then? -- My joys want a name;
Melintus, Philemon, and the King, must die, Their fate which is, I have said it.
The Prince shall live, but first I will show him Death to engage him in my
action, upon no other condition shall he wear his head. O the several habits
their humors will be in that Rage, Envy, Fear, and Amazement will breed in
their wretched thoughts, when they shall find my words pronounce their doom,
possess me of Claricilla, whose beauties increased by the sweetness of force
will make me more a King than all the power that a Crown can give. But I lose
time, and neglect my part in my own affairs; the King and Prince I must see
meet at the place, where they must stand but as Witnesses to the receipt of all
my part in Heaven, a Crown and Claricilla.


ACT. V. SCEN. VIII.
Enter Melintus, Philemon, and Ravack. Phil. THis is the place he appointed we
should wait for him, and it is much about the time he bid us expect him; if they
come we shall profess a joy we hoped not; he brings revenge along, whose fruits
the Gods have been pleased to feast with, and the sweets we see makes them from
us Mortals with fiery injunction still enclose the Tree.


[Enter Manlius. Mel. Hark, I hope he comes, the Moon is friendly, it is he.


Man. Are you ready?


Omnes, Yes, yes.


Man. Be resolute then, and still, for they are coming.


Enter King, Appius, and Seleucus. King. Are we right?


Sell. Yes, Sir.


King. Where Is the Soldier?


Sell. He Is stepped before.


King. Sir, I refrained to tell you what the occasion was till now, because I
was ashamed to let you know my Daughters fault till you might be a witness of
it, and then you would not wonder at my displeasure, when you perceive she
could so put off her honor as to leave me lost in my promise to your self, and
hope of a wished Heir to succeed me here.


Appius. Sir, I hope some mistake has begot this doubt; the Princess ever
promised a fair return of love to your Majesty, and I shall be glad to find
you are deceived.


King. No, Sir, it is too true; for had not Seleucus his faith been watchful
this night she had made her base flight into the loathed embraces of a Traitor
and a Subject, nor does she yet know she shall be prevented.


Appius. I am sorry, Sir, your doubts have so much reason to build upon.


[Manlius whistles. Sell. We are called.


Man. This way, your hand.


Sell. Manlius, do they know how to distinguish me?


Man. Yes, I have given them a Sign.


[He leads the King and Seleucus, and delivers 'em to the Slaves. King. Is it
long to the time she appointed?


Man. No, Sir, it is the hour she commanded me to wait; one of you look out, and
if you spy a fire call, that we may approach to the Garden-wall with the Boat.


Phil. I go.


[Exit. Sell. If it be possible let Olinda fall by the board, I Would have her
dead, she will be talking else.


[Enter Philemon. Phil. I have made a Light from the Princesses Window.


Manl. Quickly then set to the Wall; and do you hear Rhodian?


[They whisper. Phil. Leave that to me.


[Enter Claricilla and Olinda above. Clar. Do think they will come? Do thou
believe I shall be happy? My Love was ever of her bliss afraid.


Olind. You need not fear, I am confident your thoughts will be prosperous, I
hear the water dash. Who Is there, the Soldier?


Man. Yes, it is I. Who Is there, Olinda?


Olind. Yes, and the Princess.


Man. Come to the next corner, we are all ready, be speedy.


Exit. Enter King, Appius, and Seleucus; to them Manlius, and Claricilla. Man.
You are safe, the Slaves are the men I told you of; your Father, Appius, and
Seleucus are all here; but be confident.


Sell. Stand close till they be off the Wall, and Olinda come, for she is guilty
too.


Enter Manlius, Melintus, Philemon, and Ravack. Man. Fallen by the board, and
not to be found? God's Death, Slave, thy life shall answer the neglect.


Phil. She perished by her haste, no fault of mine.


Man. Leave your prating, Sirrah. Madam, your pardon for this unfortunate
accident, your Maid is lost, fallen by chance by the board, and drowned; I
should not dare to look you in the face after this but that I am confident I
shall show you other Friends that are as dear to you.


Clar. My Maid lost! O set me back again, this ill omen foretells a greater
danger.


Man. Can there be danger to Claricilla where these Friends are?


[Discovers the King, Appius and Seleucus. Clar. Ha! Traitor to my Love and me,
What have thou done?


King. Thou art a Traitor, unworthy, no more a Daughter, but the sin and shame
of my blould; Fool that thou art, could thou thou believe that thy base
passion could walk id so close a disguise that my anger could not find it: no,
thou art deceived; and to urge thee to despair, know, thy obscure Paramours,
Melintus and Philemon, (the two Wolves to my heart) thou have thus with safety
cut away, put off to the shore, and there thou shall behold their ruin.


Manlius stands by the King, Philemon goes to Claricilla, Ravack to Appius,
they seize them. Sell. Yes, Put off, that is the Word, and then put off hope, and
in amazement behold the Lightning that is wrapped in this swollen cloud, which now
breaks, and in death shoots your several fates.


King. Heaven, thou art just; and it is equal to let me fall in the design I
laid to destroy those noble youths; but for thee, I will not look upon such an
hated Traitor when I am so near my home.


Sell. No, you must be witness first to the Marriage of this Princess, then you
shall both be a Sacrifice to our Hymen.


Clar. Thy wife? I smile upon thee; thou art so base a thing thou could never
find my anger yet; my scorn was ever strong enough to strangle thy hopes.


Sell. Anon 'twill be my time to smile when died in thy Father's blood, my
Revenge shall force all their Sweets from thee which I will gather in the
presence of thy Paramour; nor shall he or these have liberty to die before I
have enjoyed thee; but that act once past the Earth shall not redeem their
Lives; Do you perceive how small a share you are like to have in this Kingdom?


Appius. I am glad to see thee grown to such a height of sin; for now my hopes
tell me the Gods will not suffer such a Dog to bay them long, their Lightning
will shoot thee, Monster.


Man. Sir, stay not to talk, but away to Neptune's. Temple; when we have
performed what you resolved there, then to the Gally, and end your hunt.


Sell. Bind them then, and let us be gone.


ACT. V. SCEN. IX.
Enter Timillus above, Jacomo below knocking. Tim. Who Is there?


Jac. It Is I, Jacomo; we are lost if you stay this night, your Friends aboard
are betrayed to the King, and the Princess that was this night to meet him is
surpised in her journey by the treachery of a Soldier that they trusted; and
if you attempt not your escape you are lost; your Window's large and stands
upon the Haven; if you can swim, this night leap in, and I Will be ready on the
shore to receive you, with dry Clothes and Horses, to convey us to our safety;
if you stay you perish.


Tim. Nay, I can swim, but the season is somewhat too cold for that pleasure; I
could be glad to have the wounds the mad Dog gave me cured without being
drenched in Salt Water; but however if you will assist me, I Will leap far enough.


Jac. What hour shall I expect you?


Tim. At Twelve.


Jac. Till then Farewell.


[Exit. Tim. There Is some comfort yet, where there is a way, when leaping forth
a Window can do it; Well, if I get free if ever I come into any company that
think it lawful to love any woman longer than a man has use of the Sex, they
shall geld me. By this hand I have lain with a hundred unsound Wenches with
less danger than I have looked upon this wooing, this scurvy honorable
Matrimony, which is so dangerous a thing the very standers by are not safe. I
must swim but for wishing well to it; but from this time either Melintus shall
quit his honorable way to his Loves, or I Will leave him to the honorable
dangers.


ACT. V. SCEN. X.
Enter Seleucus, King, Melintus, Manlius, Ravack, Appius, Philemon, Claricilla,
and a Priest. Seleuc. STand, now Priest do your office.


[He take, Clar. by the hand Clar. Has this impious Traitor bound the hands of
Justice, that thus she lets him proceed to mischief, and will not in her own
battlestrike? Must the innocent fall and none defend them?


Phil. Yes, fair one, and in their usual way show their power, which thus from
the meanest of the earth Heaven has raised me a Guard for your Virtues.


[Philemon draws his Sword. Sell. Ha!


Phil. Who is so much a Slave that he can let this sin chain him for ever?


Man. How Is this?


Phil. We that have together born our miseries, and with a harsh fate worn out
our weary days, have not amongst them all met one that will ly so heavy on us
as this base act if we assist the Traitor.


Rav. Sir, be free, and let honor only draw your Sword.


Ravack releases Appius, they draw, as Seleucus attempts Manlius sets a Dagger
to his breast. Sell. Kill that Traitor, Slave.


Mel. Free the King -- Fool, can thou yet read the miseries thy hated life
shall feel? Here Melintus tells thee what they are.


[Manlius undisguises himself. Sell. Melintus!


Mel. Yes, Melintus, whilst Philemon and Manlius triumph in the Victory their
Loyalty has gained over thy insulting treacheries -- Sir, to you I kneel for
pardon, for thus venturing to threaten dangers; all else are acquainted with
the Plot we laid to discover to your abused trust this wretched Monster.


[Rav. seizes Seleuc. Clar. The Prince, Sir, was of Council in all we did.


Mel. And we have his consent, Sir, to be happy.


King. Of all I ask a pardon whom my doubt has injured; and I Will no longer
cross your joys, you have my consent, and Heaven crown your wishes; but for
thee, thy villainy shall destroy thee.


Sell. Madam, to your virtues which my mischiefs still have hunted thus low I
bow, and when with repentant tears I have washed the way let my last breath
find your faith. That I loved the rate I would have paid speaks how much; and
since from him I derive these miseries, by his power which you have bowed to I
beg and conjure your mercy that it may in pardon find me; and then with a
wound here I Will give Balm to those under which my honor now languishes.


[He draws his Dagger. King. Disarm him.


Sell. Attempt it not.


Clar. Hold, I forgive.


The Names of the Actors:
The Kings of Sicily. Eumenes, the Sicilian General. Sortanes and Cleon Two
Sicilian Lords. Philon, a Sicilian Lord, Kinsman to the King. Theagines, Judge
of Sardinia. Memnon, Chief Priest of Sardinia. Hipparchus and Pausanes Now
Prisoners, the lost Sons of Memnon and Theagines. Gallippus, a banished
Sicilian Lord, now a Pirat. Zenon, alias Pelius, a disguised Lord of Sardinia,
in love with Zenonia, a Lady of Eucratia's, who was abused by Eumenes, the
Sicilian General. Dyon and Cremnofeild Two Sardinian Commanders. Procles, an
old common Soldier. Boat-swain. Sailers. Slaves. Lysimella, Sister to the King
of Sicily. Leucanthe, Daughter to Theagines. Eucratia, Daughter to Memnon,
beloved of the King of Sicily. Eugene, Lysimella's woman.
The Scene SARDINIA.

THE PRISONERS, A TRAGI-COMEDY.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
Enter the King of Sicily, Sortanes, Eumenes, and Cleon. King. ARe the Galleys
come from Rhodes?


Eumenes. Yes, Sir; they arrived this evening.


King. Then we are all in readiness; and if the gods smile upon us, those proud
Sisters shall find they have pulled down fire by playing with my anger; thus to
pretend a vow to peace, and feign a Law by which they are bound not to arm but
in their own defense: come, 'twas treacherously designed; and since in our
greatest danger they could leave us to that sudden ruin that then threatened
all our Nation with a foreign yoke, they shall find (now our virtues have
wrought through that storm) what enemies we can be, whose friendship they have
despised; till in their bosoms I have thrown all those miseries of war, whose
single name was such a terror to them; but where is our Sister? did you call
her, Cleon?


Cleon. She went this evening, in her Galley, to take the air.


King. When she returns tell her, I must speak with her. -- And (do you hear?)
Eumenes! let all things be in readiness to put to sea, with the morning tide.
The wind stands fair still?


Eumen. Yes, Sir; the wind's south.


King. What said the Captain of the Galley that you took, had they notice of
our intent?


Eumen. Yes, Sir; he says they had intelligence, but they are so unprepared for
war that the knowledge was no advantage; they received it as men stabbed in
their sleep, that wake only to find their dangers certain.


King. Their falsehoods have begot their fears, and now like cowards they fall
upon their own swords. Eumenes, let the slaves be well fed to night.


ACT. I. SCEN. II.
Enter Lysimella, Philon, Eugene, and three Soldiers, being chased ashore by
Pirates. Philon. FLy Madam, save your self while we with our faiths oppose the
pursuers; for know, Philon will lay his body a willing sacrifice to intercept
your danger.


Lysimel. Oh Cozen, which way shall we take? I know not where we are; why did
you land here? he durst not have pursued us to the harbor; my Brothers fleet,
now in readiness to depart, would have protected us.


Eugene. This way the slave ran that went to call for aid. Pirates within cry
follow, follow.


Philon. Hark, Madam, we are pursued; it is now no time to talk, upon my life, it
is Gillippus, and the bold Pyrat I fear knows the value of the prize he hunts.


[Within follow, follow. Lysimel. They come, take some other way, and try if
you can divert their chase whilst we take Covert in these woods.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. I. SCEN. III.
Enter Gillippus, Hipparchus, and Soldiers of their party. Gillip. FOllow
Mates, for we have in chase the wealth of Kingdoms; one whose maiden mine the
gods would dig in, nor has her virgin earth been wounded yet for that precious
metal, but keeps her Indies still unconquered; if we gain her, we need sail no
more to find uncertain fates; she is prize enough.


Hippar. Slip not this opportunity then; you know not how long fortune will
Court us; which path took she?


Gillip. I know not; let us divide our selves; I Will take this.


[Exit Gillippus. Enter Pausanes, and meets Hipparchus. Paus. Hipparchus,
Hipparchus; what glorious things were those that fled us, as if we durst hurt
'em?


Hippar. They were handsome women, man.


Paus. Were they but women?


Hippar. But women! no, but women. -- What ail'st thou?


[Pausanes stands with his eyes fixed on the ground. Paus. I Am sure they are
more then man; for I never saw any of that sex that made me tremble, yet these
did; and with a cold fear the memory dwells in my breast still.


Hippar. What? thunderstruck by a woman! courage, man. Black eyes though they
lighten yet they do not use to shrink our He shakes him. hearts in the scabbard.


Paus. These do not use to fight, do they? -- If they do, by all Hipparchus
laughs. the gods, they will conquer me; oh Hipparchus, do not mock my misery; but
tell me, have thou seen many such? are such forms usual amongst'em? this has
Medusas power, in a beauteous form, and I am changed to weeping Marble.


Hippar. By this good day, he is in love; could I be so, how happy should I be;
for I have been pretty lucky in the sex; and could I have loved all that I have
lain with, what a share of heaven should I have had? -- Look how he stands now!
Pausanes! what do mean, let fall thy weapon when thou pursu'st a Wench?


Paus. A Wench! what is that? I thought of none.


Hippar. What is a Wench? why, the greater part, and the handsomest; and that
they are not the better part of woman, is yet to be disputed.


Paus. How can thou distinguish 'em? how do thou know a Wench?


Hippar. How do I know'em? several ways, but the best and certain'st, is by
feeling 'em.


Paus. But that I know from our rocking in the Cradle it still has been so, I
should wonder how we two came to be friends; there is such contrarieties even in
our natures, that both looking on one and the same heavenly form, we should
thus from the same subject draw such different thoughts; for whilst I was
Philosophysing upon her diviner part, and preparing how to worship her, thou
were casting to pollute her; but, prithee tell me, were it not better to find
those beauties that adorn her, the clothing of a perfect goddess, then such a
falling image?


Hippar. Faith, in serious thoughts (which handsome women ought not to be
mingled with) worship is a good thing; but to have them worship me I should
think were better. -- But, prithee put off this serious discourse now; this is
no time to talk when we have such prey in chase.


Paus. Fare thee well; but that I know thee stout, faithful to thy friend, and
one that speaks worse of himself then any other dares, I Would tear thee from my
bosom; but when I know this, and how strictly thou will pay thy vows to
honor, thou shall dwell for ever here.


ACT. I. SCEN. IV.
Enter Gillippus, following Lysimella. Gillip. YOu are very fair; let that
remove your wonder, how I dare again gaze upon that excellence. -- Why do you
frown? is it your innocence, or your beauty, that you mistrust? She fr^wns.
that thus you arm your self with anger to defend you: Pray leave to be an
enemy, you see that could not protect you.


Lysimel. No, Monster; it is not to see thee play thy part that troubles me; but
to think that heaven fails in hers, thus to leave virtue without a guard, while
lust and rapine grow strong in mischief; as if the innocent were created white,
only to be fit to take the murderers purple.


Gillip. As you have mercy remove that threatening danger; He kneels. that ruin
in your curled brow, and in justice (which your anger cannot know) weigh my
action and cross fate together; then call to mind how severely I was punished
for a single fault, a fault that my love pleaded for, but did not excuse; and
when you have found that blot in my story, if you are equal you must confess
all my life, to that hour, paid you an humble and a faithful service, and to
the King my Master a ready hand, and a loyal heart; nor could he urge any thing
against my pretense, but that I was born his subject; yet that I could
willingly have undergone, and all things else but your scorn, which still left
me to my despairs, I had else waited my fortune, and not by force attempted to
have gained my wishes. -- Oh Madam, had you not bowed me that way, but tried
what I could have suffered for you, not from you, 'twould have started your
soft soul to have seen me suffer that would through a thousand hazards have
courted your favor till I had fallen your Beauties Martyr.


Lysimel, Away; thy oily tongue, nor bloody hand can prevail, thy slattery and
thy force; I am by my resolutions above both, for Love and his soft fire thou
never felt'st it, nor know that god but by the name: These thy false
stoopings conclude thou can not worship, that thus durst again by force
attempt me; that heart that truly loves nobly suffers; and knows that god of
passion is to the longing soul both the hunger and the food; and if his heaven
be not reached by knees, their hands dare not, nay cannot; yet may thou live
to love, and me, I wish it not to glory in, but to punish thee.


Gillip. Are you so resolved? then I Will kneel no more; but frowning gather all
thy sweets; begging Lovers teach women a way to deny, Her^ is up. which else
they durst not know -- (A slave there) Hipparchus, take to your charge this
fair folly, and as your eyes look to Ent^^^ Sl^^e and Hipparchus. her; let not
her face betray your faith; away, I say, convey her to the Galley, there my
Empire will begin.


[The slave binds her. Lysimel. Think thou thy threats can fright me? no, I
cannot so much doubt the care of heaven, as to think that power, whose
providence considers the fall of every little Bird, will sleep now, and o'resee
the ruin of a Kingdom; no, Monster, I defy thee.


Gillip. Away to the Galley; there, when we have got the booty, I Will meet you.


[Exit. Hippar. It Is a lovely form; with what a scorn she bears her fortune!


Lysimel. Sir, I am but a stranger to you; yet if you durst disobey this bad
man, and give me freedom, I will not say I can reward such a benefit; but I am
certain I can be grateful; can you do it?


Hippar. If I durst be dishonest, Madam, I think I could.


Lysimel. Dishonest, Sir! if it were not mine own cause I would dispute the
act; but since'tis for my self, I Will urge no more; for know I can with less
pain be a prisoner then twice beg my freedom; obey him, Sir.


Hippar. With pain and blushes, Madam, I shall.


[They meet Paus. Paus. Ha! it is she, and bound, Hipparchus! whither do thou
lead that innocence?


Hippar. Our Captain delivered her to me, with command to carry her to the
Galley.


Paus. Hold, Hipparchus, at what price have thou accepted this unbecoming
office? it is not like thy self; the brave hunter dotes not upon the quarry; nor
had Hipparchus wont to fight for spoil.


Hippar. Nor does he now; nor ever shall so faulty a conquest hang upon my name
as to make me blush the victory: She was delivered me a prisoner by our
Captain, as the Jewel of his soul; and she can witness that to my faith he left
the securing her to the Galley; and Pausanes knows Hipparchus dares not break a
trust.


Paus. Alas! thou mistak'st this service; for to do this act is breaking trust
with heaven; thou break'st with the gods, thou break'st with them that gave
thee credit for thy courage, and thine honor, and sent thee forth their
Soldier to fight for them; and this is their day of Battle; here is the virtue
on whose side thou ought to bleed, the innocence in whose cause they bid
thee dye to live a conqueror with them; now thou flyest, now thou runn'st away;
Hipparchus flies, meanly vanquished, as if by a pannick fear terror-struck, for
he is beaten by a mistake, and conquers for his enemy, while he loses his same
at home.


Hippar. Hold, what means Pausanes thus with injurious words to wound his
friend?


Paus. I injure thee! I wound Hipparchus! I throw a scandal upon my friend! ye
gods strangely punish Pausanes when he does so.


Hippar. What do you less, when you upbraid me for my faith, and with art of
words labor to make me appear faulty? as if you did not know the law by which
we are bound is not alike with freemen; we are his slaves, and for our loyalty
have been rewarded with these privileges above our fellows; would have me
kill the cause of his bounty, and in justice, for my treachery, become a slave,
and make that which was my fate my punishment? I tell thee, Pausanes, I could
not be free here, should I do this act.


[Lays his hand upon his breast. Lysimel. Defend me, ye powers, from this
youth; his honor brings greater dangers then the traitors bands. Sir, pray
plead She looks on Pausanes. no more for me.


Paus. Thou see how tamely I have pleaded, and in calmness urged my reasons;
once again, by our wounds and blood so often together shed that their mixtures
have in their fall upon the earth Hipparchus offers to go. begot a kind of
kindred, by all our miseries which still have been allied, by our friendship I
conjure thee, give me her freedom.


Hip. I see thou hate me, else my Reasons would prevail, and thou would
leave to prefer a Prisoner or a Face before thy Friend, and his faith given;
and therefore know, though your friendship do plead, when it is thus wilfully
against mine Honor, I can be deaf.


Paus. Thou can be any thing, and I can weep to find it: Ye Gods! would I
have used Hipparchus thus? -- O Heavens! that ever I should call thee Friend!
-- Hipparchus, stay; I have one Hip. offers to go away: Paus. draws. Argument
still left, unbinde her or guard yourself.


Hip. Pausanes!


Paus. Your Sword.


Hip. Hear me speak.


Paus. No words, her freedom or your Sword.


Hip. Why then I draw; and Pausanes knows I will not be beaten into an opinion;
and since thou have drawn thy Sword I will not yield her, my honor forbids me.
Thou art injurious to think thy force can prevail beyond thy Reason and thy
friendship; for I tell thee, Pausanes, thy anger should not start me if I could
make thee an Enemy.


Paus. Defend your self.


[They fight, and are both wounded. Hip. Will you yet give me leave to be
faithful?


Paus. No, Hipparchus hunts his will, not his faith.


Lis. As you have honor hold, and let a Virgins tears that shall fall to Seas
divide your anger but till my Prayers can confirm your friendship.


[Here Hipparchus gets Pausanes down. Paus. Look upon her tears and these
wounds, whose anguish thy friendship not thy sword brings, and then weigh the
act: I would thou had been ten Enemies rather than one Friend, to have
disputed this cause.


[Hipparchus disarms him. ACT. I. SCEN. V.
Enter Gillippus, Zenon, and Soldiers. Gillip. MAke all possible speed aboard
with the Booty, they pursue us close -- Command Hipparchus and Pausanes ashore
to guard us; Tell 'em our Scouts are beaten in, and the Kings party presses
upon us -- Ha! what means this? What makes she ashore?


Paus. That which thou can not make aboard; she has made an honest man; and
if thou dare make another she may have two Friends.


Gil. Hipparchus, resolve this Riddle.


Hip. This woman whom you gave to my trust Pausanes would have released; and
when his Arguments, as Friend, could not prevail, meanly, he threw off his
faith, and by force attempted to take her from me.


Gil. Slave, did I for this prefer thee when at the Sack of Tunis thou becam'st
my Prisoner, and by thine own confession were a thing without a name, and
could neither from men nor country claim a being? now thy Treachery shall
make thee as dark an Exit as thy base soul had entrance.


Paus. I scorn thy threats, from this death I shall begin to live; till now I
lay wrapped in rust, and the Canker fed upon my fame; from this act I shall
adopt a name which till this minute I despaired of since that fatal day in
which old Perseus fell, in whom only lived that knowledge we so hunt for; and
Hipparchus, if thou continuest thou wilt be ashamed to find. For the bounties
thou urgest, Gillippus, what were they but making us a better kind of Slaves,
commanded Commanders, empaling our free souls so that we could employ but one
virtue, our courage, since we served thee; and that has thrown us into dangers
honor would be ashamed to own, and brought wounds that leave these blushing
scars. This, when Hipparchus has let fall his passion, will make him tremble to
find he could not fear but bleed for a Traitor, and struck against a virgins
honor, and in his rage sold his Friend to buy his will: Then, then,
Hipparchus, the wounds thou now art proud of will He turns to Lisimelia. hang
upon thee with more dishonor than thy Chains; for me, I smile at the chance;
for though I have mist my first freedom yet I have found my last wounds.


Hip. Ha!


Gil. Villain, have thou not yet enough laid open thy treacherous soul? Art not
satisfied to be false thy self, that thus thou labour'st to shake his tried
faith? Hipparchus, kill him, kill even his memory, that the ungrateful Slave
may fall like a Dog, and leave no name behind him -- yet hold, he shall not die
so nobly, nor find such The slaves offer to kill him mercy in his fall:
Hipparchus, Strip the Slave, and upon a Tree stretch the Traitor's body; there
let him hang alive like the condemned fruit to the fruitless Tree, doomed
thither to live a death; and would count that Murder that threw him there
Mercy, if it would come and break the snare.


Lis. Bloody Villain, dare thou command this with a belief thou should be
obeyed? What is he that has so much Hell about him, that dares execute what thy
bloody rage imposes?


Paus. Gentle Soul, plead not for Pausanes, nor grudge him this glorious end;
for now I fall, what I could not have lived with him, Honor's servant.


Gil. Away with him, and see it done; or by the Gods he pulls his own fate down
that disputes it.


[The Slaves seize Pausanes, Hipparchus stays 'em. Hip. He that trembles at
death let him die; it is just. Hold -- Sir, witness my wounds, I dare be loyal;
and when my faith was given I swom through the Streights of Friendship to serve
you; yet though I did this, because my faith was given, and Honor told me I
was in the right; Do not think I will be so faulty to my Friend as to start at
your frown more than his sword, or be frighted to the Murder of my Brother.


Gil. Ha! what is this?


Hip. No, Gillippus, I have no such aguey courage, nor comes my honor so by
fits. Know, though I durst not break my trust, yet. I dare disobey your impious
commands: nor can you call it Treachery when to your face I disavow it: Frown
not, for whilst I have mine old guide, Honor, there is no act brings so dark a
hazard but Hipparchus will strike a fire from it shall light him through.


Gil. My Rage, whither will thou hurl me? Draw, Mates. -- Villains, though my
anger has lost her tongue, yet her hands are Gill. Zenon and the slaves draw.
left still; and those in wounds shall print on your wretched bodies my Revenge.


Hip. There, defend thy self; Fear not, Madam, these are our Enemies.


[Hip. returns Paus. his sword, they defend themselves. Paus. Now I have my
wish.


[Paus. steps to Lys. and unbindes her, Gil. wounds him. Gil. At this rate take
it.


Paus. Think thou I would not buy her freedom when my blood could purchase
it? Have I lived as if I feared wounds? thou can scarce be mine Enemy after
this favor. O that I could kiss it, thou should kill me ere I would take my
lips from it.


Lys. For what fate I am reserved I know not, but I am resolved to shun this if
it be possible -- Help, Rape, Murder, Murder.


[She runs out, and meets the King her Brother. Enter the King, and Soldiers,
they beat off Gillippus and Zenon, and take Hipparchus and Pausanes. King.
Bind these, and pursue the rest. Sister, well met, Come you along with me.


[Exeunt omnes ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter the King, Lysimella, Philon, Sortanes, Cleon, Hipparchus, and Pausanes
bound, with a Guard. King. YOu are my Sister, but I beg you will urge me no
more; thy softness was betrayed, and because they were penitent thou thought
them innocent; I tell thee, Lysimella, if they could have hoped to have born
thee hence thou should have seen Lust and Pride flow naturally in them; 'twas
their fear made them fawn; Away with them to the Galley.


Paus. Our fears?


Hip. Had we escaped misfortunes till we met fears, thy Army, King, might have
found a Grave ere they had seen us bound; and to let thee see we have no
shaking souls, this threatened misery shall not make us or fear or fawn on thee.


Paus. Peace, Hipparchus, let him see us die ere touch an Oar; 'twill resolve
him what we dare do.


Lys. Has my Brother lost all his nature? Then I shall not wonder that I have
lost the interest of a Sister. Can you be a King and have They offer to lead
Hip. and Paus. away. neither mercy nor justice? Farewell; henceforth I may obey
but never approve your acts -- Hold, Sortanes; Sir, look upon their wounds; ye
gods! ought any thing that chance owns make men fall so low that we esteem'em
less than beasts? See, they bleed still; Can you leave'em like Dogs to lick
these wounds, whose every drop of blood, I can witness, fell a sacrifice to
honor: O it is a fault, a fault (I fear) the Gods will punish; as if men in
misery had no souls, or slaves did not upwards look.


King. Hold, Sortanes, unbinde 'em. Sister, they are your Prisoners, and as you
please dispose of 'em, and think not my nature cruel, or that I frowned upon
them, for Kings do often so upon the fault when they pity the man; yet if I get
the head of this Serpent, Gillippus, he shall find our justice with its full
weight but we'll crush him.


Lys. Now I kneel to you, Sir.


King. What means my Sister? Rise, my occasions give me leave only to say
Farewell; this accident has retarded me some hours beyond my resolution. Till
my return my power I leave with thee, my Sister -- And Philon, obey her as my
self.


Lys. The Gods guide and bless the King.


King. Sortanes, command the Officers aboard, and give order the Galleys be all
loose with the next Tide.


[Exit King. Lysimel. Cousin Philon, pray let your care provide for those men.


[She looks back as she goes out. Exit. Paus. O Hipparchus, I am lost ere I
have found my self, and have fought for bonds; Come my Friend.


Hip. That title confirms my life; for now I find my rage did not destroy my
self, and through thy wounds let out thy friendship, with joy I live to redeem
my fault.


Paus. O Hipparchus! This be my witness, thy friendship grows here, nor were
thou faulty at all to me, nor do I want an Argument They embrace for what I
did; thou had Reason, and I had Love to plead; Love whose power yet thou
never felt'st; but when thou shall find he is undiscerned got in, and in thy
bosom displays his fiery wings, then like me with all that light thou wilt find
thou arti'th' dark, and thus stoop to a willing yoke, sighing for what thou
would not part with. These, these, Hipparchus, are the wounds I fear; those
the Sword makes are remedies, and if deep enough bring a certain Cure.


Phil. This way, Gentlemen.


Hip. We shall follow, Sir.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. II. SCEN. II.
Enter Eucracia, Leucanthe, Dion, Gillippus, Cremnofeild, and Zenon. Leuc.
NOble Gillippus, thus to venture your self and fortunes in our hazard is an
obligation we know not how to pay; for the preparation you speak of brings our
certain ruin, if by treaty we cannot appease his fury.


Gil. Pray, Madam, from whence springs his anger?


Euc. It Is just you know the cause of this War that thus venture your self into
the dangers of it: this Island blessed beyond our Neighbors with a fruitful
peace drew us into a consideration how we came to be so happy; and in the
search we found Ambition had no dwelling here: for our custom admits no one
man chief, which kept all from that sin: our Government is here in the hand of
a Priest and Judge, which are chosen by lot, not faction; and their power
remains to them during life, if they obey our Laws; the breach of one of which
Laws has begot this danger; for when our Predecessors made their vow to peace,
a Law was then enacted to prohibit our taking Arms but in our own defense.


Leu^. This Law the King credits not; for when we returned it as the Reason
that forbad us to yield that aid to him he then implored, he says we urged it
but to hide our Treachery, and concludes we assisted his Enemy because we would
not fight for him; so that now having labored through that storm that
threatened Sicily his rage bends this way.


Dion. And at a time when we have neither Arms nor Counfel to defend us: now,
Madam, the punishments your Fathers have called down pursue us banished for
abusing the Oracle and trust reposed in them. Theagines being chief Judge and
Memnon chief Priest of this Island, their Counsel and your Brothers swords were
aids, which we shall best find when to our despairs we feel the want.


Cremn. Yet let us not quit our selves when we must fall; the dearer we sell
our lives the greater fame will wait us; nor have our men forgot to fight,
though we have left to invade.


Gil. Spoke like a Soldier: How is the Town fortified toward the Harbor? for
there your danger will begin.


Cremn. It Is no regular Fortification, yet it is in defense.


Gil. Madam, I beseech you remove your fears, they are ill omens here: Speak,
Courage, you know not what Miracles we may act; the night comes on apace, pray
retire to your rest, while Cremnofeld, Dion and my self, go set the Watch, and
provide for the entertainment of these strangers that come so rudely without
inviting.


Euc. We'll go and join our strength of prayer with our Arms, which I hope will
protect us, though they fail to conquer them.


Gil. I Will but order my Galleys to join with yours, and be ready in the Harbor
to board 'em as they come straggling in, then I Will meet you upon the Guard.


Dion. Eucratia is the Word to night, Farewell.


[Ex. all but Gil. Gil. Farewell, shallow Fools. Think ye Gillippus will sell
his blood for airy honor? No, it is Revenge or the satisfying some other Lust
engages; me therefore, I Will to my Galley, and while this dark protects us
command Zenon to lanch from the Harbor, and in a little Creek ly loose and
undiscovered with his Galley, it is wisdom to secure a Retreat; nor will I again
put my happiness in the power of Slaves whose Treachery wracked my soul, and
deprived me of the pleasures I had promised to my self, in the embraces of the
fair Lysimella: but these faces have removed that pain; for he that like me
loves beauty, where e're he meets it sows his Love, and when he enjoys it reaps
his Mistress.


ACT. II. SCEN. III.
Enter Lysimella, and Philon. Lys. WAs the Fleet within sight of Land this
morning?


Phil. Yes, Madam, they hung about the Isle of Asmarae these four days, kept
back by contrary Winds.


Lys. When returns the Galley that came from my Brother?


Phil. This Tide she puts off.


Lys. This opportunity then will advance my Design. Have you fitted those
Prisoners with a Disguise?


Phil. Yes, Madam.


Lys. Hark, what is that, a Lute? Are they musical?


Phil. One of 'em plays and sings.


Lys. Prithee, let us hear.


A Song.
FOnd Pausanes, let not thy Love aspire
To a hope of coming higher:
But let thy faith grow under a Cloud
Of being not allowed.
And still pursue thy Love till she like well
To know it, but thou not tell:
Next thy care must be, she not perceive
Thou believ'st sh'has given leave:
Thy love and sufferings thus being humbly told,
And not a sigh too bold,
Nor with a look speak, or let a fear be proud
To be discerned, lest thou love too loud.
Whilst fairly thus thou do thy love pursue,
Pretending nothing due:
Who knows but that in time her heart may grow
To wish thee well whether she will or no?
By such soft steps as these and slow degrees,
And ever on his knees,
Pausanes still shall approach his bliss,
But not come near enough to miss:
But at a distance look and love;
And see Lysimella far above:
Yet not wish her descending to my sense,
Or hope of meeting but by influence.
Lysimel. Call him hither. -- Now, Lysimella, arm thyself with Exit Philon.
resolution, that thy sex may not still be called weak, nor thou yield to thy
passion, lest this god in a cloud deceive thee, and force thee with his
yieldings; he sings his actions, and acts his opinions, which makes him a
dangerous friend here; he is one that boldly dares, yet humbly loves; he struck
his Master, and bowed to me; and when his rage had filled his eyes with fire,
he sighing turned, and looking this way, in languishing streams quenched their
rising flames. -- Oh power of honor! that makes this gallant in him, and
honor in me not to return his love; it starts me to find honor pleased still
to confound our Reason; and impose upon us an obedience to her Laws, when
Nature and Reason plead against it; but see, they come.


ACT. II. SCEN. IV.
Enter Philon, with Hipparchus and Pausanes, like common Soldiers. Paus. DO
thou speak, while I collect my self; yet do not, why should I refuse by my
disorder to speak her power? if He sees Lysimella and her woman. she deserve my
love, I Am certain she may command my fears; nor is it a dishonor to shake
here, it is not, I tell thee, Hipparchus, it is not; these are valiant fears,
and I Will speak to her even what my heart sends out; for by my life, all that I
resolved of I have quite forgot.


Hippar. But do not rashly tempt her to a scorn.


Paus. Scorn! Oh no, Hipparchus! if ever her softness has felt Loves power she
knows his proper language is free prose, and their distractions wrap the
powerfull'st truth; confined Verse tells us they are too much themselves, nor
is he afflicted who can compose his sufferings. -- See where she stands.


[They kneel. Lysimel. Rise, your freedom is the bounty of another, and the
thanks not due to me; I sent for you to tell you my Brother is now upon a
design for Sardinia, but has been staid by cross winds, so that you may
overtake him ere he lands, in a Galley which this morning is bound for him, and
in this disguise striking on his party unknown, pay his bounty.


Hippar. Arm us, Madam, and you shall hear how deep we'll plow, how thick we'll
sow their wounds too, but we'll reap the honor, my mistake has lost me in
striking against your virtue; and now we are friends so that Pausanes and
Hipparchus undivided draw, I think we shall not easily be overcome; for give me
leave to say we are not often conquered but by our selves: and then though
Pausanes be victor, Hipparchus triumphs.


Paus. We can be grateful, Madam, though not fortunate.


Lys. That Is my Q. pray, let me be thankful too, lest you think I can only
counsel it: within this Cabinet I believe is in value as much She fetches a
Cabinet and offers it to Hipparchus. as my person would have yielded at a Mart,
if it be less, it is the modest opinion I ought to have of mine own worth makes
me faulty in the sum; for any other consideration take this too. She gives him
a chain,


Hippar. It Is just, Madam, that you throw this scorn on me; for I confess the
fault looked as if I had fought for money: which opinion my refusal now I hope
will remove.


Lys. Pray take it; why should you receive wounds for me?


Hippar. I do not let my self out to dangers, nor is it my trade to fight:
wounds and blood are neither my daily labor nor the sweat of my brow; they are
honors and pay themselves: if I have courage, it is a gift the gods sent me
freely, and as their blessing freely I Will dispense it.


Lys. Your pardon, Sir, I meant no injurious upbraiding, for by my life I do
not think you faulty: if you will not be rewarded, yet give me leave to supply
your wants.


Hippar. I kiss your charity.


Lys. What to give him I know not; Oh unequal Law, that binds us women, and
forces me to let him perish, because I know how to save him! I must not stay, I
know you are friends, and what the one has is but the others store, I wish ye may
be fortunate. My last words, e're I knew what you were.


Paus. O stay! unbind me ere you go; and hear my soul labored with admiration
of your beauties; but since I was blessed with knowledge of your diviner part,
all your acts from honor sprung have collected those sparks your eyes
kindled; and they are blown to a flame here, here it burns, and though this Altar
(divinest) be built upon the meanest earth, scorn it not; for my offering shall
be of the purest love; and my sighs shall constant incense breathe.


Lys. What thou might have done I know not; but I Am sure thou can not
now, thou have said too much: Go fight, fight, for thou know not how to
love. Oh woman, woman, woman still!


[Speaks aside. Paus. Not love! what stranger then is this that is got in here,
and wanders so to seek; not love! it is he or cowardice crept in, no third cause
can beget the fears, the tremblings I labor with; Oh! teach me how to know him.


Lys. That stranger when thou meet'st him at the eye thou will find he is
conceived in fire, and in an instant grows to perfect form; thence in fullness
of time he takes his birth into the heart which is his world; there if he prove
a healthy love he lives in silence, the tongue has no part 'ith birth of
gallant loves; nor are they long lived that make their Exits that way; the true
births of love know no delivery. But where they took their life through the
eye, this is love: thine a short-lived passion, I fear.


(I fear spoke aside. Paus. My passions are no faults, Madam, when I master
'em; when we do not serve them we command admiration; or should I yield to 'em,
could any passion be unbecoming that has so beautiful a cause as the fair
Lysimella, who (I fear) has been used to such Hecatombs of hearts, that my
single one being but a slaves might well be scorned at your shrine; yet if you
be that power that my thoughts have worshipped, you must confess he that offers
all, though a beggar, sacrifices equal to a King. O turn not from me, but be
She turns away. like those gods you bow to, which though they give and guard
She turns away. our flocks, yet accept a Lamb.


Lys. Plead no more, if thou love thou will prefer me; I must not, dare not
understand, I am too much a party to hear him Aside. plead.


Paus. O do not show the several ways you have to wound: may the fire for ever
inhabit in those eyes, but do not in frowns dart it this way.


Lys. Be gone then. And consider what thou suest for, a slave by his passion
crowned, and a Princess by her enthroned.


Paus. Do but believe I love, it is all I beg; strike me heaven, if I have so
faulty a wish as to attempt the unshrining such a power, or would live to see
your beauty fall from this vast national adored condition, to make them my
petty household god. O say! do you believe I love?


Lys. Yes, yes; I believe and fear.


Paus. O continue that friendly faith; I Will at a distance kneel, for it is a
wealth I Will pray for, fight to keep, and weep to part with: and if that way of
obtaining, that way of keeping, and this sense of Here he reverences and
kneels. loss asked with a whole heart, and with a whole heart defended, but
parted from with a broken one, can confirm it, all joys.


[She in passion interrupts him, and in disdain speaks, and leaves him. Lys.
Peace, be gone. Lysimella collect thy self, for thou art lost. O ye gods, would
ye had given more, or that I had known less of honor.


[Pausanes starts again. Paus. Hipparchus, my friend, I find my misery, and
conjure thee that if thou outlive us, steal some of my ashes into her Urne,
that in our earth being become equal we may become one.


[Exit. Hippar. This is strange, yet it is the best kind of anger; and the storm
is to friend, if I can judge a woman.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. I.
Enter the King, and Eumenes, Sortanes, Pausanes and Hipparchus, with their
swords drawn. King. EVmenes, now the Soldiers are landed let 'em be drawn
Alarm. into Battalia; we'll charge this instant, and not give 'em leave at land
to collect their loss at sea.


Eum. They were Gillippus's Galleys that boarded us; yet I saw not the Pluto
there; her brazen Prow had wont with the earliest to bathe in blood her
Proserpine.


King. That injury has brought some fuel to my rage, to see they have given
harbor to that traitor, that twice has attempted the rape of my Sister; and in
advowance of his fault, in his Prow he wears the hellish president for that
black deed.


Eum. Lose no time then, but while they are scattered with their dangers, and
their fears strike for us, let us bring that justice their treacheries have
called down.


King. Away, every man to his charge.


[Exeunt all but Hipparchus and Pausanes. Paus. Oh Hipparchus, the joy to find
Gillippus here has dispersed all my sad thoughts. Ye powers that rule our
fates! if Pausanes have any of you to friend, give me Gillippus, this day,
within my swords reach.


[Alarm. Hippar. So, now my friend speaks like himself; and when thou strik'st
not at thy self, thou stand'st safe; but hark we must away. Alarm still.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. II.
Enter Gillippus, Eucratia, Leucanthe, Dion, and Cremnofield. Gillip. THis is
no time to talk now; they have begirt the Town, and will instantly attempt to
storm it, the immediate danger calls for resistance, not counsel; Dion, go you
to the gate that is next the harbor; and, Cremnofield, take you the charge of
the Princess's persons; I Will to that Port against which the Kings Standard is
advanced; if we must fall, let us not go out faintly.


Eucratia and Leucanthe. The gods protect us.


[Exeunt omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. III.
Enter Pausanes and Hipparchus, Pausanes wounded. Paus. 'TWas Gillippus; he
fled, and left me to the multitude; Oh Hipparchus, pursue the chase, and if
thou overtak'st him, thou wilt find the coward imboss'd with running from me; if
thou can set him up, Bay him till I come; and as thou love me, let me not
lose the honor of his fall.


Hippar. Are you sure he is this way?


Paus. Yes, yes; I Am certain 'twas he.


[Exeunt. ACT. III. SCEN. IV.
Enter Gillippus alone. Gillip. THey have forced the Town, and there is no hope
of safety, unless I can recover my Galley, God's Death; I am accursed of late; I
hunt nothing but unprofitable wounds. -- Enter Leucanthe and Zenon. Ha!
Leucanthe, the Princess! as I could wish; yet if fortune would smile, here were
a prize would heal all my unlucky wounds.


Leucan. Oh Gillippus, we are lost, our lives, our honors and our gods, subject
to the rage of the common Soldier.


Gillip. Will you venture then to follow me? if we can gain the Port I have a
Galley may secure you.


Leucan. Oh guide me; which way, noble Gillippus?


Gillip. Come Zenon, follow, for there is no abiding here; hell I think fights
on their side, for 'twas nothing less then a devil that forced, and then
pursued me through our Guards; By day it self, he struck as sure as if he had
been the fate he brought; my flight could scarce outstrip his conquest.


[A noise within, follow, follow. Zenon. They pursue us still; away, lose no
time.


[Ex. omnes. ACT. III. SCEN. V.
Enter King, and Eumenes. King. THis way, this way, Eumenes, the gallant
Reapers went; sure by this their sickles are dulled, and their hands weary with
griping such full victory; when the word was given they charged through their
fellows, and like lightning scaled and leaped the wall, where once entered,
cowards lose not faster then they gained ground; I was amazed to see their
charge, 'twas as if they had flown, not fought for conquest.


Eum. They are not clothed proper for the Parts they Act; either their honor
or condition is misplaced.


King. If they survive, this day, inquire'em out, and then, when we can reward
we'll admire, now we'll assist the work.


[As the King and Eumenes go off, they meet Leucanthe, Gillippus, and Zenon.
Gillip. Ha! the King! fly Madam, haste to my Galley and save your self.


[The King and Gillippus fight, and Eumenes and Zenon, Gillippus wounded, Zenon
quits the Stage, Gillippus throws his sword at the King, and counterfeiting
falls, the King leaves him, and pursues Leucanthe. King. Thou shall not long
impeach my stay; do you stare?


Gillip. Hell take thee.


[Exit the King. Enter Eumenes and Zenon. Eum. What have you, at length, found
daring to look upon the dangers? is the dead-doing Zenon, so famed for his bold
deeds?


Zenon. Yes Euemenes, Pelius dares, though Zenon durst not; does the name of
Pelius start thee? know, false man, all thy darings cannot protect thee from
the justice this brings, for the injuries Zenon discovers himself. thou did
me during the Treaty here, when thou sought'st aid for thy ambitious Master.


Eum. What act of mine during that time were you concerned in.


Zenon. Have thou forgot the fair Zenonia? methinks the half I borrow, for my
disguise, from that name, should prompt thy soul to a remembrance of the vows,
the false vows thou made her.


Eum. False vows?


Zenon. Yes, boasting her the conquest of thy vanity; when with thy perjured
breath thou begg'st for that thou valu'dst not, merely to affront my passion
which pursued her with all those truths of love, thou feignedst; yet never
reaped a harvest for all my pains. But this is not the injury that wakes my
anger; it is thy scorn, not thy love of her engages me to think it should be in
any mortals power to scorn that deity which I sacrifice to.


Eum. How do you know I scorn her?


Zenon. Say thou do not; say thou will return and pay those vows of love, and
by all our gods I Will kneel to thee; for if thou wilt love again (although my
Rival) her love shall guard thee, and from henceforth thou shall be my friend;
but if thou proceed thus to triumph in her miseries (whose pains I feel, though
she be insenble of mine) thou shall find, though I cannot entreat her love, yet
I can force Revenge from her darkest Caves.


Eum. What does Pelius see about Eumenes, that he should take him for a fool or
coward; thus to think I would trust a Rival, or fear an enemy? and now I know
the reason of thy hate, if thou should swear thou art my friend, I Would tell
thee thou lie; if mine enemy, why, I do not care.


Zenon. Do you slight my profer'd friendship? do you believe this language?


[They fight. Eum. Yes, I understand it, and you shall find it by the answer
I Will make.


[Eumenes wounded falls. Zenon. This ring was hers, and shall witness I have
punished his falsehood. -- Gillippus wounded!


[Enter Gillippus. Gillip. Yes, Zenon, but not slain, and yet the King struck
home; I found 'twas folly to resist his force, unless I could have conquered
his whole Army; and therefore wisely I preserved my self for better days. --
Saw thou the Princess Leucanthe since?


Zenon. Yes, she is fled toward the West-port.


Gillip. Who Is this? Eumenes fallen! well, pursue Leucanthe, gentle Zenon; and if
thou findst her tell her of my escape, say thou left'st me aboard the Galley;
and if she know not where her Sister Eucratia is, tell her she is with me, who
negligent of her own danger impatiently expects her coming to the Galley, where
I Will go and wait your coming.


[Exit. Zenon. Yes, I Will go, but not to assist thy treachery, yet I Will bring
her if I can; she has an interest in Zenonia; and if I can thus bring her into
dangers, my protection of her honor will endear me to her; and so engage her
to be my friend to Zenonia, the thoughts of whom my soul will ever labor with.


[Exit. ACT. III. SCEN. VI.
Enter Pausanes and Procles, having both hold on Eucratia. Paus. UNhand her.


Procles. She Is my prisoner, and I will not lose her.


Paus. Dare thou be a Soldier and speak that falsehood?


Proc. I first seized her, and I Will keep her.


Paus. Had thine age been able to have kept flight with me, thou should have
seen me hunt her through the streights of a thousand wounds, and mow down all
the weeds that grew about her; yet then, then this Laurel protected by her own
virtue stood safe in the midst of all that Lightning; and let me tell thee, the
same cause that kept me from laying violent hands upon her makes me spare thee;
it is a reverence that in some measure thy silver hairs command.


Proc. I defy thee and thy naked Chin, Talker; this plead for me, nor shall
thou find a gray Coward here; Bind her, and then we'll dispute whose she is.


Paus. Bind her! Look upon her, and then tell me on which part of that divine
form thou dare hang a Chain.


Proc. I Will dispute no more, unhand her, she is my Prisoner or but Earth.


[He offers to stab her. Paus. Remove from her breast that threatened danger, or
by our Gods thou art Earth.


Proc. Think thou Procles will quit his aged Honors for fear of a Boy proud
in his first wounds?


Paus. Boy, nay then defend thee.


[They fight. Euc. I know not too which is guiltiest, but I can ill preserve
mine own.


[Exit Euc. Paus. She Is gone, there is something whispers to me, Protect her;
I Will follow her -- There, take thy Sword, I will not rob thy age in Paus
disarms Hroc. thy fall.


[Exit Paus. Proc. I thank thee, and may thine be no less fortunate than this
has been, and thou buy thy Honors at a cheaper rate.


[Dies. Enter Pausanes hanging about Hipparchus neck, wounded and fainting.
Paus. Had I lived to have finished my Revenge on that Traitor Gillippus, and
from his bosom torn the knowledge of our selves, which in a golden Relick the
Tyrant wears about his neck, and still with threatened loss would a we us to our
faith, then, Hipparchus, I could have died in peace.


Hip. Whither did you go to find these wounds?


Paus. In pursuit of the fair Eucratia, I followed her through all her
miseries, but not with intent to add to them, but to guard her from the raging
lust of the common Soldier, till at length some of her party met us, and to
them I owe these wounds.


Hip. This disorderly possessing the Town will ruin us; the wounds we receivd
since the Conquest are more than we got in the Attempt; the Cowards fears have
in their despair struck deeper wounds than their courage knew how to deal.
Enter Zen. and Leuc.


Zenon. This way, Madam.


Leuc. O Zenon, Haste, I know not which I fly to with greater zeal, my Sister
or my safety; Is it far?


Zenon. If you can pass the Port you are safe. Ha!


Hip. Stand, the Word?


Zenon. The Word! Death, if thou refuse us passage.


Leuc. Or a Virgin's thine for ever, if thou dare let my innocence escape
this ruin. O speak, Death and Dishonor pursue us close. O speak, Sir; Shall I
pass?


[Hip. is surpised with Leucanthes beauty, and stands amazed. Hip. Pass! Yes,
fair one, I dare let you pass, and through all hazards serve you; O Pausanes,
live to counsel me; something like thy description I feel here.


[Speaks aside to Pausanes. Zenon. Shall we pass, or no?


Hip. Smooth your brow, your frowns will make no way here.


Zenon. My Sword shall then.


Hip. No, Zenon, thou know it never could when Hipparchus denied thee
passage.


Zenon. Ha! Hipparchus!


Hip. Yes, Zenon, Hipparchus; who to let this Lady see how much he dares do in
her cause, he will not only give her a passage, but with it all his peace of
mind, and do thou thank her for this Sanctuary; for were it not that thou
had taken hold on that Altar the Murder of Eumenes here I would have
punished; but such is the power of that Deity that I can defer my hate, nay,
forgive thee, if she will confess thy Sword or Faith has sacrificed ought to her
deliverance.


Leuc. He has, he has, and he only can guide me to a hope of safety. Gentle
youth, the Gods reward thee -- Hark, I am pursued, if thou have power divert
their rage.


[Within Follow, follow. Hip. Your name, leave but that to call upon in my
danger, and then I Will plant my self here an Enemy to all that dare pursue your
softness. O do not hide your name from me, nor leave me to bow to a Power I
know not.


Leuc. My name's Leucanthe, the unfortunate Leucanthe; gentle youth, May all
thy wishes fall upon thy head. Away Zenon.


[Exeunt Leuc. and Zen. Paus. Now, Hipparchus, had I Reason once?


Hip. Leucanthe, the Princess Leucanthe, is it not?


King. Yes, Soldier, Leucanthe, the Princess Leucanthe, Which way went she?


Hip. This way she went, Sir; but I must beg you will not pursue her.


King. These are the Soldiers I so much admired. Is it your ignorance, or do
you wilfully strike out the reward your daring youth has this day merited?


Hip. If we are faulty it is wilful; but this act (we hope) owns no guilt.


King. Is it not a fault thus to blot the Conquest, whose greatest beauties are
gifts of your own hands?


Hip. My soul has vowed, and I see it written yonder, not to suffer any one to
pass this way whilst my Sword and I can impeach their stay.


[Paus. offers to rise, but cannot. Paus. And I, though weak in body, am strong
in friendship; my Friends vows shall ever be my cause.


Hip. You see our resolution, Sir, and we dare die.


King. And I dare fight, and thus force my passage. The King charges, Hip.
only defends himself.


Hip. O! hold, Sir, and hear me speak.


King. Shall I pass?


Hip. Your self can witness what faith I brought to your cause; my charge
ushered pale death about the field; and when I found him lazy and waiting upon
Fate I leaped from his lean side, and with my Sword dealt more deaths than he.


King. Pursue that act still, and let me hunt this scornful Lady till with
miseries I have made her wild heart tame, the Conquest will be perfect then.


Hip. All Is done already; I fought to Conquest, and Cowards only strike
afterward. A Foe that flies is your Slave, and no longer deserves the name of
Enemy.


King. Shall I pass?


Hip. It Is ssaughter you pursue, and will stain all those honored wounds your
Conquest gave; but for this Princess, whose virtue I bow to, O, Sir, can you be
so blinded with your rage as to avow a War with her?


King. Leave counsel and obey; Mercy and Justice are specious shows, but to
obey is your best Sacrifice, which if thou offer'st not, by mine anger I Will
offer thee.


Hip. Obey! Yes; the Gods I Will obey, and strike against all that strike at
them; Know, you command a Freeman, one that chose your party, and none of that
number that was born under you; And yet I beseech you, Sir, attempt not your
passage here; for I must not betray her safety as to defend her cause we eakly.


King. Are you so resolute?


[They fight. Paus. O Hipparchus! hold; Remember it is the King, lift not thy
hand against him; this Victory will be full of Curses. O for strength enough to
part them!


[Euc. pursued by the Kings party lays hold on the Kings Sword, and yields her
self Prisoner, who amazed in passion speaks. Euc. This by his habit should be a
Commander to him, (since I must feel the misery of bonds) I Will yield my self.
Defend me, Sir, I am your Prisoner, my name's Eucratia.


King. Hold your Swords; he that adds another stroke to War shall feel the
weight of this.


Hip. Blessed chance.


King. Eucratia! Are you Eucratia?


Euc. Yes, and a Princess, till thy ambitions (King) hunted me to my ruin.


King. O Eucratia! Soul of sweetness, that wretched King see prostrate at thy
feet; and if thou can not pardon, tread upon my neck, and let thy virtues
sink me to my Grave: there is something divine about thee which in an instant
has from my temples torn the Laurel reward of all my bleeding wounds, and from
a conquering King made me all thy Slave -- Command me something.


Enter a Soldier. Sold. Help, Sir, to save the Princess Leucanthe that is
lost, sold to lust and rape, if you redeem her not suddenly,


Euc. Unfortunate Leucanthe, I foresaw this danger, sad Fate! O my Sister!


Hip. Leucanthe! Which way went the Ravlsher? O Sir, your pardon.


Sold. I saw Gillippus, in the Pluto, bear her from the shore.


King. Gillippus! it is false, pray (Madam) remove your fears, my self slew him
in the battle.


Hip. O Sir, he has abused you by some wile; for on my life I saw him since
your encounter.


Sold. Let me die, if this be false.


Euc. O Sir! now I claim your offer, and beg, not Command, you will not
complete your Conquest, and pusue this Ravisher.


King. Soldier, thy faith in her cause has been already tried, Do thou provide
one of the swiftest Galleys for this Expedition. Come, Madam, we'll all go to
save this Innocent: Some one help this wounded Youth aboard, and see he want
for no care; such virtue shines not every where.


Euc. Sir, his courage has obliged me, and he shall be my care; he found me
when I was fallen into the rage of the common people.


Paus. I kiss your hands, Madam; and it is happiness enough that I have lived to
serve such a virue as is seated in the fair Eucratia.


King. Command a Cessation of Arms, and let all Acts of War cease here; for the
fair Eucratia is now the Conqueror.


ACT. IV. SCEN. I.
Enter Lysimella, and Philon; Lysimella in Boys habit. Lysimella. URrge not his
condition, I must not so mistrust the Justice of those Powers I bow to as to
fear they would leave me to such a scorn; a common Slave? No, Philon, if there
were not chance in his condition, their tongues would have doubled under such a
Load, as Love. A Slave's heart would have had too many hungry wants upon it to
have found leisure to have begged for Love.


Phil. This, under favor, is no Argument; and though I fear a want in their
blood, yet I believe they have wit enough, and their craft perhaps took hold of
some pity which your Highness shew'd'm; for under favor, Madam, your mercies
were even to weakness, and but that I fear to displease you, I could say, he
but returns love. -- This will move her; and as my faith and duty thus low bows
Aside. He kneels. so my honor bids me defend you, especially when you have so
dangerous an enemy as your passion to engage my faith against: look but upon
your habit, examine the nature of this act, and you shall find you walk blinded
to your honors ruin; have you not thrown off your sex, the honor of a Queen,
and now appear clothed in blushes, and disguised with faults? but this were
nothing if my fears were false, which tell me, this habit is lined with as
faulty resolutions; nor can you condemn those that know you not, if they
conclude you have, with your sex, thrown off your modesty too.


Lys. Oh! Iam lost for ever.


Phil. No Madam, if you stay, you are safer for this attempt, by having found
your error; I confess, to this journey I carry nothing but obedience; had you
fled to meet a plighted faith, through darkest hazards I would have waited on
you; but when you fly to follow one you know not, a slave too, that perhaps
flies from you. Nay grant him a Prince, can your honor be safe when you
pursue? Oh, Madam, when you were your self, and from your Reason collected
truth, and from that rock would in Arguments give law to Love; I have heard
your powerful Reasons conclude, that a Queen is safer that is pursued by a
slave, if he keep the path of love, then the greatest Monarch of the earth
could be, should she pursue a god; and now upon my knees I beg you would not at
this rate reward the ambition of a wretch.


Lys. Oh Philon, Philon, thou art cruelly faithful, and unsensible of my
sufferings; can prescribe an abstinence! but had thou my Fever upon thee
thou would drink (ambition) why? say he has that Giant fault; yet it is a
glorious sin, and without it not one among all the Synod of the gods had filled
his seat, and 'twas their fears that made it sin in us; yet, in Loves Religion
it is meritorious still to aspire to a Mistress; and that love that gives, but
will take no Laws, has called it gentleness, not savage Nature, for a servant
to leap even at the heart of his Mistress: yet thus much I Will satisfy thy
faith; by the honor of my mothers ashes, he wooed first, and in such words as
my resolution only could deny; and for his nature, how stout, how gentle, how
full of honor, judge you that were witness of his actions.


Phil. Madam, I see you are resolved, and then I know you will not want an
argument; and now I know not whether 'twere a blessing, or no, their protection
brought, since you believe they love.


Lys. If thou wilt turn away I Will blush, and tell thee why I believe he loves;
thou saw his friendship could not divide him from me; it made his virtues
faulty passions, searching with blushing wounds an enemy in his friends breast.
Oh my Cozen! when I think on this, and call to mind how for my freedom he stood
as if h'ad been immortal, and intending only that, let the false Gillippus
wound his stout breast, which when he will defend, none, save the thunderer, or
a friend can hit; oh Philon, Philon, when I consider these miracles, why should
I be so wicked as to conclude him less then a god that acts 'em? and now take a
secret from me (for I will satisfy thee even with a faulty act) which may look
like vanity; but turn thy face, and hear me; I know my Cozen is full of honor;
and I know, with all that honor; he loves me, this confession I would have
died with e're it should have been forced from me, but to confute th^e, for it
makes thee a party here, and thy love as unfit to give counsel, as mine
incapable to take it; and now I conjure thee follow and obey me, that will obey
my fate; nor shall the winds that now begin in storms to plead against me,
prevail; I am resolved; and this night I Will to sea, and in her greatest The
storm begins in the Scene. depths dive to find this rich Pearl, which the wise
value not the less for having a rugged shell.


Phil. Oh Madam, to be born your Kinsman was one blessing, but to find I have a
friends place in your thoughts, two; and that you know I love, and not I tell
it, is a joy beyond all but what your love brings; forgive me, and henceforth
I Will obey not counsel. Your Galley shall instantly be ready; thus I have gained
all my ends in love, by having no unworthy ends upon her I love.


[Exit. Lys. O Love, do thou prosper my intent, and a Virgin shall thy Priest
become; and these great truths in all thy Temples shall be sung how in thy
infant hand thou grip'st a bow larger then Joves; so that, when thou thy darts
let'st fly immortality is no guard, for often they have through his lightning
shot and struck the thunderer: thy Religion's easy, thy Law light; for thy
Tables hold but one act one Commandment; obey, and we cannot miss the way; let
none then say this youthful god or cruel is, or blind, since from disobedience
grows all the strange crosses and dangers that we find.


[Exit. ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter a Hermit and his Son, with the body of an old Man. Herm. GEntly Son; lay
him down, and bow him forward; more Storm. of those waters, he stirs; so, so,
chafe him still while I dry his snowy hair which the sea could not melt, it is
he, strange accident! but I Will not be discovered yet.


Son. He sighs, there is some comfort in that.


Herm. Sad condition for his age, when it is a joy to hear him sigh.


Son. Good heaven! what does age abroad at this time of his life?


Herm. Sure he has wandered far that has missed a resting place in his evening;
and to be piti'd when he is forced to seek his Inn thus late at night.


Son. Sure he was of some Religious Order, by his habit.


Herm. No matter for his habit, pull it off, and fetch him my gray Coat; dry
now is better then rich.


Son. Which opinion if he had held, perhaps his had been dry now. Storm blows
high.


Herm. Good heaven, what a night's here! this evening promised dangers, but not
like this; sure this Barque was one of that Fleet that we saw off the Point
last night, if we can recall life, he may inform us who they were.


[He stirs. Son. He stirs, and sighs still.


Judge. Wretched, wretched Theagines; what mercy is this at length has found
thee? was my self only saved of all this wrack?


Herm. All else perished.


Judge. Oh! that I had missed this charity too! my friend, aged Perseus, my
Brother, brave Memnon, and my Son, the hopeful Pausanes, all these my former
losses have robbed me of my griefs, which else these poor men would have
required of me; O equal heaven! thy abused Oracle, and breach of vows, thou now
but beginn'st to punish. Father, by thy habit thou art vowed unto the gods; if
then like me thou wilt not be punished for perjury, again deliver me to the doom
they appointed, and in the watery womb of the Sea intomb me.


Herm. Oh, Sir; despair not; they appoint us better then we can choose, and in
our greatest fears surprise us with their mercies.


Judge. Hear but what I am, and thou wilt be afraid to harbor me; for where ere
I go, there vengeance pursues me; my name's Theagines, once Judge of Sardinia,
and blessed with all that men call happiness; Children, Wealth, and power to save
or destroy where I lived, and though our State forbad Kings, all but that name
I possessed; my Brother too, whom they have punished, reigned chief Priest when I
ruled as Judge, equal in our births, equal in our blessings, in our power
equal, and in our faults too alike guilty, but not alike punished; for he I
fear is lost for ever; but the fault which now they are busy in punishing, is
this; 'twas enjoined by our Predecessors, as a grateful offering to peace,
under whose protection we found such benefits as all our neighboring Countries
wanted; that it should not be lawful for any to take up arms but in their own
defense, nor upon pain of perpetual banishment send their Sons abroad, lest
they might bring home the dangerous customs of other Countries; this law was
made, and with it vows of the strictest ties; this vow we vowed, and to this
Law with oaths were bound.


Herm. What danger could that bring you?


Judge. O Father, this Law we broke; and the curse of this vow pursues us; for
know, we had each of us a Son and Daughter; which blessings made us covetous to
have our Sons succeed us in our honors; and therefore thought to breed them
abroad, where they might learn'to rule: thus by ambition blinded we abused the
Oracle, and told the people 'twas the will of the gods our Sons should be sent
abroad; and I affirmed if they commanded, the Law assented. Then to the charge
of a faithful friend we gave our children, who were so young they knew not
themselves what they were, with a command to breed 'em fit to be Princes; but
neither to the world nor themselves discover that they were so. Long this fault
lay not hid, for the abused Oracle unasked complains, and to the incensed
people tells our falsehood; by them we were banished, never to return till we
had found our Sons, which was some mercy; but alas! Fate was juster then the
people; for our Sons are lost, my friend dead, and my Brother in our Pilgrimage
by a strange accident divided from me. Now ought I to hope for mercy, or wish
to outlive these losses?


Herm. As yet you are not secured that these are losses; nor has any assured
you they are dead; therefore defer this sadness, and let me lead you into my
Cabin.


Judge. Oh let me lean upon thy aged shoulder; for I have a load will sink me.


Herm. Do, do; sad time when I can be a stay to a Prince! Son The Son makes a
fire on the Stage. make a fire upon the shore, that if any wretch unfortunate
be cast upon this loan place, they may see it and repair hither; 'twill be some
comfort to find we have charity.


ACT. IV. SCEN. III.
Enter three Slaves. Slav. THe gods protect us, and recall this judgment, Storm.


[Ent. Gil. Gil. Hence, ye dogs, leave your howling; God's Death, have we lived as
if we hoped for mercy, or expected protection from our prayers? be gone, and
endeavor; every wise man rules his stars, and may defer that fate which prayer
cannot alter, see if I have not lost my power? why stay ye? who plies the Pump
now, she will founder through the slaves negligence.


Slave. Why should we labor against heaven that has decreed our ruin? there is
no hope, we are all lost, the sea already is our grave.


Gil. Villain, thou shall not dye by water, I Will be thy fate. -- And yours if
you stay.


[He stabs one, and the other slaves go off. Enter Zenon and Leucanthe. Zenon.
See if the storm has not wrought in her Element of water too, and blown it in
tears from her eyes.


Gil. Would it had blown the fire thence too, the earthy part would not wound
me; my danger and their beauty in those active Elements lie; for in her living
Jeat the fire bears sway.


Zenon. I know his resolution, but I Will watch him.


[Steps aside. Gil. We are alone; I must not lose this opportunity; will you
yet grant my suit, and yield me love? or must I follow the examples of the
gods, and in a storm compass my will? say, will you give, or shall I force?


Leuc. Is this a time for love, when the raging storm drowns thy words? Oh thou
abused power! who thus enraged pursues us even to the last of all our name; and
for abused sacrifice will the Priest in judgment offer? if thou have decreed
my fall, take it while I am fit for sacrifice, while I am pure, and my virgin
snow unsoil'd. Protect me from this ravisher, whose impious heat burns his
hated Gillippus lays hold on her and pulls her. breast, even in the bosom of
the sea.


Gil. Cease to call, and yield me love; thou see all the ship is busy with
apprehension of our danger, which my love will not give leave to fear; thoughts
of thee so take up all the room here, that care of my self cannot get in.


Leuc. Away, unhand me; consider the dangers and misery thou He offers to take
hold of her. art in.


Gil. Dangers! it is but noise only; and to me no new thing to see the Elements
thus at war, and strive to run again to their first Chaos. Thousands of times
have I naked stood their rage, when the element of fire has shot his angry
flame into the yielding main, as if he had meant to wound her god with his
forked lightning; this I have seen, and felt the mischiefs the unruly winds
beget when they break prison, and force from the entrails of the earth a
dangerous birth; and still their dangers were but noise.


Leuc. O impious man! have thou seen their power, and felt a mercy above it,
and do thou slight it?


Gil. Slight it? no, nor fear it; nor would you apprehend it were you
acquainted with the uncertainty of this element, and with me had seen these
dangers grow from nothing. A thousand times I have looked upon her smoothest
brow, and heard the false winds whisper to her, till their flatteries have
wrought into her bosom, and there filled with ambition the covetous element
that would aspire at heaven, being thus seduced, discovering even to the eyes
of men the secrets of her womb; this I have seen too, and wrought through these
dangers; nor will I believe any thing can save me when I cannot save my self:
will you yield? or you will find other dangers.


Leuc. Oh strange daring! O heaven! quench his saucy flames, or He pulls her.
add your fires to 'em, and hide your lightning in his lustful breast: fool and
villain I never met before, though wise and wicked seldom join; do tempt me
now with all my fears about me? if I were a common prostitute acquainted with
sin I durst not, when thunder speaks, listen to thy wickedness; it shakes even
my Reason; rather fall upon thy knees, and no longer tempt the gods thus to our
destruction.


Gil. Away, I Am deaf.


Leuc. Villain, will thou sin while their Plagues hang over thee; and add to
thy faults while they are punishing? Oh ye winds, take Still he pulls her, and
she r^s^ts. my tears upon your wings, and through this storm convey 'em to that
youth whose honor took me even in the amidst of my dangers; and tell him his
faith unfortunately has betrayed me to this misery. Hipparchus, unknown name of
honor, guilty by chance, by fate only faulty; oh! that thy sword were here to
defend us both.


Gil. Ha! is there another that you love? nay then the earth He takes her in
his arms and sets her down again. Enter Ze^on. shall not save you.


[Enter Zenon. Zenon. But it shall, veer more sheat, hale, tack aboard; who is
at helm? Master, set a yare man to the helm, steer thus, thus.


Helm-man. Done it is.


Zenon. Peace.


Gil. Hell take thee for thy interruption.


[Exit Leucanthe. Zenon. Low're your main-sail, 'twas your fault we laod our
bonnet to; full, full.


Helm-man. Done it is.


Enter Master. Mast. Strike her fore-sail, here is a gust will bear our Mast by
the board else.


Gil. How now, Master, is she tight?


Mast. No, a pox on her for a Whore, she leaks, but we have girt her: port,
port hard.


Helm-man. Done it is.


Mast. What Galleys are those that chase us? the Admiral's one.


Zen. I believe the King's aboard, she has stood with us all this day.


Gil. No matter what they are; would we had no worse enemies to deal with; who
keeps the lead there?


Within. O them a deep, fifteen fathom and a half, oh!


[Within. Gil. What ground have you?


Within. Corral.


[Within. Gil. Corral, hell and confusion; we are upon the Rocks of Asmara,
luff, luff-hard, and veer, tack, hale your sheat aboard; Boatswain, brace your
fore-sail, bring her in the wind, be yare Mates, clap the helm a lee, bring her
upon her stays, we are lost else.


Zenon. Keep the lead going.


[Exeunt Zenon and Master. Gil. They Are howling already, what is my fate's my
fate, and it may conquer; but I Will never yield to it, nor sink while these oars
Teey cry within. can bear me through.


[Exit. ACT. IV. SCEN. IV.
Enter Hipparchus and Pausanes. Hip. LOose the slaves, we want men to trim our
sails.


Paus. O Hipparchus, that we had but the Pluto here to bustle with this storm;
this is a painted whore, her back's too weak to bear her burden.


Hip. Look out, Pausanes, the Galley that we chased is sinking.


Paus. The gods protect the Princess; see, see, she has escaped that gust, and
now they bear up with the land.


Hip. Let us steer with 'em, we may save some; port, port hard.


Helm-man. Done it is.


[Enter Boatswain. Boats. Who Is at the helm? slaves, we'll bring our sails into
the wind, veer more sheat there; for heavens sake, Gentlemen, to your Cabins
and pray.


Hip. We have changed our course to bear up with the Galley that is in distress.


Boats. Is the Princess in that Galley?


Hip. I, she is there, and her virtue interceding a safety against all their
hopes or merits.


Boats. In with the lead there: Ho, the cunnery, due west, west, Enter the King
and Eucratia. steer due west; we are so far upon the Lee-shoar we shall never
weather the Land, if we fall to the southward we are lost, the westward has a
safe bay; courage, Madam, we a tight ship, and a stout ging.


Paus. Mates, clear an anchor to drop, ere she strikes; heave out the longboat
there.


[Exeunt all but the King and Eucratia. King. O ignorance of man! it is best
seen in diverse ways that knowledge runs in; this their art and wise directions
is to me distractions. O Madam! let me add to these dangerous multitude of
waters my tears, that my repentance may wash off this stain. It Is not the Sea I
sink under, but my faults to you. Can you forgive my blindness that have led
you into these dangers? Accursed be that Traitor Villain that brought 'em into
this extremity. That on land I could have redeemed, but this all these waters
cannot expiate.


Euc. They are not dangers fright me, though yours be joined to them, for which
Heaven knows I have a pain; you have proved such a friendly Enemy, my griefs
concern not my self now, for I am only in the power of Heaven, and the Gods
are no less strong at Sea than Land; for though their wonders dwell in the
deep, yet their mercies wait there too.


King. O divine Eucratia! let me kneel to thee, and in this storm call upon thy
name to save me.


Euc Tempt not those Powers which must protect us, but join with me for my lost
Sister, poor Leucanthe, who is not only subject to this storm, but the dangers
too with which a Traitor's lust begirts her. O Sir! I know to die spotless is
now her Prayer and all her wishes but what we pray against, a wrack.


King. 'Twas her Galley that we chased, the Villain was forced to run ashore;
nor will we fail with our endeavors to seek her safety: but O! she strikes: O!
we are lost, she strikes: O! Within O! O? O? Enter Paus. and Hip.


Paus. Man the Longboat, not a man enter till the King and Queen be in: Sir,
descend, the Ship strikes, but we are near the shore, the Longboat now is all
our hopes.


ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Gillippus with Leucanthe tied at his back, and the knot in his mouth.
Gil. THe fire of lust, and warmth which that heat lent gave me strength to
resist the coldness of the water, and to my appetite and longings the Powers
that saved me: If I can call back her life I Will sacrifice this Lamb; I made
Zenon bind her, that she might not have her will ere I had mine; the knot in
my teeth I held that when I could keep her no longer she might slip; for my
love it is vowed to the living not to the dead; and when I cannot what I would I
will what I can; to yonder fire which guided me to this safety I Will bear my
load, when she begins to live I Will seem to die; and so I Will handle the chance,
and in oily words cloth this service, faintly pleading Pardon for my past
faults, as if I had only life enough to tell her the obligation she owes me:
then if I find her melt, by degrees I Will let her charity prevail, and slowly
seem to recover: but if she seem to rejoice in my fall, and my prayers fail, by
all the Gods hers then shall not prevail.


ACT. V. SCEN. II.
Enter the King, Eucratia, Hipparchus, and Pausanes, all above. King. THe storm
begins to cease, and this our miraculous deliverance calls for a hearty and
speedy sacrifice; Let the Longboat immediately search the wrack for the
Princess Leucanthe.


Hip. What other Vessel's that? Some of the wrack swims still.


King. It Is a Sicilian Galley by her Flag.


Euc. O Sir! look, they swim still in charity as a Sacrifice for our
deliverance, if it be possible save 'em; the Youth strikes the Waters with
unskilful Oars: O save, save the Innocent.


Paus. Be at peace, Madam, if it be in man I Will save 'em.


Hip. What do you mean?


Paus. To leap in.


Hip. It Is desperate.


Paus. It Is honest, nay it is honorable; and when can a young man die better, or
hope to have his end waited on with braver Mourners? Thou see I have hunted
from danger to danger all my life but to find a name, or one to own me, and
cannot compass it; therefore to choose I Will leap into this danger; for from this
glorious end I may in story force one; and therefore leave to counsel, and leap
in with me; and let us through this as a thousand other dangers together
labor; then if I faint, Hipparchus may be by; and if Hipparchus faint, Am not
I there? Farewell, if thou will not follow, Farewell for ever.


[He leaps in. Hip. He Is gone, Pausanes, Friend, steer thy Course to yonder
fire, there I Will meet thee, and if it be possible, assist thy brave resolution.


[Exit. King. Ye Gods! What strange kind of men are these?


ACT. V. SCEN. III.
Enter Gillippus with Leucanthe in his arms. Gil. SO, here I Will rest my Burden;
she begins to recover her strength, and Reason works apace; she called for
help, but He arries her to the fire. named no body, but at large, Gentle
Soldier help.


Leuc. O save me, save me, Gentle Youth, I am betrayed.


Gil. Hark! again.


Leuc. Ha! Where am I? What place is this?


Gil. Now Gillippus, hide thy Snares cunningly, and then thou may catch this
Bird.


[Gil. counterfeits himself dead, and lies by her. Leuc. Ha! wet? -- Good
Heaven! now my fears return with my Reason, and I remember the danger I was in
by a storm at Sea. -- Ha! What Is this? A man laid by my side? Sleeps he, or is
he dead? Good Heaven protect me, How came I here? -- Who Is this? Gillippus?
Bless me! he is so wicked, Methinks his Ashes should be dangerous. Hark! he
groans. O! that faithful stranger, little does his soul fear what miseries his
bounty has brought me. Hipparchus the Traitor called him, or my busy mind
deceived me.


Hip. Yonder Is the fire which my Friend, will steer his desperate Course to.
Ha! What do I see? Leucanthe, and Gillippus dead by her? Enter Hip.


Gil. Who Is that named Gillippus, Zenon?


Leuc. What, alive?


[Gil. seeing Hip. rises. Gil. Hipparchus! Nay, then I see my fate pursu es me.


Hip. Art alive? -- Ye Gods, take this in sac ifice while I offer that --


[Kneels and kisses her hand, then points to Gil. Leuc. It Is he, it is the Youth
that saved me -- O Sir, protect me from this Ravisher.


Hip. If he escape me now I Am strangely cursed; Do you stare, Sir?


[They fight. Gil. I bleed apace.


Hip. I Am wounded.


Gil. Nay, it has a mouth, would it had this tongue in it.


Hip. You can fall when you are not dead; if thou jest now take that in earnest.


[Gil. falls. Gil. Hold, I Am unfit for such a sudden Exit; O she is lost, she is
lost, for ever lost.


Leuc. O Sir! Spare him a little time to throw off that load that sinks him.


Hip. O Madam! to what danger has my mistake of service brought you? Are you
not at war with all our Sex for the Treacheries of this Villain?


[Hip. as he speaks faints. Leuc. How do you, Sir? Alas, he faints!


Hip. I bleed apace, and I fear my wounds are deeper than I apprehended; for I
feel a darkness now begin to close mine eyes. O Madam! Madam!


[He falls. Leuc. O! I fear he is lost; Good Gods, send some aid and counsel to
a wretched Maid whom ye have pursued with change of cruel fates. O that I had
died ere I had seen this Youth; unfortunate Leucanthe, to see thy Love thus in
the Cradle bloody, born only to add another cause of grief.


[Enter Judge, Judge. This way I heard some body cry for help, and 'twas
mingled with the noise of Swords; What Is here, a man wet and wounded? Good
Heaven! last night thou little expected'st such a land fate: More misery!
Whence are they? A woman too? It Is some Murder sure. I Will take my Sword, those
that could so destroy their youth will not spare my age.


Leuc. What art thou, Father, that pitiest our sad fates? Come hither and I Will
teach thee how to mourn.


Judge. Is he dead thou mourn'st thus? Let me see his wounds, Hold up's head,
he breaths, Bow him forward while I fetch a Balsam, whose sovereign power (if
the vital parts be not perished) will restore his health.


[Exit Judge. Leuc. Run, run; O my Joy! if thou dy'st, upon thy Tomb I Will lay
Marble rough as thy fortune, and on it set fixed a living statue till with my
tears I have pollish'd it.


[Enter Judge. Judge. So, pour this Balsam into his wounds, and bind them up,
and stay his head while I go find the Hermit's Son, he shall help to bear him
to my Cabin.


[Exit Judge. Enter King, Eucratia, Sortanes, Hermit and his Son, with the
Bodies of Lysimella and Pausanes. King. Bring 'em to yonder fire; and while
Euoratia applies her charity to the Youth I Will assist Pausanes.


Judge. Eucratia! Who named Eucratia?


Leuc. Why, do thou know Eucratia?


Judge. Know her! Yes, Leucanthe.


Leuc. Father!


Judge. It Is she.


Leuc. O ye Gods! your hands are visible through all this change.


King. Who are those about the fire?


Euc. Leucanthe and Theagines. O Sir! we are blessed beyond our Euc. goes to the
fire and knows them. hopes.


Judge. Eucratia here too! O remove my doubts, by what fate are we met thus
strangely?


King. 'Twill ask a longer time, Sir, than her charity now can spare to tell.
In this time the Hermit is busy about Lysimella.


Son. Father, they are all acquainted, and yet in my conscience they never
appointed this meeting.


Hermit. What Is here? A woman's breast in a Doublet? Ladies, some of your hands
will be more proper here, this habit belongs not to the Sex it clothes.


Euc. A woman!


Hermit. Yes.


King. Sortanes, have you never seen that face? The King knows her.


Sor. Yes, on my life.


King. It Is Lysimella.


Lys. Here, O here! Who called wretched Lysimella?


King. Madam, your charity has found my Sister, my Friend, all that I call
dear; and see if a cross fate has not attempted to snatch her hence: O persist
in your charity, and a little dispense with your joy, and try to save her.


Euc. If my blood could save her, to every vein I would a passage give, and
through those thousand streams pursue her safety.


Hermit. More of that Strong-water, and give him leave to breathe.


[Hermit busy to save Paus. Euc. Here, put on this loose Roll, and hide her
Disguise.


Gil. Some charitable hand convey me to Hipparchus, that from my dying lips I
may breathe him comfort. About my neck you will They turn to Gillippus. find two
golden Medals which I took from him and Pausanes bosom, in which (I heard one
Perseus tell, who that day fell in battle) was writ in Characters their Names
and Country, which yet they know not.


Judge. Perseus! Who can tell tidings of the aged Perseus?


Gil. That can I -- At the sack of Tunis he fell by my hands, when I took those
youths Prisoners, they called him Father -- O! I feel I Am sinking, but whither,
O whither, Mercy, Mercy, Heaven.


[He dies. Judge. I am wrapped in amazement at these things; these are He takes
the Medals from Gil. bosom. the Medals we hung about our Childrens necks;
Which of these two was called Pausanes?


Euc. This.


Judge. On thee then fall a blessing; but on thee my Son a thousand, thousand
blessings; all that a weeping Father can with penitent He turns to Hip. tears
call down fill thy days.


Hermit, aside. What have I lived to see?


Judge. Oh, Leucanthe and Eucratia, see your long lost Brothers.


King. Though my part be strange; yet these wonders make it seem nothing,
there is such providence in the chances; how fares my Lysimella?


Lys. Oh Brother, can you forgive this fault? I heard some body name Pausanes,
where is he?


King. Here.


Lys. There! and not come to Lysimella? oh! my fears will end this wrack,
speak; by all the honors of thy youth, I conjure thee, is he dead, or no?


King. No, upon my life, he lives and is found a Prince.


Lys. A Prince! and will not my Brother then --


King. Why do thou hide thy blushes in my bosom, think thou I can be cruel
to Lysimella? no, no; since I saw thee I have felt thy pain, and now can love
too, but dare not promise I shall be fortunate.


Euc. Can I add to your joys? if I can, Sir, let this Priest witness my vows to
the King.


Herm. Will it please the King to retire to my homely Cell, it is free from
storms, unless you bring 'em with you; I have lived long there, but never felt
any save what my sins brought. Some skill too I have in herbs, and fortunate (I
thank the gods) I have been in my attempts in Surgery; and hope they will smile
upon these Patients too, I find no danger of death amongst 'em: and when I have
my Salvatory laid by, then I Will take up my Beads; for the Priest, I see, must
complete the joys of these happy pairs, my interest in which I Will no longer
hide. -- Oh speak Eucratia, think thou the gods will accept an offering from
aged Memnon's hand again, that Puts off his disguise. once abused their altars
by giving false Oracles, which thus they have revenged? if thou think they
will, here I throw off my disguise, and from a Father and Priest, Sir, receive
her.


Euc. My Father!


Judge. Memnon, my Brother! oh welcome!


King. Let me interrupt your joys, lest their excess prove dangerous; and to
the gods that have wrought this blessing, let us pass on to sacrifice.


Herm. Lead on, Theagines, while we these young men bear off, on each of which
a Virgin shall like their good genius wait; the story, how we came to be thus
happy, we'll defer to a fitter time, when health and Hymen shall wait on these
Princes, to set their Prisoners free, and prove Loves Fetters Liberty.


[Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

