Three Plays Written by Sir William Killigrew, Vice-Chamberlain to Her Majesty
the Queen Consort. 1664. Viz. Selindra. Pandora. Ormasdes.


LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb; for John Playfere, at the White Lion, in the Upper
Walk of the New Exchange; And Thomas Horsman, at the three Kings in the Strand,
1665.

WIT (like the World) is so decrepid grown,
It wants some Crutch, or Hint to lean upon.
Only you work alone, it may be said,
Your Poems are created, and not made.
You frame the stuff too, we but shapes and features;
Our Poems are our Children, yours, your Creatures.
Just as Gods Poem, Earth; So vast, so fair,
Suspended in, not built upon the Air.
Poys'd by it is self, (like Archimede's Dove,)
Your Fancy's made to exist, as ours to move.
We vex the Subject that we write upon,
Whilst all you write is Emanation.
Thus you retrive Old Time; for just as then
The Golden Age, was but the Iron Men;
So to Posterity it may be told
Our Age is Iron, but our Wits are Gold.
For tell me why, the Golden Age may not hence
Be styled from Wit, as then from Innocence?
He that will choose your Fancy, let him dread
To wish for all your Wit, without your Head.
What fan's the Ship, the Cock-boat would o're-turn,
And what in you's but bright, would else where burn.
For Marcyas to be Pan were pretty fair,
Too much for Pan t'usurp Apollo's Chair.
T. P.

Scholars your Studies, and your Books lay by,
Unless you could with Art and Industry
Something produce, beyond what here is shown,
By one to whom your Learning is unknown;
Nature in him the Effect of Art supplies
With stories full of such varieties,
And proper Language, for all Humors fit,
So wonderful, for Judgment, and for Wit;
That only he, so aptly could Relate,
What his high Fancy could alone Create.
R. T.

On Pandora.
FOr me to praise your Play, were to dispraise
So weak a Bays, can no great Trophy raise;
Yet my Respect commands me fix a Name,
To you no Glory; Yet may prove my Shame.
Prose, though indifferent, yet passes still,
Verse, if not Excellent! most Men count ill:
Foyls set off Jewels, such my Lines must be,
Then to be short, is no ill policy.
I think, there is Rich Sense, and Language fit,
I think, there is many turns of spritely wit,
I Am sure, you reach what was your highest end,
To show her power, on whom you now depend,
Whose Virtue has, so blessed an influence,
To make him Spiritual; that more loud sense;
You like Clearcus were; some thought too gay,
Now changed; witness this Recantation Play.
Lodowick Carlisle.

In Honor atissimi Domini Gulielmi Killigraei, and Regiae Catharinae Majestatis
Vi-Camerarii Praeclarum, and Inculpatissimum Drama Selindra Praeconium.
QUod prudens tua, quod modesta Musa
Vitavit petulantiora Scenae,
Nec Lenocinium joci procacis
(Quod falso ingenium student vocari)
Dum risum movet exuit Pudorem;
Inculpata tua at sonant Theatra
Quod virgo proba, quod stolata matter
Quod purus posita severitate
Jam post pulpita perlegat Sacerdos;
Quod jurat tibi nullus histrionum, aut
Laeso numine quaeritur venustas,
Nec constat populo tuum Poema
Impensis animae suae ut crumenae;
Quod (sermon humili urbium relicto
Vernis sordidulis and institori)
Venam Nobilis Auxiliumque spiras
Dignum Caesaris aure cum requir^ns
Summas Imperii levare curas;
Vult ut desipiat duabus horis;
Has dotes reputo tuas secundas:
Sed, quod cum veniunt ad implicata,
Cum Scena haereat, and quod impeditae
Desperant animi exitum Fabellae,
Qua vates veteres Jovem vocabant
Ad parts, poterit throno ut crepante
Narrare ambigui dolos Theatri,
Atque (ut vincula Gordiana quondam
Pellaeus juvenis) molesta tollunt
Insulso gladio nudique plaga,
Tu per nescio quam modo citatam
Ex nota tibi plebe Passionum
Ut quodam noviter reflante vento
Convertes alio novisque tota
Compages operis rotis movetur;
Neglectis superisque and inferisque
Per curam facilem domesticamque
Affectum proprio e sinu petitum
Salvas attonitos and haesitantes.
Hanc Artem tibi, Killigraei, solus
Tu posces, dubii hanc Strophen Theatri.
T. L.

The Latin Verses Translated.
THat thy wise, and modest Muse,
Flies the Stages Looser-Use;
Not Baudry Wit, does falsely Name,
And to move Laughter, puts off Shame.
That thy Theaters Loud Noise,
May be Virgins Chaste Applause;
And the stol'd Matron, Grave Divine,
Their Lectures done, may tend to thine!
That no Actor's made profane,
To debase God, to raise thy strain;
And People forced that hear thy Play,
Their Money, and their Souls to pay.
That thou leave Affected Phrase,
To the Shops to Use, and Praise;
And breathe a Noble Courtly Vain,
Such as may Caesar entertain,
When he weari'd would lay down,
The Burdens that attend a Crown,
Disband his Souls severer Powers,
In Mirth and Ease dissolve Two Hours!
These are thy Inferior Arts,
These I call thy second Parts!
But when thou carriest on the Plot,
And all are lost in the subtle Knot,
When the Scene sticks to every thought,
And can to no Event be brought,
When thus of Old, the Scene betrayed,
Poets, called Gods unto their Aid;
Who by Power might do the thing,
Art could to no Issue bring.
As the Pellaean Prince that broke,
With a Rude and Downright stroke.
The Perplexed and Fatal Noose,
Which his skill could not Unloose!
Thou do a Nobler Art profess,
And the Coyl'd Serpent can no less
Stretch out from every Twisted Fold,
In which he lay inwove and roul'd.
Induce a Night, and then a Day,
VVrap all in Clouds, and then display
The Easy, and the Even Design,
A Plot, without a God, Divine!
Let others bold pretending Penns,
Write Acts of Gods, that know not Men's.
In This to Thee, all must resign
The surprise of the Scene is wholly Thine!
Of Pandoras not being Approved upon the Stage as a Tragedy.
SIr, you should rather teach our Age the way
Of judging well, then thus have changed your Play;
You had obliged us by employing wit,
Not to reform Pandora, but the Pit:
For as the Nightingale, without the Throng
Of other Birds, alone attends her Song,
While the loud Daw, his throat displaying, draws
The whole Assembly of his fellow Daws;
So must the Writer, whose productions should
Take with the Vulgar, be of vulgar Mould;
While Nobler Fancies make a flight too high,
For Common view, and lessen as they fly.
Edmund Waller.

To Envy.
THou Snake that lurk'st under the Poets Bays,
Envy, confess thy Malice to these Plays,
Art thou not vexed to see the Plotts well laid,
The Language pure, and every Sentence weighed?
New Humors? Passion wrought up to that height,
Men weep, and yet their grief begets Delight?
All this by Nature done, which shows, the Arts
Infuse themselves, where they find Wit and Parts.
Out of these Premises we may infer
Here will be no work for the Censurer;
The wiser Critic will do better first:
And for the Foolish, let him do his worst.
R. Stapylton.

A Catalogue of Books printed by John Playfere, at the White Lion, in the Upper
Walk of the New Exchange.
ENderbie's History of Wales* Folio. Diggs of Unlawfullness of taking up Arms,
etc. 8o Birinthea, A Romance. 8o May's Lucan Complete. 8o Accademical
Discourses. 8o Court of Rome. 8o Luellin's Poems. 8o Juvenilia Sacra. 8o
Overburie's Characters. 8o Sleidan's Key of History. 12o Abbotts Geography. 12o
Mr. Hobby's Answer to Mr. Boil. 4o Court-ship a la Mode. 12o Countess of Kents
Receipts. 24o Dr. Walmstry, on the Saerament. 24o Earl's Characters. 24o
Plays.
Wit without Money. Night-Walkers. Cunning Lovers. in Quarto. Virgin Martyrs.
Filida Seiro, a Pastoral. The Prisoners and Claracilla, 8o
By Thomas Killigrew.
SELINDRA, A Tragy-Comedy.

Written by Sir William Killigrew.

Imprimatur, Aug. 23. 1664. Roger L' Strange.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb; for John Playfere at the White Lion, in the Upper
Walk of the New Exchange; And Thomas Horsman, at the three Kings in the Strand,
1665.

The Actors Names of Selindra.
LAscares, Emperor of Greece. Philocles, Lascares his Son. Ordella, Lascares
his Daughter. Secropius, Lascares his Favorite. Cleonel, Secropius his Son.
Selindra, A great Lady Attending Ordella, and supposed Daughter of Periander;
but is Astella, Princess of Hungary. Periander, A great Lord of Ciprus. Three
Ladies Attending Ordella. Antillacus, General of Greece. Armanthus, General of
the Horse. Antenor, Great Lords of Greece. Gillon. Officers. Guards. Servants.
Pages. Trebello, King of Hungary These appear not. Barzanes, his eldest son.
Pollinesso, Trebello's youngest son. Astella, His only Daughter. Orsanes,
General of Hungary. Lords. Officers. Pollidor, Hungarians. Tennedor, Tecknor,
Titius, Servants.
THE SCENE Is the Emperors Palace at Bizantium.
THE FIRST ACT.
Enter Lascares Emperor of Greece Secropius, Cleonel, and Attendants. Las.
HAve you yet Learnt Secropius, from whence this Rumor comes concerning Hungary?


Secro. I can by no means find the Author Sir; yet the whole Town is full of
it, it is in all men's mouths that Prince Philocles is Crowned King of Hungary,
yet ^one know why they say it?


Las. It cannot be, these Letters are but three days old, in which Antillacus
only mentions Philocles returned to Belgrade, having chased the Germans
home: --

Enter the Princess Ordella, Selindra, and Ladies to them
Las. Daughter I sent for you to partake the News these Letters bring; they
speak Philocles his Victories over the bold Germans, by which we gather, he
will be shortly here; -- We will welcome his return Ordella, with a Solemn
Triumph, to raise his great thoughts to Higher Actions; -- To this end I sent
for you, to think of some new way to Entertain the Princess Astella, who no
doubt your Brother will bring with him.


Or. Sir, I am so pleased to hear my Brother's well; I cannot yet enjoy his
Conquest.


Las. Secropius, be it your care to see these Triumphs ordered for Philocles,
as they were for me when I returned Victorious out of Asia; And Cleonel thy
charge is to Summon all our Young No^ bility unto a Royal Turnament, and be thy
se^ the Glory of our Court.


Cle. You make me blush Sir.


Secro. It shall be as you direct Sir; but how soo^ does the Prince write his
motion will be this way


Empe. My Letters are from our General Antillacus in have; who by the next,
does promise full Relation.


Or. Have you no Letters from my Brother Sir.


Las. Not yet Ordella; -- What News Armanthus?

Enter Armanthus in Mourning, he kisses the Emperors hand.
Arman. Sir, the Prince sent me before, to give you notice of his approach.


Las. His approach! how near?


Arman. He is about a League behind Sir.


Las. Is this habit, and thy sad looks, the signs of Victory? are Philocles
and you alone returned? Is all lost Armanthus.


Arman. Your Army is safe Sir, the Germans have quitted Hungary as you have
heard, and that Crown also has been offered unto Philocles.


Las. And by him received I hope; why then is this sad show? why such sorrows
in thy face? while we were ordering Triumphs to receive Philocles, thou have
surpised us with such sadness, as becomes ruined States only.


Arman. It Is for no less a loss I mourn Sir, for by your Victories, so sad a
fate is befallen Hungary, that all Noble hearts will feel some sorrow for it,
though they merrited no less.


Las. Make me know it.


Arman. When we had freed Hungary from the Germane War, and while the brave
Prince Pollinesso, with Philocles was Conquering, and returning from the
Germane Confines back to Belgrade, the old King Trebellio, and his Eldest Son
Barzanes, repented the Conditions made with your Majesty, for the re-delivery
of Moldavia; they forgot the benefit received by our Grecian Swords, and
prepare to send home Philocles, laden with Scorns, instead of Trophies.


Las. Strange Insolence! and as high a perjury as ever provoked Heaven! what
followed? how did Pollinesso bear himself?


Arman. The Young Prince Pollinesso was a firm Friend to Philocles, and
Endeavored what he could, to divert his Fathers, and his Brothers wicked
purposes.


Las. I Will make the whole Nation shrink under my Just Anger.


Arman. It will not need Sir, for as they securely sought to seize on Prince
Philocles (who lodged in the same Castle with them) it so pleased the gods,
that he by a quick securing of himself, the same night the Plot was laid, did
accidentally occasion all their ruins, though he intended no harm unto their
persons.


Las. Their ruins! are they dead? all dead.


Ar. They are Sir, and their crimes, not worthy of that sorrow the Prince has
for them, had not the innocent Pollinesso fallen with them.


Las By what accident fell he?


Arman. Pollinesso to do Philocles Service, was that fatal night concealed,
where he in a byroom might discover his Fathers wicked Counsels, unto which he
was never called, by reason of his avowed love to Philocles; So that when we
from the Princes Lodgings surpised the Castle Gate, the Alarm roused the
Hungarians from their close Council, and discovered Pollinesso where he stood
hid, who being in that amaze, compelled by his Father and Barzanes, to fly with
them unto a little Postern Gate, (to us unknown) that led unto the River, where
all entering a small Fisher Boat, they hasted down the stream to their own
Camp, which they found newly destroyed by our Army: (a mischief they designed
that night on us;) frighted by this ruin, they all return into their Boat, and
by a sudden wind that rise, were all drowned in the rough Danube.


Las. Why had not Pollinesso notice of your purpose?


Arman We had no time, nor could we come where he stood Concealed, if
Philocles had delayed he had been lost; and then our design being only to
Seize on Trebellico, and Barzanes persons; we could apprehend no danger toward
Pollinesso.


Ordel Where is Astella? how did she escape? how does she bear her Father and
her Brothers loss? how does she look on Philocles? and how become the Crown,
and Throne, now they are her own?


Arman After this sad accident, Philocles was informed that Astella was
conveyed away before the War, on purpose to abuse him; but where concealed,
none knew but those who were with Lascares drowned.


Las But how has Philocles despos'd the Affairs of Hungary?


Arman. The Hungarians much amazed at Astellas absence; did urge Philocles to
accept the Crown, as by the hand of heaven thrown on him, but he without delay,
delivered up the sole power and trust unto Orsanes, and five more, until
Astella might be found; and then by the consent of all, he did Command
Antillacus in his return with the Army, to take possession of Moldavia, which
by a double right is now again rejoined unto your Empire Sir.

Enter Prince Philocles, and Lords in mourning; with Servants he kneeles and
Rises.
Las. Philocles the gods are just, they have blessed thy undertakings, which
thou should not grieve, but thank them for, they have saved me a labor too,
in punishing those ungrateful perjured Princes.


Phil. Had not Pollinesso fallen, I had not cast away a sigh for all the rest,
for him, my whole Life spent in sorrow is not enough, He was as Noble, as the
others were unworthy; he and I, contracted such a Frindship, you would have
thought but one heart had given Life to both.


Las. Thou have done ill Philocles, so rashly to despose so great Affairs
without my Council; I hear you have given away a Kingdom, in a Complement.


Phil. Sir, what I have done will not abate my interest there; I have also made
a promise to search for Astella in our Neighbor Islands, where it is most like
she is concealed.


Las. That will be near as great a folly as the other, to what purpose will you
run such a hazard? rather meet our Army, and return with it to Belgrade, there
let Astella find you securing her interest, in her absence.


Phil. I cannot with my Honor do it Sir, Astella may then believe, I sought
the Ruin of her Family, to gain the Crown unto my self.


Las. What if she do? you may at leisure inform her of the Truth; -- I do
Command you to lay by your further thought of this fond Journey, to search for
Astella; is this a time to Act Romances in? when the whole World is in
Combustion round us; think better on it Philocles.


Or. I hope my Brother will not throw himself on dangers, without a good
Argument to justify his Actions; this new Journey, gives me new fears for you.


Phil. I shall consider ere I go Ordella, and at your Lodgings this night,
express my joys to see you.

Philocles Embraces his Sister Ordella and leads her out after Lascares.
[Exeunt Omnes. Only Selindra stays and sits ^n a Chair.
Sell. Oh! Oh!

Cleonel Returns
Cle. Selindra weeping, -- has the sad tale of Hungary drawn these tears from
your fair eyes Madam?


Sell. Good my Lord, spare me a while, I am not fit for Courtship now.


Cle. I cannot with Honor leave you in the power of such an Enemy, as your
sorrow is.


Sell. You cannot deliver me from a greater then your self, at this time.


Cle. That is not kindly said Selindra, scarce Civil, if you consider my long
Love, and my Respects.


Sell. My Lord, you know I ever shunned your Love, and as much as in me lay
avoided those Respects, you now upbraid me with.


Cle. I do confess you have, it is therefore I now come, to pres^ you to declare
if I may ever hope to gain more favor from you; my Suit is present Marriage,
may I hope for such happiness at last?


Sell. As I never have, so I shall never give you cause to think it.


Cle So Fair, so Innocent, so Gentle, and so Severe, I never saw before. But I
shall hope to find you in a better humor at some other time Selindra; your
Father interrupts me now.

Exit Cleonel. Enter Periander to Selindra.
Sell. Unhappy day that I was born, and more unhappy this, that I have lived to
hear such mischief on: Oh Periander! my Father, and my Brothers are all Dead,
Murdered by Philocles, Betrayed, and Slain by Philocles; Pollinesso's dead,
my only comfort is for ever gone, and yet I live to tell it.

[She Weeps*
Peri. Madam the Crown of Hungary is now yours, and Philocles but the
^nstrument sent by the gods to punish your parents crimes, their perjury pulled
this Judgment on their own heads.


Sell. It does not become you my Lord to tell me so, nor yet to think it, if you
consider Lascare's covetous nature, and Philocles ambitious spirit, you might
with me see all this was designed to ruin my Family, and so to get the Crown
unto themselves; but I shall soon revenge it on dissembling Philocles and
bring such a Ruin into Greece, as no time shall parrallel; -- here to
Pollinesso's Ghost, She Kneeles. I vow Philocles his Life, if ever I can
safely reach it.


Peri Madam take heed, least you like them do pull a second mischief on your
self; Philocles you see is Noble, he leaves the Crown to you, when offered him
by all your Subjects; he Loved Pollinesso you have no Argument against
Philocles, he Laments him as much as you can.


Sell. I Periander, and in sorrow seeks me too; no doubt but he would gladly
have me in his power to murder.


Peri. I cannot think so; but Madam you should now consider where you are, and
in whose power; in my opinion you must keep this disguise, with all the Art you
can; and lay by your sorrow for a while, not practice any thing toward
revenge, nor by a look discover such a thought, un^il I can go to Belgrade,
there make Orsanes and the rest, know that you live, that we may find some way
to fetch you home with safty, where you may with security prosecute your
revenge.


Sell. I shall take your advise my Lord, now that you comply in my revenge, and
study to disguise my grief till your return, but can admit no thoughts, but my
revenge on Philocles; Pollinesso my dear Brother, I will Celebrate thy
Funerals in such a manner, as shall speak my Love to thee; and hate to him that
murdered thee;

No Roman Pile e're made so great a flame;
I Will Sacrifice this Empire to thy Name.
Weeps.
Per. Madam, this passion will discover, and destroy you in spite of my
Endeavors.


Sell. I have now done my Lord, indeed I have.


Peri. I can have no Faith Madam, unless you will now promise in presence of
our gods, to hide this anger, and not to discover your self till my return,
unless some Eminent necessity require, for you will be lost, when known unto
Lascares.


Sell. I do engage as you desire, and shall --

Enter Ordella to them with Ladies.
Or. In tears Selindra! what cause have thou to weep?


Per. My present departure for Ciprus, makes her thus Childish.


Or. Will your stay there belong my Lord?


Per. Not many days Madam.


Or. Come Selindra, thou shall go with me, I Will divert thy tears, by showing
thee my griefs which thou will be Concerned for, if thou do love me.

[Exeunt Omnes.] Re-enter Ordella, and Selindra, in Ordella's Chamber.
Sell. Truly Madam, I am very sensible of your Grief, and do not approve of the
Prince his journey, to search for Astella.


Or. You must not only not approve it Selindra, but with me condemn it, as a
rash and hazzardous undertaking; besides the folly of seeking one he never saw,
one that he has no engagement to! What madness will it be for Philocles, to
put himself within her power, before he knows how she recants her Friends
deaths? for if there were such affection between Astella and Pollinesso (as is
said) the sight of Philocles, must needs raise a passion in her, such as may
destroy my Brother, before Selindra Weeps. his innocence can appear; -- (How Is
this? can these tears fall for her Fathers absence a few days? or is it for
what I utter? I hope she Ordella speaks (aside) is not so much concerned for
Philocles;) -- Selindra I do take it ill, that you thus lament your Fathers
absence, who runs no hazard above my sorrow, for my Brothers dangerous
Journey, in search of Astella.


Sell Madam my tears were re-call'd by your Highness sighs, by your trouble for
the Prince his Journey, your favors have been such to me, that I were
unworthy, if I should not weep, as well as smile with you.


Or. It Is handsomely put off, -- -- I thank thee [Ordella aside. Selindra, and
do so little doubt thy Love, that I do beg thy best Arguments to assist me,
that we together may convince my Brother, and prevail with him to stay.


Sell. Madam, I shall obey your commands; and observe your directions as far as
will become me: But I do fear the Prince will condemn me of much rudeness, If
I shall interpose my vain opinions against his purposes; good Madam do not put
me to do, what hereafter you will blame me for.


Or. Fear it not Selindra, I love thee better, then to throw away thy credit
so! -- see where my brother comes.

Enter Philocles, Ordella meets him kindly, yet sadly too.
Sell I have a hard task on me! Selindra, [Aside (to complement the man I hate
to death*


Phil. Why so sad my Deer Sister; your looks speak a sorrow through your smiles!


Or. Can you ask? and know your self to be the cause of it, can Philocles be
in danger? and Ordella, not be sad! can you think smiles would become my face?
when my heart shrinks to think of your rash journey, to seek Astella you know
not where; I can no more put off my fears, then my affection for you.


Phil. Dearest Ordella, let not a mistaken cause of fear for me, beget such a
trouble in you; there is no danger in my purposed Journey, I shall only search
the Grecian Isles, where none dares do me harm, you know I am engaged in
honor to perform, what I have so publicly declared, and I am sure you love
my Honor, equal with my Person.


Or I do so, and could I see the necessity you urge, to search for Astella, my
passion should submit to your reason, and that I may not flatter my own
affection, I shall now submit unto Selindra's opinion, who has no reason to be
partial to either of our arguments; I prithee good Selindra, speak freely what
thou thinks't of my brothers Journey.


Sell. Truly Sir, if I may judge! the Princess tells you what you should better
consider of, then I think you yet have; not that I do apprehend any dangerous
hazzards in the Journey as she does, nor can I find any arguments fit to
persuade you from attempting dangers, when your Honor calls you to them; give
me leave Sir, only to ask, how your Honor is concerned to make this search?
why do you entend so great a trouble to your self; from whence is this value of
Astella? who you never saw; why does your Highness seek a Woman that has never
oblidged you? nor you her, but by the ruin of her Family, insenc'd her.


Phil. It Is true that I have never seen, nor obblidg'd Astella in particular;
but I have by many hazards of my Life endeavored both; the Fame of her
Excelling Beauty, and greater Virtue, begot in me a desire to serve her, and
her whole Family, which I did faithfully, in freeing Hungary from the Germain
Yoke: 'twas an unhappy Fate befell her Parents, by themselves pulled on them,
not by me intended; in which sad loss, I bear so great a share, that I have
no peace within, until I have made my Innocence unto Astellas self appear,
that she may see, that I had no design to hurt the Princes persons, nor to
Conquer Hungary.


Sell. What you have bravely done in that War, deserves a Trophie, and from
Astella no less value, when she shall be well informed of all that past there;
till then Sir, the Princess thinks it not fit for you to Visit, Astella, for we
often see Great Princes Virtues, does not answer the Report Fame gives them.


Or. Most true Selindra, my heart presages a Ruin if you go; could I lay by
my affection to you, and put on Astellas cause, I would undertake to confute
those Arguments, you so much trust in: Methinks I see you kneeling, and the
enraged Astella, deaf to all you say, swelling with anger, for brave
Pollinesso's loss, and ready to facrifice you. -- come Selindra if ever I have
deserved Ordella weeps, Love from thee! show it now by assisting me my own way,
by thy best Language: do thou stand forth, and as Astella, receives my
over-confident She pulls Selindra to Act Astella: She stands before the Chair
of State. Brother, spare him not Selindra, but suppose you had a Brother as
dear to you, as Pollinesso was to her, and that beloved Brother, by Philocles
his rash attempt, sent to his untimely grave; let loose some tears, to
accompany those I have shed, and for my sake, put on a look so mixed with
Majesty, Grief, and Anger, as may present her Part thou play'st: (I, that look
will do it.)


Sell. Madam, You see my ready Obedience to your Commands; but will the Prince
permit such boldness?


Phil. Yes Selindra, since nothing else will satisfy my Sister, I am content
for once to bear a part in this Child's play, -- on condition Ordella that you
put off your sadness if I prevail.


Or. I shall, so you will stay at home, if she do get the better of you.


Phil. Content: -- can Selindra frown in jest? He turns to Selindra and sees
her looks angry -- methinks she looks as if she would do it to the life
Ordella.


Sell. Yes Philocles, I can frown when I have just, cause! and will make thee
repent this rash attempt to visit me, thou have beyond my hope, put thy self
into my power to punish;


Phil. How that angry Cloud spreads! Can those bright Lights suffer an Eclips,
and not portend some fatal Ruin? what if they do! shall I shake at Thunder,
that cannot reach me? be concerned for an unjust anger! no, not though the gods
did threat: -- But Astella will not nourish a thought mis-be-coming her Virtue,
nor so much lessen her great name, by a mistaken passion, to harm a man, whose
Endeavors were to serve her.


Sell. A mistaken Passion Philocles! are not my Father and my Brothers dead?
though not by thy hand Butchered, yet by thy attempts they fell; is not the
glory of our name Extinguished? the honor of men fallen? all lost in
Pollinesso's death!


Phil. Astellas self is not more free, then I was, from intending evil to her
friends; they forced me to secure my self; by which they were all lost, their
Plots and Perjuries pulled this Ruin on them: only Pollinesso was not Guilty,
he would not comply with fierce Barzanes envious designs, nor with his Fathers
blacker purposes, Pollinesso was a witness of my hazards in that War, and did
partake an equal share in them, and in the Victory; we often sealed our vows of
Amity in our best bloods together, which did beget so mutual a Love, that our
souls moved ever one way; I would rather have dyed with Pollinesso, then live
thus to lament his loss; by these unfeigned tears I would.


Sell. Thou speakst a Language so pleasing to my ears, that I could wish my vow
to sacrifice thee to my brothers ghost, had never past my lips, for I can see,
and value all thy noble actions; and judge the guilt of my own friends that
sell, and can bear the loss of all but Pollinesso! -- he you say dyed
Innocent, free from the others Crimes, full of Honor, Rich in Virtue, in the
Blossom of his Age, my only Joy fell: -- and you my only hate, shall dye so
too! your Worth, your Youth, and your Innocence, will make my oblation
acceptable to those powers, I have vowed you too; vain man, can thou think
Pollinesso's ghost will be appeased with words? or tears! if thou were ever
worthy my brothers love, show it now, in courageous dying to his memory, for by
all our gods thou dyest; -- a guard there.

She is interrupted by Ordella.
Or. It Is bravely done Selindra, thou made me start, and shake to see thee
look, and hear thee speak with such aweful majesty! -- how is it Brother? how
do you think Astellas self will receive you? when one so unconcerned, can use
you thus! do you yield yet? have we the better argument?

Philocles and Selindra stands both amazed.
Phil. Yes you have.


Or. You Will stay then!


Phil. I think I shall.


Or. My deer, deer Selindra, let me kiss thee, thou have oblidged me beyond my
power to grati^ie, beyond my expression to acknowledge; -- the Emperor, and the
whole Empire shall thank thee for Philocles his safety; -- come my brother,
let us now find my father; this change will please him.

Exeunt Ambo.
Sell. How near lost was I, on his fresh mention of Pollinesso's death! how
dangerous a work did I undertake; and how happily brought off, by the Princess
Ordellas timely interruption! -- I thought my self within my strengths at
Belgrade, and Philocles in my power to punish; I must no^ more of these games,
it is my disguise preserves m^ life, and I do care only to live to be reveng'^
on Philocles, the Author of all my sorrows. -- Oh! but the Princess Ordella
sits too near my heart, to suffer that; she is my friend, if I destroy her
beloved brother! I wound her to death; a^ least give her the same intolerable
grief for Philocles, I now suffer for Pollinesso. -- -- Oh! horri^
ingratitude! Oh miserable Astella! my Obligations to Ardella, do infringe my
vows to heaven -- -- ye gods, direct me so; that these differing passions may
not distract me; I would do^ what should become me best, and please yo^ most,
though my own life in the attempt be lo^

[Exit Selindr^
THE SECOND ACT.
Enter Emperor, Lascares, Cecropius and Cleonell. Cecropious. MIghty Sir, what
you have said, was my thought, when I first heard of the Prince his stay, and
had been now my Council, as the best way to secure his Interest in Hungary, by
which Astella must submit unto the will of him that has already won the hearts
of all her people.


Cleon. Sir, you know I have long loved, and long sought Selindra's Love; and
Lovers Eyes are quick to discover the like looks in others; it is my duty (as
well as my own Concern) to tell your Majesty that I have observed Selindra's
good looks, to ^e the Orators that have put off the Prince his journey, not his
kind sisters Importunity, and when your own observation shall inform you
better, your Majesty will find this no causeless ^ealousie in me.


Cecropious, What he tell you sir, is the whisper of the Court, but I look on
it slightly, the Prince may have a mind to a Wench, and Selindra is a pretty
one; but sir, in my opinion, you should ^ake no notice of such youthful
passages; the ^rince cannot think her a fit Wife, and then no matter who is his
Mistress.


Lascares; Cecropious I do think it worthy my care to prevent an evil; the
Crown of Hungary can be no way mine, but by Astella; we se^ Selindra is rich in
Beauty, and more rich in Virtue; if not by Birth great enough to be his Wife*
she is too good to be his wanton Mistress; Philocles is young, and young men
are apt to be in love! He is as gallant as great, and if his affection should
meet a repulse (as its most like from Selindra) these sparks we now see, may
grow to suc^ a flame, as neither we, nor he can quench: I wi^ observe him, and
set spies on them -- [Aside some of my own spies* Cleonell may be jealo^
without a cause! I will sift Ordella too. --

Enter Philocles to them in rich clothes, with Ordella, Selindra, Lords,
Ladies, and train, all fine
Lascares; Daughter, you have wrought a go^ work on your brother; thy Interest
I see, has pr^ veiled, beyond my entreaty, or my Comman^ I thank thee for it
Ordella, and am glad Philloc^ to find that your Ears are open unto reason, i^
deed the journey would not have suited w^ your other great actions; I like well
thy galla^ spirit; but I like not to hazard a Kingdom (...) a Complement.


Philocles, Sir, I do thus low beg pardon for (...) [She kne^ first
disobedience to your commands, and (...) confess my sister wrought my consent
to st^ ye^ I must tell you sir; 'twas because her Arg^ments complied with your
commands, nor was your command her least Argument.


Las. Thus let me embrace the greatest comfort of my life, thou shall set ever
next my heart He holds their Arms under his, and walks as he speaks, -- give
me thy hand Ordella, and thine Philocles; What wealth is there beyond these?
what joys beyond those I feel? thus supported! I am the envy of Princes; may
all the blessings Heaven can bestow, fall on you both for this love, and this
obedience to your old dying Father, -- tell me Philocles: how stands the
affairs of Hungary? I have had late Intelligence, that some Commotions do
appear there: if so? since you have thus discreetly laid aside the search of
Astella, in my Judgment, 'twill be next best that you repair to Belgrade with
your Army, there by your presence to keep the people in Obedience, until
Astella be found; we know the Hungarians are a busy headed people Philocles.


Phil. Sir, I have left the Government of that State, in those hands that will
neglect no means to invite Astella home; they love her sir; and do want no
power to secure the Kingdom for her; my presence at Belgrade, would rather
deter Astella, then invite her home, and may be justly thought I meant to
force, what I yet doubt to sue for: In my opinion sir, I ought to hear more
from thence, before I stir that way, but my opinion and my will, shall submit
to your Commands.


Lascar. Thou art still on thy Complements, but my gray Hairs are not
convinced by such Arguments, think better on what I propose, though I
Philocles and the rest go off. do not command, but only wish it; while I
instruct your sister with my reasons, that she, and you may consult together.

[He whispers with Ordella.
Or. I shall obey you Sir, and weigh well what you have said, I shall not be
wanting in my care for Selindra, nor in my love unto my Brother.


Las. I am satisfied Ordella, and do only wonder why he will not lead the
Army into Hungari^ where such apparent need is of his presence.


Or. He will go, if you will have him Sir.


Las. I will think further on it a day or two.

This while Cleonel Courts Selindra, she shows dislike to him.
Las. Cleonel I see loses no time in the War he makes, ply her hard young man,
those knit brows do often prove the ^ipher to a smiling heart, and yet Cleonel
I must tell you, that I approve not this whining wa^ of Wooing; most Women like
to be approached with such Alacrity, as shows the mettle men are made of; where
is thy heart young man?


Cle. Mighty Sir, one frown from bright Selindras eyes, has power to shake me
into Attomes, to unman me quite!


Las I think so, and must my self Woo for thee, He speaks to Selindra. how is
it fair one, that you neglect such honour^ and such Wealth, as Cleonel brings
with him? he is a man in my eyes worthy the greatest subject of my Empire: --
Or is it the nice Lovers part you thus do act in Public, while your united
hearts delight in private? say Selindra, when shall our Court flourish in
triumphs for your weding? -- while Ordella provides Ornaments for you, it shall
be my care to set forth Cleonel like himself, and fit for such a Mistress: --
tell me when Selindra, when shall this Jolly time be? come I must press you for
my Friend.


Selin. I am very sensible of this Honor you now do me Sir, yet cannot choose
but wonder why your Majesty thinks fit to press me to a public Answer.


Las. You have delayed it long enough, it is a good time to declare now.


Selin. I obey Sir, and do confess that I have ever had a true value of
Cleonells worth; I have also observed your favor to him, and do believe that
he may make the best of Women happy; but yet I think not fit to entertain his
Love, I have more Noble thoughts, then to encourage him with hopes, of what I
never can afford him, such a return as his merit may jus^ly expect from one
more worthy then my self; I must declare that my purpose is not to marry, but
to attend the Princess so long, as that honor may be permitted, and her
Highness favor shall continue to me.


Las. May all thy wishes be ever on thee, happy will that man be, that gets
such a Treasure, as this fair Cabinet contains: I am vanquished Cleonel, and I
advise thee to tear this Serpent from thy heart, before it be too big for thee
to graspe; -- (observe you this Ordella?) -- Philocles are thy thoughts yet
for Belgrade?

[Aside.
Phillo. They shall be Sir, if you Command it.

Exeunt Lascares Cecropius and Cleonel.
Phillo. Ordella can you guess why my Father does now urge my absence? that so
late enforced my stay?


Ordel. Does not the Affairs of Hungary require you there?


Phillo. No Ordella, I should not then wonder at it.

Enter Messenger.
Messen. Madam, the Emperor calls for you.


Ordel. I Will over take him presently; -- I have much to say to you Brother,
pray stay my return; good Selindra Entertain him in my Chamber, with Cleonells
last Melancholy Song, I like so well.

Philocles and Selindra sit within the Scene.
THE SONG.
Cloris we see the offended Gods,
At first do show, and shake their Rodds,
That they may rather threat, then strike,
So we forgo, what they dislike:
These faulty streams, shall flow no more
Above their banks* as heretofore;
Nor swelling tempest from my breast,
Hence forth thy Virgin cares molest;
All shall be fashioned to thy will,
So thou will let me Love thee still;
My Lips shall not a word let go,
That may offend to tell thee so;
But to dissemble, or deny
That I do Love thee were a lie
Would stain my soul, 'twill prove a spot,
To look as if I Loved thee not.
Phillo. This charity becomes you Madam, and Cleonells lines I see are smiled
on, though himself be not, but why did you with such severity, in public
disclaim his interest, and seem to reject a man so worthy, when the Emperor
himself wooed for him?


Selin. It Is the Princess Ordellas pleasure, that I should learn his Song Sir,
and not my fancy to the maker of it, though his love, and respects may
challenge a greater complement from me, for I shall ever acknowledge
obligations to Cleonel, yet not think fit to treat a Marriage in my Fathers
absence, by whom I shall be wholly ruled in that matter, if he think fit to
make that choice for me, I must submit.


Phillo. Give me leave Madam so far to interest Philocles takes her hand, she
shows dislike. my self in your Affairs, as to ask if your thoughts for Cleonel
be such, that you will not admit the like profession from another; For though
my Father cannot match him in his Dominions, I believe that I can find you a
Servant as faithful, and as full of love; one every way as worthy your
favors, one that will out-bid Cleonel, to gain Selindra, do but --

[He offers to kiss her hand.
Selin. I beg your Highness pardon for some time.

[Exit Selindra.
Phil. Thus to leave me while I was speaking to her, is a scorn I looked not
for; -- Selindra was not wont to be so rude, nor I so foolish, sure my looks
and Language rendered me Rediculous, so slight, that she blushed for me, which
to hide she thus withdrew, leaving me to wonder at my self, that am of late
become, what I want a Name for; -- -- If this be Love, and this the Effects of
Love, I Will tear the Monster from my heart and be my self again, before it grow
too mighty for me; -- my hands cannot reach it, no force can touch it, it is a
subtle foe, not to be compelled; it is reason only must prevail; -- Selindra
loves, and dissembles her affection to Cleonel, neglecting me; -- how unworthy
then am I, that seek to separate united hearts; how fond, to Cove^ what another
does Enjoy; how much am I now fallen below my self, by this passion?

He throws himself on the Couch sadly. Enter Ordella and Selindra.
Ordel. When went my Brother hence Selindra?


Selin. He sits there Madam.


Ordel. My Father I fear has too much cause for what he said; Prithee leave us
a while Selindra, and let none disturb us.

Ordella goes to Philocles, he starts at her approach.
Phillo. Oh Selindra!


Ordel. She is not here, why do you stare thus on me? are you not well?


Phillo. Only a little dull for want of sleep Ordella; but why sent the
Emperor for you in such have?


Ordel. To tell me that Philocles does love Selindra and to enquire my
thoughts of it; I answered boldly, that you were too Noble to dishonor
Selindra, and too wise to neglect Astella and a Crown, for such an idle fancy;
-- I have confirmed him that you have not such a thought, because I saw him
troubled at it; -- but what is this that thus distracts you?


Phil. Ha! what says my dearest Sister.


Ordel. Ye Gods defend that I be not mistaken; Brother what have you done with
your self, since I went hence?


Phillo My head is full of the Affairs of Hungary, I was contriving how I
should secure Astella in her Throne, and thinking of a thousand other things;
but why did my Father send for thee?


Ordel. This is very strange, I told you why, and you regard me not, it was
about Selindra.


Phillo. About Selindra; prithee Ordella let us talk of something else, -- thou
weepest.


Ordel. How can I choose but weep, to see you thus distracted, and all my hopes
of future joys dying in me? -- Philocles has left to Love me* he dares not
trust me with his heart he Loves, and by dissembling seeks to hide his love
from me, that can dye for him.


Phillo. I am guilty Ordella, thy charms overcome me, and I do submit to thy
severest Judgment, I do love Selindra, and would do more then thou can
fancy, to gain her Love; now my heart lies open, thou will find the wound is
deep Ordella, touch it gently my dear Sister.


Ordel. 'Twill not be cured then Philocles, I must lance it to the quick, and
you must endure to hear that Cleonel, and she have been long contracted, and
only do disguise their Loves because Cecropius seeks Selindra for himself, it is
only until her Fathers return, they thus dissemble it.


Phil. Contracted Ordella! thou have blasted all my hopes, destroyed me in the
twinkling of an eye, the gods have not a greater curse in store to throw upon
me, is this thy cure? I shall sink under the burden of this remedy! farewell
Ordella, farewell for ever! for I am undone for ever!


Or. Stay Philocles I can cure thee yet; I Will stroke Philocles going out, in
haste turns back. thy wound, and try how that will work, they are not
contracted, that I ever heard, it was my pure affection that thus abused your
ears: by my Fathers command, I was in the bud to crush your love, which by
their pretended Contract I thought best to do: can my Brother pardon my Zeal
to serve him this way? and yet trust my love.


Phil. I can do both Ordella, now thou haste restored me to life again; come
let us sit, that I may at large declare my purpose concerning Selindra, -- do
you remember Ordella, that day you made Selindra act Astella? how I was then
convinced, and overcome by her; how she spoke then! and with what Majesty she
appea^'d! Methought then if Selindra were not born a Queen, yet she was
designed to be one! from that hour I loved her, (and you the occasion of my
love,) I have since observed her strictly, and well weighed all her
perfections, and considered Cleonells hopeless suit to gain her: if she can
afford me love Ordella; I would wade deep in blood -- it would look like
vanity, to tell thee how great things I would do to win a value from her.


Or. When I consider Selindra's Beauty, and her worth, I cannot blame your
admiration of her, truly brother, I do wish your desires upon you, but know not
how I can comply, or how to serve you this way?


Phil. I have weighed all kind of arguments Ordella, and do allow them to be
good worldly thoughts, fit for Princes that have no other heaven on earth then
their Wealth, and their Dominions! -- I tell the Ordella to be Emperor of all
the world is poverty without Selindra! if thou love me, thou will use thy
interest to persuade her to cast off all thoughts for Cleonell, and receive me,
who she yet shuns: -- now my Sister speak comfort to my soul; that must
languish until you engage for me.

Ordella sits silent a while, and he staring on her.
Or. I have been thus long silent Philocles, to consider how I might comply
with your desires, and not break my Fathers trust, do but show me an
honorable way, and I will serve you with the same Zeal you wish it; but if I
should consent? how can you avoid Cleonell? or how disguise your love from my
Father?


Phil. We Will think of twenty ways to blind the old man's eyes, and as for
Cleonell, I will so overload him with Wealth, and Honors, that he shall gladly
give up his interest in Selindra, (if he have any!) but if he refuse! I will
become his Rival publicly, I will either carry the fair prize or loose my
self Ordella; say now, will you strain a Complement with my Fathers trust to
save thy brothers life and honor?


Or. Pardon me heaven! if I offend by varying from my Fathers trust, to save my
Brothers Life and Honor! Philocles now I am yours, employ me like a Sister
that you love, put me not to use artifices unworthy of that value, the World
now holds me at.


Phil. By all our gods, I Will rather perish, then permit thee to act any thing
unworthily: Dearest Ordella lose no time to make known my affection to
Selindra, while I seek Cleonell, to make him mine.


Or. Since no argument can prevail against your passion, I am content to be
directed by you.


Phil. Thou will make me happy then Ordella! beyond all the State arguments.

The greatest Politician can invent,
Or brightest messenger from Heaven's sent.
[Leads her off. Enter Cleonel.
Cleo. This falls out well for my designs upon Selindra, the Prince his
absence, will give me opportunity to effect, what his presence might prevent,
for it is now most evident that Selindra slights my Professions in hope of
Philocles, who is become my Rival; by subtilties I must therefore compass,
what my power and credit cannot reach: the Prince is too mighty for me, to
contest with? but this New War, will do my work -- see Enter Philocles. where
he comes, how full of thoughts he is of late! this love transforms us all.


Phil. I Will share the Empire with him if he consent! if he consent! if he will
not! I Will force my way. --

He sees Cleonell.
Cleo. Sir, The Emperor sent me to signify unto you the News from Belgrade,
that Astella is arrived there, and is rejected by those you left to govern;
it is his pleasure Sir, that you prepare to march with all possible speed to her
relief.


Phil. I have just now received an express from thence, which informs me of a
Faction there, that did hope to have set up a Counterfeit Astella; but those
Tumults are alayed, the plot being discovered, all the partakers fled the
Country; I therefore hold it fit to hear again from thence, before I stir: but
if my Father will needs have his Army march into Hungary, I shall advise him
to conferr the honor of that War, Cleonell on you.


Cle. On me Sir, I am neither worthy, nor capable of so great a charge; your
Highness does me much honor in this thought, but I must not presume to accept
the favor, least the Emperor do think me so vain to seek it.


Phillo. Why Cleonel? thy forward youth promises great things, and I know the
Emperor will be pleased to see me join to heap honors on thy deserving head;
I will undertake it with my Father, and shall not doubt to say, thou will
deserve the sole Command of all our Forces.


Cle. If the Emperor consent, I am cozened; [Aside. your Highness does
o're-load me with your Favors, I shall not live to express my Gratitude, much
less to merit such honors.


Phil. I tell thee Cleonel, it is in thy power to lay an Obligation on me, such
an Obligation Cleonel, as half my Empire cannot recompense; -- Say, may I hope
such kindness from thee? but if it be not in thy heart, do not flatter me into
a hope of what I shall not find.


Cle. Sir as you are my Prince, my duty binds me to serve you with the hazard
of my life and fortunes.


Phill. I thank thee for thy love, as I do all that will like thee, say, and do
as much, but I would have engagements unto thee, beyond the common complement
of other Subjects.


Cle. Your many favors Sir, have so much obliged me beyond all others, that
your Commands (what ere they be) shall make me happy.


Phil. Take heed Cleonel, do not engage too fast, for I shall demand what thou
hold'st dearer then thy life; dare thou hear me now?


Cle. Speak boldly Sir, I am yours, and all that is mine is so; I hope he will
discover his love to me.

[Speaks aside.
Phil. Thou art indeed my fate, or I am thine -- I would have thee give up to
me thy interest in Selindra, dissolve all engagements between her and you: --
my dearest friend; thus thou may bequeath an Empire to me, that I prize far
above this I am born to, -- start not at it, for I will Philocles Embraces
him. wear thee in my bosom, thou shall be the greaest and the richest man in
Greece!


Cle. Without Selindra!


Phil. I, without Selindra!


Cleo. What is all Greece worth, without Selindra? good Sir, give me leave a
little to consider on this matter; -- sure he has solicited Selindra [Aside.
for himself, and received a repulse -- it may well be that she has expressed to
him, some value of me, beyond what I my self can yet discern; he would not else
thus rashly, nay thus madly tempt me! it is so: -- Sir, do I mistake, or did you
demand that I should give my interest in Selindra up to you?


Phil. Thou do not mistake, it is only that can make me happy.


Cleo. And only that I cannot grant, I can no more consent to part with the
hope of such a happiness, then with my interest in Heaven; pray Sir, find some
other way to try my Faith.


Phil. The Gods cannot give thee a means to oblige me another way, themselves
cannot bles^ me with a gift, that I can prize beyond Selindra.


Cleo. And you would have me debauch thi^ young Lady, for your private pleasure?


Phill. By all that is holy I would marry her.


Cleo. Marry her! what shall then become (...) Hungary, and Astella?


Phill. Thou shall have that Crown, and her I Will woe her for thee, I Will fight
that Conquest o'^ again, and give it thee, if she refuse.


Cleo. Will you get the Emperors consent (...) this exchange?


Phill. Yes, or I will do it without him.


Cleo. (All this shall to the Emperor,) (Asi^ but if you can do neither? this
inestimable jewel you would have me throw away.


Phill. Will it be thrown away; if placed on me?


Cleo. I might have put my words into a Courtlier phrase I do confess, but I
can never mould my heart to such a form, as shall consent to make my tongue
betray it: I swear by all that is good, I never can relinquish my interest in
Selindra? I do prize my weak hopes there, above all the wealth and honors you
can lay down to purchase it.


Phill. He has abused me all this while, to get the secret out, which shall now
consume him; since he will not consent, his base treachery shall be my first
step to climb unto Selindra.

Philocles stands silent musing.
Cleo. I shall now persuade Lascares to believe that the Prince loves Selindra
-- while he is musing I Will steal off, lest a tempest [Aside. do fall on me.

Cleonel is going out*
Phill. Stay Cleonel, I have more to say; I have considered my rash suit, and
cannot with Justice quarrel with thee for not parting with such a Treasure as
Selindra is; but I must call thee to account for thy late smiles, and false
fawning on me, and for thy base treacherous kindness, by which thou have
betrayed me to reveal a secret too great ^o trust thee with: -- Thus I lay by
my greatness, and as a private injured man, I draw my sword to kill thee.


Cleo. But I must not lift up mine against my Prince, I have been ever taught
to draw my sword in your defense, and shall be as glad to serve you with it, as
I should be proud to use it in this cause against any other man; I dare scarce
show it you Sir.

[He draws.
Phill. I have now made my self thy equal, by my rivalship in love; either
defend thy self, or by heaven I Will kill thee.

They fight, Philocles hurts an^ disarms Cleonel; as the Emperor comes in
Philocles thro^ Cleonel his sword, and goes out Enter the Emperor, Cecropius,
and Attendants.
Lasc. What insolence is this so near us? Cleo^ this posture does not become
you in this place.


Cleo. You will pardon it Sir, when you she know I only drew to save my life,
not to offend t^ Prince, who swelling with rage, came like a rui^ on me,
because I would not quit my Interest Selindra unto him, to be his wife Sir.


Las. Is this true Cleonel?


Cleo. You Will find it true Sir, I could have h^ Astella and her Crown for my
consent; it is so^ sure to deny another, what I cannot get my self.


Lasc. Has he not hurt thee?


Cleo. Not much Sir, you came in just as he fell on me.


Lasc. This must be timely cared for; Cecropius send presently and fetch
Selindra to your Lodgings, this night she shall be your charge, to morrow let
her be sent back to Ciprus to her father; and be you sure Cecropius that
Philocles do neither see her, nor send to her this night.

Enter Ordella, Selindra, with Ladies.
Cecro. She is here Sir, with the Princess.


Ordel. Where is my brother Sir?


Lasc. He is gone hence hurt Ordella, (I wish he were else) fighting forsooth
for Love! you now see what mischief your fondness to Selindra has produced;
your brothers life endangered, and the Empire tottering: Cecropius take
Selindra to your care, as I comm^nded let her be sent home, attended as befits
her quality: -- Ordella come you with me.

All goes off but Cecropius, Cleonel and Selindra.
Cecro. Leave us a while Cleonel, -- Madam, you Exit Cleonel and harkens at the
Scene. now see the evils I foretold, are come to pass, these young fiery
spirits will never submit to suffer either to enjoy you: do but consider how
happy you may be, by being mine, though I am not so young; yet many men of my
years have made young Ladies happy: of my love you have had long trial, my
Power, my Honors, and my Wealth, will prove as pleasant as the smooth chin of
Cleonell: -- Philocles his wife you cannot be, his M^striss I hope you scorn
to be; much may be said, Lady on this argument, but the time allows it not, to
morrow early you must to Sea, unless you will bless me, by being mine.


Cleo. Is it even so my good father? I shall show He peeps in you a trick for
yo^ trick, if my skill fail not!


Sell. My Lord, I must now give you the same answer I have ever done, that I can
never have affect^on for you.


Cecro. No matter, few old men's wives have any.


Sell. My Lord, I do submit unto the Emperors commands, pray let me be sent
away.


Cecro. It Is my humble love begets this contempt [Aside -- I must try her
another way, -- Madam, you know the Emperors humor well, and you have heard
how eagerly he covets to join Hungary to Greece, by Philocles his match with
Astella, and how much he abhors his love to you, is evident: The truth is
Selindra, you are this night by his command, to be ravished by my son Cleonel,
to that end send thither, which will allay the gallant Prince his appetite to
marry you, and remo^e all further fears of that matter: It Is yet in your own
power Madam by obliging ^e, to prevent Cleonells force, who ^or undertaking so
base an act, ought to be dispis'd.


Sell. Ravished, I Will rather dye, then suffer Cleonell, or yield to be your
wife; the gods will not permit such wickedness!


Cec. Please you to retire unto your Lodging Lady: --

He leads her in and r^turns. ^There is no way to win this foolish Girl, I am
angerd even to hate her, yet cannot choose but love her; -- but why should I
lose this (...)? I may now do, what I only invented for Cleonel -- I shall
curse my self when she is gone, and when no possibility is left, wish it had
been so: it shall be; -- if when I have ravish^d her, she can consent, I Will
marry her, if she will not, I Will poison her, and being dead at Sea, hi^e the
Mariners to throw her overboard, I will about it while my blood is high!

Venus propitious be to my design.
I Will offer Insence only at thy Shrine.

THE THIRD ACT.
Enter Philocles. Phill GIven to Cecropius custody! that is to Cleonels
embraces; I must see her: -- He knocks at Cecropius's Lodgings, and enter three
servants with swords. -- is Cecropius or Cleonel within?


Serve. They are Sir.


Philo. Is Selindra yet at rest?


Serve. Yes Sir, long since.


Phill Is it so late? I do believe you do mistake, and she is not; --

Philocles offers to enter, and they stop him. -- what means this rudeness?


Serve. The Emperor has given command, that neither your highness, nor any from
you, should visit Selindra; besides Sir, all within are now at rest.


Phill. My Fathers command! this is some design from Cleonel: -- are they all
at rest say you? -- whence then is this no^e I hear?

[A no se within.
Serve. We know not Sir.


Phill. Hark, the same noise again, it is within -- stand by, -- Villains give
way, or I shall force my pass^ge through your hearts, -- [This way the noise
is. by Heaven it is a Woman's voice! -- it is Selindra's [Goes out and returns.
voice, she calls for help too!


Selin. Help, oh help! murder, murder.

[He hearkens at the Scene. Philocles enters, breaks open a door within, and
Cecropius is seen struggling with Selindra, Philocles takes Cecropius by the
Collar, and as he offers to kill him, Cleonel enters and holds his sword at
Selindra's breast.
Cleo. By my Fathers soul, I will strike with thee Philocles.


Phil. Thou dare not be so base to harm such innocence.

Here they look at one another in this posture a while, then Philocles throws
by Cecropius, and runs at Cleonel; he quits Selindra, and meets philocles;
while they fight, the others run out and raise the Court. Enter the Emperor,
with Train and Guard, who part them.
Lasc. Philocles, I have thus long winked at you^ follies, hoping that my
mildness would have begot a better temper in you, but I now see your son
requires a Corisive: go to your Lodgings, and a^ you value my displeasure, move
not from thence without my leave, -- you of the Guard wai^ upon the Prince, and
let him not stir out, as yo^ will answer it to me, -- Cecropius, let all leav^
[Exit Philocles with the Guard us but your self -- and now inform me of thi^
Fray, and how he came hither against my Command.

[Exeunt omnes
Cecro. Mighty Sir, the Prince forced my servants from the door, and found me
threatening Selindra; and frighting of her, as if I meant a Rape, which I only
feigned; intending to take off Philocles his affection that way, by which he
might apply his thoughts toward Astella, for if the Princ^ should marry
Selindra how can Hungary be yours this Sir, is the truth.


Lasc. I wish thou had done, what thou only talkest of, ^r this young man
will ruin all my hopes of Hungary, if we do not prevent him! -- Cleonel peeps
in it must be poison Cecropius; I see no less will do it; Selindra must dye,
and that presently.


Cecro. And shall ^ir, if you so direct; by to morrow night it shall be done.


Lasc. Be it so then, 'twill be the least evil; and the only way to secure all
the rest; let her be poisoned.

[Exeunt amb^. Enter Cleonel.
Cleo. Poison her, my curiosity was to good purpose at this time; was ever gray
hairs so wicked? how to prevent this mi^1chief I know not; -- Selindra will
never credit it from me; yet I will urge her hard, and if I do get belief, and
by this means bring my designs to pass! I shall find doors strong for
Philocles to force: -- Love and Venus guide me.

Cleonel goes out and returns Selindra flying before him, with a knife drawn,
which she holds at her breast.
Sell. Hold Cleonel, if thou presumest to touch me, this knife shall be my
rescue.


Cleo. Will this distance, with my obedience, and my humility remove your
fears? -- by He steps back and kneels. Selindra's self I swear, my only
business is to save that life you threaten, -- does my heart and my looks so
ill agree? that you can fear harm from me.


Sell. Art not thou Ceeropius's son? and does not his wild blood run in thy
vains?


Cleo. No Madam, I am no whit allied unto Cecropius the Ravisher; he was a Man
when he made me, and is now become a Monster; such as I dread to see Selindra
under his Roof.


Sell. My Lord, that posture does neither become you nor me, -- pray come no
nearer.

He rises and comes toward her.
Cleo. You will pardon my approach when you shall know the cause of this
unseasonable Visit, I have by accident over heard the Emperor give my Father
order to poison you, and he is providing to do it, this next night.


Selin. I am glad to hear they are grown so merciful, death is less dreadful
then his Rape, -- but how can I credit this from you? and how avoid it, if I do?


Cleo. Can Selindra believe my love could ere conceal such a mischief? or that
I will omit any endeavor, to preserve her from it?


Selin. Were not Cleonel akin to the Ravisher; I might believe he would detect
a Poysoner.


Cleo. If I tell you a false word, may sudden plagues seize on me, and if you
plea^ (...) ^ake me the blessed instrument of your escape; the Honor will be
ample recompense for any hazard I shall run: I have Madam a strong Castle
within the Forest, about a League from hence, thither I can convey you first,
and then whither you please.


Selin. Pray my Lord, leave me a few minutes, [Exit Cleonel. that I may
consider this great concern: -- it is very like that he who would have ravished,
may consent to poison twenty such as I, rather then lose his hopes of Hungary:
-- I like well to fly from this near death, but I like not to trust my self to
Cleonel, there may be more danger at his Castle, then in the death I would fly
from, if I discover my self unto Ordella, she will solicit me for Philocles
(who I must ever hate) this will prove more desperate then all the rest: -- I
must trust Cleonel, though he be of a fiery Spirit, his honor was never yet
tainted: -- I will look gently on him, and engage him if I can to be true to
me: -- [She calls Cleonel, who enters. My Lord I have weighed my dangers, and
your Counsel to avoid them, and I will trust my self to you, so you will swear
to carry me directly unto Belgrad (and not to your Castle) I have friends in
Hungary who will protect me, and there I shall have time to consider of your
hazzards for me.


Cleo. By our Household gods I swear to do it, by this fair hand I will observe
my Oath, and what ever else you shall command me: -- though it be late, we must
this night depart, you must make ready, while I take order for my Servants, and
my Horses.


Selin. May I not see the Princess e're I go? will not to morrow night be time
enough?


Cleo. To morrow night brings death beyond all power to hinder; we should be
going while we talk: -- Let no fears disturb you Madam, I can command the
opening of the Ports at any hour; all shall be according to your wish.


Selin. Heaven grant it Cleonel:

When I remember the strict vow you have made,
It were impiety to be afraid.
[Exeunt severally. [Enter Philocles and Guard.
Phillo. Leave me all.

Enter Ordella, to visit him as in his chamber, the Guard at the door
appearing.
Phill. Thou art welcome Ordella, let us sit and talk sadly.


Ordel. My coming is to divert this sadness which you too much indulge.


Phill. Does not my sorrow become me Ordella? can thou wish me merry, when
thou considerest my Condition? who is there now in Greece more scorned then
Philocles?


Crdel. Who more honored? thy Victories shine bright upon thee, thy virtues
are unparalled, thy self adored by thy own Subjects, and by other Nations
coveted; let not my brother provoke the gods by his ingratitude.


Phill Thou art mistaken my dear Sister, I am not that Philocles thou meanest;
not he that chased the Germans out of Hungary, I am one that Cleonel dares
Rival, and with a single arm can check my force; a poor contemned prisoner I
am, a man with half a soul thou see; do I not become my Goal?


Ordell. I am sad my self to hear you talk thus; -- but, my Brother, your
affairs do require your present Counsel; pray let us consider how Selindra may
be secured from farther danger.

Philocles starts up hastily.
Phill. Is Selindra in danger? speak Ordella, what danger? who dares threaten
her?


Ordel. You mistake me Brother, I was about to tell you that in my opinion she
will be safe at Ciprus, and do think fit when she takes leave of me to let her
know your Love and Resolution to marry her, which will soon dash Cleonels
hopes; this I could not yet do, by reason she was so suddenly committed to
Cecropius; -- your looks do fright me, and your unquiet thoughts will ruin you.


Phill. Thou art my only comfort, thou shall still direct, and I Will obey,
prithee Ordella chide me when I do amiss; methinks thy looks speak good
success; I do approve her absence for a while at Ciprus, because you like it,
and I will have patience too, because you say it is fit.


Ordel. Patience will become you best, and be^ suit with your affairs.


Phill. Thou Councell'st well Ordella but can^ not fancy what a broken heart
endures; -- m^ whole soul labors under the burden of my Love, and to that is
added her neglects more weighty, and to this double load, my fathers unjust
anger falls upon me, as if I were not sinking fast enough before.


Ordel. My fathers anger will be soon over.


Phill. I wish it not Ordella, may his fierce anger urge him on to my
destruction, it will be handsomer to fall so, then to perish by Selindra's
scorns.


Ordel. You raise imaginary evils that are not; I am confident Selindra has no
thought for Cleonel, nor can I doubt but she will meet your love, with as
bright a flame as yours is.


Phill. Oh! that I could suffer such a hope, or such a thought possess me, I
would then meet my fathers frowns, and blow away his thunder; did Selindra love
me, I would wage a second war with heaven to gain her, and be more proud to
fall her Martyr in so high attempt, then fit next to Jove, with her neglects
upon me.

[En^er Antenor*
Ante. Madam, the Emperor sent me to see if Selindra were here with you.


Ordel. What means my Father by this? Is she not a prisoner with Cecropius?


Ante. She was, but is now missing, at which Cecropius is half mad.

Enter Antillacus
Antil. Madam, I come to let you know that by daybreak Cleonel, with Selindra
past the Ports, and about two hours after were met on that way that leads to
his Castle.


Phillo. Let them that love me follow me.

Philocles snatches Antillacus his Sword and runs at his Guard who give way.
As Philocles goes out, he meets Lascares, and Cecropius* and wounds Cecropius
in the arm.
Las. Traitor, Villain: -- stay all; I do command you stay Antillacus: -- See
the Court-Gates locked, that none go after him; -- Cecropius do you retire and
look to your hurt, he meant it at thy heart Old Man; may thy Sons good Sword
revenge it on him, if they meet, and he fall under it.


Ordel. Oh Sir! Let not your curses follow my Brother, he has Afflictions
enough without them.


Las. Peace Ordella, thy tenderness does too much nourish thy Brothers follies,
I would rather he should not be, then be thus Effeminate; I have fought many
Battles, and done great things to settle this Empire; and think you it will be
kept* and Governed by a heart with a dart in it.


Ordel Good Sir, let not my Brothers single error put from your memory all his
great Actions, if you would speak mildly to him of his Love, I do believe your
Arguments may move him more, then all this rigor can; he has a Noble Spirit,
such as you did like, and I know he Loves you Sir


Las. Let me know when he returns.

[Exeunt Lascares*
Ordel. Are any gone after Philocles?

Enter to Ordella Armanthus, Gillon Ladies.
Arman. Yes Madam, we think Antillacus is gone with Antenor.


Ordel. But can they overtake him time enough before he reaches Cleonel?


Gillon. No doubt they may.

Enter to them Antillacus, and Antenor.
Ordel. Not yet gone Antillacus?


Antil Madam, all the Court-Gates are by the Emperors express command locked
up, an^ Guards set that no man now can pass.


Ordel. Is it not madness to hazard him alon^ against Cleonel and his
company? My Lords, (...) you mean to give obedience to this rash command? and
suffer Philocles to perish thus, wh^ my Fathers anger is allayed, he will curse
your m^ desty, if not punish it, in case my Brother (...) miscarry.


Antil. Madam, we have no way to follow the Prince, unless your self command
the Guards to let us pass.


Ordel. Come then with me; I will stand my Fathers anger when it goes highest,
rather then let my Brother fall thus neglected.

[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Philocles.
Phillo. Those at the Castle do not hear of Cleonel, nor expect him there; sure
Antillacus did mistake them, or I him, which way now to take I know not: -- It Is
strange Antillacus and Antenor stay so long, I must not quit this Road until
they come: -- Hark I hear Men and Horses within the Wood; my business is to
search every where: Love guide me to her Rescue, or my Death.

[Exit Philocles. Enter Cleonel, leading Selindra, followed by four Servants.
Cleo. How is it now Madam? your Spirits seem to be returned, are you yet
strong enough to ride on? we have rested long.


Selin. I hope I am, 'twas the blow which the bough gave my head, makes me thus
ill, the bushes kept me from the ground, so that my fall could not hurt me.


Cleo. The day is far spent Madam, and we shall be no sooner mist, then
followed; pray let us to horse, there is a place near, where we may rest for
one night secure.


Selin. My head grows diszey with this little motion, I fear I cannot sit upon
my Horse yet; -- methinks you might hide me here in these thick bushes until
night, and when it is dark, find some better means to carry me away.


Cleo. 'Twill not be safe to stay longer so near our Enemies.

Enter Philocles.
Phil. It Is Cleonel; -- turn this way Traitor.

Cleonel holds up Selindra, and sends his Men to Philocles.
Cleo. Take the Prince without harm if you can.


Phil. Am I not worthy thy own Sword Ravisher.

[They Fight.] Philocles runs desparatly among the men, passes them, and comes
up to Cleonel, they all incompass him, fighting, Selindra runs amongst them.
Selin. I beg your patience Sir; -- and do command thine Cleonel, but hear me
speak, I do conjure you both; -- Philocles brave Prince, look on me with
pity, and on Cleonel with justice; my life being sought several ways by
Lascares, and Cecropius I have endeavored to preserve by flight; you must
therefore look on Cleonel as trusted, and employed by me, being engaged by Oath
to carry me to Belgrade, to my Friends there.


Phil. Thou art betrayed Selindra, lost for ever; this is not the way to
Belgrade, you are now within a mile of his Castle, this way leads to no other
place; -- thou perfidious Villain, can thou smile at such a treachery?


Cleo. Yes Philocles, and will be my own carver now, I must be first served
here: -- do you two carry her to Horse, I Will soon o're-take you.

He delivers Selindra to two off his Men.
Selin. To Horse Cleonel; -- I Will rather dye then stir a foot that way.


Cleo. Force her to Horse, we have no time to talk.


Phil. Force her! thou cursed slave, I Will Sacrifice thee ere she goes.

Cleonel and his two Men fight with Philocles while the other two force off
Selindra: --
Selin. The gods preserve the Prince; help, help, murder, treason, treason: --

[Exeunt with Selindra. Upon her cries, enter six Travetors, Pollider the
Chief.
Polli. Let some help those that cry, let others search the wood, I Will toward
the clashing Swords: -- how is this three to one.

Pollider runs at Cleonel and diverts him, just as Philocles had killed one
man, at which instant the other man hurts Philocles in the back, and seeing
this rescue, he runs into the Wood; Philocles runs after him that fled,
believing it had been Cleonel, whom he could not see, because Pollider having
run Cleonel through the heart, was fallen himself upon him, who being by
Cleonel run into the throat, lay also as dead covering Cleonel. Enter to them
the rest of the Travetors, with Selindra very weak, who when they see Pollider
dead, do let Selindra fall, who lies on the ground while they take up Pollider,
and dress his wounds.
Tene. Cursed be that Woman, accursed our ^ate to loose our Prince thus.

They dress him as they talk.
Teck. Now the blood issues at the wound, it may prove not mortal.


Titi. The blood only choked him as he lay, you see his eyes look cheerfully.


Tene. Ye Gods, if any do take care of Hungary, [Kneels. look down on
Pollinesso, and restore him to us.


Selin. What Is that he said? -- was it Pollinesso that he named?

[She looks up.
Titius. The King will live, thanks to heaven for his deliverance.


Selin. They call him King too; Pollinesso's name Selindra creeps to look on
the hurt man, as they dress him. gives me Strength; -- but that face is none of
mine, and yet that name makes that face Lovely to me; -- How I fool my self
with vain hopes of what cannot be.

[She lies down sadly.
Tene. How is it Sir, your looks are lively, and your wound though it did at
first seem desparate, is not very dangerous.


Polli. My tongue moves heavily and painfully, loss of blood makes me faint
too; -- how shall I travel with these wounds? -- my stay here will be very
dangerous, and my Journey to Belgrade, too long for one so weak as I am.


Tene. The same gods that have preserved you to this day, will not let you fall
thus.

[He faints and slumbers.
Selin. They talk of Belgrade too; who can this be? -- give me way that I may
gaze on this wonder.

She rises, crowds in amongst them, and stares on Pollider.
Tene. Away wild Woman, thou Author of this mischief.


Selin. He looks up again, those eyes are mine, I know 'um now.

[She offers to Embrace him.
Tene. Throw her off, tear her away, she disturbs him, sure she is mad.

[They pull her from him.
Selin. It Is you are mad, it is you that love him not; why do you hail me thus?
whither will you dragg me? did you not call him Pollinesso?


Titi. Yes.


Selid King Pollinesso.


Titi I think we did.


Selin. That name is mine, those wounds are mine then.

She offers to go to him, but they hold her off.
Titi. I wish they were.


Selin. And so do I with all my heart, pray let me go to him, I can heal him
with my tears; -- I Will suck his wounds well, for I have heard wounds have been
cured so.


Tene. How comes his name in her mouth?


Teck It Was not well done of us to name him as we did, best to stangle her,
least she discover us.


Titi. Shall I shoot her in the head? though the Act be horrid, it is better she
perish, then all we.


Teck. Let us first hear what she will say to him, we shall have time enough to
kill her after.


Selin. I pray who are all you?


Titi. It Is very fit indeed that we should tell you.


Tene. We are the hurt man's servants Lady, pray who are you? by whom we have
received such damage.


Selin. If my eyes deceive me not, I may be happy; but am yet the most
miserable, accursed Woman living.


Titi I think so too: --


Polli. What Woman is that weeps so?


Tene. It Is she you rescued Sir.


Polli. Did I rescue her? -- loss of blood makes my eyes dazzle, and my fancy
work even to a lightness; that face brings to my memory something that I have
known: -- why does she weep? and why do you hold her so rudely Tenedor?

Pollidor and Selindra both look earnestly at each ^ther.
Selin. In charity to me Sir, though they know it not, for had they sooner let
me know that Pollinesso lived, my sudden joy had slain me.


Polli. What is this she says?


Titi She is a Witch Sir I think.


Selin. Does not my Brother know me yet? has my sorrows wrought such a change,
that Pollinesso should not know me?


Polli. Oh! my Astella, pardon my dull sight; -- for I am very weak.

[He faints.
Selin. Would I had dyed, rather then be rescued at this rate, so joyful, and
so sad a day I have not seen before.


Teck. He does but slumber Madam, and it is good he should do so.


Selin. But slumber say you, it looks so like death, that I would dye to see it.


Tene. Madam, the Joy will outlive the sorrow of this day, the Prince's hurt
is without danger; -- can your goodness pardon the rudeness which my self, and
these Lords in our distraction, used you with?


Selin. Alas my Lord, I was not sensible of what you did, my mind was so
o're-loaden with my griefs, and so intent on Pollinesso, that I heard you not;
Now while my Brother takes this rest, pray make me know how he escaped, when my
Father and Barzanes fell, and why he has been thus long concealed.


Tene. Madam, in that sad day, Pollinesso in vain attempting to save his
Father, was with my self, and these you see here, cast on a sandy bank, from
whence by good swimming we got to shore, and have been since disguised for fear
of Lascares, in several Princes Courts soliciting for aid, to force the
Grecians to quit their stolen possession of Hungary; when in the midst of
Pollinesso's preparation, he hears that Philocles had resigned the Crown to be
preserved for you; This made us lay aside all further preparation for War, and
thus disguised to pass this way to Belgrade: It seems by destiny directed to
your rescue.


Selin. I shall find some fitter time for my own story, twere good that we
removed my Brother -- he walks -- how are you Sir, has this repose refresht you?


Polli. I am something better then I was Astella, and shall soon be well, now I
may look on thee.


Sell. And I most happy! my brother you must give us leave to remove you to some
place of rest, and safety, and you must be still concealed; which these new
wounds, with your Perriwig will be disguise enough.


Pol. I shall be directed by you.


Sell. You must also a little counterfeit your voice, least you be remembered by
it; for should Lascares know who were in his power, all his hopes of Hungary
would vanish until he saw you dead; I am called Selindra here.


Pol. Who were those Robbers? and how came you amongst them?


Selin. 'Twas Cleonell, who did beguile me, after he had sworn to carry me to
Belgrade, was conveying me to his own Castle.


Pol. Was not Cleonell Cecropiu's son? and will not his death, be our ruin if
we stay here?


Sell. My interest in the Princess Ordella, will secure you, and his guilt was
such a crime, as can expect no justice from the law to touch you; besides the
rescue you brought the Prince, will merit a reward, -- but where is
Philocles? where is the Prince! we are all lost indeed, if he be falln; I have
been so much distracted, that I mist him not till now!


Tecknor, What Prince mean you Madam?


Sell. Prince Philocles! 'twas he my brother rescued; run, look, search about
the Wood, for heaven sake search; -- unfortunate Astella, and unworthy, that
could thus long forget him; now Pollinesso lives, I have no hate to Philocles;
methinks his virtues now look gloriously upon him -- but how shall I look on
Ordella? if her beloved brother have lost his life, to save my honor!


Pol Was it Philocles that I found fighting with Cleonell and his two men?


Selin. 'Twas he.


Pol. It Is strange I knew him not, but I now remember as I came in, he did
pursue the man that fled into the wood, -- (let some look that way,) Selindra I
must glory in my wounds, that have saved thee from false Cleonell, and relieved
Philocles, who my soul thirsts to see, next thy self most dear to me.


Sell. And mine trembles at his absence.

Enter Philocles bloody, and weary, leaning on his sword; he calls before he
is seen to Enter.
Phil. Selindra, Selindra, is Selindra safe? -- has she any mercy yet for
Philocles?


Selin. She is safe and happy too, now she sees you alive sir; my heart is so
much disturbed by She goes kindly to him. my fears and joys, that I know not
how to express my gratitude: good sir, let these strangers dress your Wounds,
they have showed much skill on this hurt man.


Phil. My Wounds are but slight scratches when Selindra smiles; my joys are
much more dangerous then my Wounds.


Selin. My life sir, and my honor you have saved, I must look on you with
devotion! pray be pleased to own these our Redeemers, and give them some
assurance of your Protection, they fear Cleonel's death may by Cecropiu's power
with the Emperor, prove their destruction.


Phillo. I will be their security, Selindras Redeemers shall command my Life;
of what Country are they?


Tene. Hungarians Sir, Men that since the late War have sought Fortunes in
Foreign Lands, and now on private Affairs were returning home.

Selindra brings Philocles to Pollidor.
Phillo. Unto you Sir, I have a great Obligation, such as my whole Life shall
express my Zeal to serve you, for by you Selindra lives.


Polli. Sir, I am rewarded much above my merit, and shall bless the occasion
that gave me power to serve you.

Enter Antillacus and Antenor.
Antilla. Sir, the Emperors much enraged at Cecropiu's hurt you gave him, and
at your departure, staid us till now; -- Is this Cleonels, or your own blood
Sir?


Phillo. It Is neither, Cleonel fell by that Noble hand, whose timely aid
delivered Selindra from a Rape, and me from death; My Arm Antilla^ is grown
weak of late, and thy good Sword so du^ it will do nothing in my hand.


Ante. But Sir, how comes it that you thus neglect your wounds?


Phillo. I have business of more weight to thi^ on, now Selindra smiles: --
Antenor pray h^ you back unto Ordella, and desire her to be (...) first relater
of Cleonels death; bid her tell my F^ther of his horrid Treachery, and let her
magni^ these strangers sent by the gods to say the innocent, and to chastise
the perjured Ravisher; man have Antenor, and tell Ordella that I am in Paradise.


Ante. She will be glad to hear that you are (...) Sir.


Phillo. Well Antenor, why thou art well, and (...) is he, and he, we are all
well; But I am blessed (...) all my heart can wish for; tell my Sister the gentle
and the fair Selindra smiles, and let her thi^ the rest; -- I am all Air,
Antillacus pray the Exit Antenor. help me to rub my wounds, a little smart may
(...) me know that I am mortal.


Antil. If I mistake not Sir, you will find sma^ enough in your Fathers rage,
when he hears (...) Cleonels death.


Phil. Some anger will do well Antillacus, to all^ this joy within me.


Selin. I have some fears too, least Cecropiu's m^lice may ruin us, you know
his power Sir.


Phil. Let not my Divinest Mistress have so me^ a thought of my power to serve
her, let not a sad look appear on this day, that you have dain'd to smile on
Philocles: Madam, it is time that we were moving toward the Town with our
wounded friend; how must I call him?


Selin. I think they call him Pollidor; Sir, though my confidence in you be
equal to the value you are pleased to set on me, I cannot choose but fear
Lascare's anger, when I think on Cleonel.


Phil. Believe me Selindra, I will rather dye, then let them suffer.

He leads off Selindra, the rest take up Pollidor.
Phil. Thus let us march in Triumph to the Town,
Aloud proclaiming Pollidor's Renown;
While the Arched Heaven does Echo its content,
To see Selindra freed from Ravishment.
[Exeunt Omnes.
THE FOURTH ACT.
Enter Lascares, Ordella, Cecropius, Antenor, and Servants Cecro. SIr, I beg
the due Execution of our Laws on Murderers.


Ordel. And I Sir, beg mercy for those that have saved my Brothers life.


Lascares. I may not hearken to thy suit Ordella, the Laws must be inviolable,
to pardon such a Murder, would pull down Vengeance on my own head, on thine
too, on all our Family.

[She weeps.
Cecro. When you remember Cleonells faith, and his many services, I hope Sir
you will not deny me Justice.


Las. Cecropius you shall have Justice; -- go you Antenor, and command the
Provost of the City that he seize Selindra, and her fellow-Murtherers, let them
be all close Prisoners in the black Tower; by to morrow this time, shall their
bloods be shed, as they shed Cleonells.


Ordel. Did you say Selindra should be Prisoner Sir.


Las. I did.


Ordel. Good Sir, call back Antenor till you have heard me speak.


Las. I may not Ordella.


Ordel. Who can forbid you to be Merciful, and Just? you break the Laws of
Hospitality in this; Selindra is a stranger, she is innocent, and cannot suffer
justly; Cleonel was full of horrid guilt, and was cut off by a just hand; --
the Travelers too have saved Philocles his life; good Sir, let not Cecropius
malice persuade you to do, what you will blush to think on after.


Las. They shall have Justice, and a Legal Trial.


Ordel. Oh Sir! where is your wonted mercy? whither is that goodness fled? how
have I lost your favor, that cannot with my Tears, nor Prayers prevail on your
mistaken anger.

Enter Philocles, Antillacus and Armanthus.
Phil. Is it your Majesty's Command that Selindra should be a Prisoner?


Las. Must I ask your leave?


Phil. Though not my leave Sir, I cannot choose but wonder at such rigor!


Las. You have leave to wonder on.


Phil. Thus low Sir, I do humbly beg Selindra's He kneeles. Enlargement; and an
equal Trial for those that rescued us; --


Las. Selindra as chief accessory, must abide the Sentence of the Law, in this
case of Cleonel: -- Philocles thy mean Love has drowned all my Favors, and
Eclip'st all thy former actions; from this time I shall study to forget thee,
unless thou will forget Selindra, and Lead the Army to relieve Astella.


Phil. I shall obey you Sir in this, and all things else, so you will be
pleased to send Selindra safe to Ciprus, and set those innocent men free that
saved my life.


Las. Degenerate fool, I shall cure this disease in thee; Cecropius send
presently for the Judges, Command them by virtue of this my Signet, to put the
Laws in present Execution, upon thy Sons Murderers; let the rigor of the Law
pass on them all.


Phil. Ye Gods, to what purpose are men innocent? why is virtue praised, and
taught us? -- Good Sir, consider how you do murder these innocents with a show
of Law, and a pretense of Justice.


Las. How dare you talk thus?


Phil. You make me desperate Sir.


Las. Do not raise my temper higher, least I cu^ thee off, as if thou were no
part of me; -- they shall dye.


Phil. Had the Gods so pleased, I wish my self the meanest of your Subjects,
for I am now a slave unto your passions, and must inherit the cur^ that is due
to all your guilts, such as I shake (...) think on; It Is you Sir, that have
murdered Cleonel, 'twas your poison that Selindra fled from by your confining
me, you gave Cecropius first, and Cleonel next the power to become Ravishers;
pray let the Law take notice of this; -- It may free innocent persons.


Las. Who am I tro? Is this Gallant my Son, or my Sovereign?


Phil. Sir I do see fire, and fury in your eyes, and am prepared to meet it,
it is better to dye with those are Noble, then to live thus neglected; by my
hand two of Cleonells men fell, it is I am guilty of that sin of rescuing
Selindra from a Rape: let your Justice and your Laws grow famous by my blood,
'twill please Cecropius well; by all our Gods I Will not outlive those innocents.


Las. It Is fit to take thee at thy word.

Lascares Draws and Runs at Philocles to kill him, Ordella steps between.
Phil. It will become your own hand best.


Ordel. Have you another Son Sir, when you have slain my Brother?

[Phillocles is going out.
Las. Antenor call in my Guard, and carry Philocles to the New Castle; see
that he be safe, and close there, as you will answer it with your life; -- I
shall not trust you in the Army now Sir.


Ordel. Pray Sir re-call this severe command, my Brother has no danger in him,
you saw he did not avoid death, when your hand offered it.


Las. Antenor, I will be obeyed; -- by Heaven Here all Intercede. he dies that
dares dispute my Will.


Phil. If I go to Prison Selindra dies, there is [Speaks aside. none can help
her, and then I shall have time hereafter to lament her sad fate; Sir, I ask
your [He Kneeles. pardon for the harsh words I uttered, I did believe those
truths might touch you, and move compassion toward those you threaten so much
rigor too: but I now see your anger has decreed them dead, and that you have
the same thought for me; my last suit is, that since we may not live, we may
dye together: I shall submit to any kind of Death Sir; But I have vowed to be
no more confined.


Las. You of the Guard seize on him.

As the Guard comes toward him he draws.
Phil. Against Imprisonment I shall endeavor what I can; command my death Sir,
and I will welcome it.


Las. Kill him; -- Kill the Traitor; -- dares none stir to do it? Is my breath
grown so weak? I Will try my own strength then.

Lascares snatches a Partizan from one of the Guard, and wounds Philocles in
the breast slightly, Philocles holding down his Sword opens his arms and
receives the wound; they search his wound set him in a Chair, while Lascares
stands amazed at what he had done.
Ordel. Oh, my Brother's slain! how cruel, and unnatural a deed is this?

Enter Cecropius.
Cecro. The Surgeons say the Chief Prisoner will not Live till Morning; I beg
Sir, that the Sentence may pass on the rest.

Lascares gives Cecropius no answer, only points to Philocles, lets fall the
Partizan till then in his hand, and exit with Cecropius.
Antil. 'Twas well the Emperors age did not permit his force to act his will,
the wound has not past the bone Madam, it is but a slight cut in the flesh.


Arman. It Is time that you hasten to the Army, for while Cecropius holds his
power, you can not be safe here.


Ordel. He advises well Brother, until my Father be dispossessed of this evil
spirit that reigns in him, I wish you away too.


Phil. I think it must be so; the Soldiers I hope have not forgot their love
to me; -- My Dear Sister, pray will you o're-take my Father least in this fit
he slay all our Friends; say that Selindra did fly willingly with Cleonel, and
that she regards not my Love, say any thing to gain alittle time, until I may
do something to relieve them.


Ordel. I shall do my best: --

Ordella at the door meets Lascares with Selindra in his hand, and Pollidor led
in, he delivers Selindra to Ordella, and points to them to set Pollidor by
Philocles, then goes out with Cecropius and Servants.
Ordel. What means my Father, by this dumb show.


Polli. Where are we now Tenedor?


Tene. Truly Sir, I know not, but I see Friends here.


Polli. Who are they?


Tene. Those that brought you in were the Emperor, and Cecropius; you know
Prince Philocles that whispers with Selindra, that other sure is the Princess
Ordella.


Polli Is that the Princess Ordella?


Phil. Your presence Madam gives me strength, and your kind looks give life
unto my drooping spirits.


Selin. How miserable am I Sir, that am the occasion of all these evils.


Phil. Your own sufferings are the only evils to be lamented, I could curse my
self, that brings such troubles on you; -- but Madam we forget to comfort this
Gallant man, by whose sword we enjoy our lives: -- Sir can you pardon me that
undertook so much, and can so little serve you?


Polli. It was an injury Sir, to think I would receive my life, ransomed by
your death.


Phillo. By my wound Pollidor, I have appeased my Fathers Rage; by thy Wounds
Selindra Lives, and through all these Clouds I see the Tempest ceasing; --
cannot Selindra speak to him?


Selin. I have a heart as full of Gratitude as yours Sir, but not yet any means
to show it; I shall make it my business to serve him.


Phillo. Has my Dear Sister no complement for Pollidor? by whose valor she
enjoyes Selindra and me.


Ordel. Yes Philocles, I am studying how to express it, for you two have left
nothing for me to say: Sir I can only thank you over again for my Brothers, and
my Friends preservation, by which you have obliged me, and the whole Empire,
and do deserve some public Honor, and High Recompense.


Pol. What honor, or what recompense can outweigh this you now heap on me?
Madam, if what I have done, be a service that you will own, I have no wish
beyond it; I shall ever on this day keep a solemn Feast unto the Gods, that did
direct my course that way, and gave me power to become as happy here, as in
Elysium


Phil. Let those Lodgings next to mine be made ready for Pollidor, I will not
trust him farther from me; -- Antillacus, go you with as little noise as may be
to the Army, and let the Soldiers know that I will suddenly be with them; --
some take up Pollidor.

[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Lascares and Cecropius.
Cecro. 'Twas not revenge, for Cleonel made me press your Majesty to do Justice
on his Murderers, but to cut off Selindra, by which Philocles might have no
hindrance to gain Astella; -- -- But Sir, since you have freed the Prisoner,
and are content the Prince shall marry Selindra, I have done; if you Sir, can
lay by all thoughts of Astella; and that Crown, I shall soon forget a private
loss.


Las. I must laugh Cecropius to see how thou art abused by my feigned show of
kindness, which I only did to heal the wound I gave; had I another Son, by whom
I might gain Hungary, Philocles had found my Force answerable to my Anger; but
(...) confess I did relent upon a sudden thought, which made me strike so
feebly at him, for now to loose Phillocle, were to throw Hungary away, and to
destroy Selindra, were by another kind of stroke to destroy Philocles.


Cecro. What other way have you Sir, that I cannot yet fancy.


Las A sure one Cecropius, a way that cannot fail, I will give loose reins to
my Sons Love, let him run on, and Joy in his Beloved Selindra, whose sweets
once had, and his young Appetite allayed (as most violent passions soonest are)
then 'twill be best to take away Selindra by a poison; then it may be done
without suspicion, while I urge on the Marriage, join in all the Nuptial
Jollities, and put on such pleasing looks, as shall make thee doubt my purpose,
though thou know my heart.


Cecro I see not yet how this can get Astella, or that Crown.


Las. Thou art grown so dull of late, that thou see nothing; while this joy
lasts, Astella may be found, and then Selindra dying, what can hinder
Philocles from getting Astella?


Cecro. I do submit Sir, and must applaud your purpose, it is a design I do
confess much above my reach, and the first mischief I have come short in.

[Exeunt Ambo. Pollidor seen as in his Chamber, Enter to him Philocles and
Ordella and Selindra, the servants go off.
Phil. You look cheerfully to day Pollidor, we may hope to see you abroad
shortly.


Polli. I believe I might venture now Sir, though my Surgeons be not of my
mind; but Sir, how do you find the good old Emperor disposed?


Phil. I like not my Fathers smiles Pollidor, his sudden starts into such
extremes, makes me apprehend more danger in his kindness, then his rage; so
that to prevent all further evils, I have a purpose to repair unto the Army;
and it is Ordella's wish as well as mine, that Selindra would trust her self with
me there.


Polli. That may secure you both, but will not Selindra's Honor suffer?


Ordel. Now that Selindra's interest, and his are become one, I see no reason
she should fear to go, nor indeed any scruple why their Marriage may not be
privately, and presently dispatched, for while the business lingers thus, they
give hopes to such Endeavors as would divert it, and do run daily hazzards, by
staying here.


Phillo. Ordella argues what my soul wishes, but Selindra's looks, do not
consent to make me so soon happy.


Selin. Sir, my looks do be-lye my heart, if they show ought that would delay a
happiness to you, for I have none beyond yours: -- But Sir, above all other
reasons, Pollidor (not being yet able to attend you) if he be left behind, will
hardly escape Cecropius's fury?


Phil. Most true Selindra, he will be in danger, I shall therefore attend his
recovery; without him I will not move; nor will I put a thought in act without
thy Council.


Ordel. You have both said well, but in my Judgment this is no fit time for
such Complements, when your lives are daily sought.


Poll. If you be resolved to attend my recovery, I shall propose a sudden fancy
of mine, to that purpose, which may secure us.


Phill. Speak it Pollidor.


Pollidor. Suppose Selindra do ask the Princess leave to return to Cyprus, and
give out that she only expects her Fathers coming to convey her thither. --
Sir, you may court Selindra publicly while she stays, and she seem to neglect
your love, and put on a show of kindness unto me, as in gratitude for my
hazzards in her redemption, I will also counterfeit affection to Selindra, and
give out that I am of better quality then I seem: This Sir, if well managed,
will be ground enough to deceive their best Spies, and for some time secure us
all.


Philocles. I approve your thought Pollidor, and if Selindra can undertake her
part, doubt not me, I Will put on such a seeming jealousy, as shall puzzle the
old Fox Cecropius himself.


Selindra I shall easily observe my directions, and soon learn to be civil to a
man I owe so much to!


Philocles. Come Ordella, while they practice love, we will reconcile us to
the Emperor, and try to bring him on a present visit to Pollidor, before this
fit of his good nature leave him.


Ordella. Selindra we must find you sitting in a more familiar way with
Pollidor then ordinary conversation does allow.

[Exeunt Philocles and Ordella.
Selindra. I shall obey you Madam: -- Now they are gone, we may enjoy our
selves, this happy design of yours, will afford us many hours of freedom.


Pollidor. My soul is joyed to look on thee Astella!


Selindra. And my happiness too great to be expressed by words! that you live,
makes this Earth a Paradise to me; my heart can scarce make room for
Philocles, it is so full of Pollinesso!


Pollidor. I am all thine Astella*

[She embraces him. Enter to them Tenedor, Tecknor, and others.
Tenedor It is time Sir, that you retired to rest* you spend your spirits by so
much discourse, which does retard your cure.


Tecknor* You should neglect no means Sir, for your recovery, least by a long
stay here, some accident unlooked for, may make you known.


Tenedor. I wonder Philocles does not call to mind that he has seen you.


Pollidor. He believes me dead, as all others do; but I shall observe the best
Rules for my recovery however: -- Now Astella we have time to hear how ^ou were
conveyed from Belgrade, pray make me know how you ^ame hither!


Selindra. That same night that you departed to the Army, and our first
Ambassadors went toward Greece, to implore Lascares's aid against the
Germans, I was by my Fathers own hand delivered unto Periander, whom I was to
call Father; and by him was brought to Ciprus, where the Plague then raging, he
transports me with his family to this Town.


Pollidor. How came you into the Court then?


Selindra. On the first Feast Day, I went with Periander to the Temple, that I
might see the Emperor, and the Princess Ordella, where the Princess casting
her eyes on me, found mine so fixed on her, that I could not remove them, but
blushed, and still looked on her: by what power led I know not, but she took a
fancy to have me live with her, which Periander durst show no dislike to: thus
was I to my great joy called to Court, where I became a Companion to the
Princess: within a short time Cleonel had affection for me, which did not free
me from old Cecropius dotage: of which, with Prince Philocles his worthy love,
you shall know hereafter, for I have now held you too long from your repose.


Pollidor. Dearest Astella thy words are balsome to my wounds;

[Exeunt Lords. Pollidor and Selindra embrace. Enter Lascares, Philocles,
Ordella, Cecropius, and train, and see them embracing.
Philocles. Your Majesty will not think this honor too much for Pollidor,
when you shall know he is of better quality then he seems; -- ha! what do I see?

They embrace and rise disturbed.
Lascares. That which should teach thee to have nobler thoughts Philocles.


Philocles. How they are disturbed!


Ordel. They do it rarely well.

[asid^*
Lascares. Sir, I am now come to excuse the imprisonment you had, and to give
you thanks for my sons life; I shall rather endeavor to recompense your merit,
then trouble you with words.


Poll. Great Sir, this honor, with the many other favors I received, do shame
me to think that you allow me a merit I cannot own; but if the Gods do give me
life, my only business shall be to seek occasions to serve you and yours.


Lascar. I shall contribute what I can to your health, and will please my self
with the expectation of great things from you.

While they talk, Lascares observes Philocles courting Selindra, and she
neglecting him; Lascares observes Pollidor to be troubled at their Courtship,
and is pleased at it.
Poll. Sir, you oblige me beyond words to utt^ my sense of your favors.


Lascar. My purpose is to give you a kind welcome, and a respect suitable to He
goes to Selindra. your worth, and quality: -- fair Maid, I know not well how to
frame my discourse to you, whom I have so ill treated: but I shall no more
disturb your joys, I do now make it my suit, that you will defer your return to
Ciprus, I shall lay my Commands on Ordella, to deny you her consent to go.


Selind. Sir, the favors and honors I have received here, are far beyond the
ills you mention; and my happiness such in the Princess Ordella's love, that I
lament the thoughts of my departure; but when I consider the mischiefs past,
and foresee worse like to follow, 'twere madness not to fly them; when my
father is returned, I shall renew my suit to have the Princess leave to leave
this place, and until then make it my care to tend this hurt man, my redeemer!
to whom I owe my life and honor!


Lascar. Selindra if I can add any thing unto thy happiness, I shall do it
gladly, for thou art something more then I have ever found in woman.

[Exeunt Lascares and Cecropius.
Philloc. What thanks do we owe Pollidor for this disguise! it takes Ordella
beyond our hopes; did you observe how my father eyed us, while he talked to
Pollidor?


Ordella. Yes, and do believe Cecropius and he are gone to compare their notes,
for that Fox was very vigilant.


Phill. Selindra let us enjoy this blessed minute.

Philocles leads Selindra to the Couch, and Ordella sits by Pollidor.
Ord. Sir, While the two Lovers whisper, pray oblige me with the knowledge of
the occasion of your coming into these parts, by which we have received so
great an obligation; and if you please to pass this time with the relation of
your own story, unless with your self you would conceal it.


Poll. Madam, My story is not worthy your ears, nor my self this honor: --
yet I have a story, -- such as will make me blush to utter, though no crime do
belong to it: -- nor am I what I seem, and yet not fit to appear other, -- but,
Madam, your commands are too high honors to be neglected, my own resolutions
shall give way, and my nearest Concerns submit to your will.


Ord. I perceive you are disturbed at my curiosity, to know what I believe you
would conceal; it may be you have vowed not to discover; truly Sir, for want of
what to say, I only said it.


Poll. Madam, I was surpised by your approach, which made my tongue appear
less ready then my heart to obey you; your commands, Madam, are sufficient to
dissolve any vows of mine, and since you will vouchsafe to hear, I shall relate.

Philocles and Selindra come to them.
Phill. How are you Sir, Methinks your eyes do show some anguish in your
wounds, do we not trouble you?

Here Philocles and Selindra interrupt Pollidor, which puts him into some
passion, for he now began to love Ordella.
Ord. We have done ill to stay thus long, Selindra it is your fault, you should
have directed better.


Poll. No, Madam, my hour to rest is not so precisely to be kept, nor have I
any pains upon me, as the Prince thinks; my wounds heal the faster for your
company.


Ord. You are civil Sir.


Poll. Madam, the Prince's kindness, and his care is not at this time
necessary: -- pray Sir, if your occasions call you not, do not take your self
away thus hastily.


Phill. Pollidor we know your civillity is great, our discretion must not be
the less, I see you are disturbed, and know your pains are great upon you; make
no reply, we will visit you again suddenly; come Ordella, let us leave Selindra to
her charge; good rest unto my friend, all joys unto my Mistress.

Exeunt Philocles and Ordella.
Poll. Beshrew your kindness at this time -- how like Tantalus was I?


Selind. What mean you by this passion brother? shall I call the Surgeons?


Poll. No Selindra, they have no skill in my disease.


Selind. You talk, and look, as if you wanted sleep, pray retire to rest.


Poll. Rest Selindra! where can I find rest? Philocles has taken all rest from
me! did you not observe how the Princess sat down by me? and how she threw her
favors on me! when in the height of all my joy, your approach destroyed me.


Selind. If this be all, I must smile to hear you sigh brother.


Poll. All Selindra! do thou mock me? are thy own flames so weak? thou
smilest at mine!


Selind. I cannot choose but smile when I rejoice to see my wishes fall so fast
upon me: you love the Princess, and she will love you, she must, she shall,
nay, I doubt she does already! and have some fear the work will be too easy,
if I undertake it.


Poll. Now thou mockest me more then thou did before! prithee Selindra be
serious, and do not play with what torments me.


Selind. What can be more serious? then to make a marriage between so great a
Princess, and the King of Hungary? pray where can she make a better choice? or
who can better plead your suit then I? Look to your wounds brother, leave this
affair to me.

[Exit.
Poll. My best wishes do attend thee, she ha^ raised in me such doubtful hopes,
that they begin to vanish with her, and such fears to lose what^ never had, do
throng so fast upon me, that on the sudden I am orewhelm'd,

With doubts, with joys, with fears, so strangely mixed*
My heart is Hell, until my hopes be fixed.

THE FIFTH ACT.
Enter Selindra, pensive Cecropius meets her. Cecro. GOod day unto the bright
Selindra! Selind. May your Lordship find many such.

[She is going out.
Cecro. Why do you fly me, Madam? I come in diligence to make known to you,
what concerns you more then any other business can, toward which you make such
haste from me.


Selind. I fled not from your Lordship, nor did I perceive that you had ought
to say to me; what is your pleasure now?


Cecro. My business is to preserve you from a certain ruin, and to set you
above the reach of mischief, as high in honor, as you are in beauty, and in
virtue.


Selind. I were much unworthy such a favor, and not Mistress of any virtue, if
I should not return a befitting gratitude;


Cecro. Know then Selindra, you are designed unto your grave; your wedding robe
will prove your winding sheet, if I prevent it not; the Emperor puts on this
show of kindness, only to destroy you with less noise; he does consent that
Philocles by a present marriage, should satisfy his appetite; after which you
shall be poisoned, that the Prince may have no object between him and Astella:
This by all our Grecian Gods is true, and this I have consented to.


Selind. Can there be such a wickedness amongst men!


Cecro. Can you doubt it, that have seen so much? or can you think Lascares
will consider such a life as yours, when it does interpose between the Crown of
Hungary and him?


Selind. If this be so, how can I avoid it? shall I think you will betray the
Emperors trust, to oblige me!


Cecro. Madam, if you would please to look on your faithful servant with equal
eyes, and on your dangers with judicious thoughts, you will see that Philocles his
love brings death; -- and Pollid^r methinks should not have gained an interest
where Philocles pretends.


Selind. My Lord, I must confess what you have said, is worthy my most serious
thoughts, -- but my Lord, it is not fit that I treat farther in this affair,
until my Father does return; if you please to move him in it, my obedience
shall follow h^ will.


Cecro. Of his consent I make no doubt, my best Mistress.

She suffers him (...) kiss her hand.
Selind. But how can you secure your self, and me from Philocles? will not his
rage raise a revenge as ruinous, as this you would have me fly from?


Cecro. Good Madam, let not so mean a thought remain with you; I have Lascares
Scepter in my hand, and all the Frontier Towns in my Command; the Soldiers
too, since Philocles forsook them, are become mine; if my fair Mistress would
by one kind look confirm my joys, it would encourage me to let her see at what
a rate I value her.


Selind. Truly my Lord, I blush to think that I have smiled so much, upon so
short acquaintance, Pray Heaven you have not a design to destroy me this way!


Cecro. Can you think I will destroy my souls only joy? to remove all such
fears, I will now put my life into your hands.


Selind How my Lord! your life?


Cecro. You have heard, Madam, how the Hungarian Army marches toward Greece,
it does so: drawn in by me, to my aid they came, to assist me to get Selindra,
and to set Lascares Crown upon her head, if she will deserve it: -- we are
interrupted now, -- think on me, and thou shall wear this Imperial Crown,
Selindra.

[Exit Cecropius Enter Philocles and Ordella
Phill. What has caused thy clouded brow Selindra? has that viper vexed thee?


Selind. He has frighted me, and will anger us all, if he be not prevented,
such horrid mischiefs he has in love to me revealed, as I shake to think on.


Ord. To what tune run they?


Selind. To several tunes, some to Love, some to private bloodshed, others to
public War, and in sum to ruin all that is good; -- The Emperor will permit
our marriage Sir, and after poison me, that you may have leisure to gain
Astella; but above all, Cecropius treachery must be looked to; He has called in
the Hungarian Army to make me his by force: he talked of a Crown too, that I
should wear, if I would comply with him, and at that word you interrupted us:
good Sir, make it a little more your business to prevent these Devils, and
their designs.


Phill. There is danger in this worthy our best care, Selindra, I see our stay
here will still occasion new designs on us.


Ord. And you too late, I fear, will find my counsel good, why may not I have
credit to protect Pollidor in your absence?


Phill. I think you may, but yet it is not fit to hazard such a friend to the
fury of that Monster Cecropius; besides Selindra is now engaged in honor to
stay for him.


Selind. Truly Sir, I think I am in honor bound not rashly to throw away a man
that has preserved us both; -- but Sir, when you shall consider that his wounds
do now permit him to walk abroad, a few days more will get him strength to ride
with us: during which time I can secure all, by dissembling a little kindness
to Cecropius, by which I shall also discover his treaty with the Hungarians


Ord. Pollidor is much obliged to you Selindra, I like well this noble humor
in you.


Phill. It does become her, my dear sister, it shall be my care to look after
Cecropius now, and if necessity require, I will remove him speedily; I must
leave you for some hours, Ordella to attend my Father; Farewell, my bright
Mistress, pray, let your care continue unto Pollidor, and let* not fall your
kindness to Cecropius, he may confess to you what no tortures can draw from him.

[Exit Philocles.
Selind. It does concern me Sir.


Ord. It does indeed, Selindra, thy gratitude to Pollidor looks hansomely;
methinks as he recovers health, he grows comely, he shows to me as if he were
above the ordinary rank of men, I dare say he has a Noble soul.


Selind. Madam, you judge right, did you converse as I do daily with him, you
should wonder at such worth; methinks I see greatness in his looks, and do
observe that he holds in that luster, with more advantage, then others show it
forth.


Ord. He is sure some great Prince disguised, Selindra! and a happy man he is,
that has found one that can discover his concealed perfections so fully.

Enter Tenedor to Selindra.
Tened. Madam, my Master is now awake, and begs the favor of a visit.

[Exit Tenedor.
Selind. I shall follow your Lordship when I have brought the Princess to her
Chamber.


Ord Is he a Lord too, Selindra?


Selind. Did I call him Lord, Madam?


Ord. Ask when you see him next, go Selindra; this Ceremony to me is needless,
I shall find the way alone; it is fitter that you attend your charge, Pollidors
wounds will not heal out of thy sight, Selindra; -- I cannot choose but wonder
what kind of entertainment you can find for so many hours, with so great a
stranger as Pollidor!


Selind. Sure she is jealous, and I speaks aside. have been too free in
praising him; -- Pollidor and I do spend more hours discoursing of Ordella's
beauties, then of all other matters; he admires your perfections, Madam; his
other wounds are slight, compared with those he received from your eyes: for --


Ord. Hold, Selindra, I delight not in such saucy thoughts from Pollidor, nor
does it become you to hear, much less to relate them unto me: I do ^ear,
Selindra, you hope by this invention to dazzle my eyes, that I may not discover
your own affection ^o this Pollidor; take heed you fall not from that virtue
you are valued for, if you do deceive my trust, or Philocles his love, you
will be neither worthy his anger, nor my pity.


Selin. Let me fall under the weight of both your angers, when I deserve ill
from either of you, your jealousy afflicts me Madam.

[She weeps.
Ordel. I hear my Brother coming, retire that he may not see thy tears, and
meet me in the Garden after supper, then I will hear more of this, and till
then suspend my Judgment of thee.

[Exit Selindra. Enter Philocles.
Phil. Why went Selindra weeping out? and what troubles you my Dear Sister?


Ordel. I am not troubled now Sir: pray how did you find my Father? in what
temper is he?


Phil. Well Ordella, all is safe yet; but I cannot be satisfied until you tell
me why Selindra weep^; -- your silence will beget doubts more troublesome, then
the knowledge can be.


Ordel. 'Twas nothing but an Argument that fell between us.


Phil. That Argument Ordella, if thou love my peace, that Argument.


Ordel. I may wrong Selindra by it, and trouble you without a cause, when I am
certainly informed you shall be so, till then pray do not urge me farther.


Phil. I am so weak a man in thy Esteem, thou dare not trust me with my self;
Ordella, thy discourse will disturb me much, unless thou let me know the
whole matter.


Ordel. My unwillingness to tell you, is now become the only cause I fear to
do it, for I was questioning Selindra only about her frequent visits to
Pollidor, which it seems I put into such Language, as made her weep; this on my
credit is the truth, are you now satisfied?


Phil. I am satisfied that we have the same thoughts, your judgment on this
matter, confirms my observations, which till now took no hold on me; -- If she
prove false, thus I can blow her off; -- But Pollidor, shall pay dear for his
Treachery.

Enter to them Pollidor, very weak in Rich Clothes; a staff in his hand.
Polli. Madam, it is fit that I visit you before the Temple, and pay my first
vows at your shrine, offering up a Life devoted to your service.


Ordel. You owe your health Sir, next to the Gods, unto Selindra's care, such a
Gratitude I have not seen before, nor such a zeal as hers to serve you.


Polli. My Obligations to Selindra, I must rank after the Honors I have
received from you [He turns to Philocles Madam: -- Pray Sir, how does the
Emperor, and Cecropius, take this fained love between Selindra and me? how
does it work with them?


Phil. Since Selindra dwelt with you, the whole Court believes it is a mutual
Love; only my Sister and my self, have other thoughts.


Polli. (Those last words came coldly out, I must remove this jealousy;) I am
glad Sir that you are secured by it, and I am joy'd to have a hand in any
thing, that shall conduce to serve you, I do profess my Medicines have not so
much wrought my cure, as the joy I have to see such unparalleld Virtues, and
Affections meet, as is yours, and the good Selindra's; day by day she tires her
tongue in praising Philocles, and still grows fresh by talking of you Sir; I
cannot wish you greater happiness on Earth, then you will have with her, may it
last while you last, and my Eternal Curses light on those that wish it less.


Phil. I thank you Sir, and will hope to prosper, as you pray for me, and next
to Selindra, and my Sister, place you by my heart.


Polli. You Honor me too much, and will make me proud, I must take my leave
Sir, my strength is not yet enough confirmed to stay long abroad.

[Exit Pollidor.
Phil. The Gods go with thee, thou Man of Honor.


Ordel. What think you Brother of this Complement?


Phil. I think him really what he seems.


Ordel. I wish I could do so too, but when I call to mind that Selindra unto me
did talk just thus of Pollidor, as he now discoursed to you of her, methinks it
looks like a design.


Phil. Does Pollidor presume to pretend to you?


Ordel. So Selindra would have me think, which indeed was the main cause of my
anger, and her tears.


Phil. I am not willing to be jealous, nor yet so fond, as not to be sensible,
when there is just cause; Ordella let us smooth our brows, and observe them
farther, such a guilt cannot be long hid, and until we be confirmed by some
better proof, it is unworthy in us to suspect them on our surmises only, since
what they do, is by our direction.


Ordel. It Is not my nature to judge ill of any, and I hope Selindra will
deserve better; I am converted, and now we are thus secure, why may not you go
to the Army, and leave Selindra with me* Pollidor in your absence, may Court
her in Public, which will confirm my Father in his mistake, when he sees me
dislike it.


Phil. I like it well Ordella: what will you do this Evening?


Ordel. I have some business for a while; Selindra after supper will meet me in
the Garden, pray come to us there.


Phil. Bid your Boy attend us with his Lute then, it may so happen that I must
take leave this night, for I hear that the Hungarian Army comes on apace.

Enter Ante nor to them.
Ante. The Emperor sends you word Sir, that Cecropius has delivered all the
Frontier Towns unto the Hungarians, and himself advances in the head of that
Army toward us.


Phil. Dispatch a Post unto Antillacus, bid him advance toward the Traitor, I
will this night set forth, and by daybreak shall reach him.


Ante. Sir, Antillacus retreats before the Enemy, his men fewer in Number, are
so disheartened by Cecropius's revolt, they dare not look on the Hungarians.


Phil. Let the Page call Pollidor to my Sisters Chamber presently, we will take
leave there, and depart immediately; Come Ordella, this is somewhat quicker
work then I expected; bid my servants make what have they can to meet me here
at my return.

[Exit Omnes. Enter Periander with a Lady, as in Ordella's Chamber.
Lady. My Lord, since you went hence, the Court has been in daily Tumults about
Philocles his Love unto your Daughter.


Perian. Is Selindra so much in favor with the Gods, as to be looked on by
Prince Philocles?


Lady. The Prince seeks no other Heaven but her, and as the World thinks she
neglects him, and Loves one Pollidor.


Perian. Madam, I cannot raise my Faith to what you say, nor can I joy in such
a blessing, until I know the Emperor does approve it; pray Madam, where may I
find Selindra?


Lady. She is now with the Princess in the Garden, I shall let her know your
Lordship is returned.


Perian. You obliege me Madam; -- though [Exit Lady. I have been long absent, I
have not been idle, nor could I well have made more have hither, confidering
how many great Affairs I have dispatched, since I went hence.

Enter Selindra to him.
Selin. Oh Sir! You are welcome, I have with some trouble, and some fear
expected your Return.


Peri. Madam, I stayed the longer by reason of those Tumults I found at
Belgrade, a false Astella was set up by Euticus and his faction, but so soon as
I made known that you Lived, both sides laid down their Arguments though not
their Arms, which I advised as the best means to bring you home in safety.


Selin. But why does our Army enter Greece?


Perian. That Is the riddle Madam, the old Fox Cecropius gave notice to the
Hungarians, that Lascares purposed in his own person to invade them, since
Philocles had refused it, and would by a conquest join that Crown to his
Empire; he insinuates also, that if the Hungarians would assist him in his
design, he would make Lascares unable to harm them, by delivering up all the
Frontier Towns into their hands.


Selin. And what is his design?


Perian. Only by their power to force Lascares to deliver you, and one
Pollidor up to him: This I persuaded Orsanes, and the rest to harken too, and
my long stay was to see the Towns delivered to Orsanes, which is done, and
Cecropius fooll'd by his vain hopes, Marches in the head of your Army, which
comes on apace, only to receive your Commands Madam.


Selin. The Gods reward you, for I never can; -- but here is News Seriander
beyond what you tell; Pollinesso Lives, Lives here under the name of Pollidor;
[Enter Pollidor. and see where he comes; -- Oh! my Brother we are happy above
our wish; this is Periander, who has so much obliged me.


Pol. I hope I shall live to thank you Sir.


Peri. Sir, I am rewarded in the good I have done, if my services do prove such
in your Esteem.


Selin. My Brother, you must dispatch Periander back unto the Army to give
Orsanes and the rest notice that you live; -- Cecropius has rendered the Towns,
and comes on demanding to have me delivered to his lust.


Pol. We shall order him at leisure, our care to inform Orsanes must indeed be
speedy; -- Periander, though I cannot command, I may entreat you that know our
Affairs to return unto Orsanes, and give him notice that I intend this night to
set forth with Philocles, and will come over to him, with my first
opportunity; bid him march fairly through the Country, and take heed that
Antillacus engage him not to fight till I Arrive; if you ride hard, you may be
back with us, before we part from hence, for I hear Cecropius is not far off.


Peri. By my speed Sir, judge my Zeal to serve you.


Pol. As you pass by my Lodgings, pray send all my servants to attend me in
the next Room, from hence we shall take Horse this Evening; -- Now [Exit
Periander. Astella, methinks the Gods do smile on Hungary* and on us; if
Ordella would be gracious Pollinesso were most happy; How does my love prosper,
Astella?


Selin. I can make no certain Judgment on it yet.


Poll. Can thou not procure me one smile before we part?


Selin. 'T will not be possible, if you depart this night; I could wish we had
more time, because I now propose some pleasure in my woing for you; methinks
the storms that I have raised, look merrily now the calm is certain, and so
nigh, I have so light a heart, that I could play with dangers, if any were
within my reach.

[They sit. To them Enters Philocles, and Ordella, who stand unseen behind
them, siting on the Couch.
Pol. Let me Embrace and Kiss thee, my Dear, Dear Selindra; thou art so great
a Joy unto my soul, that I lament to part one minute from thee; when we meet
next, we shall Embrace more freely.

[Embrace.
Selin. That you must go from me, grieves me; -- must you needs go with
Philocles? may you not stay one day longer with me?

[She weeps.
Pol. I dare not, do not weep thus, thy tears will prove ill Omens, and I
become a superstitious fool, to fear I know not why.


Selin. How can I choose but lament to part with what is dearer to me then my
life; pray do not go this night, bestow this night on me.


Polli. I swear thou make me sad, prithee speak more cheerfully, and dry thy
eyes, least Philocles perceive thy tears, and Ordella do discover us, and so
unmask us both before we be prepared.


Selin. No matter for their jealousy, are not we above the reach of malice now?

Philocles draws and offering to strike, is held by Ordella.
Pol. Not yet Selindra, we may be ere long, till then, it is not good to provoke
any, it is by your advice to, that we should be still disguised.


Selin. Yes, and it is my opinion still; but when Philocles is gone who can
discover us?


Phil. The Gods, who will not suffer such impiety to be longer hid? let me
loose Ordella, and I will out these twisted Monsters into Atoms, that their
united souls, may so expire together.

The Women part, and hold them.
Polli. Why thus enraged Sir?


Phil. Can thou ask false man? we have heard and seen, all that has past
between ye.


Pol. It may be so, and yet be mistaken in all you have heard and seen too; --
Sir, if you will have alittle patience, your shall see your mistake, and be
sorry for this injurious Language, when you know to whom you speak.

Philocles offers to run at him, but is held by Ordella.
Selin. Good Madam, persuade the Prince to hear us, and there will be no cause
to fight.


Ordel. Thou worst of Women, how dares thy lips move toward me?


Selin. For Heavens sake Madam hear us, you will too late repent this rashness
else; we are both Innocent.


Ordel. Brother you may do well to hear them and revenge at leisure; pray lay
by this anger for a while, and take it up again when you see cause they are in
your power to punish as you please.


Phil. I thank thee Ordella, they are so; -- am tame, and now you may say on.


Polli. Sir, if you have heard, and seen what pa^ between us, I do confess you
have reason for yo^ anger, and our fondness does deserve blame, b^ not death;
it is true, that we have negligently showed, what we might better have concealed;
necessity therefore now compells us to discover what we yet meant not to do,
that our Innocence may no longer suffer.

[Exit Philocles.
Phil. Your Innocence.


Polli. Madam, the Prince his absence gives me opportunity to beg your pardon
for Selindra and my self, who have too long hid our affections from you, and
our selves also; for she is my Sister, and will ere long appear worthy
Philocles his best thoughts, and I do hope my self, when I shall dare to be my
self, may have leave to say, my life is vowed to serve you.


Ordel. Sir, you are mistaken, I am not to be deceived by this slight trick; --
you would gain time to escape my Brothers vengeance.


Polli. No Madam, you will shortly see I am above it; and if --

Enter Philocles with a Guard.
Phillo. Seize on that Traitor.

Pollidor steps to the other door, and calls alone.
Pol. Tenedor, Periander, Tecknor, They Enter, and both parties stand ranged on
either side. Treason; -- what means this madness Philocles? a reasonable man
should hear another speak; If I do not satisfy all your doubts, you shall find
that I dare meet your fury, and can raise storms as high, as you can wish to
see.


Phil. Pray unfold this mystery, I do attend you.

Pollidor leads Selindra to Philocles who steps back from her; --
Polli. Let this pledge speak for u^ both, for I can have no other interest,
then to give her up into your Arms Sir, send your Guards off, and this riddle
shall be as easy, and as pleasant, as it now looks hard; -- Philocles will
blush when he shall know from whom he flies, and by whose hand offered to him.


Phil. I understand you not, nor do I care; -- hark, what noise is this?

Enter the Emperor with his Train, and his Guard, swords drawn, crying Arm,
Arm, as they enter.
Las. What Is this? a War within his our own Walls; Philocles is this a time
for private brawls? when the Hungarians are at your Gates?


Phil. I am ready to depart Sir; and shall send them back much faster then they
now come on. I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect.

Enter Gillon.
Las What News brings Gillon?


Gill. Antillacus sends you word Sir, that you must prepare to receive him with
the Army under the Town Walls, his Soldiers have so many pannick fears, he
dares not lead them out to ^ace the Enemy; he also wishes that Prince
Philocles would draw out the Court Regimens, to hear^en his dejected men.


Las. I think 'twere better to receive them within the Walls, until their shame
do outface their fears; Tell Antillacus my old Arms are on, and that I will
my self, strike the Traitor in the face.


Phil. Have back good Gillon, and tell Antillacus; If he can defend his Camp
till I Arrive, I wish him not to move this way; my looks will send those
ungrateful people ^ome, if not, I have a flame within me, which will consume
them all. -- I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect.


Las. Repair it by your speedy succor, I shall take present order for what the
Town can afford us.

[Exit Lascares.
Phil. Ordella I have a War within, that will consume me.


Ordel. I hope this great Affair will divert your thoughts, and remove your
trouble.


Phil. For some few days it may; -- farewell my Dear Sister; -- and when I
return, you shall hear from me Sir.

[To Pollid^r.
Pol. I shall not stay behind you Sir, my wound Philocles is going out. is not
so ill, as to keep me from waiting on you; when this hurry and your anger is
over, I hope you will be at leisure to hear me out, and be pleased rather to
find you can be mistaken, then me guil^y.


Phil. I will by no means suffer it, 'twill be no charity, to permit you to
hazard Selindra's interest by new dangers.


Pol. Sir, your scorns shall have no more power to stay me, then your anger
has, I will along.


Phil. But you shall not; I do suspect you will betray me to your Countrymen,
and dare not trust you with me.


Polli. All this will not do, I know you do not doubt me that way? and I do
swear, unless you break the bonds of Hospitality (and do imprison me) I will
along.


P^il. And I will rather do it, then have your company, if you desist not.


Pol. Philocles will not so much blemish his great Name! imprison me that
saved your life; -- me, that am vowed to stand or fall with you; -- Sir, I must
chide you now, you do too long hold up a causeless anger, you know not why;
too long neglect the great Affair that calls you hence; -- I will stay no
longer for you, but go do the work before you come.

[Pollidor is going off.
Phil. Stay Pollidor, thou have confounded all my reason, such a mixture of
Nobleness, never met with ^uch a Treachery till now; though I do know thee
false, and do resolve with my own hand to Kill thee; I will trust thee this
way, and do now entreat thee to stay till to morrow that my Father comes.


Pol. I Obey.


Phil. Oh! my Dear Sister, once more farewell,
I am now fallen from Paradise to Hell.

Ordel. The Gods go with you, and your action bless,
While I retire, and pray for your success:
Exeunt all but Pollidor and Selindra.
Pol. We will be gone Selindra, and face Philocles in the head of our own
Army; -- what news Periander?

[Enter Periander*
Peri. Sir, I am come to fetch you to your Army, I can convey you thither,
before you are mist here.


Selindra. We are ready now, how far off is the Army?


Peri. You may hear their Drums Madam, at the City Gates.


Pol* Come, let us hasten to our Troops; --
When Instruments of War, from War release,
It Is a good Omen, to a happy peace.
[Exeunt. Enter at one Door Lascares, Philocles, Antillacus, Armanthus,
Gillon, and the Grecian Army. Enter at the other door Cecropi us, Orsanes, and
other Lords with the Hungarian Army.
Lasca. Thou art a bold ill man Cecropius, thou art ungrateful to thy Country,
and my trust.


Cecro. Sir, I have but hid my gratitude under this old Armor, which is only
now put on to obtain what my prayers could not, -- I demand justice Sir, for
Cleonels blood, which you have hitherto denied me, in favor to his Murderers:


Lasc. This fained modesty is more impudent then thy Arms are, thou know I
was more eager then thy self to do justice on those that slew thy son, and thou
see clearly our Laws cannot touch them for his fall.


Cecro. Was not Cleonel slain by Pollidor? and was not Selindra accessory? and
does not our Laws condemn such murderers to die?


Lasc No; thou know they do not, thou know thy son was by a just hand
punished, and that Pollidor deserves, --


Phill. Good Sir, spend no more breath on this vile man, the slave is not
worthy your anger: -- -- Foolish Hungarians, ungrateful perjured people: --
Orsanes I did not look for this from you; -- but my sword shall speak my
vengeance.


Orsan. Prince Philocles has not in Greece a more faithful servant then
Orsanes; Pray Sir lay by this passion but a few minutes, and you shall see that
I have labored hard to bring your own desires to their wished ends: -- and
Cecropius the main Agent in it all!


Phill. Why do your actions and your words so disagree? Orsanes knows our
Grecian hearts cannot be compelled, when we have time to draw our swords.


Orsan. Great Sir, your actions have enough declared your worth unto the World,
and to our Nation most; which we shall ever own, though now by some necessity
compelled, we do appear as enemies, in the behalf of this good man, who has
engaged us to deliver up a Lady called Selindra, and one Pollidor to his hands,
which he by strong arguments assured us, would be for your, and for our future
happiness: this done, we are all at Philocles command.


Phill. Those two you mention are of late become unworthy of my thoughts; yet
your engagement was barbarous, to undertake you know not what: -- sound the
charge.


Orsan. Hold Philocles, I have entertained you with discourse thus long, only
till I might hear that shout behind [a shout within* us: -- hark, hark, Sir!
Now the time is come for us to keep our oaths to Cecropius, and to manifest our
love to Philocles, -- make way there for the King.

The Hungarian Army opens, and through them enters Pollinesso crowned, leading
in Astella; Orsanes delivers them both unto Cecropius.
Phill. What Riddle's this? what wonders do I see?


Cecro. Take away that shadow of a King to present death, Orsanes; and now
Selindra you are once more at my dispose: and you Sir, that think you can
command the World, shall find this weak old arm can justify my title here.


Orsan. Have I now performed my oath unto the great Cecropius?


Cecro. You have.


Orsan. I must then set this Lady free from the danger of our swords, --

[a shout of joy He delivers Astella to Pollinesso.
Orsan. Long live the King of Hungary.


Cecro. I am betrayed.


Phill. Pollidor! and Selindra! why is he crowned! how come they there?


Lasc. They are confederates with Cecropius, on which design they have thus
long lived amongst us.


Poll. Orsanes, lay that Monster at his Masters feet.

They deliver up Cecropius.
Phill. Pollidor, what mean these mysteries?


Poll. All respects to Philocles.


Phill. How comes Selindra then with thee? and that Crown upon thy head? I tell
thee Pollidor, if Selindra can neglect me, I can contemn her; and not envy thee
that mis-becoming Crown thou wearest, which I will tear from off thy swelling
brows, and trample on it, when it is mine by a second conquest.

Pollidor leads Selindra to Philocles, and he retires.
Poll. -- Will Philocles forsake the List? fly from such a foe! send for the
Princess Ordella then, that we may meet on equal terms.


Phill. You are merry Sir, my gentle temper I see, begets contempt from your
great courage.


Poll. No, Sir, you are mistaken still, I am your servant, and do value
Philocles, more then he can contemn me: -- Orsanes, bring my Standard hither:
-- carry this and my Crown unto the Princess Ordella; lay them at her feet, and
if she dains to take them up, tell her your King with his whole people do wait
on her Commands.


Phill. I understand not what these Riddles mean.


Poll. If Philocles be yet at leisure to hear me speak, I shall soon remove
this wonder?


Phill. If Pollidor prove worthy, I shall not trust my eyes nor ears for ever.


Poll. But when Prince Philocles shall know that Pollinesso speaks, he will
believe no hand has more right to deliver up Astella into his arms, then I: Do
you not know me yet Sir?

He pulls off his Perriwig, and his patch from his eye.
Phill. Nor yet know my self: -- Antillacus, do I wake? or is this a Phantosm
that I think I see?

[Phillocles stands amazed.
Ant. It Is as strange to me, Sir.


Lasc. While my sons wonder lasts, let me embrace you, Sir, and obtain both
yours and Astellas pardon, and chide you both in the same breath; why did you
suffer us to walk so long in this unhappy darkness? and run so many hazards,
which this light would have avoided.


Poll. There was no other way to obtain this light, while Cecropius eclipsed
your glory Sir.


Phill. Does Pollinesso live? can he forget my crimes? and forgive my blindness!


Poll. Can Philocles pardon my concealment^ by which he was so blinded?

[They embrace.
Phill. There is but one happiness on earth beyond holding Pollinesso thus!


Poll. To me too there can be only one above it! -- and that is Ordellas leave
to love her: -- but Sir* have you no room for Selindra in your heart?

[Points to Selindra.
Phill. I dare not look that way: I dare not have a hope so high as pardon from
her. -- I am so full of guilt, that I dare not live longer to think of my
unworthiness.


Selind. What have I done Sir, that you should be thus cruel to me! will you
not look on me?

Enter Ordella and Orsanes.
Phill. I shall blush to death, if you speak thus again.


Ast. Will Philocles turn from me ever?


Phill Yes, Madam, as ashamed to look on you; I have a guilt within, that takes
my manhood from me! -- shall I dare to think you can forgive my unworthy
jealousy?


Ast. If you can forgive me that provoked you to it? I can meet you thus.


Phill. And I fall as low as earth will let me, to receive your pardon.

[They embrace.
Ord. I am so much amazed at what I see, that I know not which way to turn me!


Lasc. This way, Ordella, if you will by me be guided to felicity? -- this is
Pollinesso's wish too, if I mistake not.

Lascares leads Ordella to Pollinesso.
Pollin. It Is my ambition Sir, my highest hope on this side Heaven.


Ord. And my honor, that Pollinesso has such thoughts for me; but Sir, 'twill
ask some time for me to raise my wishes to such a value of your worth, that we
may meet on equal terms.


Phill. Pollinesso's merit, and his worth is such, that when he says he loves,
it is argument enough to gain the greatest Queen: -- Ordella, the Gods smile
upon us now: -- and you, Sir, I hope concur with Heaven in our felicities.


Lasc. My prayers and my blessings shall not be wanting: let Pollinesso give
sentence on Cecropius before we go unto the Temple.


Pollin. Let him live for ever banished from this happy Climate, which he has
so long polluted with his venomous breath.


Lasc. Antillacus see it done.

[Exit with Cecropius.
Ast. Madam, can you pardon my disguise?


Ord. I cannot well tell what to answer! to find Selindra worthy, is a Concern
greater then Astella can be to me; and that you now are Astella, does not more
raise my wonder, then that you were Selindra does confirm my love, and my
respects to you, Madam.


Ast. I have a heart too full of joy to keep this distance any longer!

[The two Ladies embrace.
Phill. We now lose time that might be better spent,
In sacrificing for this blessed event!

Lasc. Lead on then to the Temple, and proclaim
A public feast, in bright Astella's name;
While we do march in a triumphant state,
That all the City may participate
Our joys, now Philocles captivity
Is changed into a triple Victory.

FINIS.
ORMASDES, A Tragy-Comedy.

Written by Sir William Killigrew.

Imprimatur, Aug. 23. 1664. Roger L' Strange.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb; for John Playfere at the White Lion, in the Upper
Walk of the New Exchange; And Thomas Horsman, at the three Kings in the Strand,
1665.

The Actors Names of Ormasdes.
CLeandra, Queen of Citherea. Ormasdes, Her General, a Prince of Greece. Old
Titus, Admiral, Young Titus, His son. Cleobulus, Great Lords of Citherea.
Nearcus, Chiron. Ladies Attending the Queen. Servants to Ormasdes. Doctors,
Guards. Nearcus his servants. Ambassador, From Valeriana King of Treconia.
Mariana, His sister. Cleon, Ambassador servants. Erillos. Ladies to Mariana,
Other servants to the Ambassador. Pages. Surgeons.
ORMASDES.
THE FIRST ACT.
THE SCENE In the Island of Citherea.
Enter Menetius, and Nearcus; A Messenger meets them. MESSENGER. MY Lords, the
Queen sends me to let you know.
That she is safe, and her whole Fleet secure.

Mean. The Queens safety, is welcome News to all,
Though from the Castle top, we saw the fight;
None could so clearly the success discern;
As to rejoice for her security!
Till you are arrived.

Ne. It Was bold, and bravely done, with less numbers
To Assault so great a Fleet, so near home!
I wonder how they got Intelligence?
So just, to know the Queens return from Greece.

Mess. To Assault us, was far from their design;
They fell by chance amongst our Ships in the night,
As they were passing by; found us secure,
And unprepared for such an accident:
So we together sailed, till Day appeared;
Then our great Admiral, and his brave Son,
With their two Squadrons, did begin the Fight:
-- The Queens Ship was attacqued on every side,
In which, Ormasdes by the Gods was placed,
That by his hand, Cleandra might be freed,
As by a Miracle! her dangers such!
And his Achievements so beyond them all!
That my Relation, 'would Romance appear,
To tell you, how he acted every where.

Men. I hope this accident, will now persuade
The Queen, that she no more such journies make:
Great Princes to such visits and not bound,
Where Complements do so great danger bring.

Near. Though Cleandras visit, may not admit
Of a State Argument to justify
A danger; -- She had reason to return
Some high respect, unto the Grecian Court,
Where she so long, in so great splendour lived;
Before she had this Citherean Crown:
Nor was it now amiss to show the Power,
And Glory, of so great a Fleet, as Greece
Never saw before! by which, our renewed League
Will be more valued, and our Nation feared.

Mean. I have no Argument for a dispute;
-- This visit past, she needs no other make;
But Sir, how comes Ormasdes here again?
What great Affair, occasions his return?

Near. How can the Grecian Empire so long spare,
So great a Captain? and so much beloved.

Messen. That happy Emperor; who has no War,
Did give Ormasdes liberty once more,
To grant Cleandras suit for his return,
That he may now confirm, what he has won,
Least his late Trophies in the Zelnian War,
Be tumbled down! for we may doubt! those Kings
Who border Zelnia, will not long endure
Such loss; as will Cleandras Crown secure.
Though her great Ancestor that Kingdom won,
And left it to his most unhappy Son;
Who all those Princes Tributaries made,
That in Affection called him to their Aid.

Mean. Hark Nearcus, hark how the People shout!
As if the Queen were now, come near the shore;
Pray Sr. command the Guards advance with speed,
Unto the Port; Nearcus I do fear,
The Queen may land, while we are trifling here.
[Exit. Enter Cleandra Queen of Citherea, Ormasdes a Prince of Greece. Her
General with his Arm in a Scarf Old Titus Admiral, Young Titus, Lords,
Ladies, and Train.
Admi. The Gods have given you a full Victory,
And all your Fleet will be in Port, by Noon.

Queen. I have thanked the Gods Titus, and do fee
Yours, and your Sons mirits, in this great work:
But have not words that can express my thanks
To brave Ormasdes, for preserving me;
Had you seen my danger, when the bold Turks
With assured Victory, my Labin forced!
And how by his hand from that Ruin freed!
You would with me admire, if not adore
The force which Rescued, with so great a Power!
My fear, my wonder, and my joy, so mixed,
I had no time for any thought betwixt
My danger, and my safe deliverance,
Which did the Price of that great work inhance!
The bloody Trophies of Ormasdes sword;
Surpas'd what Mars to Hector did afford.
Ormasdes faints, and leans on Young Titus.
(weak;
Adm. He faints, this remove to Land, makes him
-- How do you Sir?

Ormas. My soul Titus, shrunk away, much ashamed,
To hear my service by Cleandra famed,
To much for any modest man to own,
That my weak Arm, should rescue her alone!

Quee. I am amazed, thus suddenly to find
The Gods so cruel, who have been so kind!
Thus to Eclips the joys they freely gave,
Shows they repent the mercy which did save;
Ormasdes death will now so dismal be,
I cannot sacrifice for Victory.
Unless the Fates this mischief do divert!
It will our Triumphs, into Tears convert.

Y. Tit. -His wounds show not the danger you con
Madam, you Prophecy so great an ill, (ceive;
The Fates themselves will tremble to fulfill.

Ormas. I am well Madam, only blush to hear,
That my slight wounds, should be so much your
If great (leandra, do mean Acts admire, (care
Brave men will not to high Attemps aspire.
Enter to them, Nearcus, Cleobulus, and Cithareans, they Kiss Cleandras hand, a
noise of joy within from the People.
Cleo. Madam, the Public joy for your return,
Does show how much we did your absence mourn.

Qu. My Peoples joy brings me great happiness,
And your love my Lords, my true value has:
But still I must your gratitudes, direct
Unto Ormasdes, by whose powerful hand,
Cleandra was preserved, and now restored. (don,

Ormas. Madam, you reward my small endeavors
With praise above, the merit of a man!

Queen. I can afford Ormasdes as much Worth,
And Honor, as the Ancient Heroes had,
So he will me such gratitude allow,
As s^tes with my great benefits received; --
-- What Fleet Nearcus, lies within our Port?

Near. It Is from Treconia Madam, here is Arrived
A brave Ambassador, from that great King,
Who here has long expected your return;
His Equipage is Rich, and with him shines,
A Lady he calls Sister; hither come,
To wonder at the Glories of your Court,
While we do all admire, their Princely Port!

Qu. He shall have present Audience, to excuse
His ^ong attendance; give him a respect:
Beyond the reach, or thought of a neglect;
-- Do you Nearcus, bring him to us now; --
[Exit Nearcus.] -- Cleobulus, what news from Zelnia?

Cl. The frontiers have been frequently attaqu'd,
Since you went hence, but no great damage done.

Ormas. I beg the Honor Madam to chastise those haughty Rebels, for their
Insolence.


Q. The whole world knows, Ormasdes can command
The fortune of a war; why then should you?
As if your Name were yet obscure! desire
New dangers? But you covet a Renown,
Beyond the value of the Zelnian Crown;
Else, you would secure my People from their fear,
By your consent to be my Viceroy there.

Or. Such proffered gifts from Princes are not used
To be molested, and much less refused!

Ormas. But I must not your Majesty permit,
To load me with an honor so unfit!
As will Eclips the merit you allow,
When gifts shine brighter, then my Actions do.

Qu. Is there no way Ormasdes to remove
These niceties? must I for ever own
Your benefits? and make you no return!
How little do I seem to your great Eye?
Who scorn I should your service gratify.

Ormas. I have in Greece, all my relations left,
To serve you Madam, and am hither come,
With a fixed zeal to wish, and to obey,
What ever you command! and only fear
My inclinations may my tongue direct,
To beg what you will deny: though I affect.

Qu. Though I your suit dislike, I will consent,
And from your happiness, raise my content.

Or. With your permission Madam, I would beg
Leave to retire unto the little Lodge,
Within the Forest, half a League from hence,
Where after all my Travells, I may find,
Ease for my body, and refresh my mind,
With the soft solace of a private life,
Free from Affairs, and Courts Eternal strife.

Qu. This is far beyond my fears Ormasdes!
It Is no wonder you my favors slight!
When you do our society dislike.
But I will not your purpose now oppose,
Though I your councils, and your frindship lose;
Who in debates can speak; in fight command,
And order all, that in disorder stand; --
-- Can nothing alter your desire from this?

Ormas. Not unless, troubles be preferred to bliss.

Queen Ormasdes it shall be as you desire,
And freely, when you please, you may retire.

Or. Though I a while absent my self from Court,
I shall be ready to lay by my Books,
When you do call me to put Armor on,
Stories tell that great men the like have don.

Qu. Though I know no example, I believe
What e're Ormasdes shall make choice to do,
May be a president, that will engage
Brave men to follow, in the future age. (content

Ormas. Your Majesty in this, has given me more
Then all the favors proffered me before.
[Exit Ormasdes.
Y. Tit. Is this his humor? or some fancy grown
From passion for some Love, to us unknown;

Qu. No Titus, he has ever been observed,
A great contemner of Amores, and does
True friendship more esteem, then idle Love.

Ti. The more like now to be so much concerned
When touched; our mortal bodies are so frail,
That we may love, and know not what we ail!
Why, does your Majesty think friendship can
With as much force as love, transport a man?

Qu. Not to such frensies, as wild brains Create,
When fancy cannot change the course of Fate --
-- When love to faces, with the face decay,
A virtuous friendship will for ever sway. --
-- I wish you Titus, when he first retires,
To try how far your friendship can prevail,
To get the secret from Ormasdes soul;
It Is for his good, that he his griefs impart;
True friendship will allow a little Art,
When the design does nothing more import,
But bringing of Ormasdes back to Court.

Tit. I shall be joy'd, and happy if I can
Bring back to Court! so Excellent a Man.

Enter An Officer and Ormasdes.
Officer. The Ambassador attends your Majesty.
The Queen sits.
Queen. Admit Him.
Enter Ambassador, and his Train.
Embas. Madam, my Master, the Treconian King,
Salutes you in these Letters, and by me,
Congratulates your Zelnian Victory;
But does lament, that he no share acquired,
In that great Conquest, he so much desired:
He was ambitious Madam, to command
In that near War, and not as neuter stand.
When strangers merits do such Triumphs claim,
While he to you unknown, sat still with shame.
But since Ormasdes conduct, and his skill,
With such high Valor, has fulfilled your will.
He envies not so great a Soldiers praise,
But would have shared in his Triumphant rays.

Qu. If I had known Valerianus mind,
He might my thanks have shared, and not repined.

Emb. I have commission also, to propose
A League between your Kingdoms, and your selves,
Such, as new Conquered Zelnia will secure,
That Cithereas peace may long endure. --
-- Your beauty Madam, more then Crowns invite,
Valerians wishes to unite
Your hearts; and then, your Scepters may
Be doubly fixed, when both do love obey.
He begs, that he in person may appear,
To plead his love, and treat this great affair.

Qu. Valerianus friendship I approve,
But never shall consent to treat of love;
'Twould raise my dead Lords Ashes in his Urn,
If I should to a second Lover turn?
Your great Kings proffered League, I do embrace,
With fit Affection, and a cheerful face: --
Declairing to the World, how I respect,
His person, though I must his suit reject.

Emb. I shall acquaint my Master, -- and beg leave
I may your Majesty's commands receive,
Without the Ceremonies that belong,
To a State audience, in a formal throng.

Qu. You shall have free access, as you desire,
And now my Lord, I must a Suitor be,
That fair Mariana will appear,
Who I am told is come to visit me. (quest,

Emb. That Madam, should have been my next re
That you my dearest Sister would permit,
To kiss your hand, who does attend without.

Qu. Will you Ormasdes please to bring her in? --
[Exit Ormasdes. -- If I had known that she had been so near,
She had been better treated for your sake.

Emb. You oblige me Madam.
Enter Ormasdes, with Mariana and her Ladies; the Queen Salutes Her.
Qu. You do me, and my Country, honor more,
Then any Lady ever did before.

Mari. I have done my self a favor Madam,
And it is your Majesty that honors me;
The fame of Citherea I confess,
May Princes hither bring, but my address,
Is ^o Cleandras self, that I might see,
The virtue famed for such Divinity.

Qu. Madam, if you such flatteries throw out,
You will your welcome spoil, and make me doubt
You rather come to mock, then to admire!
On such another word? I shall retire.

Mari. I can be silent Madam, while I live,
But m^st speak truth, when you this freedom give.

Qu. We then will change our argument, and place,
Least I do chide, whom I intend to grace.
Exeunt all but Nearcus and Cleobulus.
Cleob. Did you observe, with what forced modesty
The Ambassador suppressed his anger?
When his Masters suit, so briskly was denied.

Nea. Yes, and how sudden his sad looks change,
When bright Cleandra did so soon admit
His private visits; as if himself were struck!
And did no further press his Masters Suit.

Cle. I have other thoughts, that made me believe,
The Lady he calls Sister, is his Love.

Near. Such things have been, and Mariana may
His Mistress be; whose beauty in my Eye,
Does far surpass Cleandras Majesty.
And now you put these thoughts into my head,
I did observe Marianus eyes and his,
Did a long practiced silent language show,
While they by turns did entertain the Queen.

Cleob. But I had second thoughts, led me to think,
I did sometimes perceive Marianas eyes,
On brave Ormasdes fixed; and seemed to take
Such a survey, as Purchasers do make.

Near. I doubt Mariana has not an estate,
To purchas^ him, at great Cleandras rate.

Cleo. Let us observe them better next, and see
If it be Art; or their simplicity.
[Exeunt. Enter Ambassador, and Mariana.
Emb. I have undone my self, Mariana!
For now beyond resistance I do love;
And find Cleandra will by her neglects,
Dash all my hopes, and turn from my respects,

Mari. There does not a just cause to me appear,
For such a doubt; much less to raise despair:
Because Cleandra runs not at first sight,
Into the arms, of such a wandering Knight.
Though your State Arguments cannot procure
To Treat; she may but a short Siege endure,
When as your self, a King you do appear,
The Castle may be won, by love, or fear.

Emb. No Mariana, I have heard, and seen
Too much, the brave Ormasdes stands between
Me, and my happiness, his retirement
Is to cloak their close love, and to prevent
Pretenders; or such scandal, as would rise,
If openly in Court, without disguise!
Such unproportion'd love should ere be known,
Which shows they dare not their affections own.

Ma. What nee^ such disse^bling? to hide that love,
Which all the Cithereans do approve;
And publicly do pray, his great Renown,
Might be rewarded with Cleandras Crown.
To public fame, I therefore credit give,
They not in love, but in true friendship live.

Em Such friendship between man, and woman, may
Amongst silly people make a holy day.
No Callenders of mine, shall ere admit
Of a red Letter, for a counterfeit.

Mari. The Gods defend Brother.

Emb. Why Mariana? what is your concern?
To blush, because we do their crimes discern!
Can you believe, that a Platonic flame,
Has power to Cannonize Cleandras Name?

Mari. I blush for you, who now so boldly dare,
Against the person that you love! declar^.

Emb. Your words, and looks, do not at all agree,
But shame for your Ormasdes infamy.
He is the man in Marianas eye,
Whose blushes, would his vices justify.

Mari. Though I his virtues honor, and admire
The glorious Actions of his life, my heart,
Is not in any danger to be lost.

Emb. When a heart is so well lost Mariana!
'Twill soon be found, I did believe my own,
As fast fixed as yours, and yet at first sight,
Of the fair Queen, 'twas from its center forced.

Mari. I Brother, your business was to lose it.

Emb. But the blind Deity considers not
Our purposes he wounds at random still; --
-- I wish thou would ingeniously confess,
If in thy thoughts; Ormasdes be not grown
The handsomest and gallantest of Men;
Whose famous actions, in our western World,
May well excuse thy wonder, and thy Love; --
-- I wish thy beauties could his heart engage,
That I might have no Rival for the Queen.

Mari. To oblige my dear brother, I will try,
What may be done, for your security.

Emb. Thy whole life, never can oblige me more;
-- Ormasdes is a great Prince in Greece,
And I for thee, will make him greater yet,
By my additions in Treconia;
If you can think him worthy of your Love?
-- Our forces joined, may double conquest gain,
When seve'rd; both endeavors may prove vain.

Mar. While you talk thus, I had as good confess:
What you so much believe, and do allow,
I gladly would obtain, if I knew how.

Emb. That was well said, let us to Council then --
Suppose I Court the Queen in my own shape?

Mar. I think it is best that you do first inquire,
How far the subtle Queen does stand engaged
Unto Ormasdes, that you may not kneel
To her, if she unto another bow?

Emb. It will not be amiss, that I inquire,
Of some great man in power, who I may bribe: --
Such as Cleandras trust does most admit,
To plead my Masters cause, and argue it: --
-- What if I first Ormasdes self do try?
Twill search his love, and his fidelity.

Mari. I am not fit to judge, nor can advise;
But will with prayers, assist your enterprise.

Emb. I Will visit him, and if he guilty be,
I shall confound his great security.

Mari. I fear you sooner will your self destroy,
Then by your furious passions him anoy.

Emb. Will you go with me to Ormasdes Lodge?
Least I disturb his solitary Soul,
And with my rude breath, harm the man you love.

Mari. I Would rather be the subject of your mirth,
Then great Ormasdes should such rage discern,
As from your Arguments will soon arise.

Emb* No, I Will approach him with my gentle looks,
As calm, and smoath, as Virgins when they smile,
Such as our tender yielding hearts beguile;
Bu^ ^f Ormasdes do a lover prove!
He will my hopes and fears to anger move; --
-- Do you attend the Queen, till my return.
[Exeut severally. Enter Ormasdes, a Book in his hand, as talking to Young
Titus.
Ormas. I never lived, till now you think me dead --
Does my dear friend believe, what I have said?

Y. Tit. Sir, if the friendship you allow, be more
Then an Airie name? you will now permit
That I as freely speak, as I do love.

Orm Titus friendship would have honored Cato,
And now my self am prouder of advise
From Titus, then for all my victories.

Tit. Thus then Cleandra thinks, and so do I,
This loneness will your sorrows multiply;
Passions concealed, do nourish discontent,
But if revealed, much mischief may prevent:
It Is my ambition to obtain this trust,
If great Ormasdes thinks I dare be just.

Ormas. By all our -- I know no discontent,
Nor has my quiet breast a passion in it. --

Titus Hold Ormasdes, hear me out; who now come
To let you know, that I, and many more
Who love you, do believe that you repine,
Because Cleandra is so much reserved;
And dare not own the passion that you have.
-- If this be your trouble, trust it to me;
And you shall soon perceive, what I can do,
In satisfaction to your highest wish:
-- I do so far encourage, and assure,
What I have mentioned; Is the Nations hope;
Who pray that great Cleandra may comp'y
In all, that will Ormasdes satisfy
Thus my affection, has my heart expressed,
And I expect an answer I may trust.

Ormas. What you have uttered Titus; I believe,
And scorn to think such friendship, can deceive.
By the same sacred tie, I you conjure,
To credit me, who seriously do vow.
I only chose this solitary life,
To ease my body, and repose my mind;
I have no passion, nor do grief sustain,
Nor have a wish beyond Cleandras smile,
And Titus friendship; which I Will near beguile.

Titus. Sir, I am bound to credit what you say,
And shall no more endeavor by discourse,
To alter such well grounded purposes:
But must we never hope ^or your return?
To Court? where you with the same freedom may
Enjoy what private hours you can desire,
And not thus put the World so wholly off;
Which surely was, with all its glories made,
For use of man, and its felicities
To be by us enjoyed; without a crime.

Ormas Yes Titus, but we vain men mistake,
And from our fickle Infancy propose,
Glittering felicities we never find,
For as we grow up to the enjoyments
Of what riper years bring with them, we see
That our desires do daily higher grow
And our fruitions but foundations lay,
TO entertain our busy brains, a new way.
So that we seldom contentation have,
In what we do possess; but forward look,
And only find some pleasure in the way,
Toward the end we aim at; which obtained,
Brings not those real joys, we did expect;
Only affords some relish which invites
Our idle fancies, to seek new delights;
-- How unhappy then, is our best happiness?
When no fruitions, can our fond hearts bless.
Still subject to unsatisfied desires,
That from quenched Ashes, does beget new Fires.
Thus all our Appetites, do make us slaves,
And from our cradles lead us to our graves.

Young Titus. Has the Gods only given us active souls?
And no objects, fit for them to fix on?

Orma. To think on those Gods, will afford our hearts,
A full variety, of lasting joys;
With which our earthly fancies cannot mix,
When on Celestial happiness, we fix.

Titus. I shall e're long, this argument revive,
And show, how you are buried alive!
Where is that valor, and that virtue gone?
Whither that courage fled? I doated on.
Though you can passion, and desire sustain,
You must not quit the Court, as if disdain
Of all the glories that a Court can give,
Could not persuade you there again to live.
-- I must now leave you to attend the Queen; --
[Exit Titus.
Ormas. A clearer virtue I have never seen.
[Exit omnes severally. Enter the Queen, Ambassador, Mariana, Old Titus, and
Train.
Ambassador. Madam, shall I return without a hope?
No gracious answer to my Masters suit!

Queen. My Lord, I fully have declared, that way.

Ambassador. Never to marry Madam!

Queen. It Is my opinion now.

Ambassador. Will you permit my Master to appear?
Whose person may bring Arguments to prove,
It necessary to allow his Love.

Queen. By no means my Lord, I shall not admit
His visit, if he come on that affair!
But must against his coming now declare.

Embass. How can you Madam, thus declare against
A person, and a passion you see not?
Or prejudge, what you will think hereafter!
His presence, may change this severity.

Queen. I have considered all that can be said,
Urge it no more.
The Ambassador stands concerned. Exit Queen, and Train.
Ma. Brother,-Sir,-what do you ail? what strange looks
Do you put on? you will be discovered!

Emba. I Mariana, it is now my business,
To try if this Scene changing, may not change
Cleandras stubborn heart; when she shall see
This borrowed habit, thrown away; if then,
She scorn my Love! I will break off the League
And in my own Right will a War declare,
For her so lately conquered Zelnian Crown,
And there will try, if her concealed Gallant!
The great Ormasdes may once more be drawn
From Sanctuary, to defend her Right,
From my just rage; -- I will now visit him.

Mari. This humor is not fit for complement,

Emb. Fear not Mariana, I Will not wrangle now,
My business is to bribe that mighty man,
And make him plead my cause to the fair Queen,
-- But if I find him rotten at the heart!
I shall unmask him, spite of all his Art.

Mari. That is what I fear.
[Exeunt.
THE SECOND ACT.
Enter the Ambassador, with Ormasdes, who holds a Book in his hand, they sit
on Chairs by a Table. ORMASDES. YOur Lordship by this visit, honors me;
Emb My visit brings you business of the State,
You must not take it for a Complement.

Ormas. What is your business then?

Emb. I have observed Ormasdes, the Queens sense,
Is yours, in her Affairs of Consequence,
She moves by you; this brings me to consult
My Masters Marriage, for a full result!
For I conceive Valerianus Name
Of so great Credit! and so high a Fame!
That our two Nations, by our Princes joined;
Though our surrounding neighbors were co^bind,
Our Territories would be safe, and we
Should thank the Gods for such Tranquillity.
But when a Lady Rules, they may presume,
And their Rebellious Principles assume;
If great Ormasdes shall be called away,
And fair Cleandra left alone to sway.

Ormasdes I know Sir, that Cleandra does esteem
The stout Treconians friendship, as she ought;
And I know she honors your brave young King,
Whose martial acts, have gained him through the
A character so noble, and so great! (world,
That she with joy this proffered League, does treat.
Only dislikes the Marriage you propose
On good State Arguments, as I suppose,
In judgment, and affection to her Son,
She will not raise a Rival to his Crown.
And for her angry Neighbors, she believes
The late Zelnian war, has such wisdom taught,
They will not suddenly, unurg'd, provoke,
A Queen, so powerful, and so fortunate.

Ambassador. Suppose Valerianus take offense?
And look on this neglect as an affront!
Because he only did propose this League,
To introduce his suit, which he conceives,
Will both our Nations equally advance;
But if laid by with scorn! suppose he then,
Do join with your old Enemies? and claim
His Fathers Title to the Zelnian Crown;
What may the hazzards? and the issue be?
If a new war, dispute your Victory?

Ormasdes. I will not Prophecy the sad event,
That so unjust a war, may justly bring
Upon so Gallant, and so wise a King!

Embass. Suppose then, that I have his Commission?
To ^ay by the Treaty of this new League,
Until the Marriage be agreed unto;
And if denied! I must Proclaim his Right
To Zelnia; and your late Conquest bring,
To a new question, with a Powerful King.

Ormas. If Valerianus be so fixed, we must
No h^zzards fear, in wars that are so just.

Embass. Your great success have high thoughts begot,
Above your Conquest, which I value not?
But wish such evils as we now foresee,
May be avoided by our industry;
For 'twill become your Wisdom, and your Trust,
T'advise Cleandra to this happy Match,
Wherein if you prevail! I have full power,
Now to confer on you, the first, and best
Of our Treconian Principalities.

Ormas You do me wrong, and are in this unjust,
To think that I will break Cleandras trust,
Which I do value 'bove your Masters Crown!
And therefore boldly will advise the Queen
Not to admit his suit, on Arguments
Which must an evil consequence produce
To her Sons Right, if she Comply,
And by it lessen her own Dignity.

Embass. If my employment, anger did allow,
And my own Honor would permit, to strike
A-Book-man! this rude language, I Would correct.

Orm. If the Queens honor were not more concerned!
In a respect to your employment due;
You soon should find, how little I do value you!
The Book-man would not from your Master take
This Insolence; but for Cleandras sake
I do forbear; pray visit me no more.

Ambassador. Fear it not; when Valerianus knows
How little worth, Cleandras honor is!
He will this League, and her Alliance scorn;
Who puts Ormasdes into this Disguise,
To hide her Lover from her Peoples Eyes?

Ormasdes. This is beyond sufferance.
Ormasdes Grapples with the Ambassador Enter The Queen, Young Titus, and Train,
who part them.
Queen Hold Ormasdes, I heard his Insolence --
-- Sir, you have leave to go aboard your Fleet,
Where you only can be safe; begone then,
Without reply be gone; for if it be known!
What you have said! my People may revenge
My wrong, before your Master do me right. --
[Exit Ambassador in Anger.] -- Ormasdes you must in this, my will obey,
Your wonted Judgment, must your passion sway:
While I by a quick war, with Fire and Sword,
Require such Justice as he must afford.

Ormas. Madam, the Conduct of that war I beg;

Queen. If you this passion will lay by till then!
You shall: But no more of this anger now;
I came to take the Air this Afternoon,
But will defer it, till another day.
-- Pray be pacified, you shall not stir out*
I do entreat, and do command you stay.
Titus stay you, till this heat be over.
[Exit Queen and Train.]
Ormas. Titus, my friend; I have a flame within,
That will consume my heart, if you help not!

Yo. Tit. Do you doubt my assistance, to serve you,
In any way you can prescribe a friend?

Or. I Will rather thank thee for it, then doubt thy love,
The Ambassador can this night hardly* reach
Coriola! where we, in a swift Boat*
By break of day, to morrow may Arrive;
I^ some hours since! we in the dark, Imbarke!

Yo. Titus I guess your purpose, and I will obey;
Yet I would gladly have an Argument,
To justify what we intend to do;
Lest Foreign Princes should condemn our State,
That Laws of Nations rashly violate;
And so Cleandras honor, suffer more*
Then by his Insolence, she did before.

Ormas. How can he justify, those words he spoke?
His rude language, the Law of Nations broke.
For when a Public Minister puts off
That sacred shadow, which should him protect;
And dares in such vil'd language give affronts,
To a much greater Monarch then his own!
That minute, his Commission did expire;
When he his Cloak of Majesty laid by;
And like a Ruffen, talked so lavishly.

Yo. Titus. This I confess, is reason for revenge,
But if the World our action not approve?
Pray think, what we shall urge for our excuse,
In case we can no president produce?

Ormas. A president Titus! where will he show,
That Nations do Ambassadors allow
To be so barbarously base, as he?
When he dares make his Act, a president!
I will another show, and kill him for it.
In the first Age, no presidents, were known,
And in ours, this shall be my Creation:
It Is not Cleandras work, nor is it thine;
The glory, or the shame is only mine*
Titus my heart would break, if I permit
That man to brag, as he will do at home;
How he has braved Ormasdes to his face!
And on Cleandra thrown so foul disgrace.

Y. Tit. Since I your resolution cannot change,
Pray name the place, and hour, and I Will not fail.

Ormas. Some 3* hours hence, we will at the Ferry meet,
Where a swift well-man'd Boat, you must provide,
My motion may some jealousy beget,
Of what we do intend; and must perform;
If our best speed, can but this Madman reach,
I shall his fury, better manners teach.
[Exeunt. Enter Cleandra, Mariana, Old Titus, Cleobulus, and Ladies.
Queen. Madam, you are now got so near my heart,
That I am sad to think that we must part.

Mariana. And I too soon do find, that I too late,
Am now involved in my Brothers Fate.
We leave our hearts behind, though we now fly,
This place by our impulsive Destiny.
My soul has not a wish can send me hence,
If I could stay on any just pretense.

Queen. Why may you not stay here Mariana?
And let him go, we will a friendship make,
Such as thy virtue justly may expect,
And my affection give, if here you will live?

Mari. I am unhappy Madam, who must be
At his dispose, has done you injury
So great! that I must suffer while I live.

Queen. Rather then you shall suffer, I Will forgive

Mari. Your pardon is, beyond your power, I fear,
Unless you will admit his Master here?

Queen. His pardon then, is far beyond my reach,
If for his King, his own concern be such!
And yours, so much for him; I must consent
To part with both; yet I could be content,
To see him for your sake, I and forget,
What he so rashly has against me said,
Thy tears for him, have satisfaction made.

Mari. My Brother is already on his way*
And has ordered Boats for me to follow,
Where I expect to find his rage to high,
To hearken to such mercy, as I bring,
Unless Cleandra will admit his King!

Queen. I have not seen such useless rage before,
Whom but himself? can his mad fury harm?

Mari It is a Riddle I dare not expound.

Queen. Dare not Mariana? am I so low
In your Esteem? you da^e not let me know
What you dare do? this secret I confess,
Has only power to make me love thee less.

Mari. I cannot, I have sworn not yet to say*
What it is, to him I Am doubly tied to obey:
But since your goodness, can so soon forgive,
So great a Crime, I Will try to bring him back,
And if I can prevail, for his consent,
I Will show the cause of his distemperment. --

Queen. You have his pardon, and may now pursue
Your own design, to bring him back with you;
But if he choose to go, and set you free,
Your self shall be much welcomer to me.

Mar. Your words encourage me to take no leave,
But cherish hopes which may my heart deceive
With present thoughts rather to smile then mourn
As a good Omen to my quick return.

Queen. You Nearcus, shall conduct Mariana
To Coriola, and at your own house,
As you pass by; pray treat her as my friend.

Nearcus. I shall be careful in it Madam.
Exeunt Nearcus, and Mariana.
Queen. I love her, and am somewhat more concerned
To part with her; then I can make you see!

Admiral. She has by her behavior, gained esteem
From all the Court, and from the Nation to.

Queen. I wonder Titus none of you lament,
When so great Beauty from the Court is sent!

Admi. Your Majesty has showed enough for all.

Queen. I do mean Love Titus, and did expect,
Her beauty should have fired a hundred hearts!
And by the powerful charms of her bright Eyes,
O're-ruled, our Citherean Destinies.

Admi. My heart Madam, has been so often burnt,
There is no substance left, that can take fire;
Indeed I wonder how the rest have escaped!

Cleob. Nearcus, and my self, had other thoughts!
Of this great beauty, which did secure us;
We do Mariana for his Mistress take,
Few Sisters Travel for a Brothers sake!

Queen. How Cleobulus! have you any ground
For this? to justify so vile a thought;

Cle. Only the freedom, which they daily used,
With this new way, for Men who have no Wives,
To carry Sisters, into Foreign Courts!

Queen. Though not in use, it does not sure deserve
A censure so severe! such Innocence,
In Mariana, did to me appear,
That I should sooner judge her good, if bad!
Then blemish such perfections by a thought
It cannot be! so Insolent a Guilt!
He durst not own! nor such a scandal raise,
On his own Name! and on his Country too!
I do command you to suppress this thing,
I am ashamed a Cithereans heart,
Should entertain a thought of such a crime!
We bring our own Worth in question then,
When we asperse the Worth of other men.

Cle. They were but thoughts, as rashly then tain up,
As now thrown out; with no design to wrong
The Innocent; I wish her virtue may
Our thoughts convince, and she be justified.

Queen. Keep firm there my Lord, for all those who live
Near Princes Ears, should weigh how they let fall
A word, that may a Woman's Honor blast;
If I were apt to credit your report?
And on your groundless jealousy affront
Such virtue! what a sin were it in you?
To make me guilty of so great a Crime!

Cleobulus. I am sorry for my rash opinion,
Since it offends your Majesty so much!

Queen. It is the baine of Courts, when we permit
Those near us, to asperse the Innocent;
If our strict Laws for petty theft, gives Death?
How much a greater punishment is due
For Robbing a good name? a sin so vil'd,
And so unknown! no punishment was made
By way of Prophecy, for crimes to come!
If I did think this malice from your heart,
I would for ever banish you my Court.

Cleobulus. Your Majesty does raise your anger now
Above my guilt; which had no mischief in it.

Queen. I am no farther angry with you now,
But take occasion to declare my sense,
Against all such as defame Innocence.
It Is a Prince his chief business to be Just,
The Gods impose on us no higher Trust!
We have no petty faults, to answer for,
Universal Justice, is our great work,
And those who shall divert it, to destroy
The Fame, or Fortune of an Enemy,
Deserves to be thrown off with Infamy.
[Exit Queen and Ladies. Remains the Admiral and Cleobulus.
Admiral. I have not seen the Queen in such a heat!
You have offended her some other way?

Cleobulus. Not that I know of, in this kind ever!

Admi. What Devil, made you talk thus to her now?
You knowing that she is so good herself,
She makes a doubt, that any of her Sex
Can do amiss! and it is great Nobleness!

Cleo. There is a kind of pi^e Devil, dwells
In many Courts, that haunts our idle heads;
And prompts us, when we know not what to say;
To Entertain great Princes with reports
Of others so to please and pass the time;
This foolish spirit, I think, entered me.

Admiral. You gave Cleandra cause, for your reproof,
For how can Princes judge Malice, for Mirth?
When cunningly thrown out, with specious shows,
Of probabilities; when those aspersed,
Are never called, to ans^ for themselves;
The Queen did Excellently well, to chide
You, whom she loves; that none may ere presume
The like hereafter! for if Princes be
Born Credulous? Malicious persons may
Defame a Nation, if they please! this way.

Cleobulus. I know I was to blame, but from this day,
I Will hold my peace, till I know what to say.
[Exeunt. Enter Nearcus, with Mariana and Servants at his House.
Mari. (well.
Where are we now my Lord? this house stands

Nearcus. It is my poor habitation Madam;
Here I must treat you by the Queens command,
It Is the midway unto Coriola.

Mariana. It Is a Noble, and a most pleasant Seat;
Has it no Mistress Sir? Are you fingle?

Nearcus. I am only that way, happy Madam;

Mariana. You have a Mistress then? or do you call
It happiness? that you as yet, have none?

Nearcus. Will you please Madam, to view the garden?
The rest of the Train stay looking on the Pictures, and see them not go out.
Exit Nearcus with Mariana.
1. Lady. That piece methinks, does look as if it lived.

2. Lady I do prefer that smiling Figure first;
Whose hand is it my Lord?

Lord. I have not skill enough to know the hands,
Though I love Pictures: -- pray observe the next;
Is ^ot this sleeping ^us, rarely done?
See how that Cupid (...) the Tree stands off!

2. Lady. It Is rare indeed, that Satyr, and the rest,
Of the whole piece, is excellently good!

1. Lady. Let us look into the next room my Lord;

Lord. This way they went, and this way must return.
They go out, and return hastily.
Lord. The doors are locked, and we can pass no way.

1. Lady. Is this by accident? or on command?

Lord. Let us attend a while, and we shall see;
From the next Chamber window, where they be.
[Exeunt. Enter Nearcus with Mariana in the Garden.
Mariana. I have no Argument for further talk,
And now am weary grown, with this long walk;
Where is the beauty? you so much admire!
Your praises, have in me raised some desire
To see this wonder of our Sex! that I,
May judge your skill, and with your choice co^ply.
Nearcus locks the door, and kneeles.
Nearcus. She is here already, oh she is here!
A brighter beauty, never can appear!

Mari. Why do you lock the door my Lord? why kneel
To me? you make my heart some tremblings feel,
By this surprise; and I do doubtful stand,
What of kind Treachery you have in hand!
It looks! -- yet, like a Lio^ness betrayed
Into the Toils; I scorn to be afraid.

Nearcus. I have no Argument for either now,
But a distracted heart; that knows not how
T'excuse, what I have done! - it is love has brought
Me to this Precipis, and too late taught,
That I from hence, shall headlong tumble down,
If you disdain to save; oh do not frown!
[Offers his Sword. Rather take this, and while you may, prevent
Your own near ruin, and my rash intent. --
-- That angry look, and those enraged Eyes,
Pierce like quick Lightning, from the stormy skies;
They melt my heart, and make me ^mbling stand,
To beg what Love, and Nature may Command.

Mariana. Love! do the Cithereans by such Arts!
Such force! and treachery! win Ladies hearts?
Fie, ^e Nearcus, this does not agree
With Love! nor with Cleandras trust to thee;
I shame to find such ills! and blush to chide:
-- Repent, and I thy Infamy will hide;
Oh! it is the basest of all crimes to be
Justly condemned, for infidelity;
And with a treachery, my trust beguile,
Beyond the story of the Crocadile.

Ne. What dares not love attempt? when it goes high
Like mine? your ships are ready, oh to nigh!
The wind is fair; and I, no time but this,
To woe; no other means to reach my bliss!
The Queens command, and my desires here meet,
To throw my life, and fortune, at your feet
That by this desperate course, you now may see,
Your love, or scorn, I make my destenie.

Mari Nearcus, how would you prevail my dreams!
Instruct me not, to answer such extremes!

Nearcus. I would have you Mistress of me, and mine,
Before we part, made so, by vows Divine:

Mariana It Is a short warning, to a work so great!
Is this Cleandras Love? and this your Treat
To strangers? do you think my lips, my heart
Does hold so loose? as at first sight, to part
With it to you? what do you find in me
So slight? that looks like so much levitie.

Nearcus. If you will afford more time? I will proceed
With caution, and respect! and shall take heed
How I offen^; if you will resolve to stay,
Or to comply, my passion will obey.
-- If not! I must this desperate course pursue,
And trust my ruin, or success, to you
-- Who does in desperate attempts engage,
Can seldom at first sight, the event presage:
-- Love led me on, and reason comes to late,
Now to retreat; this Fortune, is my Fate.

Mar. Your language, and your looks, do rather threat,
Then woe; which does in me such scorn beget,
As to an Enemy, that does invade
-- That Innocence you have berest of aid;
And boldly dare impose on a free heart,
What should be won by Love, not such base art!

Nearcus. Give me but time to woe! and I will fear*
And tremble in your sight; with zeal appear,
And the same duty, I approach the Gods,
When my offenses, make me fear their Rods!
It is not I, (as y^ affairs do stand)
But high necessity, makes me command;
That all the remnant of my life, you may
Triumph! for my ambition's to obey.

Mariana. Think you by force, that I shall ere think fit,
To yield my self to such a counterfiet?
I am not born unto so mean a Fate,
As to submit unto the man, I hate:
Nor will I be thus frighted, to comply,
With so contemptable a destiny.

Nearcus. I must confess, I can by no disguise
Lessen, or hide, the guilt, of this surprise;
But by some greater crime, more amply show,
That a distracted passion may soon know,
To act such evils, as I fear to think;
But do not set me in despair thus sink.
Speak so, as that I may, some hope retain,
And you will restore me to my self again.

Mari Stand by vil'd Man, and let me pass; who waits?

Near. None within call; that now can help! the fates
Themselves have not the power to set you free,
Nor can you hope for safety, but from me!
No storm at Sea, nor in it, ships on fire,
Creates more terrors, then my wild desire,
Brings me! here is a Tempest in this breast,
Above all them; since raging Love possessed
My heart, I am become a walking storm;
Reason, and Virtue, are both wracked, no form
Observed, while this confusion bears the sway,
None knows to govern; but must all obey,
If we cannot resist; then to cry no,
Is madness, when we must to ruin go!

Maria. I have no power, but (...) ^st my Brothers will
Obey; I must his mind, not yours fulfill;
Lest his great pride, and anger may destroy,
What you would preserve, and frustrate all your joy.

Nearcus. If my high birth, and quality do prove
Less then your o^n, I will expect no love;
But hazard all my hopes, on his consent,
Let his denial, sign my punishment.

Mariana. If your birth equal mine, and he consent
To join our hands! I have no argument
Against your hopes; but must be Mistress still,
Of my own heart* not part with my free will;
Yet now Nearcus, I do promise you,
What truth and honor dictates, I will do.

Nearcus. Unless you both do ere you go, comply,
You shall soon see, that I know how to dye.

Mari. Pray call my servants down, that I may see
Your truth; and find my self at Liberty.
[He calls at the door^
Nearcus. Now Madam, that my life's at your dispose,
Your self secure* I humbly do propose,
You will before the Gods, confirm by vow,
What you have freely promised, to me now.

Mari. By all those powers, I Will keep my promise made*
Andnever fail to own, what I have said.

Nearcus. It is enough, a kiss of your fair hand,
Must satisfy the man, you may command;
Nearcus has no soul, cannot be blessed,
Until his love, with love you do invest.
Enter Servants, and all go off together.
THE THIRD ACT.
Enter The Ambassador, as at Coriola, with Cleon, Erillos, and Train.
AMBASSADOR. THis Piazzo Cleon, is Magnificent;
I have not seen any so Beautiful!

Cleon. It shows the Princes Treasure, and their minds,
Are alike great, who can so soon Erect
So vast a City, which in every part
Deserves to be as much admired, as this!

Emba. We may walk through it, ere my Sister comes!

Erillos. You may, the River side is your best view;

Cleon. There is a Boat now coming to the shore;

Erillos. Those who land, seem to be of Quality!

Ambassador. I see no Woman yet with them appear!
They are very brave, and come toward us!
Do any of you know who these may be?

Cleon. Young Titus landed first, but as I think
It is Ormasdes who now leads the Troop:

Embassa. If so! I must expect some angry words,
From the Offended Queen.
Enter Ormasdes, and Young Titus, with Servants, who come up close to the
Ambassador without any respect.
Emb. What means this kind of rudeness Gentlemen?

Ormasdes. It speaks my business, who am hither come,
To scourge that pride, you so much glory in.
And with this hand that insolence chastise,
Which boldly durst endeavor to defame,
By base surmises, great Cleandras Name. --
[He turns to Titus. -- Titus, I beg as you love my Honor,
If I do fall! let none come in to help!
[To the Ambassador. -- Sir, you shall have fair play, that we may see,
How Insolence, and Courage do agree!
[Titus makes room.
Embass. I shall soon satisfy the doubt you make;
[To his Followers. -- Stand off; he dies that stirs to my relief;
Or by a word let fall, does make me known!
They fight, Ormasdes burts and disarms him. Enter Mariana, and servants, who
run in and part them.
Mariana. Ormasdes hold; it is a King you wound!
It is Valerianus you fight with.

Ormas. My self a Prince of Greece of the same blood
With our great Emperor, will justify
What I have done; and to the World declare,
If any man do wrong me in disguise!
I do his Titles, and himself despise.
Exit Ormasdes, Titus and Train.
Mari. Oh Gods! my prophetic soul, did long since
Foresee this Evil! oh let not --

King. Hold Valeriana; there are no Gods!
Nor shall one Altar in my Kingdom stand,
To honor those we foolishly call Gods!
I will Erect new Temples unto Chance,
Which guiddely, thus governs us below.

Val. Take heed Sir, lest you do provoke those powers!
(You now despise!) to punish your contempt!

King. I will not own those Gods, those empty names,
Who cannot shelter us from public shames!

Vale. The Gods be just, and you are much to blame,
'Twas not Ormasdes, who the King ore-came!
It was his Virtue conquered your offense,
Your Guilt gave Victory to Innosence.

Kin. Will you, become my Judge? will you, co^demn
My Life, and Honor? A fit Sacrifice
To your beloved Ormasdes fatal Sword;
Fool, from this hour, I do thy blood disclaim,
And will forget, I ever knew thy Name; --
-- Erillos, let my goods be sent aboard,
I will not stay a minute longer here,
Then my necessity compells me to.

Vale I have prevailed with the much injured Queen,
To lay her anger by, and to forgive
Those rash words you spoke, and have her leave
To bring you to her sight again with hopes
She may her inclinations change, when known!
Your fury did proceed from Love alone.

King. My Love is vanished, and my heart too full
Of my revenge, to think of my return;
Till I can pull Cleandra from her Throne!
I hope Ormasdes will take care of you,
Who plead his cause, and are to love, so true!

Men. Sir, though yr wounds be slight, if you remove!
So soon? we cannot answer for your life.

King. I Will rather dye at Sea, then live on shore,
Make have good Cleon; lead me to my Boat.

Cleon. Will you leave the Princess, in a strange land?
Thus unkindly cast her off; for ever?
Because her Love did argue for your good!

King. And thee that dares so boldly her excuse,
Who does my honor, and her own abuse.
[The Princess sound.
Cleon. Look Sir, she dies! your unkindness kills her,

King. She cannot do her self, and me more right,
Then to dye now! but she cannot depart,
While great Ormasdes Triumphs in her heart! --
[She Recovers. -- See how his Name, her fainting soul Revives!
Lead on, or I shall laugh to see her dye!
That can raise Trophies for my infamy.
Exit King and Train.
Valeriana. What cruelty is this? to leave me here!
Who love him better, then he loves himself;
-- You Will be all ruined, if you stay with me!

Cleon. What we have said, has ruined us enough,
If his unruly rage, can reach so far?

Mean. I think 'twere best, that you return to Court,
And do Cleandras proffered friendship try,
I have all your Brothers Jewels here,
Which will defray your charges while you stay.

Valeriana. It Is a plentiful provision for us;
But where is young Nearcus, all this while?

Cleon. He has not yet appeared, since we Arrived.
Enter to them Ormasdes, young Titus, Nearcus, and Servants, Ormasdes stands
off.
Nearcus. Madam, can you forgive, what I have done?
And own the Author of so great a crime?
Who saw not then a Princess in disguise,
But was captived by Marianas eyes!

Valeriana. My Lord, I do forgive, and shall forget,
So you repent! and I will serve you to,
With all my power, and interest in the Queen.

Nearcus. If that be all, would I had guilty been
Of greater crimes, then my good natured sin.

Young Titus. Madam, we hear your Brother is unkind,
But by Cleandras favors you may find
Some means to reconcile you unto him

Valeriana. I am most happy in Cleandras love.

Yo. Tit. Will you permit Ormasdes in your Boat?
Or shall he seek some other passage home?

Maria. I could have wished Ormasdes less concerned,
Or that his courage had not been so great;
But cannot quarrel him on this account;
He was obliged to right Cleandras wrongs;
And must in Justice be applauded for it.

Ormas. Madam, I thank the Gods for my success,
And now with the same breath, can humbly beg,
That you will forgive, what they so late approved?

Valeriana. Sir, it will not become me, his Sister,
-- Now to congratulate your Victory,
Who have just cause to mourn my Brothers Fate;
From whence my own misfortunes have their date

Ormas. Madam, shall we attend you to your Boat?

Valeri. Let Titus order all, as he thinks fit!
I am ready now for my remove.
Exeunt. Titus leads off Valeriana, the rest follow. Enter Cleobulus and
Chyron.
Chy. The Queen is troubled, and her Guards are sent
With speed, Ormasdes Quarrel to prevent:

Cleob. She must secure the Ambassadors return,
Lest all our Neighbour-Nations do complain,
And say, we give occasion for a War;
Which the Treconians claim cannot pretend,
Nor the rejected Marriage, Justify.

Chyron. Valerianus has an ancient claim
To Zelnia, which may beget a War!
If the Treconians do a quarrel seek?
There wants no Title to a Prince provoked

Cleob Ormasdes will rejoice, to see that day!

Chy He is our Nations Darling, and deserves,
Cleandras favor; but methinks, he (...)
As if his heart, were higher, then his head!

Cleo I have been lately chid for juggling looks,
And dare not say, what I believe, I see.
Enter to them Cleandra. Old Titus, and Ladies.
Queen. You tell such wonders from Coriola,
That I want faith for it! how comes this News?

Admiral. Madam, a Messenger but now Arrived,
Saw the Combat done, and heard Nearcus say,
They would attend Valeriana back
Unto your Majesty; (whereas the wonder?)
Princes have been in foreign Courts disguised!

Que. But have you ever such strange humors found?
A Prince where Vice, and Virtue, is so mixed!

Admi. No, I have not, nor such a president!
As now Ormasdes gives us to correct
Such impudence, as near before was known.

Queen. If I were not concerned, I should approve.
What he has done, though now I must not own?

Admi. For public thanks on his behalf, I move. --
-- Why should we thus, our honest thoughts disguise?
When Virtuous Actions, Virtue Justifies.

Queen. Had not Ormasdes stird! by Arms I might
Compel his Master to have done me right.

Admi. By war, thousands of guiltless persons might
Have suffered, for one man's oversight.

Queen. You have reason Titus, and I shall Judge
Ormasdes Act, as he deserves from me;
Who with my Nation, am so much obliged,
I must approve, whatever he will own!
-- Let the young Princess lodgings be prepared,
Fit for my Friend, and Sister to a King.
Enter to them, Valeriana, Young Titus, Nearcus, and Servants.
Queen. You are welcome Madam, and I am glad
To have you on these terms; do not weep
To part with, what your virtue could not keep!

Valerian. I am happy, by my unhappiness,
For by your favor Madam, I may find
Some remedy for my afflicted mind.

Queen. Be sure, what Citherea can afford,
Is yours; and all Cleandra does command
With me rejoice, to see you safe returned;
-- But where is Ormasdes? I must chide him.

Nearc. He is retired Madam, to avoid your sight.

Titus. Ormasdes thinks it duty, and respect,
Not to appear at Court, till you direct!

Queen. Pray fetch him hither now; I hope you can
Exit Titus. With me, forgive so Excellent a man!
Whose passion never does his reason sway,
But follows on, when virtue leads the way.

Valeriana. I have no anger to Ormasdes, since
Young Titus did my Brothers crime relate,
I hope this letting blood, will do him good,
When this affront, at home, is understood!

Queen. Your Justice, and your Charity is great,
And I do see no reason but you may
Admit Ormasdes, in my company;
I am informed, he has a slght hurt to!

Valeriana. My furious Brother will be glad indeed!
That brave Ormasdes, by his hand does bleed.
This accident, if you will be pleased, to call
My Brother back? may reconcile us all.

Queen. I never shall consent to his desires,
Though I my anger, and revenge remove,
In complement to you, whom I do love.
Enter to them Ormasdes, and Young Titus.
Ormas. Madam, if doing Justice, have displeased!
I do repent, and now your pardon beg.

Queen. Since his great insolence, and your revenge,
No Age can parallel! both must submit
To such a censure as the World thinks fit.

Ormas. Your pardon Madam, is not all my suit,
I beg your interest to obtain like grace
From this sad Lady! my whole Soul is vexed,
To see such innocence, so much perplexed.

Queen. I can now secure you there Ormasdes,
She does discreetly Judge, what you have done,
Was, what a man of honor could not shun.
-- Is not this truth Valeriana? speak?
[Valeriana stands surprised.
Valeri. Yes Madam, I do think, I did say so!
[She sighs, and weeps.
Q What sudden change is this? can your soft heart,
Conceal a thought of ill? toward the man
You have excused? and seemed to smile upon!

Nearcus. She does love Ormasdes, and I am lost!
Aside.] [Valeriana weeps.
Qu. Pray leave us, all withdraw! to the next room:
[Exeunt. -- What have I said? that can disturb you thus?
Impart your griefs, and I will share in them.

Valeriana. I dare not show 'um with an open face!

Queen. And why, you cannot have a guilt so great
That I cannot forgive; speak it freely.

Vale. Has not my face, my guilty heart betrayed?

Queen. I understand you not!

Vale. -- I am safe then, and may my sorrow hide.
[Aside.
Queen. Madam, what means this talking to your self?
While I stand by neglected! is your trust
So great? that you can doubt I will be just?

Vale. I doubt my self great Queen, and fears not you;
[Aside. She Is jealous of me, and my thoughts too true!
She loves Ormasdes, and most unhappy I,
Am forced to smile on my own Tragedy;
I know no way to hide my broken heart,
Unless I do immediately depart! --
-- Madam, I beg your Pardon, and your Pass,
I must begone, least I too late alas!
By my distempers here, deserve your blame,
And raise my memory, eternal shame

Queen You are not well sure, this distracted talk,
Requires Physicians to consult; I Will send; --

Vale. Oh no! there needs no more consult for this,
You only can restore me unto bliss!

Queen. And can you doubt, that I will not?

Vale. I fear so!

Queen. What I can do, be you assured, I will.

Vale. What I desire, may be more prized by you,
Then is the Citherean Diadem!
-- Will you know now? and if not grant! forgive?
For I am desperate on the sudden grown,
And am resolved to make my weakness known.

Queen. Speak it aloud, or in my bosom breath,
[Imbraces her. The troubles of thy soul, let not a thought
Be hid, but freely show, how much you trust
My love, and you shall find me kind, and just.

Vale Do not you Madam, value Ormasdes
Person? and his service above all men's?

Queen. Yes, I do.

Valeri. You are Just, and Worthy; -- and I am --
[Valeriana faints.
Queen. Help, help, some help there!

Enter Ormasdes, Titus, Nearcus, and Ladies, who take up Valeriana.
Nearcus. It Is love, upon my life!
[Aside.
Queen. Leave us again, the dangers over now;

Ormas. I beg your permission to retire.

Queen. My best wishes still attend Ormasdes.
Exit Ormasdes, with the rest.
Valeria. What can I say, t'excuse what I have done?

Qu. Speak plainly your full thoughts, and I Am yr friend;
But if you longer dally with my love!
You will my friendship, unto anger move.

Valeri. I know you have discovered by my words,
That your Esteem of him, you boldly own,
Becomes the ground of my distraction;

Que. You love him then! that look declares it now!
And so do I, or I would never consent
To give him unto you; if this cure grow
Within my reach! Ormasdes shall be yours.

Valeri. Is not your Majesty engaged to him?

Queen. Indeed, I am not so in love with him,
But I can second your desires; and will
With all my power endeavor to persuade
Ormasdes that he meet with open arms,
So great a blessing by the Gods defign'd;
Though I must part with what I value most,
Your passion, never shall by me be crossed.

Valeri. Madam, your kindness to me flows so fast,
That I am now in danger to be lost,
By my abundant joy for this success
You give, of unexpected happiness.

Que. Remove these sullen clouds from thy fair Eyes,
And be thy self again, for I will show
Ormasdes suddenly how great a bliss,
The Heavens prepare to Crown his Virtue with.

Valor. The Gods reward you with your highest wish!
That you may never want what you desire,
My spirits fail so fast! I must retire.
[Exit. Her Maids lead her off, leaning on them, and showing much weakness.
Queen. Do so; what is this, I have so rashly done!
Thrown off Ormasdes I depend on!
Must I persuade him quit that Interest here,
Which for my sake, he purchased so dear!
-- How ill shall I repay his service past?
If I advise, this banishment at last;
What a rash promise, has my pity made?
By thus proposing my improper Ay'd!
Though by the secret charms of sympathy,
Her passion won my reason to comply,
I must on this employment Titus use,
My Honor will my active part excuse.
-- But if his Arguments should not prevail?
And by my nicety, the business fail?
-- If she should perish so? and I repent
To late, that ill! which I may yet prevent;
-- I must about it then, and loose no time,
Lest my nice complements do prove a crime!
-- My faith is past, and I will now proceed,
Though b^e Ormasdes do condemn the Deed*
Exit with Train. Enter Nearcus, with Valeriana, in her Chamber, her Ladies
stand off, but go not out.
Nea. Madam, my desperate State, and high transport,
You may complain of, though not blame me for it;
Your eyes, like bright misguiding fires, betray
My wandering soul, and make me lose my way.
It Is now too late, to see that I am lost,
^ed by those guides, to this obdurate coast,
Where neither Rocks appear, nor crossing* Tides;
Yet this expected safety, ruin hides!
-- But I must claim you by a solemn vow,
Made in the sight of Heaven; and am come now,
To prove my Birth, which you will not deny,
Is with your own, of equal Quality;
These are such Arguments for your consent,
I cannot think, you dare your vows repent.

Vale. It cannot well be thought, and much less said,
That I repent a promise, never made;
How could such hasty words, strict vows appear?
Which my surprise, then made me speak in fear!
When you to seize me, stretched those Lions paws,
And threatened against all Hospitable Laws!
Worse then Death to me; what might I not do?
To get from such a Monstrous Beast as you!

Near. Did my humility such danger threat?
Or my submission, with such horror treat!
Were it even so, as you your self have said!
I might my own conditions, then have made.

Vale. Did you not all my Servants first exclude?
And me into a loneness so delude,
As that no rescue could be had! to free
Me from your Traiterous Captivity.
When you with humble looks, strong fetters laid,
And words let fall, which made my soul afraid;
And caused me use some little Art, to gain
Your trust, that I my freedom might obtain.

Near. It Is true indeed, and you reproach me well,
Or else you might another story tell!
For I confess, I did too much! to prove
The humble passion of a gentle Love;
And much too little, now to justify
My high affections, or my fact deny.
Had I with vigor my first step persu'd, (new'd.
You might have wished my vows, with yours re

Vale. You talk, as now, I at your mercy were;
As if you still might threat; and I must fear!
But I shall make you know your self, and me,
If you proceed not with more modesty!
And shall soon let Cleandra understand,
How well you Treated me! on her command.

Near. Though I do shake, and tremble at your frown,
Cleandras anger, cannot bow me down.
For if my suffering no compassion move,
Nor your past vows, make you regard my Love!
You shall then see, how little I esteem
This Life, you will not with a smile redeem!

Valeriana. I am not thus ungrateful as you say,
So I may be secured another way;
-- I did not threat, till you aspersed my Name,
By this false promise, you unjustly claim.
For though your Birth flow from a Noble Spring,
It Is something less, then Daughter to a King.
And more, I must the secret now impart,
That brave Ormasdes long since, had my heart.

Near. Madam, I have no Plea beyond my Love,
If that, do of too mean a value prove!
Think how your honor stands engaged by vow,
And that my all depends upon it now!
Yet here I do before the Gods profess,
To quit my Title, if my birth be less!

Vale. From Nearcus, the Gods will me protect,
Who boldly must a subjects claim, reject.

Near. Which I am not; but a Prince Nobly born,
As is Cleandra! though you now do scorn
The Man, who laid his greatness at your feet,
Without a thought, of Royalty to meet!
Your Virtue, and your Beauty did engage
My heart to Love; and did create that rage,
You now so much condemn; and makes me sha^
I did no more, who was so much to blame!

Vale. You do amaze me! knows Cleandra this?

Near. She yet does not, but must do, when I plead
My Title to Valerianas Bed.
For Madam, you can only now be mine,
Made so by humane Laws, and by Divine.

Vale. What ere you are! I do much scorn to think
Of being compelled and will strong poison dri^
Rather then be by such a trick betrayed,
Or of your scandalous reports, afraid;
Your first attempt was base; and now as vain
Your hopes are; you are a Prince! I do disdain
To have a thought for him, who poorly can,
Demand, what is given to another man.
I must this Injury at last reveal,
And to the Queen, for Justice now appeal.

Near. I am content, then let Cleandra Judge,

Vale. I Will hear no more.
[Exit with Ladies.
Near. What a strange heat I feel, that always burn,
Yet do not wast, cannot to Ashes turn!
But like a fire-flaming Statue stand,
To warn the World, not to approach this Land;
Ye Gods! how cruel is your doom? that she
Melts not; but should an Icie Mountain be,
Of power to kindle such tormenting fires,
Where her own frozen heart has no desires.
[Exit.
THE FOURTH ACT.
Enter Cleandra, with Ormasde^, the Lords, and Ladies stand off. QUEEN. I shall
allow your Argument for War,
If the Treconian do provoke so far!
But how shall I, Valeriana free?
From her fierce Brothers great barbaritie;
And how Estate her in her Mothers Land!
If her mad Brother, should that right withstand!
Though she do now desire but what is her own,
If he should dye; She must Ascend that Throne.

Ormas I have heard so, and that, by my rash Act,
She suffers, which makes me repent the Fact!

Queen. Her virtues, do her beauty far excel,
And in my judgment, have no parallel;
What is your thought? will not the man be blessed?
Whom Cods with such felicities invest!

Ormas. I doubt not Madam, her perfections may
In hearts of Men; above her Scepter sway.

Queen. She has won me, to a concern so high,
As if my own, were the same Desteny
With hers; my thoughts do labor where to treat
A Marriage with some Prince, worthy so great
A Queen; can you Ormasdes find me one
To recommend? will Greece afford us none?

Ormas. Madam, if Citherea can produce
None fit! for Greece, there will need no excuse; --

Queen. I think so too, unless Ormasdes will
Himself, thus my prophetic soul fulfill!
That does such glories, and such joys foresee,
As may endure unto Eternity.

Ormas. Me Madam, does your Majesty think me
A man worthy of so great Felicity?
Alas I am too old, now to begin
To Love! you may as soon learn me to spin;
-- My Sword, and Armor, into Needles turn,
As ^each my Age in Youthful flames to burn.

Queen. It Is you Ormasdes, are the man so blessed,
Her love to you, she has to me confessed;
And me in honor has engaged to try,
If I can now persuade you to comply.

Ormas. Madam, I hope you do not thus abuse
Your servant, cause my nature does refuse,
Such correspondence with your Sex, as might
Engage a braver Man; Oh do not fight
Against my weakness! that must now confess,
I never unto Lady made Address;
And only chose this solitary place,
That I might here some quiet thoughts embrace.
-- Sure Madam, you mistake; how can it be?
That she should covet such A^tipothy!
-- Can the good Gods to her be so unkind?
To let such excellence, become so blind?

Qu. Think you her self knows? what her self desires?
Or that she has no sense, of those quick fires,
That do consume her! can you doubt such Love?
Which through despair, did then so mortal prove!
That but to name Ormasdes, she did Dye,
Till you appeared, to change that destiny;
-- And when you all retired, she did confess,
Her life depended on her good success;
Your Glorious Acts had raised so loud a Fame,
That she was first in Love with your great Name!
Which brought her hither, with a full intent,
To Judge, and Justify, that Argument.

Crm^s Madam, I must believe what you avow,
And do so far your Argument allow,
That it has raised in me, a greater war,
Then I was ever in; and am so far
From slighting this affair, that I descry,
My certain Ruin, by this Victory.
The Gods cannot afford less punishment,
If I refuse to hear! and if consent!
I Am lost, to all my joys on Earth; for Fate
Has not in store, nor can the Gods Create
An evil, I fear more, then to deny,
What you command; though a sad Desteny;
-- Can nothing less then my destruction? save
This Excellence? from an untimely Grave!

Queen. If I could see this danger you foretell?
Ormasdes harms, should make no other well!
Though Valeriana do my pity move,
Ormasdes friendship, is before her Love
In my esteem; but if this match unite
Your hearts? it will our Children then invite,
To imitate our friendship, and so tie
Fast knots, for everlasting Ametie.

Ormas. My mind can move my body any way,
But my hard heart, will not my will obey;
My utmost power, my soul to mourn shall teach,
Cause my Affection, is beyond my reach!

Queen. If you oppose not, but your ear will lend,
I doubt not, but the Gods your heart will bend
This way, and your good nature in short time,
Will make you wish for, what you judge my crime.

Ormas. Although I cannot, wish, and must not choose,
I would not Madam, willingly refuse
What you advise; but boldly meet my Fate,
That no one thought, may a vain fear Create,
Lest you should judge my slackness, for neglect,
Because I graspe not, what I cannot affect.

Queen. Can you such pleasure tak, in this disguise?
Be thus retired? and all that is good despise,
When offered! do you fear? or scorn to meet
This Excellence, now fallen at your feet!
-- Is your great heart Ormasdes, only made
For dangerous attempts? shall it be said?
This Parragon of all our Sex! now dies,
Because Ormasdes, does her Love despise!

Ormas. No Madam, I do suffer more, then she
Does for her self! hers, is my misery;
I dare not virtue, with vain hopes abuse,
I cannot love; and therefore do refuse
To dally with so bright a Saint, whose Shrine,
Compells all hearts to bow before't, but mine;
I am not capable of Love; not blessed
That way! my heart's with other flames possessed.

Queen. All flames you feel, would vanish, did you see
Valeriana in such misery
As she endure! now fetching her last breath,
Enquiring your health, neglecting her own death.
Thus my compassion has her sorrows learned,
I weep her tears, while you stand unconcerned!

Ormas. Madam, your passion does my pity move,
Though my dull heart cannot consent to Love;
My resolution is now fixed; I Will try
My self to vanquish, or her Martyr Dye!
-- I swear, I did not hear that she was ill,
And now it does my soul with horror fill,
For her concern; no danger is so great,
But I will rather dye in it, then retreat.

Queen. It Is bravely said, but dare you try the effect,
Of one short visit? after such neglect!

Ormas. Thus provoked! if your Majesty stands by!
I will not such a visit now deny.

Queen. You speak, and look, as if you meant to fright,
Much rather, then revive her by your sight!

Ormas. Madam, to Complement, I have no skill,
Nor can be pleased, if loved against my will!
Yet sensible, and civil, I can be,
Though it do prove unfortunate, to me.

Queen. When shall I bring this comfort? to revive
Her fainting soul; if she be still alive.

Ormas. Is she really so weak; so soon grown
Thus ill? I have no skill, in this unknown
Mystery of love! but will boldly try,
What I can do, for her recovery.

Queen. High passions do weak bodies sooner bring
To the Graves mouth, then any other thing;
Her despairs, are of a much longer date,
Though sudden sickness do break out thus late;
-- When I your humor, did at first rehearse,
And showed, how your whole life had been averse
To Love; she sighed, and presently grew pale,
Despair that minute, made her spirits fail;
And so transported by her fancy, fell
As if my doubts, had rung her passing bell.

Orm. Though I cannot speak, nor do yet know how
To look; I Am ready to attend you now!

Queen. I fear, so sudden, and so great a joy!
As your approach; may equally destroy!
Let me her heart prepare, that by degrees,
She may but hope retain, before she sees
The comfort, that your visit brings; and then
Ormasdes may ere long, prove best of Men.

Ormas. Madam, I do my self to you submit,
Pray order me in all, as you think fit.

Queen. You shall then stand unseen, while I do tell
This welcome story, which will make her well.
And then by what you will see you may observe,
How my true friendship will from both deserve!
Who have no wish beyond Ormasdes good,
When time shall make me rightly understand.

Ormas. Madam, I have now no more to say,
But that I will your Majesty obey.

Queen. You shall not stir Ormasdes till I send.
Exit Queen and Train. Enter to him Nearcus.
Ormas. Did you not meet Cleandra going out?

Near. Yes, but I have business of importance,
Pray let us withdraw, and be more private.

Ormas. Come this way then: --
They go out, and Re-enter.
Ormas. Why have you drawn me to this inner room?
Is the secret, of so piercing quality?
That fewer walls then these, cannot contain't!

Near. It is my Lord of a high nature grown,
I must impart it to your self alone;
-- You and I, must kill one another now;

Orma. May not I live? though you are pleased to die?

Near. No Sir, since it is decreed that I must die!
I am resolved to have your Company.
-- There Is a sword, the same with mine, defend you.

Ormasdes. Hold a while: --
-- May not I know the cause of this hatred?

Near. I have no hatred, yet endeavor, must
That we together may revert to dust.
Though you by chance have robbed me of my right
-- I Would not outlive Ormasdes, if I might!

Or. From whence dos this strange kindness to me grow?
Say, for I will not fight, until I know!

Near. This then, will teach you to defend your self:
Runs at him; he put his Sword by, and holds him.
Ormas. I shall call my Servants, unless you now show
The cause of this distracted fury?

Near. I will: --
[Lets him go -- Valeriana's my Quarrel;
She throws neglects on me, and dotes on you.

Ormas. You are mistaken sure, and much abused!
It is not possible! -- She dotes on me!
Who never Courted Lady in my life!

Near. By all that is good, she told me so her self.

Ormas. This must be some design, beyond my reach!
But if true? from whence does my guilt arise?
Who never heard of your pretense, till now!
Nor have a serious thought for hers, to me;
If such a folly, do her heart possess;
Am I to answer for her guiltiness?

Near. I do accuse you, of no guilt at all;
But joy to think, if by my hand you fall;
It will Create in her such misery,
As will adorn my death with Victory.

Ormas. If such revenge, and malice you intend?
Where is the Love, that you so much pretend?

Near. We Will talk of that, as our two souls expire;
She flattered me with hopes, that blew my fire,
She threw out vows to marry me, and now
In hope of you, disowns that holy vow.

Ormas. Made vows to marry you! and yet love me!
Pray show me how, this story does agree?
I swear, I never had a thought of Love
To Lady in my life; and will now quit
The intrest you pretend, rather then fight --
For such imaginary Dreams, as this.

Nearcus. You must Fight.
Nearcus offers at him, he rings a Bell: Enter Servants.
Ormas. No; disarm him, -- so, now leave us alone, --
[Exeunt. -- Nearcus, I have loved you, and shall still,
If you will permit! -- what does this story mean?

Near. By Hea -- Valeriana did engage
To marry me; if my birth equaled hers!
But now repents, in hope to marry you.

Ormas. This story grows stranger, and stranger still
Does your birth equal hers? on which you ground
Your Title, and on which her vow was made.

Near. It does Ormasdes, and did hers exceed,
When I first urged that sacred vow she made;
She but a Subject, unto me appeared.

Ormas. And are you other now?

Near. Yes, have you not heard that Prince Orontes,
Brother to our late King, had a young Son
Called Leonatus, who by sad mishap,
Fencing with the Prince, hurt him in the Eye,
Of which hurt he dyed; and the King, enraged,
Made vows to Sacrifice the Murderer;
As if the mischief, purposely were done!
In order to his own Succession; --
-- (After Cleandra;) who was then married
To a young Prince in Greece, and settled there.

Orm. I'ave often heard the Queen, with sighs lament
Her Brothers loss, by that sad accident:
And say, she pitied Leonatus death,
As innocent! for that unhappy youth,
She heard, was drowned, endeavoring to escape
Her Fathers Vengeance, he unjustly vowed.

Near. She was mis-inform'd my Lord, he yet lives;
'Twas by this fatal hand, her brother fell;
And I accursed, that have thus long survived!
To fall a mis-becoming Sacrifice,
To Love; by a disdainful Ladies Eyes.
After so long concealment, and so safe!
By Old Nearcus, put in this disguise,
Bred as his Son; but now* I Life despise;
And call to have that Justice on me done,
Which I have used much industry to shun.

Ormas. You tell me wonders, of a different kind,
Of which I shall enquire; and if I find
Valeriana stands engaged to you?
And all this story of your self, prove True!
I will my best endeavors soon employ,
This gross mistake of me, to rectify.

Near. If my address, do find no good success!
The business of my life, shall be to dye,
And whether by your hand, or by command
From our great Queen? it is the same to me,
The Princess must my Life, or Death decree.

Ormas. I shall conceal your Name, until I see,
I may reveal it, with security;
And in few hours, if my desires succeed!
You shall from all your doubts, and fears be freed.

Near. You will oblige me ever, if you do!
[Exit Nearcus.
Ormas. My hour is come, to wait upon the Queen,
Unto Valeriana, where this News,
I hope will bring me off, from the first Rock: --
-- By Valeriana to be thus loved!
And by Cleandra, for another wooed!
And by Nearcus killed, I know not why!
To me is a new kind of Mystery.
[Exit. Enter Valeriana, brought in very weak, lying in a Couch, with
Physicians, and Servants; She speaks very faintly.
Valeri. Is not the Queen returned to Court yet?

Lady. No Madam.

Valeri. I wish she were; my heart dessolves so fast!
That I do find, I shall few minutes last.
[She faints.
Doct. Your fancy, does your weakness much increase,
This passion, is the worst of your disease.
Enter Queen, and Ormasdes, she sets him to stand unseen.
Doctor. Oh Madam! you are much wished for here;

Queen. Let all withdraw, I must be private now,
Only do you Ormasdes stand unseen; --
-- How is it with my friend?

Vale. I Am glad that you are come to close my Eyes,
My spirits wast so fast, that I must dye!

Queen. I hope not yet Valeriana.

Vale. Alas Madam, I had not lived till now,
But for the joy my broken heart conceives
In hopes to hear Ormasdes is grown well.
Before I leave this world.

Queen. It Was the distemper of an Ague fit,
And he is now so far from being sick,
That he without, begs leave to visit you.

Vale. Me, did you say? to visit me Madam!
Will Ormasdes visit me? is it so?

Queen. Yes, He Is without, and does by me desire
You will admit him; -- Why are you silent?
Now my endeavors prosper to your wish!

Vale. Does wise Cleandra think it will be fit?
That I in such a passion leave this World!
As I shall do, if I see Ormasdes! --
-- I shame to think that he should see me dye,
Yet cannot choose, but wish it heartily!

Queen. Shall I call him in then? why do you doubt?

Vale. Oh Madam, I dare not see him, must not!
You have said something, to bring him hither!
Makes me fear to see him; it must not be!

Que. Pray see him, and let this great crime, be mine;
His presence, may your troubled heartrevive.

Vale. He cannot Madam, for it is now too late!
I do feel here, the heavy hand of Death
Is crushing me to Air.
She faints in the Queens Arms.
Queen. Ormasdes your help! she dies, she dies!
He draws, and proffers to kill himself.
Ormas By all our Gods, I will dye with her then!

Queen. She lives again! Ormasdes your help now; --
He flings away his Sword, and helps. -- So let her head lie a little from us.
He kneels, and holds her hand.
Ormas. For Heaven sake Madam, tell what I must say?
Or what now must do? is she not dead still?

Queen. Does not her hand inform you, that she lives?
Is it not warm?

Ormas. Oh yes! it is warm, but I, who never dared
Thus boldly touch a Ladies hand till now;
Understand not how to use it, as I ought!
[He Kisses her hand.
Que. There needs no other kindness, then you show,
-- How is it now Valeriana?

Vale. Well Madam to well, I fear, to last so:
I dare not look that way, because I blush
To think how I have scandalized my Sex!
And how Ormasdes now is justified!
In his contempt of Women, for my sake!
I have no power to take away my hand,
Yet dare not own, to leave it with him longer.

Ormas. Oh why? what has Ormasdes ever done?
Justly to merit this dissertion?

Vale. Pray Madam, say something in my behalf;
Either to hide, or to excuse my shame.

Queen. Turn this way then, and let your Eyes excuse
That guilt, which will Ormasdes disabuse.
[They turn her.]
Ormas. She looks desperately ill!

Queen. It Is only weakness, and no danger in it;
Pray call her Servants, and let us retire.

Ormas. Retire! you have engaged me now so far,
That I must see the Battle won, or lost!
Before I can consent, to a Retreat.

Queen. It Is late* and she must sleep.

Ormas. Why Madam, so she may, though I be by!
I Will sit as silent, as the God of sleep,
And here attend, while her tired servants rest.

Queen. You will not watch all night Ormasdes?

Ormas. Oh but I will Madam; watch night, by night,
Till she recover! This is my fixed Post,
Appointed by the Gods; not your command,
Nor any force, has power to take me hence;
While this good sword will hold for my defense.
[Takes up his Sword.
Queen. Why so fierce, and violent Ormasdes?
I am much joy'd* to see you thus concerned!
And on this quarrel, am not like to fight*
With such a man at Arms, by candle light!

Or. For Heaven sake Madam, pardon my rash words,
And disrespect unto your Majesty;
For I do scaree know what I say, or do;
I am become a stranger to my self,
So suddenly transformed, that I would hide
Me from your ^ight, if I durst stir from hence!

Queen. I will forgive, so you will let me direct
Your future actions, I Will your Love protect!

Ormas. If you will command? -- I gladly will obey.

Queen. You must submit, to what she does appoint.

Ormas. Most willingly.
Valeriana, sighs aloud, and weeps.
Qu. Does our discourse, these sighs, and tears produce?

Vale. You have said nothing that will need excuse.
These tears flow from joy, and gratitude,
To you great Queen, who by this act, include
More pious pity, then past stories tell; -- --
To make Ormasdes counterfeit so well!
-This thought raisd those unruly sighs you heard.
And Madam, now it makes my soul afraid,
To see so great a courage thus submit,
To flatter me, because you think it fit;
-- At your command, to put on this disguise,
In kindness unto one, he does despise.

Queen. Do you then think his kindness counterfeit?
Can his great soul consent, to such deceit?

Vale. I can yet find no argument, for ground,
To change so great contempt, as I have found,
Into so high esteem! as he does now,
By your advice, in charity allow;
That my last minutes, may some pleasure have,
He yields to send me smiling to my grave.

Queen. You cannot judge so ill, of him you love;
Nor can so brave a man, so worthless prove!

Vale. I do confess, I should be glad to find
All real that I see; and his great mind
The same brave Character he had, maintain
Through his whole life; and not that glory stain
But if it be real, this comes now too late,
His kindness cannot change the course of Fate!

Queen. Think not of Death, for if you will endure
The Trial? I will undertake the cure;
I see your sufferings do compassion move,
Which in most genrous hearts, does turn to Love.

Ormas. Madam, I know not what, you do call love,
Nor how in that fantastic Sphere to move!
I cannot talk the language Lovers use,
When they design fair Ladies to abuse;
Nor can I yet, by this experience guess,
If Love, or a distraction, does possess
My heart? give me but leave to watch this night,
That while you sleep, I may my heart invite,
To tell me what it a^ls! if it be love?
What all the World allows! I shall approve:
And then, I Will rather dye, then e're forsake
What I avow, or what I undertake.

Q Pray Madam, give him leave to watch this night,
Some serious thoughts may set his fancy right.
He has lain often on the frozen ground,
On less occasion, and more danger found.

Vale. I shall not rest then, though you think it fit,
I shall condemn my self, if I submit.

Queen. It Is somewhat more then custom does allow,
I must confess; but how to help it now,
Who knows? you see he is resolved to beat
Us all, if we but mention his Retreat.

Ormas. Pray let not this my first suit be denied,
But give me leave to ^it on yonder side,
As silent as ^leep self; my body shall
Be fixed, as is that figure on the wall.

Queen. Let him Valeriana, pray consent,
'Twill prove his honor, or his punishment!

Ormas. Who can have more care? who so fit as I
To watch? who am resolved with her to Dye.
-- Good rest unto your Majesty.
He leads off the Queen.
Queen. He Will turn me out, if I refuse to go!
-- But why Ormasdes do you tremble so?

Ormas. This shaking fit may to a Feavor turn,
And I, e're day, in Loves bright flames may burn.
[Exeunt Omnes.
THE FIFTH ACT.
Valeriana is discovered asleep on a Couch, with Doctors, and Ladies all asleep
about her Ormasdes rises from the ground, at the Couch side. ORMASDES. ALl eyes
are shut, all hearts can rest, but mine,
I Have something here, that will not let me sleep:
-- It Is Love, I am bewitched, or it is Love!
That thus disturbs my body, and distracts
My mind; no other passion works like this!
Well then, if it be Love! where is the wonder?
The wifest, bravest, and the greatest men,
Have been in Love as much, or more then I;
-- But why then was I, thus long without it?
Why did not bright Cleandras beauty burn?
Why was not this fire kindled until now?
How comes Valeriana by this power?
To wound me deeper, then Cleandra did!
My Kind, Loving Heart, how comes this to pass?
Valeriana sighs, and groans aloud.
Ormas. Ha! Her spirit by that sigh informs me,
That doubled groan, struck through my wavring soul,
Oh thou Divinest power! what ere thou art!
I do submit, Valerianas groans
Are all sufficient arguments for Love!
It seems, my stony heart, was proof against
All charms, but deep fetched sighs, and dying grons;
By which, it is now made supple, and so soft,
That it is ready to take any form;
That sick Valeriana shall direct; --
-- Great God of Love, forgive my past neglects,
And now restore this Lady to her health,
Then I with Insense will thy Altars load,
Thy Temple with those Trophies, now adorn,
Which my whole life prepared, for Mars and Jove.
Since they allow me to submit to love!
Valeriana wakes, and calls.
Vale. Drusilla.

Ormas. Madam, your Servants do all sleep, but I.

Vale. I would not have waked you, Ormasdes.

Ormas. You have not Madam, I have not slept yet;
Pray let your Servant know what it is you want!

Vale. I want assurance of a thing I doubt.

Ormas. Can I give you that assurance?

Vale. Yes.

Ormas. And will you not lay that command on me?

Vale. Do they all sleep?

Ormas. They do.

Vale. Ormasdes I would know, what I do fear,
You are pre-ingag'd never to tell me;

Ormas. By your fair self, I swear, I Am not engaged
In any kind, but may, and will impart,
What ever in my knowledge, you inquire.

Vale. My first doubts does still remain, that the Queen
Upon assurance of my sudden death,
Has won you, thus to flatter my last hours,
Like glittering Sunshine upon dying Flowers.

Ormas. Madam, by all that's holy, she has not:
What shall I say? what do? to gain your faith?

Vale. You have done it now; I am satisfied.
And do believe all is truth, Ormasdes speaks,
But I do sear this truth appears too late.

Orm. Why Madam? have you made yows against me?
Will no repentance? nor no penance serve,
To wash away my Sins against your Sex
Will you, that Universal quarrel wed?
And bring destruction, on your Servants head?

Vale. Vows Ormasdes, and those against you made!
Oh do not take away the Joy you gave,
By such a thought; I never wished, nor prayed,
For blessing upon Earth, beyond your Love,
Which you in charity, so amply show,
That I do doubt I dream, what I enjoy.

Ormas. Madam, you do now misjudge my passion,
To call that charity, which may be love
For ought I know; this so late acquaintance
With my new heart is short, and my transports
So great, it must be madness, if not love:
For, give me leave to swear, that I will know
No other Joys then yours, nor thoughts admit,
But with design to serve, and honor you.

Vale. I do now wish the Gods my life would spare,
And make me worthy of Ormasdes care.

Ormas. Madam, you speak a Language of respect
To me, who merit nothing but neglect;
Your favors flow so fast, they over-whelm
My heart with joys, and raise my soul so high,
It turns amazement into extacy.

Vale. I should not talk thus, if I did not see it;
It Is harder for you now to hide, then shew't:
I do not fear your passion will go less,
But doubt by death to lose, what I possess.

Ormas. You cannot dye Madam, I have no fear
To find so great a curse, from Heaven sent,
I only doubt I sleep! and fear to wake
Least this abundant bliss should vanquish quite,
And so involve me in Eternal Night;
May I'presume to beg a favor yet?
Which will my fancy fix, and so confirm
My doubtful soul it is real, and no dream.

Vale. You may.

Ormas. I beg that Ring you wear; but if of price
Too great for me? pardon my Avarice.

Vale. It Is a trifle, ask something of more worth.

Ormas. Sure nothing can of greater value be
If you repent, what you now promised me.

Vale. You ask, what is not in my power to give!
My dying Mother with this Ring bequeathed
Her curse, if ever I did part with it!
But to the man I meant to make my Lord.

Ormas. It Is a charm not to be dissolved by me;
Who dare not touch it, on the terms, you name;
I was ambitious to wear it Madam
But only as your servant, not your Lord.

Vale. It never can be had, on easier terms;
Ormasdes you must have this, and me together,
Alive or dead, you must have both, or neither.

Ormas. All my Limbs do tremble, at what I hear,
I dare not understand the words you speak,
Least my mistakes do give you an offense,
Beyond a pardon, for such impudence.

Vale. You do not mistake me, nor can you err!
If you will avow, this kindness that you show.

Ormas. By all our Gods, I think my flame is Love,
I know no other name for what I feel,
But if you doubt? propose a way to try,
And as it proves, declare my destiny.

Vale. I will consider on some way to try,
But must submit unto this drowsinesse,
For a minutes time, twill take me from you!
Pray Sir, command the music now to play.
[He steps to the Door then.] [Musick plays awhile.]
Ormas. She has talked her self into a Repose,
Now I will try to get alittle Rest.
That my tired fancy, may at last be fixed.
Valeriana Counterfeits to sleep, Ormasdes lies on the ground by her Couch, and
while he sleeps, she puts the Ring on his finger; then the Music ends.
Vale. So -- when he calls to mind, what I have said;
He can expect no more, then I now give;
-- Great goddess of pure hearts, protect my fame,
And this rash act, forgive; which frights me now;
To such repentance, with such sudden pain,
I am resolved to take it off again, --
She offers to take it off, and cannot. -- His hand is so fast closed, I cannot
do it;
And to wake him in the attempt, is worse;
Such boldness may a double censure get;
I blush to think how rashly I begun,
And now repent the folly I have done: --
-- His hand opens: --
And now it is mine again,
Oh blessed accident!
She takes off the Ring, Music plays; she sleeps in earnest, while the Music
is. Enter the Queen, and Train.
Queen. Wake them not; has Ormasdes walked to night?
From that corner, hither, in his sleep?
Did any of you hear them talk in the night?

Doctor. Not I Madam.

First Lady. Nor I.

Second Lady. I heard none stir Madam.
Ormasdes wakes and stirs up.
Ormas. The Queen; is it so late?

Queen. You have had a hard Lodging my Lord.

Ormas. I have had the happiest night Madam;
And am Richer far then both the Indies; --
Ormasdes starts, and looks distractedly for something lost. -- Ha! I am
undone, undone for ever!

Qu. What look you for my Lord? what have you lost?

Ormas. I had it now, just now, on this finger!
I look for Treasure Madam, worth the World;
[He Searches. -- 'Twas no dream, it must be here abouts!
-- I beg your pardon Madam, for this search,
Which does concern my life, and honor too.

Queen. This is the strangest passion, I ere saw,
Has your great loss, no name to know it by?

Ormas. Yes, I have lost Valerianas Ring.

Queen. You did but dream, see, it is on her finger:

Ormas. How! it is so indeed, do I not dream now?
Or do the Gods us men with shadows mock?
When we do seek such great felicities,
As they allow us not to have below!
-- What a strange height of bliss? am I fallen from?

Q Has this one night, such mutual friendship gained?
That the prophetic Ring, could be obtained!

Ormas. I know not what to say, nor what to think!
I know not when I sleep, or when I wake!
Yet must believe that Ring, was mine this night;
And I have lost that Treasure Childishly:
Some kind friend strike me hard, that I may feel
I now am waking; your pardon Madam
For my disaster makes me almost mad.
[Valeriana wakes.
Queen. How have you slept Valeriana?

Vale Very well Madam, for one so weak!

Ormas. Did you not wake about midnight Madam?

Vale. Not that I remember.

Ormas. Was ever man so much abused in's sleep?

Vale. Ormasdes, what means your disordered looks?

Queen. He finds his waking fancies are much less
Delightful, then his sleeping happiness.

Orm. I dreamed Madam, that Ring you prize so much,
Was this night, by you, put on my finger;
When a thousand, thousand joys fell on me,
Which now waking, I have no name for.

Vale. My Ring Ormasdes! and on your finger!
And by me put on! it was a dream indeed!
I hope, you do not waking, think it fit,
That I, should waking do so bold an act.

Ormas. Madam, it does not become me to say
I wish, what you do not allow; nor dare
I tell so great a lie, as to deny
The joy I dreamed of when I thought I saw,
And did believe I felt, it once was mine.

Vale. It Is far from my serious thoughts Ormasdes,
After such high passion, as I have showed,
Now to raise any discontent in you,
But do not lessen your esteem of me,
By the acquisition of such favors,
As you your self in others would condemn!
Have we not both, at first sight, done enough?
To justify, what we profess; I fear
Too much on my part, did not Cleandra
Own all that she has done, on my behalf.

Ormas. I submit, and will wish, and think, and do
What the wise Queen, and you advise me to.

Queen. Ormasdes has not lost his time I see,
Nor my design for your recovery
Fallen short! the gods in their good time will bring
You to give, and him to accept the Ring.
May your new friendship never know decay,
But freely both command, and both obey:
-- I must now leave you for an hour, or two.
Ormasdes leads the Queen to the Door, and returns.
Ormas. Madam, is this a fit time to enquire
Nearcus Story? may I now desire
You, to unriddle the bold claim, he makes?

Vale. You shall hereafter have it all at large,
Only know now, he used a violence,
In show, with such unparalled deceits!
Such insolent demands, so cunning couched!
His threats, with humble looks, so plain disguised;
That at first fight, I found, I was surpised;
Then, to avoid his purpose, I was forced,
To use such doubtful word^, to bring me off,
His madness did interpret his own way;
While I was safe, by what I wisely said,
To farther my escape, when so afraid!
Thus was Cleandras trust, and mine abused;
A baser treachery, was never used.

Ormas. You have informed me fully of his fact.
I suddenly will find Nearcus out,
And hurl such vengeance, on his cursed head,
[Aside. That all the World shall say, it is well he is dead.
[They carry off Valeriana.] [Exeunt omnes. [Enter Nearcus.]
Near. It Is strange, I hear not of Ormasdes yet!
If he oblige me really! I Am his,
If not! I shall resume my first resolves,
This his delay, begets more jealousies
Then my impatient burning heart, can bear. --
[Enter Ormasdes.]
Nea. -- Now Sir, how have I prosper'd in your hands?

Ormasdes. As you deserve.

Nearcus. How is that?

Ormas. With much scorn rejected.

Near. Is that my me^rit, in your opinion?

Ormas. In mine, as in Cleandras, and in all!
Who have heard the ground of your false claim,
Which the fair Princess, and her Servants tell;
-- A Treachery so base, an act so foul!
That all do think Nearcus has no soul.

Near. This you dare justify?

Ormas. I had not dared to tell it else! me thinks
My looks might show, my business was to find
You out, and now to let you know, I must
Defend the Princess, in a cause so just.
-- Before I knew Valerianas heart,
Or was at all acquainted with my own;
I Judged your cause, against her innocence.
But now informed the right from all, I find
No argument, in Justice to compel,
Such a forced promise to Nearcus made,
Should now to Leonatus be performed.
Your juggling Arts, and your disguised Name,
With your unworthy force, ore-throws your claim

Near. You are become a subtle Orator,
Since you conversed with Ladies; but I shall
Your great Eloquence, with this steel convince;
I am not to be frighted by big words,
We now must try the temper of our swords.

Ormas. We must indeed, though I lament, my hand
Should harm a man, unto the Queen aly'd.

Ne. Shall that scruple, and this good sword once more
Teach you to call for help? as heretofore!

Ormas. I may change your opinion, with my own.

Near. Come then.
They Fight, Ormasdes runs him through, Disarmes him.
Ormas. Get Surgeons for Nearcus presently;
My hurt is slight.
[Exit Ormasdes. Enter Surgeons, or Servants, who carry off Nearcus. Enter the
Queen, in Valerianas Chamber, with her, and attended by Old Titus, Old Nearcus,
Lords and Ladies, a full Train.
Queen. It Is by your good nature, Valeriana,
That this man's evil spirit threatens us,
Had you revealed Nearcus treach^ry!
His punishment had suited with his crime.

Vale. Madam, I do confess my le^ity*
May have imbolden'd him to higher ills,
Which my just complaint, might have prevented;
But then, how hard a censure should I again?
By ruining so Eminent a man.
Who from his principles of honor fell,
Through love to me; though I co^temn'd his hopes,
His passion made me pity his distress,
So far, as his first error to forgive,
In hope he might in better order live.

Queen. You argue well, and ought to justify
Your gentle disposition, to forgive.
Mercy, does (...) young Princess, much adorn,
But I am bound to vindicate my self,
My Nation suffers, if I be not just,
To puni^ crimes like this! I break my trust;
He is the first, that ever dared asperse
The Citherean Name, by such a fact,
As no past Chronicle, can parallel!
I shake to think, how great your danger was!
And how much greater might have been my shame
To trust a man, who values not his fame.

Vale. Let not his faults your anger higher raise,
The punishment he feels, by ill success,
Is a just doom, for his unworthiness.

Queen. His sentence must, to after times appear,
Least my story be blemished with a thought,
That I, did wink at such a crime as this!
My people will exclaim, the Gods will frown,
If such a wickedness unpunisht pass!
He must dy^ Valeriana, his house
Be burnt, the ashes scattered in the Air,
With prayerst' appease our Cit^erian Gods,
We cannot offer a less Sacrifice.

Vale. For my sa^e, let his doom, be banishment.
If I have any favor in your Eyes?
Make not me guilty by that Sacrifice.
[She kn^
Queen. Rise M^dam, you shall govern as you please.
Enter to them Ormasdes, and Young Titus.
Queen. Ormasdes, are you hu^t* by that vil'd m^

Ormas. It is too little, to be called a wound!
I come now, to beg Nearcus pardon;
It Was I that did enforce him to this fight.

Vale. And I, most wronged, who freely do forgive;

Queen. The wrong was done to me Valeriana,
I put you in his power, my trust, he broke;
My honor, for your safety, was engaged!
Our Nation s^ffers by his Villainy;
The Citherean honor calls for Justice,
Against so barbarous a breach of Faith;
Nor was it you provoked, but were compelled
By him to fight, for innocence aspersed!

Ormas. Madam, though I shall never justify
Nearcus actions; his misfortune may
Admit excuse; Because humane nature
Is subject to passions, which the best men
Can never manage, as they ought! how then;
May Valeriana's beauty guilty be?
That did excite Nearcus love; and led
Him into this distraction, past his power!
To manage his own heart, (as we think best;)
If so! it is she has turned him to a Beast;
But when your Majesty shall call to mind,
The gallant service by this Madman done;
You will then pity his Distraction.
Enter to them Nearcus, brought in a Chair.
Queen. What means this boldness?

Near. Madam, I come not to beg your pardon,
But to justify my actions, and my self;
Against Ormasdes, who does now withold
Valeriana, my betroathed Wife,
Co^rm'd by vows, in presence of the Gods.

Queen. Now Ormasdes! is he fit for pardon?

Ormas. Yes Madam, as a distracted person!

Near. Why do you wrong my person, and my cause?
To call my just Title, a distraction;
Do me Justice Cleandra, or give me death!

Queen You may have both your wishes in good time:
Cleobulus guard him to the Castle.

Vale. Pray Madam, let his doom be banishment,
Because his Crime, went not beyond intent.

Queen. Madam, he must thank you, for his life then;
-- Cleobulus see him a close prisoner,
Until his wounds, permit his banishment.

Near. I do your proffered mercies, all refuse,
And either Death, or Valeriana choose

Queen Lead him to banishment: make him obey.

Near. Hold alittle: -- Cleandra look, this way,
It Is Leonatus calls; he who at foyles,
The young Prince your Brother, slew;
And fled your Fathers rage, (until his death!)
Then sheltered by this borrowed Name, returned,
And in Nearcus Family secured,
By this disguise; lived as his only Son,
Who dyed, as I returned; -- is it death yet?

Qu No, this insolence, shall not change your doom,
Nor your confe^t disguise, (long known to me,)
Force a punishment beyond the merit
Of that sad mishap! which I believe
Was fatal accident! no purposed crime!
Though my Father looked on his only Son,
By your hand slain, with such revenging rage!
As might his loss become, and him engage
To throw out yows, that Justice should pursue
So great a Traitor, as he then thought you;
For your succession after me, became
His fancies object, which increased your blame.
-- But I, who have exactly been informed,
Of my dead Brothers love, and yours, now must
For that sad accident, to you be just.

Near. I Will rather quit my innocence, then own
Your mercy, when you Justice do deny;
Give me the fair Princess, or give me death.

Queen. I cannot with Justice, give you either;
How can I, a free Princes will compel?
Or how Ormasdes true pretense de^y,
Or how afford you death, for that offense,
Which your unluckie hand, did act by chance.

Near. Would I had dyed, the day of my return,
Since great Cleandra dares not do me Right;
But suffers false Ormasdes to possess,
What is my due; Tall your mercy scorn,
And will the worst of Tyranny endu^e.

Queen I have employed you as my Brothers friend,
Thus long not at his Murderer connived!
And until now, by force compelled my face
To frequent smiles, in favor of your worth,
While my heart ak'd, to think what you had done!
But you of late, unworthy our great Name,
Have scandalized the Citherean Fame
Boldly to own a Crime so great! as may insence,
The world to question your first innocense.
Which clearly shows, you are for mischief built,
That dared to entertain so base aguilt!
-- My mercy may prove sin, unless betimes,
My Justice do prevent your farther crimes.

Near. Must I be held? and baited thus to death!
Be torn, and tortured by a woman's breath?

Queen. See my Command obeyed Cleobulus.
-- I shall take order for an Equipage
Fit for your great birth, and shall now confine
You to an Island near, from whence you may
Return, if you outlive me, and mine!
-- Remove him hence.

Ne. Hold a while! -- curse on, curse light on you all,
For this unjustice, which you mercy cal^;
Tyrants, cruel Tyrants, your juggling* Art
Lay by, and strike a Dagger through my heart;
-- If Ormasdes any honor have in store?
He Will fight another bout upon the Shore,
As I take ship; and if I chance to Dye!
My soul shall then applaud thy Victory,
And sing thy praise to the infernal Ghosts,
That they may choose thee Captain of their Hosts,*
When thou come down! -- Let not a Ladies word
D^stroy* by piercing deeper then thy sword! --
-- Will you not answer? cruel, and unjust!
Ye gods! why put you Scepters into women's trust?
Who crushes me to raise a Cowards Name!
Whom I will in the Elysium fields Defame,
No honored Ghost of Troy, shall there own thee,
The Grecian, and the Roman Souls, with me
Will trample on thy Cowards neck with scorn,
-- Poor shadow of a gallant man, only born
To lie in Ladies laps, perfumed, and curled!
-- I Will Post thee ^oward, in the other World.
They force him away, on the Queen beck with he^ hand.
Admi. It Is strange, that none of us should know him!

Young Titus. The general opinion he was drowned,
Made us not see through his disguise;

Admir. But his strange passion does amaze me most.
Ormasdes wedding, will his frenzy cure;
When love does see no possibility,
Desires, and hopes, will vanish by degrees.

You. Titus. We see dispairs, work often other ways.

Queen. He has disturbed me, but I Will forget him;
-- Valeriana come, let us consult
The Ceremony of your Wedding day,
Ormasdes joys, and yours, will blow away
The farther thought, of Leonatus crimes.

Vale. Our Wedding Madam! I see no reason
For so great a have! now we are secure.

Or. Madam, since you have raised my hopes so high!
It were a sin, to doubt my destiny.
Yet say, when shall my thoughts so fixed remain?
That I may never think I dream again.

Vale. Ormasdes, not too fast, we must proceed
With much discretion, to so great a deed!
The eyes of all this Nation, do behold
Our actions, and may think my part too bold,
If I again shall do; what I repent!
It would deserve a double punishment;
My overhasty Love, was once my crime,
I must redeem that fault, by taking time
To finish, what so violent begun,
Least into greater errors, I do run; --
-- A year or two's delay, will add much grace
To our young Love, which Time cannot deface.

Orma. Why have you led me forth, with gentle gales?
Into this dangerous deep? why filled my sails,
With such propitious winds? as would convey
Me safe to my wished Port, the nearest way.
Why do you now abstruct this happy course?
As if you wished for storms! or something worse!
Why thus for sake the Light? to sail in the dark,
As if you sought out hazzards, for this Bark,
In which, you are the only freight, that I,
Can fear to lose; by my mortality.
Oh! do not then my Joys to time betray,
Least you do ruin all, by your delay!

Queen. How Valeriana! must this Scene of Love,
Fall from its height? and now no farther move!
Does your quick conquest of Ormasdes? make
Him less worthy? when we such prisoners take,
As might our selves command! if they will serve!
We cannot give them more, then they deserve;
Consider well, least you, your self destroy,
If thus, you do defer Ormasdes joy!

Vale. Madam, you, and the world too well do know,
My Love to him, can now no higher grow!
I only thus stand off, least he despise,
A conquest gained, without an enterprise.
And that my injured Sex, hereafter may
Judge of my innocence, by this delay;
Honor forbids, that we in have engage,
Rash actions often, ill events presage.
Though I, (like a tall ship that spreads her sails
When she is carried on, with prosperous gales;
To her wished Port!) do sigh, to be delayed,
And blame the Remora, by which I Am staid.

Ormas. Honor, and Fancy, at great distance stand,
You have no argument for this command,
But your own nice, unnecessary thought,
By which your virtue, may become a fault!
It Is true, that my neglects to woman kind,
May urge, that I should now no favor find;
Till my whole life be spent, to gain a bliss,
To crown my latests hours with joys, like this!
I do confess such judgment were my due
From all the women in the world, but you, --
Who have no argument, nor a pretense,
Why you, should prove the Rod for my offense.

Vale. Ormasdes true, I only now would prove
By some short time, the temper of your Love;
And show the world, that mine was not in have,
Though its first motion moved so fierce and fast!
It makes me blush to think, that this great Queen,
And her whole Nation, have such weakness seen!
As all commanding Love, forced me to show,
Oh! it is a bold attempt, when women woo!

Ormas. What ere the vulgar think, great Princes may
The dictates of their greater souls obey;
It Is a self-doubting sin, when you alone,
Dare not avow, what gods, and men do own.

Queen. These cautious ways, are only fit for such
As have suspected virtues; you are much
Above the reach of Censures; -- it was I,
That wooed him first, mine be the infamy,
Who boast the active part, with the success,
And would not for the world, it had been less!
It does become me, now to see your hands
United, as your hearts! -- If my commands
Be slighted! and my self not understood!
When I require what is for your mutual good,
I shall repent the kindness, I have shown.
And wish, you never had Ormasdes known.

Vale. Madam, when you command, I must submit;
-- But will Ormasdes waking think it fit?
Now to accept this Ring? and safer keep
What he desires, then when h' last did sleep;
I had some pleasure, and no little pain,
To put it on, and steal it off again.
But now, since gods and you, do all agree!
Receive this bond of my Captivity.

Ormas. I kiss the hand, that freely gives it now,
May Thunder strike me dead, when I do bow
To other Earthly Power, or wish a bliss,
That Heaven can give, the Gods allowing this!
Ormasdes heart, shall into insence turn,
And in bright flames, before this Altar burn;
So long as my fair Saint, does not despise,
To look upon so mean a Sacrifice --
-- To you great Queen, I know not what to say,
How to express a gratitude, that may
Declare the glory of your life to be
A perfect pattern, for Posterity.

Qu. Brave Lord, your Triumphs, and your Trophies still
Increase our wonder! and our Nation fill
With such Esteem, as all my people may,
With Honor, keep your Wedding, Holy Day.
And in our Story, after Ages show,
Friendship, and Virtue, did together grow.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

May the 3d. 1664. Roger L' Strange.

PANDORA, A Comedy.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, For John Pleyfere, at the White Bear, in the
Upper-Walk of the New-Exchange; And Thomas Hors-man, next Door to the Sign of
the Three Kings in the Strand, 1664.

The Names of the Actors.
The Prince of Syracusa. Theodocia his Daughter. Pandora, a great Lady of the
Prince his Family. Lindamira, a Lady of Quality. Lonzartes, Right Heir to the
Principality. Clearcus, a Lord of the Prince his Kindred. Silvander, a Young
Lord of the Court. Aristonicus, Three Councillors. Clothero, Ormuseus.
Teretia, Ladies Attending the Princess. Philora. Three more Attending Ladies.
For Pandora. And Lindamira. Men-Dancers. Women-Dancers Sanga, and Lacquies.
Geta. An Old-Woman.
THE Prologue.
LOvers to You I come, without a Bribe,
From one yt boasts himself of your own Tribe,
And therefore hopes, that your good Natures may
On his behalf, above your Judgments sway:
What you will see here is natural, all pretense
He disavowes, to Wit, or Eloquence:
With Friendship he presents you, and with love,
Such as are wont in his free breast to move,
Such passions as he feels, our Author writes,
And humors such, as he observes, indites:
From Conversation bringing to the Stage,
What he does think, will please the present Age.
And if you do not grudge your time here spent,
He will accept it for a Complement.
PANDORA: THE Scene in Syracutia.
FIRST ACT.
Enter Lonzartes and Clearchus in long Gray Cloakes over their Rich Clothes,
with Sanga and Geta, two Lacques carrying Lanthorns, the two Lords Enter a
private House, the two Servants stay. San. COme Geta, our Lords have no more
use of us, we may go sleep!


Geta. It Is a fair time indeed to sleep, when day begins to break? -- this is a
lewd life, that our Lords do lead.


San. Why man? the Night was made for laborers to rest; and for great Lords to
Revel in* come away.


Geta My Lord, is not half so ill as thine.


Sanga. What Is that to thee, or me, come away; we will go to Beggars Hall, and be
as merry as our Lords.


Geta. No, no, I will no more sully my credit, in thy company; I converse with
our tall Dary-Maid, who affords me Honors, thou can not guess at Sanga! Oh
the great Felicities! that do belong to chaste embraces?


San. I like Embraces well.


Geta I mean by Wed-lock man.


San A Cox-comb thou art, and a Cuckold thou will be; adieu Fool.


Geta. Adieu Rogue.

Exeunt severally. A noise within, Re-enter Clearcus, and Lonzartes. in the
Dark.
Clearcus. Botts on thy slippery heels; we are undone!


Lonzartes. Let us draw, and stand upon guard, I hear some call within!


Cle. What was that strange noise, you made?


Lon. At the bottom of the stairs, I fell, which gave the Alarm to the dogs,
and they waked all the Family!

Enter Old Woman.
Woman. Oh my Lord! what have you done? all the House are up, pray stand close
a while, -- are you alone?


Cle. Yes, yes.

Exeunt Old Woman.
Lonzartes. Thou art a very Villain Clearcus, thus to betray a poor Wench, that
loves thee; and to force me accept a Favor, I abhor to think on.


Cle. Be the blame mine, I have no joy in any thing, unless my Friend
Participate; -- if I have any skill in Woman; you will thank me for this
favor, and say, you never had the like of Angelica.


Lon. Suppose she will not consent? must I ravish her? -- you say she knows not
of my coming.


Cle. I swear she does not.


Lon. Would I were out again, these Romances please not me; -- pray how must I
proceed?


Cle. Thus, she is in Bed, the Room is dark, I Will entertain her with discourse,
while you undress; then I Will retire, and soon return with Light, to let her see
my friend and I, must be as one man to her.


Lon. I wonder all women do not hate thee, thou do abuse all them that trust
thee.


Cle. You are deceived Lonzartes, such silly girls, do take it for a
complement, to recommend them to a Noble Friend!


Lon. Well, I must now be subject to thy will, and do submit to do, what I
detest! -- me thinks this is a kind of Rape I undertake; -- thou art too wild
for my Converse Clearcus.


Clear. Hold your peace.

Enter Old Woman.
Woman. Hist, hist, my Lord!


Cle. Here, here.


Wom. Give me your hand, softly, softly, follow me.

Exeunt Woman leading them off, holding hands. Enter the Old Prince of
Syracusa, with Silvander, Aristonicus, Clothero, Ormuseus, and ^rain.
Prince* How does Lonzartes bear his Suppression Aristonicus? now he is
full-man grown.


Ari. Like a wise man S^r, that will not seem to see, what he cannot remedy.


Pri. I have better thoughts for him, then he has for himself; if Clearcus
spoil him not!


Ari. When more years have overcome some evils, incident to youth, I hope he
will be worthy your highest favors Sir.


Pri Some of you should advise him to a little more sobriety, then Clearcus
will allow of; -- I apprehend Silvander, that the Corinthian will quarrel, for
my refusing to treat his Marriage with Theodosia, whom I design another way; --
-- she has a^ersion to him.


Sil The Princes may be excused for her dislike, unto so fierce a man, the
Corinthian Prince, is all fire, and fury, which does fright, not win affection.


Pr. If Theodosia will be advised by me, I shall provide better for her; -- you
know Lonzartes right Silvander! if he were reclaimed, I would wish him to my
Daughter.


Sil. I have some thoughts Sir, that Lonzartes does Consort with wild Clearcus,
and complies in all his Vanities, only to avoid your Jealousy, of his higher
thoughts of interest in the State! he is no fool Sir.


Pr. I wish it prove not too much his Nature, to be so debauched, for he has
not higher thoughts of State interest* then I have for him; he has been wronged
Silvander, and I will endeavor to do him right if he will be worthy of it.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus in a Garden.
Cle. Why, this grave face to me Lonzartes?


Lon. Thou art so wild, that I have lost my credit by conversing with thee,
which I must redeem, by keeping better company hereafter.


Cle. Wisely resolved, and in good time declared; -- I have indeed observed,
that you of late converse with Ladies, and delight in rich laced Satin, and in
Silver Petticoates; as if you meant to turn Apostate, from the freedom we have
had, and now seek your game in secret, my Lonzartes.


Lon. If I should, pray which is most Honorable? And most suitable to my
Quality? The daily terror of getting such diseases, as ^nhabit your dark
houses, has frighted me into better purposes.


Cle. Your Quality! I wish your (...) had all the Ladies you desire, so I might
have like freedom with their Maids.


Lon. I shall not spoil your Market, but leave you those cheap Cattle, at your
own price.


Cle. See the difference now, between your Pride, and my Humility; you have
studied, learned discourses to, such as must justify your conversion (as you
call it) but have never weighed the difference of our crimes; -- such thoughts
Lonzartes, do move, my tender Conscience, to take what I can find, for ready
money; which I freely enjoy, without those frights you daily feel.


Lon. Thou do mistake me, and exclaimest against crimes, I never understood.


Cle. You can counterfeit I know, and may cozen all the World but me! I will
not give my freedom up, to such follies as you serve, to be Master of all your
wishes.


Lon. I shall not labor to convert you, but will take leave to despise your
mean ways, while you envy mine.


Cle. Envy! by Violinas eyes, I do despise you, and your ways, and will wager
any thing you dare, that I enjoy this night a beauty more exact, then any
cloth of Gold Dame you treat with, I envy you! no, I pity you Lonzartes, that
after such experience, at your years, you should be fooled so; -- confess now
seriously, if you have ever met a better shape, a softer, or a whiter skin, or
any more sweet, or more bewitching fair, and lovely, then my Angelica.


Lon. If I have not! what then?


Cle. Why? she shall be Fine, and rich ^raid, when I so please! I can call her
Sultaness too! and by my fancy, raise her above those, the World allows of.


Lon. I do believe thee, and thy fancy, alike Extravagant.


Cle. But why so serious on the sudden? and so dull? you shall have good
Cheer, and good Company to night, at the old place.


Lon. I shall get an ill Conscience by it!


Cle. That sauce, agrees not with the Dainties we must feed on, pray lay by
your Conscience, until morning.


Lon. I wish I were well rid of thee, all thy Rhetoric, shall never engage me,
to meet such company again.


Cle. Why pray, how can you spend your time better?


Lon. I do begin to hate my self, and will love thee no longer.


Cle. Very good; -- Are not you the most debauched man in Syracusa? (except my
self!) how come you by this Impudence? to blush for going to a merry meeting?
Is not your own Lodging, beyond a Scandal? are not all the Wenches in that
Street, your Pentioners? -- not love me! I will study to scorn you, and your
love for ever; I despise a man that does forsake his Principles.


Lon. I begin to hate thy overmuch lewdness, and to see my own Deformities.


Cle. Not love me!


Lon. Come, I do love thee, too well I love thee, shall we go home, and put off
this meeting?


Cle. Lonzartes, though I do love your Friendship, I do hate this Humor in
you, that thus would lay a blemish on me.

Enter to them Lindamira and Teretia, not at first seen.
Ter. See Lindamira, the two wild Princes are in our way, how shall we get by
'um?


Lin. Put on a confidence beyond theirs, and 'twill amaze them!


Ter. Can that be?


Lin. I Will be your Forlorn Hope, do but second me, and I Will secure your pass
this time; -- You Will see them start, shoot aside, as from a Baza^iske! the
honest woman!


Ter. Barbarous! -- I have heard indeed, they shun all virtuous women!


Lin. They always look over us, as if they saw us not; but where they have an
interest, or hope to gain it, they can like subtle Serpents, humbly creep, to
flatter and betray.

He now sees the Ladies.
Cle. A prize, a prize Lonzartes, each of us one; let us reconcile for this
booty, and dispute at leisure; -- you close walk invites; -- which will you
assault?


Lon. Neither, they are both virtuous?


Cle. Who knows that? have they done sucking?


Lin. Do thou think there be none virtuous, beyond their infancy!


Cle. Yes, much too many, but I hope better of these; give me the woman, and
keep her virtue to your self: -- I Will charge 'um both, there may be a Critical
minute for me; -- fair Ladies.


Lin. Hold my Lord, you are out at first, one of us is very brown I assure you.


Cle. You do not think your self so, or if you do, you think brown the bent
Madam.


Lin. I do indeed, think my beauty such, as may prejudice your Lordship, if you
dwell on it; which gave me boldness, to interrupt your set Speech; least you
engage past retreating; -- our business is to find the Princess.


Cle. And ours, to entertain those, who have nothing else to do.


Lin How would you entertain us my Lord?


Cle. As young Gallants, use to treat fair Ladies; with love, and our best
service.


Lin I have no employment for so great a Servant as your Lordship, and for
love, I understand it not.


Cle. That you may do is my ambition.


Lin. Nay, if you be come to ambition already! I guess your love will grow to
such a Monster, in a moment, that I dread the thought on it.


Cle. You cut me off so short, you cannot apprehend, what I would say.


Lin. Therefore I do it, because I do not care to hear.


Cle. What have I done Madam, to merit this neglect from you?


Lin. In the behalf of all our sex, I am the chosen Champion, against all men,
who do believe, all Women do admire 'um.


Cle. When shall I have leave to speak? that I may inform you better.


Lin. When I have done.


Cle. When will that be?


Lin. When I am gone.


Cle. How can you be informed in absence?


Lin. As much as I desire to know, I know already; -- my good wishes shall
attend your Lordship; -- come Teretia; we may find the Princess in the other
walks.

Exeunt.
Lon. Now Sir, how do you like this Ladies me^tle?


Cle. Why well, I like her, and her humor very well.


Lon. You thought her a sure prize.


Cle. I did but hope so at the first, now I am sure of her, she is my own, if
ever we do meet alone; -- by this severity, she has cozened Teretia, and you,
and confirmed me.


Lon. I must laugh, to think how thou art mistaken, in this innocent freedom
virtuous women use, and would give a good sum, to see thee but converse a
month or two, with persons of Honor, which I believe would reclaim thee, and
fix those virtues, now lost in a Chaos of wild actions.


Cle. I marry, if you could show me a woman, that would not be won; I would
fancy some delight, to pass away an hour or two, at ilde times; but all that I
do meet with, are mine, before I wish it; so that I am always forced to stand
upon my guard amongst 'um.


Lon. That's no wonder, amongst those women you converse with; -- shall I choose
you a mistress? and if you get her! let the reproach be mine.


Cle. Shall she be worth my pains? if so! I will think on it, when I have time
to throw away; -- come will you go with me yet?


Lon. I Will stay here a while.


Cle. I Will go besore then, and make ready for you.

Exit.
Lon. What pity it is, such parts should be so drowned! --

Though I resolve to quit, I Am guilty still
If longer I do countenance his ill.
Enter to him, as in the Garden, Theodocia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and
Ladies, and Silvander.
Theodocia. Lonzartes I have been laughing at Lindamiras relation of Clearcus
humor; she says, she has abused him his own way, in the behalf of all honest
women, whom he declares against.


Lon. The encounter indeed was pleasant, but the success is beyond her guess!
for she thinks, that her neglects, have dashed his hopes, by which he is grown
confident, that her seeming scorns, were only to dazzle our eyes, while he
doubts not to gain an interest.


Lin. I wish him joy my Lord, of his quick Victory, the next encounter, will
decide this difference of Opinions.


Pan. But how dare you Lindamira, enter the lists of wit? with young Clearcus,
who has the sharpest tongue in Syracusa.


Lin. There is no contest so easy, his whole discourse to women, is ever of
love, or something like it! and does believe that all our souls, delight in
nothing else, which makes me interrupt him still as he begins, and never hear
him out.


Sil. Is that civil, to a person, of his Quality?


The. Is he not angry, when you slight him so?


Lin. No Madam, I am his mirth, and he is mine.


Lon. If Pandora would permit! I do fancy his conversion might be wrought by
her, and his Eclipsed virtues, made to shine brighter then his vices do.


Sil. 'Twill be a noble undertaking Madam.


Lin. I wish he were within my cure.


Pan. We Will join our forces Lindamira, for I shall easily consent unto so good
a work, as may reclaim so great a person as Clearcus; a man so near alied unto
the Duke! -- but how must this Charitable work be done?


Lon. If you Madam, will admit his visits? for a Month or two, the cure of
course will follow; for he who never yet conversed with civil woman, will
surely be concerned, when he shall see the harmless mirth, that virtue does
allow, to persons of your Quality!


Pan. So, I be obliged no further then to civil visits, his birth does require
that for him, which I deny to no man.


Lin. Leave the rest to me.


The. How happy are you Cousin, that may dispose of your self as you please! I
must speak, and look, and move, as my Father, and the State direct, me.


Pan. Great Princes indeed, are bound to some strict Rules, most Subjects
understand not?


Lin. Your Highness complains without a cause, we hear the Duke will leave you
to your own choice, only he will recommend.


The. When Parents recommend, it is so like command, it frights me to think whom
it may be.


Pan. Now you are safe from the Corinthian, have no fear until you see
occafion for it.


The I wish my dear Cousin, you would marry too, I should then like it better I
now dread to put on that yoke, by all the World so much desired?


Pan. Will my being in the pound, get your Highness out off it? why would you
have me run the hazard, to loose that happiness I now am sure of? by a single
life; -- If men did ever appear in their own likeness! we might choose some one,
amongst many, worth the having, but in our fights, they are always disguised
in such shapes, and humors, as they believe we like best, and so cozen us, and
themselves too; for if they make us unhappy, it seldom fails, but we make
them so.


Lin. No Oracle ever spoke truer; I am of your Sect Madam, (as to matters of
Faith!) yet I would gladly have a Husband, though it be dangerous to put my
heart into another keeping (And as my learned Author says,) to give my
freedom up, unto I know not whom! (nor ever can do, till I have him) -- this
were a sadd condition Madam, if we had not the same Arts to cozen them, that
think to cozen us.


The. Would I could get a merry heart, like yours I indamira.


Lin I Will present your Highness with a piece of mine, I have enough for both.

Enter Messenger.
Messenger. Madam, The Prince calls for you;


The. I attend him, pray Cousin go with me to my Father.

Exeunt Ladies.
Lon. A few such Excellent women would make this World a Paradise! -- how have
I walked in the dark, till now? how strangely been missed, by my affection to
Clearcus? that have approved, and acted in all his ills; begun upon design, and
led on, till custom has almost changed my nature, but will no more.

Enter Clearcus to him.
Cle. How now Lonzartes? walking alone? take ^eed the Devil find thee not at
leisure.


Lon. A greater then thy self, can hardly find me.


Cle. Very gravely replied, if I mistake not, you are whimpering after some
great Lady, and now practizing to play the fool wisely, to spend your time,
adoring you know not who, nor why.


Lon. Thou art still in the wrong.


Cle. Let us meet then, at the old place to night.


Lon. That Is a freedom, I shall never take more, you have converted me, beyond
all the Homilies I ever read, you have made me ashamed of my self for being so
long like you.


Cle. Oh Hypocrite! what new piece have you got? that I must not be trusted
with; come tell me, and I Will cry up your Austere purpose, and rail at your
conversion, as if I did believe it.


Lon. When you see me next in ill company, I am then that Hypocrite you
mention.


Cle. Out upon these tender Consciences, they spoil more mirth, then they are
worth; let old folks hear Homilies, while we enjoy the time we have, and not
whine away our youth, on dreams of virtue, which signify we know not what.


Lon. Peace Clearcus, thou art not half so ill as thou appearest; but do
glory in talking worse, then thou can be.


Cle. What should we talk of more then what we most delight in?


Lon. Of nothing less, because we often do delight in what we ought not own; --
Is It not enough to offend the Gods through frailty, which perverse nature does
invite us to; but we must provoke Heaven, beyond sense, and appetite, by our
discourse, as if we studied to defy those Powers, we ought to tremble at.


Cle. I hate Hypocrisy.


Lon. And I abhor to aggravate my crimes, by such unnecessary boastings, as thy
wild brain delights in; when I offend I am sorry for it, do thou all honesty
despise, all virtue slight?


Cle. How Lonzartes, will you confine honesty, and virtue, to the fruition of
one woman only? Fie, what a scandal is this to mankind, as if there were no
honesty, nor virtue but in such chaste breasts as yours? what an affront to this
good company, pray speak Gentlemen, is any here of his opinion? can you
Lonzartes show me one young man, that looks as he were guilty? or any so old,
who would be thought so weak? -- Is this a fit design, to set up your Title to
the Dukedom?


Lon. I see this is not the hour for your Conversion.


Cle. Nor shall ever live to see that hour, I hope.


Lon. Nor you I fear, ever live to taste, and relish the true felicity obtained,
by such a conquest on thy self; but I will pray for thee, and thy conversion.


Cle. I had rather your Lordship were at Jerusalem, then see that day of my
conversion; what have I done Lonzartes? to deserve such ill from you, do not
provoke me to a revenge.


Lon. Revenge, for what?


Cle. Can you ask for what? suppose the gods should hear your prayers, and
turn my heart, how miserable a man were I, how should I spend my time, for
forty years to come; Is it not enough to forsake your cause, but you must
seduce me too? Lonzartes, if you pray for me, I shall curse you heartily; I
dare stay no longer with him.

Exit Clearcus.
Lon. If this brave man this humor could expel,
His virtues would his vices far excel.
I have put on this Cloak of wantonness only to avoid being thought a serious
man, least the Duke grow jealous of my pretentions to his Crown; -- while the
Duke is civil and I am safe; -- he shall be so too? -- But if I find designs
against me; I have Friends, and force enough, to gain my right by this; -- Oh
but Theodocia does unman me quite; -- when I look on her, all these high
thoughts do vanish, and I become the humblest creature in the Court: --

I have no Title, that I ere shall own,
Unless she daine to raise me to the Throne.

THE SECOND ACT.
Enter Lonzartes alone, Clearcus harkening at the Door. Lon. OH Cloris, Cloris!
what stange unwonted pains I feel? what fears? what new disease conceales my
blood? -- if it be love, twill not offend the gods, because my soul does now
rejoice to find, Beauty and Virtue so divine, that both may be well worshipped
at one Shrine.

Clearcus chaps him hard on the Shoulder.
Cle. Are you talking in your sleep Lonzartes? or is it some divine meditation,
thus transports you?


Lon. You are too rude Clearcus.


Cle. I cry you mercy Sir, you can be angry then I see; I thought your
conversion, had set you above such passions, as we wicked men are subject too.


Lon. I do confess thou did make me start, and speak hastily, but I am not
angry, nor can be with thee.

Embraces him.
Cle* I Will try your temper presently, -- Oh! Beauty and Virtue so Divine, both
may be worshipped in one shrine; Ha, ha, ha.


Lon. What of this, you heard me repeat an old Song.


Cle. An old Song to a new Tune Lonzartes: do thou pray for my Conversion
this way? must I get a Cloris to sigh after? -- as thou do; -- I have heard
all, and have observed thee too, I and do guess who Cloris is, -- come, tell me
quickly, that way to oblige me to silence; for if by my own skill, I do
discover her, I Will lay thee open to the World, tell me who Cloris is, least I
tell thee; Adieu.

Exit.
Lon. How can he discovee that I love, when I know it not yet my self? -- Yet I
may admire her, and by my adoration of her virtues. --

Be by them, from all meaner passions freed,
When this new virtue, shall my vice exceed.
Exit. Enter Geta.
Geta. What the Devil ailes my Lord? his wonted mirth is changed into (...),
and twenty times a day, he sends me on sleeveless Errants, that he may be
alone; I think Lord Clearcus will prove the wisest man at last; -- I have been
five times this morning to enquire, if the Princess be in health! if she be
stirring, or if near ready! if she go to the Temple! -- And after dinner I must
enquire, if she have dyned! if she comes forth in public! if she ride abroad;
and thus twenty times a day, he tires me, with these silly Errants, when I
might ask them all at once, and save much labor; I Will try if I can find some
way to contract these Embassies; -- it is well for my Lord, that his man is wiser
then himself.

Exit. Enter Silvander with Lindamira, and her Maid.
Sil. Do not my looks Lindamira enough express what I would say?


Lin. Yes, to me, who do discern your passion thus suppressed, more clear, then
by those loud noyses, which some Lovers most delight in.


Sil. But how shall I be assured, this is not Raliery?


Lin. Cannot you judge by my looks, as well as I by yours? what kind of
security do you require? I have no Citizens that will be bound for my good
behavior!


Sil. A serious word or two, with a kind look confirmed, will secure me against
the World.


Lin Will this look serve? and I am yours, suffice for words? with this hand
given from my heart! engage beyond your wish.


Sil. It does, may I be --


Lin. Nay, no strange lines I beseech you, make me not jealous by professing
more then I expect.


Sil. I am confirmed.

He Kisses her hand.
Lin. I shall try your temper, if my merry humor hold!


Sil. It Is that free Innocence, I most adore.


Lin. And that I can afford enough off, at an easy rate.

Enter Clearcus to them, Silvander goes off.
Lin. Your Lordship was going another way, pray let not me divert you, my
lodging is far off.


Cle. Madam, I have long sought an opportunity to kiss your hands there.


Lin. You may do it here, and save the labor of going so far for nothing.


Cle. Do you call that honor nothing, which I do prize above the World? and
would give all my interest on Earth, to purchase one kiss of your fair hand, by
a free consent.


Lin The World is little beholding to your Lordship, for so low a value, that
will give all your interest on Earth, for a kiss of my hand, and this I must in
civility, look, as if I did believe.


Cle. I Will swear it Madam.


Lin That's as easily done, as said, but I am hard of Faith.


Cle. How shall I obtain more credit?


Lin. I Will show you a short way; bring me a conveyance of half your Land, and
you shall have two kisses of my hand, three if you please; and as you like your
Market, you may have more, for the other half of your Estate! and this is much
cheaper then to give all the World for such an honor.


Cle. Why do you mock me? who truly love, and honor you above all women! by
those fair eyes I do.


Lin. How can I believe it? when I know you talk thus to every woman that you
meet.


Cle. May my hopes nere prosper, if you are not the only object of my heart.


Lin. No touching good my Lord, my Affairs calls me away, I must be gone.

He proffers to kiss her hand.
Cle. And I must wait on you home Madam.


Lin. I Will rather stay here this Twelvemonth, then give your Lordship that
trouble.


Cle. Am I such a Monster, in the opinion of all Women, as you make me?


Lin. I must take care you make not me one; -- Oh happy deliverance!

Enter to them, Theodocia, and Pandora, and Silvander.
Cle. This is such a piece of nicety, as I nere met before; -- these are no
company for me.

Exit.
The. Stay Clearcus, I would speak with you; -- my Cousin Pandora tells me, you
Court Lindamira, which her self does not much deny.


Cle. I am practizing I must confess, how to talk to Ladies, and have learnt
some Speeches to that purpose, whereof Lindamira has had her share.


The. You have mocked her then! and intend her only for your mirth!

He makes a leg.
Lin. Methinks his silence, and that leg, shows more love to me, then I know
what to do with.


Sil. Excellent Girl! how she plays with his wanton humor!

Aside. Enter to them Lonzartes.
Cle. Nay, if Lonzartes fall on me too? I shall be overwhelmed with wisdom.


Lon. Now there is some hope of him, his look is Civillized already.


Pan. Are you not pleased Clearcus? to see the whole Court concerned for you?
to see your self so valued, methinks it should stir up the Noble Blood of your
great Ancestors, to set you on to such actions, as may outshine their stories,
and not loose one day more, in your wild ways.


Cle. Madam, Your Language, and your Looks, agree with your great soul; I can
be proud to be so taught, when the Princess Theodocia, and you direct, twere
great stupidity to show neglect; -- but in my Opinion Madam, one of a Family is
enough to be a Saint; -- twould take from great Lonzartes credit, and render
his conversion no rarity; if I should become virtuous too.


The. Pandora, and I, are much obliged to you, for your good opinion of us, I
wish all our ^ex were so too.


Cle. My opinion and my practice, differ very much Madam; I do honor virtue in
your Sex, as much as any man; but my Tallent lies the other way, Lonzartes does
enough Illustrate the Platonnick Name, and Eminently maintain, that high
Seraffick flame, which is above my reach.


Lon. Tell me now Clearcus, is there not more relish in this Conversation? then
with your Getinas, and your Angelinas! -- that blush shows well, there is some
hopes of grace in that blush.


Cle. Hold your prattling, my conversion does not belong to you.


Lon. I hope I may direct you to a Lady, that will work that wonder.


Cle. Hold your peace then, till we be alone.


The. We Will be gone Pandora, and not hinder so good a work; -- you shall neither
of you go with us, -- but if you please Clearcus, Lindamira may walk with you a
little longer.


Cle. No Madam, I have enough of her already, she out-wits me; we shall nere
agree.


Lin. I have got credit enough for a young Soldier, by my honorable Retreat,
from so hot a charge.

Exeunt Silvander, and Ladies.
Lon. Let us now pursue our Argument, for thy Conversion.


Cle. It comes on a pace; -- what a fine Gentleman are you grown, since the
Spirit of Chastity has possessed you? and I must live chaste, that I may have the
Honor, and Felicity to be in love! -- to be a fool! to entangle my self in
^etts, that I shall nere get out of! I Will none of it.


Lon. Let my old Friend-ship so far prevail, that on my request you will
sometimes converse with Pandora, if thy visits do engage her to undertake thy
cure! and she do work that Miracle! she must value what her self has made
worthy of her self; for so will thou be, if thy wandering fancy, were once fixed?


Cle. So then all this bussle, is to make me in love; though you know, I have
been a thousand times in love already.


Lon. I Clearcus, I know thy thousands, but I would have thee once in love.


Cle. I never will be mad, as you are; yet to give you, and the World
satisfaction in this point; I will condemn my self to one Months penance, and
make experiment to look, and talk as idly with Pandora, as you do with your
Divinest Cloris! -- If I were sure Pandora were not to be won; I could fancy a
pretty kind of pastime, by raising my desires to hopes of what I cannot have!
but I could never meet a woman yet, that was impregnable; and my nature is not
capable of being converted, by any that I can conquer; -- Pray Su^ at my
Chamber this night.


Lon. I will not fail, if you will go with me unto Pandora? --

And visit her, while this good motion's warm,
Against all your fears, I Will fit you with a charm.

Cle. I go.

Exeunt. Enter Pandora with Lindamira and Ladies in her Chamber, and Silvander.
Pan. Lindamira you must be my second, they will be two, to one else.


Lin. Gladly Madam, I cannot wish a gentler Enemy, then him that thinks he has
me at his mercy.


Pan. But if you be over-sharp upon him, you may hinder the great work, we
undertake! and make him hate all honest Women for our sakes.


Lin. I shall use him with more Art, and lead him on with hopes, that all our
Sex do scramble for him; -- if I can fit his Fancy, and his Wit, I Will engage
him in a concern for you, and then manage my young Gallant to my will, till I
confute his common places, so often urged to the prejudice of Ladies, I cannot
fancy better sport, then to see him mad in love with you Madam.


Pan. The gods forbid, I would not cure him at that rate, for my own sake, and
his; least that prove a greater evil, then he now has; I shall be very careful,
to give him no encouragement, for thoughts of that nature, my undertaking is
not beyond a common civillity, as to all others of his Rank.


Lin. That will do it, if I mistake not; -- and catch you both I hope, -- here
he comes?

Enter Lonzartes, and Clearcus.
Lon. Madam, I have brought my Friend to kiss your hand.


Cle. Thus far Madam, in order to my engagement, I have given you the trouble
of the first visit, I ever made against my will.


Pan. Your Lordship, does me honor; came you now from Court?


Cle. Yes Madam, and left the Princess Theodocia in great complements with her
kind Father, who has now declared against the proud Corinthian, and given
Theodocia her free choice where she please.


Pan. You tell me News, beyond my hopes, this will raise the Princess drooping
Spirits again; I wonder she is not here by this time.


Lon. The Duke and she, are not yet parted Madam; -- how now Lindamira, are you
tonguetyed? no welcome for my Friend, to encourage him to like of civil
company; -- You look as if you feared to loose your Gallant.


Cle. No, no, she knows she has too fast hold of my heart, to part so easily.


Lin. It Is Honor enough for me, to be in the number of your Martyrs Sir.

She Sighs.
Pan. How long have you two been acquainted?


Lin. Ever since last night Madam.

She Sighs.
Pan. And do thou sigh already?


Lin. It Is only to give you warning, by my harms


Pan. I thank your care, but I am armed against the World.


Cle. That Is good News Lonzartes, there is some hope, she has made firm
resolves against Wedlock; that I may assault her with security. --

Aside.
Lon. You may, you may.


Cle Madam, You speak, as if you held mankind at a defiance.


Pan. By way of Marriage, I do, but I can value all men that I see worthy.


Cle. He must be a bold man, who does design beyond the favors you allow, but
have you made vows against marriage Madam?


Pan. No vows, but such resolves, as are unchangable.


Lon. You are severe to men.


Lin. If all Women were of your opinion Madam? how should the World be Peopled?


Cle. I marry Madam, that was well urged.


Pan. I thought Lindamira you would have been on my side


Lin. So I am, when you are in the right, this is our common cause; Suppose you
bring these two Lords, and they bring twenty more, to be of your judgment, and
this Heresy should spread; what will become of us, who think of nothing else
but Marriage?


Lon. She tells you true Madam, when her own concern is at stake, you may
excuse her.


Pan. I do, and will make good my argument alone.


Cle. Never to Marry Madam?


Pan. Never my Lord, is my full resolve.


Cle. You are the happiest, and the wisest Lady living! and I the joyfullest
man, if you will permit me to adore you at this distance, for I am of your own
opinion Madam.


Lin. Two Fannaticks well met.


Pan So long as your respects be free from love, my house is open to you.


Cle. You are all witnesses, that this Lady does adopt me her avowed Gallant,
on the conditions before mentioned: -- you give me leave Madam to talk of love,
and to carry up this jest, as high, as he who really does love.


Pan. I do, so it be ever in Public; all private visits, and all whisperings
are excepted.


Cle. It Is enough Madam; -- This is a pretty kind of Entertainment, I never
thought of: Lonzartes thou art in the right, this will be sport beyond my hope.


Lon. But how does Lindamira like, to see her new Gallant, thus taken from her?


Cle. It Is her own fault, she might have fixed me another way, if she had been
wise.


Pan Indeed Lindamira, I thought not of your concern, and did conclude too
rashly, but I will use my interest on your behalf.


Lin 'Twill not be needful Madam, I know all his professions to you, are meant
to me.


Cle Very prettily contrived, -- This is a new kind of wit I never heard of; so
then you are to love me, in spite of your teeth, and I you, in spite of mine;
what will this come to at last?


Lon. Mirth man, all the year a constant mirth: -- Is not this better then
spending your time in a smoaky house, with your old Acquaintance?

Silvander, and Lindamira do converse while the others talk.
Cle. I cannot tell you that, till I have tried this, as long as I have the
other.


Lin. Pray my Lord, do not persuade your Friend, all this earnest is a jest, I
allow you as much mirth as you please, so the conclusion be serious.


Pan. We leave the success unto the Fates; -- Clearcus may in time have pity
on you Lindamira, he does not yet believe, you are in earnest.


Cle. Nor ever shall do Madam, till I see her heart break, and then 'twill be
too late.


Lin. He dissembles well, for so young a Scholar Madam.


Lon. We have done all well me thinks, and now it is time that we retire.


Cle. How soon may I make my next visit to you Madam?


Pan. As often as you please my Lord, at public hours.

Exeunt Silvander, and two Lords.
Lin. How did I perform my part Madam?


Pan. You fell too soon into your humor, he sees you mock him.


Lin. That Is all I aim at, he has too much wit to be abused; my only business
is to let him see, that he cannot cozen me; -- I believe you will see this
Scene changed, at his next visit, if I have any skill, you will be troubled
with him.


Pan I am armed at all points, against all men, and him most.

Enter Theodocia, and Ladies.
The. Oh Cousin! I am freed from all my fears, and come to rejoice with you.


Pan. I have rejoiced already Madam, and have begun a Scene of mirth, will hold
us long; -- Had your Highness come a little sooner, you had found the late
Convert Lonzartes, and his Friend Clearcus here, who is become my avowed
Gallant, and looks as if he liked our company already.


The. Then you have hopes to cure him; -- Pray order it so, as I may come to
your next meeting, my heart is now so light, that I could play with any thing;
-- Can I have no part in your Comedy?


Lin. For two reasons, your Highness can only be a looker on, it is petty
Treason to make love to you, though in jest; and then your beauty is too
dangerous to be dallied with; these be edge-tools, too sharp for us to play
with.


The. Why may not Princes participate in such innocent mirth? we make stricter
Rules then need; true virtue will shine through such thin clouds without a
prejudice, and be above the reach of vile tongues.


Pan. I Madam, if you could show a rule, to distinguish between Innocence and
Guilt; -- But we often see that Angelical virtues are aspersed, by malicious
tongues, and no quality exempt, from rude censures.


Lin. I differ in opinion; Princes may enjoy harmless mirth, as freely as we;
to be too much reserved, does look like disguise.


The. I would be so merry Lindamira, as should defy all scandal, and with an
open face justify it to the world; to wear always a stiff-state face, is
intolerable.


Pan Private persons may be bold that way, when few eyes observe, -- But
Princes are set on Pirameds, for all to see, and immitate.


The. You shall not fright me from your mirth, with this grave Lecture, are
they not, both my near Relations, whom you endeavor to reclaim? why may not I
share in so worthy a design? -- I fear Lindamira she doubts least I may gain
her Gallant from her.


Lin. She may well be jealous, if your Highness undertake him, I shall have
small hopes, if you two quarrel for him.


The. Why Lindamira? is Silvander vanished?


Lin. No Madam, the more Trophies I can fairly get by Victories on others, will
raife his Conquest higher, who gains me from the rest.


The. Thou art safe, and may say any thing* Silvander is thy security
against all scandal, though you carry it thus unconcerned, the secret spread.


Lin. It Is time it should do so, now we do own
Our love, it is fit the secret should be known.
Your Highness may assist, while you look on,
Though only we, the active part do own.

The. Let us retire to council then.

Exeunt. Enter Teretia, and Geta.
Ter. What is thy business honest Geta? How does Lonzartes thy brave Lord?


Geta. My Lord is in good health of body Madam, his brains are only out of
order.


Ter. How meanest thou Geta, has he got a blow on his head?


Geta. Only some fumes from his heart Madam, ^nakes his head addle, it is called
the Spleen of ^te, and much in fashion; his Lordship does desire ^o know the
Princess mind this morning* what ^e means to do all day?


Ter. This will be a hard question to the Princess fasting, why would he know
all this now?


Geta. Because he has some great affairs for me ^o manage, and cannot spare me
to ask, so often ^s I use to do.


Ter. Of what nature, be thy particular queries Geta?


Geta. He would know how she slept last night? (...) what health now? by what
hour she will be ^rest? when to her devotions? and then, where ^he walks this
morning? and if she dine in pub^que? then how she intends to pass her time till
^ight? else I must come twenty times; for what you may at once dispatch me.


Ter. And does Lonzartes send thee, to enquire all this at once?


Geta. These women are so silly, they Aside. cannot reach a deep design; -- No
but he does every day make me trou^le my self, and every body that I meet, to
ask these questions severally, which I would do at once, to show him I am a man
of quick dispatch.


Ter Oh! is that the matter? I can fit thee with one answer to all these; --
Tell thy Lord, the Princess did take cold last night, and will keep her bed all
day.


Geta I like it well, and wish her Highness would do so this month.


Ter. Out Traitor, I Will make thy Lord brain thee for that wish.


Geta Why Madam? I meant no harm, 'twas but to save you the trouble, and me the
same questions to morrow, and so on till Doonis-day, I think.


Ter. Well Sir, for this time, 'le not complain of you, this Jest shall
excu^e your knavery.


Geta. This will be a play day for me, I like this lying a Bed well.

Exeunt.
THE THIRD ACT.
Enter Lonzartes, and Clearcus. Cle. TEll me then who Cloris is?


Lon. I dare not trust thee yet.


Cle. I will know now, or break all Friendship with you.


Lon. I swear I must not yet.

Enter to them Theodocia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and Ladies, and
Silvander.
Cle. Then look to your self, least I discover Cloris.


The. Where did you leave my Father Lonzartes?


Lon. I have not seen the Prince to day Madam.


The. I was told, that you were walking with him just now.


Cle. That may well be Madam, for his brains do crow of late; -- do ye see how
he stands; -- Lonzartes the Princess speaks to ye.


Lon. To me, does your Highness command me any thing?

Silvander, and Lindamira entertain themselves in whisper.
Cle. Did not I tell you Madam, that his brains are turned, he neither hears,
nor sees of late; -- The Idea of his Seraffique love, takes him wholly up, from
all converse with us mortals.


Lon. Hold your prateing, or I shall be angry.


Pan. What has made you so grave of late Lonzartes? all your wonted mirth is
gone.


Lon. No man is always in good humor Madam.


Cle. He Is in love Madam, on my knowledge, over head and ears in love.


Pan. In love, Lonzartes, I thought you had not been at leisure, to be in love;
-- It Is your fault Clearcus, that have not counseled your Friend better.


Cle. Thus am I chid for your follie^, who reject all my councels, and refuse
all my approved Antidotes, which do preserve me against that Serpent (you call
Love) while he conversed with me, he was safe Madam.


Lon. Thou have fooled enough Clearcus, the Princess and all the company are
weary of it: -- If your Highness allow him this freedom, he will grow
troublesome.


The. Is it Love Lonzartes? or is Clearcus only merry with you?


Lon. Your Highness knows him too well, to credit all he says this way, he is
at this time, very angry that I have chid him for his lewd life, and have
withdrawn my self from his ill company, which he imputes to my being in love.


Cle. I say he is in love, most seriously in love; shall I unmask this grave
Reformado, and show you the Lady now?


The. If Lonzartes be content, I would gladly see her, whom he thinks worthy of
his heart.


Cle. No matter for his consent Madam, He holds them all to Lonzartes, one by
one. so you like it; -- And thus I begin my trial; -- By your good leave Lady
-- It Is not here; -- nor is it this; -- nor is it you Lady?


Lin. I lament the loss of such an honor.


Lon. Thou art become a pretty fool Clearcus, do thou not observe how all the
Court do laugh at thee?


Cle. Yes, and shall make them laugh at you, e're I have done; if Pandora will
make the next trial.


Pan I am content to try, what this will come to.


Cle. Now Sir, have at you; -- It Is not your good fortune neither Madam.


The. How can you make Lonzartes an amends, for all this abuse.


Cle. I will give him present satisfaction, if your Highness will permit me to
bring him to you?


The. To me! think you Lonzartes is in love with me?


Cle. It Is a Cloris in the clouds, one much above his reach, which you only are
Madam.


The. With all my heart, I shall be proud to own his conversion, as a Trophie
of my honor.


Cle. See if his guilt do not make him avoid the trial; -- stop him there; --
Lonzartes the Princess calls you.

Lonzartes is going out.
Lon. I Will cut thy throat.


Cle. He threatens me, -- guilty I Will warran^; -- now Madam, do you see no
alteration in his face? -- no change yet? -- speak all, -- you are all
assistants in this Judgment.

Lonzartes throws him off in anger.
Lon. It will disturb a Saint, to be thus subject to the fancies of a fool.


The. Be not disturbed Lonzartes, you take this in earnest, which we look on as
a jest, only to pass the time; Clearcus has more wit, then to be in earnest.


Lon. I hope your Highness will not prefer his follies, before my professions,
who disclaim such a presumption.


The. I^ you turn this jest to earnest Lonzartes, I shall believe Clearcus; --
I take it now as Ralliery; -- I wonder Lindamira you get not hold of some young
lovers heart?


Lin. I have twenty in store Madam, more then I know what to do with.


Pan Then you allow as many lovers, as you can get, and mean to choose the best.


Lin. I think it is credit for women to be admired and honored by worthy men; it
shows a value, to move so many to a general Esteem, and must be the woman's
fault, if she deserve a censure.


The. You are in the right Lindamira, men may design, but women may destroy,
faster then they can built; my thanks unto Clearcus for our mirth.


Cle. Mirth ought to be our business Madam. --

The angry gods affords cross Fates to give
Us griefs enough, and troubles while we live.
Exeunt Lonzartes and Clearcus severally. Enter the Prince and Lords, who meet
the Ladies going off.
Prince. We were now discoursing of your Gallant Pandora, have you hopes to
work this miracle?


Pan. This Lady and I, have ventred our credits on this conversion Sir.


Prince. To reclaim him, were a good work; but suppose he fall in love with
either of you.


Pan. At his peril that, let Lindamira look to her self, I am safe.


Lin. I have a sure retreat Sir, it is but seeming to comply, and he will give ore;
for he can love none that he can conquer, and I am resolved rather to be
vanquished, then not to be rid of him when I see my time.


Sil. Could all her Beauty with my love expire
Her flowing Wit, would still create new fire
[Aside. Enter to them Clearcus and Lonzartes.
Prince You two I know, come now from exercizing of your Troops.


Cle. No Sir, we went hence just now; I wish my Troop here to guard me.


Prince. Have you an Enemy in view Clearcus?


Cle. I have many Sir, that have robbed me of my peace, I cannot sleep of late,
but have a thousand fancies, which do set my brains on fire.


Prince. Take heed it prove not love.


Cle. That is the danger Sir, for if Pandora do keep her resolve for single
life; I may be in love; for I do feel strange alterations that I know not what
to make of.


Lin Have you no affection left for me my Lord? can you so soon forget your
last nights professions?


Cle. Now Sir, you see how I am assaulted, I shall be pulled in pieces
presently.


Prince. Silvander and I, will secure you from Lindamira.


Cle. If I were assured you could Sir, I should like her wit, and humor well,
-- but I fear, -- if I should be in earnest, she would be so too.


Lin. You see his inclination is for me Madam, so that what ever he shall say
to you hereafter, is meant to me.


Cle. Nor so, nor so, sweet Lady, I do respect Pandora, above all her Sex; you
throw out hoocks to catch young Gallants, she neglects those are laid for her,
that's my danger.


Prince. What riddle is this Clearcus? do thou desire, that thy desires may
not be answered?


Cle. Yes Sir, from some persons, for if my love be returned, all ends in the
fruition, (as most Examples show,) But if Pandora keep her resolve for single
life, then I can raise my fancy while I live* to Adoration of her beauty, and
that virtue, with a continual delight, which will last while I last.


The. You are then my Lord, the happiest lover living, for you will find my
Cousin, just as you wish.


Pan. Pray Madam, answer not too fast for me, for if I find Clearcus a person
of such NobleNature, beyond what I did ever hope to meet in man; I may change
my Opinion of men for his sake; and therefore it is best to find some other
sport, least we destroy each other.

He starts.
Cle. Look you now? I am Treypand.


The. Start not Clearcus, she but mocks you, you are both engaged for this
month to Entertain us, and your selves, no going off now.


Pan. I shall not break Covenants.


Cle. Nor I Madam, though I do sometimes reminde you of your resolve against
Marriage, whereon depends my bliss, secure me but of that, and I am ever yours.


Pan I shall endeavor what I can, to give you that satisfaction.


Cle. I kiss your fair hand on that word, which has given new life to my
doubtful heart, and now I do defy Lonzartes gravity, to put his heart in a
more loving dress, then mine shall be hereafter.


Prince. If Lonzartes can love too, my wonder ceases.


The. He is my servant Sir, and has a chief part in the Comedy.


Prince. I like your pastime well, but me thinks Lonzartes looks as if he were
compelled unto his part, and will do it scurvily.


Lin. That Is the sport Sir, and will afford the more variety.


Lon. I shall be glad Sir, if I might be excused.


The. By no means Servant, what an affront is this, that I must beg your
favor, in the face of the whole ^ourt to own me?


Prince. You must not be so grave Lonzartes, all is for our mirth.


Cle Now Sir, have not I done your work for you?


Lon. Would thou were hanged, hold thy peace.


Cle. Give me better words, or I Will talk aloud.


Lon. Was ever man thus hampered, between jest and earnest?


Lin. They are comparing notes in private; there is Treachery in their faces;
I Will play no more.


Prince. When begins the love Clearcus? this is only talking of it.


Cle. It is begun already Sir; if I had not valued this Excellent Lady above
the World; I had not taine this care to secure my interest to a perpetuity.


Lin. Madam, you are not to believe a word of this, for he has with the same
grave face, sworn the same to me but Yesterday.


Cle. That was in jest Madam, but now every action of my life, shall justify
each syllable I utter unto you.


Pan. I shall endeavor to believe it my Lord, and yet allow you the same
Christian liberty with Lindamira, and the rest, as you had before.


Cle. Madam, you speak, as though you did not value my respects, now my whole
soul is set to serve, and honor you alone.


Pan. I must confess, I cannot change my faith, so fast as you do your
discourse; -- And then ^s I remember my lesson, is to keep my distance, least I
loose my lover.


Cle True Madam, as to comply, but you are to see, and credit my ambitious
love, and to admit it with the same Esteem, I serve you.


Pan How can I do that, and not return you love for love? and then you will
despise me; pray my Lord, at your next visit, bring my part in wr^ng, that I
may not err in it.


Prince he is in the right Clearcus, you now seem to seek such contradictions,
as all the Court will laugh at; consult with Lonzartes against your next visit.

Exit Prince and Train.
Lon. If he will follow my advise, he may do well Sir; -- now we are alone,
tell me what crotchets next? prithee make me understand what thou would have
Pandora do?


Cle. I think you were best release me the residue of my mon^h, that I may go
seek my wits, where I last left them; -- must I see none of my old Friends,
until this month be over?


Lon. If you consider your promise, not see one of them.


Cle. Then shall I be lost, if those preservatives be all forbid me; I do find
already love will be Predominant.


Lon. The better for you if it be; -- let us now talk seriously; -- suppose
Pandora may be won, can you fancy a happiness on Earth, beyond having her?


Cle. Yes, I do fancy that having twenty, is better then any one in Christendom.


Lon. Thou do not love then, else, that one beloved, has more variety then a
thousand.


Cle. Make but that good, I Will marry her to morrow.


Lon. You think then she is already at your dispose.


Cle. When she once sees that I am in earnest, she will be, what I will have
her; and the truth is Lonzartes, I do like her best of all I ever talked with,
and have great fear that I shall be like other men, who never value what they
have, which makes me covet what I cannot get.


Lon. Suppose some other do obtain her, while you are thus long resolving?


Cle. Nay, I am resolved no other shall ever have her.


Lon. And you resolve for her too.


Cle. Yes, she cannot in Honor engage to any, while I pretend.


Lon. Art thou turned fool, to think thus? be more serious, or thou will be
dispis'd.


Cle. Why do you not allow me some relief then? to live a whole month honest,
will put my blood into a flame; I have tempted all I meet, and all within these
Walls prove honest.


Lon. By your own Experience then, you will find that Courts are Nurseries of
virtue, and are only scandalized by such vilde persons, as would have the
clearest innocence aspersed, that their own guilts might be no wonder; -- you
find few virtuous persons, amongst Censurers.


Cle. That Is true, but take heed Lonzartes, you do not lead me into snares that
will destroy me, for I already find some inclinations toward Pandora, which I
am ashamed to own, least I be laughed it.


Lon. You have reason, for there can none of us believe thee.


Cle. You have made me a fine Gentleman in a few days; -- if Pandora be of
your mind, adieu to your Philosophical love.


Lon. I hope thou art too fast to free thy self. --

Thou playest with flames which undiscovered burn,
Until they do thy heart to Ashes turn.
Exit Lonzartes.
Cle. Did ever man betray himself as I have done? by putting fetters on in
jest, which already are become so fixed, I cannot shake 'um off, but must humbly
beg to be allowed to worship that Divine Nature I so much dispis'd in virtuous
women, and must now confess: --

If I do neither Faith, nor Favor find,
The god of Love is Just, though he be blind.
Exit. Note, that all the Play through, when Silvander and Lindamira speaks
not, they are to whisper as in private discourse. Enter Theodocia and
Lindamira.
Lin. If your Highness do consider Lonzartes's Worth, and his great Birth, as
it deserves; whose Ancestor was not many Ages since, by yours put by this
Dukedom, on a nice point, (as I have heard;) so that to me Lonzartes's love,
looks like a Divine direction, to his Restoration.


The. I am of Pandora's mind for single lise, and have as small a value for
that idle passion you call love, as she.


Lin. Your Highness may as well judge what they do in China, as guess at our
Felicities that love? -- I can ^iss the ground that my Silvander treads on,
with more re^ish, then all other joys can bring me.


The. You have high fancies that lead you on to hopes, which you may never find.


Lin. These hopes are more delightful then an Age of dull life without them;
if your Highness did converse as much with me, as with Pandora, I should
convert you.


The. Why do you not then change her severity against men?


Lin. I had not the Honor to be known to her, before her heart was set another
way; but yet I Will try what I can do.


The. I wish Silvander may answer your expectation Lindamira; but if such
honor, and such bliss accompany your loves, why thus long carried on in the
dark? and why not yet avowed?


Lin. It Is now avowed unto the Duke, though I took time to know my Gallant,
before I did admit his love, and on long trial found his silent looks, did
speak more truth, then such loud noyses as most passions make


The. You praise Silvander as if you meant to sell him.


Lin. He is no Prince Madam, and is therefore safe from you.


The. The less safe, if I so pleased; -- do you believe his virtue, and his
love so great, that I could not win him from you for a Friend of mine?


Lin. I do, and shall not think him a loss, who can be won from me, by the
greatest Princess of the World?


The. If I could once see such a man, I might change my opinion.


Lin. Why don't you try Lonzartes?


The. He is too much concerned to be played with; -- you dare not venture your
fine man then?


Lin. I dare, and do desire it withal my heart, and do voluntarily engage, not
to work against your Highness.


The. And I am resolved to try his faith to you, it may cure Lonzartes to see
himself neglected, when another chosen, though but in jest, for I can pity,
though I do not love him.


Lin. And it is my desire to have Silvanders faithful love, made Eminent by this
temptation.

Enter Lonzartes, and Silvander to them.
The. In what humor left you Clearcus my Lords?


Lon. In such as does become his greatness Madam.


The. Most brave men are often puffed up with vain glory, that does Eclipse
those virtues, which themselves do overvalue.


Lin. Your Highness is severe to men, but all are not so vain.


The. Most are, when we do value them too much; -- yet I confess I am well
pleased, when I find men worthy my Esteem.


Lin. How does that appear? when your Highness does despise mankind by your
resolves against them.


The. To show how much you are mistaken; unpin this Jewel; -- wear this
Silvander for my sake; I Will own it to the World, that I do value men of Worth.


Sil. Madam, I understand not what this kind of favor means; I hope your
Highness does not choose me for mirth.


The. Do you Silvander raise mirth from my Favor? -- come with me Lindamira;
-- I do command you to stand near us within hearing; -- I will not run the
hazard of any Censure, by this trial to satisfy my curiosity concerning
lovers, such high Romantic lovers, who soar above the reach of all temptations.


Lin. I shall obey you Madam, though I desire it not.

[Exeunt Ladies. The Men stand amazed.
Sil. Can you guess Lonzartes, what this tends to?


Lon. It Is a Riddle far beyond my understanding.

[Exit Lonzartes. Lindamira Reenters to Silvander.
Lin. Wake; wake Silvander, the Sun shines bright upon thee; Theodocia dotes on
thy virtues, and will advance thy youth, much faster then thy own wishes can
propose.


Sil. How Lindamira, have you so mean thoughts of me?


Lin. So high thoughts, why may not the Princess neglect the Corinthian for
you? such things have been in story.


Sil. You speak, as if you wished it.


Lin. Can I wish you well, and not applaud it?


Sil. You cannot fancy me a greater curse, unless your own heart be turned
against me.


Lin The Princess desires your Company in the next Room; I can stay no longer.

[Exit Lindamira.
Sil. I have so much to think on, that I know not what to say; -- the Princess
unexpected favors, with Lindamira's no concern, begets such wonder, as does
amaze me -- I will not go; -- and yet I must or make my self Ridiculous, by
judging what I cannot guess at.

Exit. Enter Lonzartes.
Lon. Have I thus long adored the Princess? and still approached her with the
same trembling, I draw near the Altar, for this scorn at last, -- before my
face, to court a man, she knows engaged unto another, a man of so much lower
quality then I; this I confess does make my Faith stagger; -- Silvander was as
much surpised as I, -- Lindamira too was out of Tune; -- If Theodocia can go
less, this change will be more my admiration, then her virtue was.

Enter Lindamira, passing in as by him.
Lon. Now Madam, whither so fast?


Lin. To see which way the wind blows; -- pray my Lord, where is your heart now?


Lon. In the Princess lodgings, with yours; -- or can you tell me better, where
your own is?


Lin. I change my mind so often, that I know not where I left my heart last.


Lon. Are you no more concerned? Suppose Silvander change his opinion? Princess
have mighty power to overcome men's hearts.


Lin. Why then his opinion will be changed? -- I cannot value him, that leaves
to value me; -- methinks my Lord, the Princess favor to Silvan^r, should a
bate your passion for her.


Lon. My desires go no higher, then to look, and ^onder at her perfections! my
Esteem cannot be ^ll'd love, beyond what Duty, and Obedience ^oes allow; -- but
how does Silvander receive ^his great Honor?


Lin. They are now in private; you may judge ^y his exalted looks when you see
him next; -- ^am glad your Lordship is no more concerned.


Lon. This is a forced discourse Lindamira, pray do not mock me, who have a
true value of your ^orth.


Lin. The truth is, the Princess often angered at ^y confidence in Silvanders
love; only now (...) if she can shake his faith, by higher proposi^ions; --
and my hope is, that his virtue may ^eget in her, some better thoughts for men,
which will do your business, and confirm mine, ^or Silvander is above
temptation; and I think Lonzartes does deserve what he desires.


Lon. You oblige me to say, your confidence ^oes merit the greatest faith from
man; but is Silvander of your Plot?


Lin No, 'twould then be none, nor I no trial have of his sincerity.


Lon. These are dangerous sports, and we too ^ate may find them so; -- the
Princess and you ^re both too bold, and do too much rely on your own beauties.


Lin. If Silvander can be won, I can smile at such a loss.


Lon. It Is easy to say so, when you fear it not; but I have seen stout hearts
fall to pieces by such a blow; -- you have settled my heart again, and I advise
you from these dangerous sports, least they blow up your joys, when you are
most secure: we know our present minds, but cannot foresee what we shall like
tomorrow: --

Our Nature with such frailty is endowed,
It Is well if present moments be allowed.
Exeunt Severally. Enter Theodocia, and Silvander, two Ladies at a distance;
Lindamira is seen near observing them.
The. Is your heart my Lord so fixed on Lindamira, that no Person, nor any
Argument, can e're prevail with you to change?


Sil Our Souls Madam, are so united, that I hope death can only make that
separation.


The Can no Fortune, nor any Quality invite you to Honors, and Happiness,
beyond what you can ever hope from Lindamira? Nor a greater beauty dis-i^gage
your heart from her?


Sil. None can ever move me to a thought of change Madam.


The. What if she have chosen higher, and gives way for your preferment also.


Sil. I can smile at all this, when your Highness is so merry; -- Lindamira and
I Madam, do understand a happiness, can never be dissolved; we are above
temptation.


The. Suppose my Father be her choice, will you pretend to love, and hinder her
advancement, by your claim? -- Suppose my Dear Cousin Pandora, have like
affection unto you; and puts on this severity to others, in design only to
gain you? will you let such a beauty, of so high virtue and extraction dye for
you?


Sil. Your Highness sure does fancy what is impossible? -- but if all this were
so, I could dye in gratitude to serve Pandora, but do prefer Lindamira's love,
and virtue, above the brightest beauty, or greatest Empire this World has.


The. Can there be such worth in men? how have I been misinformed? -- Princes
who do not converse, know not the World they live in, but take all on trust
from Aside. others; -- You believe that I am now in jest Silvander, and do not
deal so freely, as I expect.


Sil. By all that's -- -- I am fixed, past ^ltering; -- if your Highness knew the
joys, which do accompany united hearts, you would sooner undertake to pull
down Stars from Heaven, then hope a separation, where true love Triumphs.


The. I am fully satisfied, that Lindamira has what she deserves, a worthy
Lover; -- appear now Lindamira, and call in Lonzartes with the ^st: -- I am
converted.

Enter Lindamira with Lonzartes and Ladies
The. Here Madam, you are coupled by the gods, Silvander does deserve your
confidence; -- Now wear that Jewel, I before gave you in jest Sir, as a mark of
my Favor, for your approved virtue.


Lin Has your Highness any better thoughts for Marriage, then you had?


The. I have found an honest worthy man, beyond my Expectation; -- Lonzartes
you look sad.


Lon My heart is not so full of feathers as it was, but is of late become a
lump of lead.


The. We have indeed been all too serious of late; come Lindamira, let us find
some Entertainment to refresh us on the Sea this Evening; Lonzartes, you, and
Clearcus may go with us, if you please?

[Exeunt all but Lonzartes.
Lon. Your Highness does honor us; -- what these various fancies tend to, is
above my understanding; -- As Nature has framed Women of a more refined matter,
then us men, so she has given to some, Souls so much above ours Excellent, that
their Intrincique purity, dazles our Judgments more then their brightest
beauty does our eyes; -- Theodocia is cetainly without blemish; -- yet may have
some notions of my love, which she thinks not fit to cherish, because she likes
not me: -- And yet may have a virtuous concern for my birth, and sufferings,
such as her good Nature is unwilling to destroy; -- It Is Theodocia's
Excellencies makes me thus humbly seek my Right, as her Gift; Else my Sword
should make my way to ascend this Throne, which is my own; -- but no more of
that yet: --

-- For if I can be rightly understood,
My love may save the expense of so much blood.
[Exit.
FOURTH ACT.
Pandora with Lindamira are seen sitting on a Couch; Enter Clearcus to them,
they rise. Cle. MAdam It Is a felicity to love you, though neglected; by what
Name then, shall I call my Joy? Now you allow my Love, to what height raise my
thoughts? -- Shall I dare to enter upon such a state of bliss? -- To be thus
snatched into so much Light, from the long Chaos I have lived in, may prove
more ruinous to me, then that Hell I came from.


Pan. My Lord, you speak a new Language I understand not.


Cle. Alas Madam, I have this night seen Visions, and do find my passion,
growing much above my own command; -- For when I look on your eyes, I forget
that there are gods, and shall do such Idolatry to you, as will provoke them,
to make me more miserable, then you can wish me happy; -- But when I consider
how vast a Chasme, your resolves have made between us; I sink into such an
abyss of misery, that I can never get out of.


Pan. I understand you less, and less; -- The more you say, the more you do
confound my Judgment.


Lin. All this Madam, is only to let us see how he could talk; if any Woman
were worthy of his real love; -- pray my Lord proceed, -- I shall take Notes
and Edify.

Pulls out a Table' Book.
Cle. Your mirth Madam, is now out of season, when every word I utter flows
from my wounded heart.


Lin. Why do you not speak to me then? who can change my mind as often as your
self? I was made for you; this Lady is impregnable.


Cle. I yield Lindamira, let not your wit destroy a man that does submit to
mercy; I beg quarter.


Lin. Oh! do you so?


Pan. It Is enough Lindamira, that he does confess himself o're-come, let it be
Registered amongst our Victories; -- And now my Lord, what is your next desire?


Cle. My next Madam; I have scarce begun with this, you do mistake all I say
for mirth; Does not my looks and Language show an Alteration? -- All those
Chymeras, that did possess my idle head are vanished, and I become a serious
man: -- Your Miracle is already wrought, and I now see the only way to my
Felicity, is to gain what I so much contemned.


Lin. Excellently well Acted, this might cozen twenty that did not know him.


Pan. You shall do well my Lord to pursue this new path, until you do obtain a
general opinion of your virtue; But I hope you would not have us credit it at
first sight.


Cle. Though my love cannot yet gain credit in your Esteem, do not deny me the
joy to think that you see how much I love, and honor you.


Pan. This is too serious for our Comedy my Lord.


Cle. Nothing can be too serious Madam, to express my love, by which the gods
are pleased to bring me to them; thus by forbidding what might entice me to
slight Paradise, by having had you here: -- It Is fit then that I submit, and
raise a joy from what I am now too apt to repine at, for it is a blessing to be
so fixed, as Antidates my Elysium here on Earth; this Souls joy will endure like
its own nature, unto Eternity.


Pan. You are cured then Clearcus, and will unto the Prince confess your
conversion, if we call you to it?


Cle. Propose away for my acknowledgement, and try.


Lin. Let us take time Madam to consider of it, least we loose half the
Entertainment by our have, and so spoil the jest.


Cle. Madam, let not this Ladies mirth prevail with your good nature, to
afflict a man, who can live only by your smiles.


Pan. I must confess I have some pain to hold in my smiles thus long, for this
serious way of fooling I expected not from you my Lord.


Cle. Why Madam, do you take all this for jest still?


Pan. Yes indeed do I.


Cle. By all the powers above, I do Adore you, next to them I Worship.


Lin. That Is no Oath Madam, for he Worships none.


Pan. I have the same thoughts Lindamira, and am safe.


Cle. What a Monster am I grown, give me credit Madam, or give me death? -- If
I do not love you, let Jove strike me with sudden Thunder; or I will gladly
seal what I have said with my best blood, if nothing less will satisfy.


Pan. Hold Clearcus.

[He Draws.
Lin. Oh! let him alone, he will not hurt himself, he only hopes to fright us.


Pan. My Lord you fright me now, and since you think fit to turn our Commick
Scene into a Tragedy; I shall quit my part in it; and from this time, admit no
farther visits from you: -- Let us retire Lindamira, his converse grows
dangerous.

Exeunt Ladies.
Cle. This had been my fate, had I engaged a little farther, and this the fruit
of chaste, virtuous love; What a folly it is, to give our freedoms up, unto the
will of Women, so humbly to obey, those we are Created to command: -- But I am
safe yet, and will now play with 'um, at their own game; and through a seeming
sorrow for my rejection, laugh at them, who think to laugh at me.

Enter Lonzartes.
Lon. A good day unto my Friend.


Cle. You speak too late Lonzartes, this is a fatal day, and I am studying how
I may make it more Eminent by death, then by my sufferings.


Lon. Why what is the matter man? have you visited the Ladies before they are
dressed, and made 'um froward.


Cle. Thy love Lonzartes has ruined me; -- yet I thank thee for my conversion,
I shall now dye a sober man.


Lon. Thy looks speak some disaster, tell me the worst, that I may join to find
a Remedy.


Cle. In a word then, I do love Pandora, as she deserves, and did so to the
life express my love; that in spite of Lindamiras mirth, she did believe it,
and has forbid my farther visits.


Lon. It Is not possible that she can be so fooled, she forbad thee in jest,
come let us go to her now.


Cle. I Will swear she did forbid me, and in great anger turned from me, I dare
not go.


Lon This is pretty, would thou have me believe thou love?


Cle. Lonzartes, I am not in humor to be played with.


Lon Nor I in humor to be fooled; what would thou have me say, when thou
talk thus to me? thou in love! Ha, ha.


Cle. What shall I say? what do, to beget faith in thee? -- Pandora's
resolution against Marriage, which I so much rejoiced at, is fatally become my
scourge, and I must dye, or have her.


Lon. That Is the only way to obtain belief; do but hang thy self, and then a
Printed Ballad (The Dary Maids greatest Faith;) will make them swear thou
dyedst for love.


Cle. Do my looks agree with so much jest? does not my face declare, my heart
does love?


Lon. No, nor ever can do to me, would thou have me belie my self, that thou
may laugh at me? these shallow Plots are lost on me.

[Exit Lonzartes.
Cle. This is right, had I been fooled into the Platonic pound; I might have
knocked my head against the walls, and never been believed; -- Thus I blow away
those bubles, those ayrie Lectures of chaste love, which lead silly mortals into
slavery; -- Ha Sanga.

Enter Sanga.
Sanga. Your pleasure Sir.


Cle. Go presently, and sum mon all that merry Crew, (who danced the other
day,) to Sup with me this Night; and bid the Music come.

[Exit Sanga.
Sanga. I go Sir.


Cle. I will retreat while I am safe, and be Armed against my Wise, Virtuous,
Chaste Friends, with their Cob-web Netts, so subtly laid to catch me; -- Thus
I throw all their Enchantments off; -- And now like the Grand Seignor, after
some great Victory atcheiv'd; -- I will retire to my Seraglio.

[Exit. Enter the Duke, with Theodocia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and Train:
-- and Silvander.
Duke. You tell me a story beyond belief Theodocia, Clearcus plays with you
all this while; he love?


The. If Pandora be mistaken, he will triumph over Women kind for ever.


Pan. I wish it were no worse Sir, it is I who now am to be pitied, who for the
common sport, and for his good, have brought an evil on my self, I cannot bear.


Duke. Why Pandora, he is descended of our own blood, and his Estate
proportionable to his Birth? so that if you can raise his virtues above his
vices, you will have no cause to murmur at his love.


Pan. True Sir, if I were not engaged to a single life, much might be said, to
set Clearcu's merrits above mine.


Lin. Is there no dispensation for such resolves Madam? when it may be
disputed, whether the gods approve them? -- They give us Laws enough, we need
none of our own making.


Pan. My heart will never consent to alter my resolves.


Lin. We shall have enough to do then.


The. Let us all agree to laugh him out of it.


Lin. You will find little cause for mirth, when you see Clearcus next Madam.


The. Can so few hours alter a man of his temper, so much?


Lin. He is ashamed of his first Principles, and is angry at that shame; He
hates himself for loving, and loves so much, he dares not wish it less; This
mixture of passions, does beget such a confusion of thoughts, that makes him
look as if he had fed on naught but sighs, and tears this twelve Month; and I
fear we shall have cause to turn our (...) (...) sorrow for him.


Duke. I Will give him Commands that shall divert him; -- come with me Theodocia.

Exeunt Duke and Theodocia.
Lin. It Is great pity so brave a man should be so lost


Pan. It Is so Lindamira, but how can it be helped? must I become mad, because he
is so; -- 'Twas not a rash word, by chance let fall, but on debate and mature
judgment, because I saw none so happy after Marriage as before; -- Why may not
I then live and dye as free as I was born?


Lin. You see why, because the gods do not allow so great felicity on Earth, as
might keep us from ever wishing to be with them; pray whoever heard of a pair
of true Lovers, that desired to be in Heaven, if they might stay here till
Doomsday? It Is therefore for our good, that such united hearts are so rarely to
be found on Earth; take heed Pandora, that you bring not more evils on your
head, then you fore see.


Pan. I must now bear my Fortune as I may.


Lin. Though you have not met with many happy Marriages, I have heard of some,
who all their lives have had a constant spring of love; their passions so high,
and joys so great, each striving to raise the others happiness above their
own; this I believe and hope for; -- Methinks till I am married, I am a thing
laid by, as if forgotten by the gods.


Pan It Is not high passions, nor great joys, I doubt to find, but their
continuance; -- suppose the Gallant Lovers to the Wars be sent, what terrors
will possess their frighted Ladies, till their return? and if miscarry, what
will their whole lives have to joy at after?


Lin. Those who stay at home, may have equal dangers, these are anticipated
dreams of evils, that may never happen; then you conceive not the joy those
dangers bring when they are over; this world affords us nothing to relish our
delights by, but such accidents as love, with some fears and dangers bring; It Is
sharps make sweet the sweeter.


Pan. But if I am satisfied with less joys, without those pains you find so
useful, why must I try to gain more happiness, then I do wish for, when I have
joys enough already?


Lin. Joys enough Madam; there is no such thing in Nature, as enough of what
we love.


Pan. I am weary of this idle talk.


Lin. And I know no better Entertainment.

Enter to them Lonzartes, and Silvander.
Pan. How think you Silvander, is Clearcus what he seems?


Sil. Lonzartes knows him best Madam.


Lon. I do believe he loves, though I seem not to credit him, and am now
resolved to play with his passion, as he has done with mine; 'twill entertain
the Princess rarely, to see how I shall anger him.


Sil. Is he enough fixed? to be so abused, for if neither Men, nor Women have
any faith in his budding love, he may fly off for ever.


Lon. I am now going to see what humor he is in.


Sil. I Will wait on you.


Pan. Pray do, and let me know how I must behave my self, that would not hurt
him.


Lin. I can direct you best, if you will trust your self to me.


Pan. I shall trust you as far as any in this affair; let us consult within.

Exeunt. Enter Clearcus and Sanga, with Men, and Women dancers.
Cle. Welcome my dear Friends, I will be no more seduced by grave Lonzartes
fooleries; this night shall reunite us while we live: -- Is the Music come.


San. Not yet Sir.


Cle. I have broke through their Nets, and now the day and night are ours to
Revel in; we will be so merry, that our hearts shall seem much lighter then our
heels.

Enter Sanga.
Sanga. Lonzartes, and Silvander are without.


Cle. They are come as I could wish, I Will entertain 'um as they deserve; they
are my kind, chaste, virtuous, well-wishing spies; -- pray retire all Exeunt
Dancers. into that Gallery, while I dispatch my Court-Friends: -- Sanga shut
the windows close, then call 'um in, and say, that I am grown sad of late, Exit
Sanga. monstrous sad; -- Now for a grave face to suite with my disguise; I have
some fear my sides will burst, with holding in my laughter.

He sits in a sad posture. Enter Sanga with Lonzartes, and Silvander.
Sanga. Softly pray; -- for a strange Melantholy has seized him on the sudden;
-- He is now talking to Pandora.


Sil. She is not here.


San. He entertains her Idea in her absence with the same passion, he would
her; -- the only sure way for a lovers happiness; -- hark.


Cle. Blessed Angel, turn not away; -- these tears must be my daily Incence,
offered at your feet; if you refuse this Tribute from my captived heart, you will
turn the Elysium I enjoy, to Hell: Oh stay! and take my Soul with thee; -- that
gentle look! that: --


Lon. Why so sad fond lover? let not one repulse dismay so great a Conqueror;
thy next charge may prove more prosperous; -- we come to council thee Clearcus,
and to raise thy drooping Spirits by new hopes.


Cle Or to laugh at my affliction, whose Soul is sunk so low by my despair,
that all my Spirits are vanished; I must submit to my Captivity Lonzartes.

[He sighs.
Lon. That sigh had almost blown me over, yet I am glad to see this, and am now
fully satisfied thou art in love, in love Clearcus; -- let me Embrace my
fellow-Prisoner, we will now shake our shackles, to the same sad tune.


Cle. I know you came to mock me; -- but I must bear it.


Lon. Oh no! who can have so hard a heart? we pity you, and have some fears
Pandoras heart will break, when we relate your mighty sufferings; -- but if I
should sit thus in the dark, would it create the like Angelical Idea in my
brain Clearcus?


Cle. This is barbarous, to catch a Lion in your Toils, and bait him like an
Ass; -- thus to render my passion Rediculous, will beget Pandoras scorn, and
may prove my destruction.


Lon. If she discern not your passion, how can she proportion her favors to
your merit?


Cle. Do I deserve this mirth from you, thus to highten my affliction?


Lon. Do you not? -- all that I can do this Twelvemonth, will not bring me on
equal terms for thy abuses: -- remember how you held me to the Ladies, and made
me your mirth, by which scandal you destroyed my credit with the Princess, this
is my revenge.


Cle. 'Twas a great scandal indeed to procure you the Princess leave to love
her; by my means you have obtained a happiness beyond your hopes, which all
your whining Poetry, or your Eternal sighs could ever reach; -- for which
special service; -- prithee good sweet Lonzartes spare Hangs on him. me; -- by
our old Friendship I do beg; -- by thy own virtue, and unparalleled chaste heart,
I do conjure thee not to raise a public mirth out of my souls sorrow, which
you have brought me to.


Lon. Well then, if I find you do continue thus humbly penitent, and truly thus
afflicted, I will show more mercy then I found from you; -- come cheer up; --
we will sigh, and condole together, Embraces Clearcus. and if possible, so
order our sad hearts, that both may the same moment break, and infect the world
with such a sorrow, as may fright the female Sex from like rigor unto men; so
shall we become a Noble Sacrifice to love, for the good of a whole Nation; --
or if you please, we will send for some of our old Gang to dance, and drink these
Melancholy vapors from our hearts, to let the Ladies see, their beauties are
not so destructive, as we make them believe.

Clearcus Embraces Lonzartes with great joy.
Cle. I marry Lonzartes, now thou talkest like a Philosopher, now thou
prescribest the only remedy for our disease; -- Sanga, -- bid the Music
strike a cheerful Air, and then call in those Friends in the next room; --
Nay, if you allow this way of cure, I shall soon expel loves venom from my
heart into my heels.

Embraces Lonzartes.
Lon. What is all this Clearcus, art thou mad still?

Lonzartes starts back
Cle. I am wise, and do not mean to quit my cool, pleasant, flowery paths, for
your consuming flames of restless love, who walk on tops of Steeples, and at
that height, plead that your chaste desires are pleasing to the gods; -- But I,
who know the end of such fair flashes, as at first appear with such folded
Arms, and down cast looks, are but steps to approach the Ladies fingers ends;
--

-- Then by degrees grown bolder, you aspire,
Till naught but ruin, quench the subtle fire.
Enter Dancers.
Lon. What do thou mean by this misterious language?


Cle. I mean to follow thy advise, -- to sigh only when I make love to Ladies,
(their backs turned) I mean to dance, and sing as often as I can, that their
neglects may pierce no deeper then their eyes discern; -- here Lonzartes, this
Girl will cure the bite of a Tarantula, and drive the poison from thy heart.


Lon. Out Hypocrite; -- is this thy love unto Pandora? was all thy passion
counterfeit the other day?


Cle. No, 'twas fairly growing up to equal thine in all sincerity of Noble
thoughts; But the nice Lady would not permit it to take so deep root as yours,
before she blasted all my hopes, and in a moment let me see, that love is like
a bitter potion, which many taste, and flying away, rather choosing their
disease, then so ill a relished remedy; This made me return to my old Antidotes
Lonzartes; -- what think you of a heat or two before you go? -- call in the
Music.


Sil. Pandora was to blame, to throw him off so rashly.


Lon. Let us retire Silvander, this Air is infected.

Exeunt Lonzartes and Silvander.
Cle. Go whine fond lover, go whine, I say, go whine, While we cheer our hearts
with Wenches and Wine, I say go whine.

[Exeunt Omnes. Here they Dance. Enter Lonzartes, Lindamira, and Ladies.
Lin. I do not wonder that he is fallen off, it was what I feared, when his
passion went so high, I saw Pandora was concerned, but we will bring it on
again.


Lon. You are mistaken Madam, all he said then was jest, for he is now as mad
as ever; -- I left him Incirculed with six wild men, and as many wanton Girls,
prepared to dance and Revel all the night.


Lin. There is no harm in dancing my Lord, unless they do catch cold; you judge
Clearcus by what is past; but when I see him with Pandora next, I Will give my
opinion of his concern.


Lon. By what means may their meeting be procured?


Lin. We Will think on it.

Enter Theodocia, and Ladies to them.
The. I am sorry Lonzartes that Pandora has cast off Clearcus, which has
occasioned his relapse, when a little patience would have settled him in the way
of virtue.


Lon It Is every way what I expected not; his love was as strange as his
rejection, and his relapse in the old humor, beyond all the rest; -- I know
not what to think of him.


Lin. Let us bring them once more together, and I Will undertake to guess at both
their hearts; -- it may be govern 'um.


Lon. I Madam, but how shall they be brought together? when both would rather
see a Basaliske, then one another.


Lin. You may be mistaken my Lord, who judge by what you see, when it is our
business, and our virtue, not to show our hearts till a full trial, that men
are worthy of them; -- then you forget that Clearcus conversion, must be by one
he cannot conquer.


The. But if he will neither conquer, nor be subdued, how can his conversion
follow?


Lin. If your Highness can contrive an interview, I have a fancy in my head,
that may reconcile them, and effect what we all wish


The. I will send presently for Pandora, and entreat my Father to pretend some
business to call Clearcus hither.


Lon. He will suspect.


Lin. Let him come, no matter what he suspects.


The. Do you Lonzartes, once more see what humor he is in. --

-- We must endeavor, and not fear to try,
But trust the Event, unto their destiny.
[Exeunt severally. Enter Duke with Silvander and Lords.
Duke. I ever thought Clearcus did but mock, and laugh at their designs; his
brains is not yet ripe for serious love: -- But how does Theodocia look on
Lonzartes?


Sil. With much neglect Sir.


Duke. That is not well, have you Silvander instructed Lindamira, that she may
inform Theodocia of Lonzartes Title to this Dukedom? and how much better then a
Foreign Prince, her Marrying him, will be applauded by our people, who are not
ignorant of his pretense.


Sil. I have Sir, and the Princess gives a serious ear to it, though she yet
makes no reply; a little of your Council and Authority, I believe may incline
her to a better value of him.


Duke. That shall not be wanting; Lonzartes is all that I can wish in a
successor; -- and his love looks so without design, that I will cherish it, and
try to win my Daughter to comply.


Sil. Your Highness will gain a double interest in all your Subjects hearts by
this honor to Lonzartes, who has merrits proportionable to your favor, and
his birth, all which his love gives Luster to.


Duke. I see it Silvander, and will recompense his Faith, and his Humility,
with my advice to Theodocia, who yet knows not his story.


Sil. The Princess must needs hear what every body talks, and all do wish.


Duke. I shall now inform her fully of Lonzartes Right, too long held from him:
bid him meet me at my Daughters Chamber; I will no longer hide my purpose for
him: --

-- His Birth and Virtue, with his constant love,
Declares he never can unworthy prove.
[Exeunt.
THE FIFTH ACT.
Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus. Cle. NO, I Will never see her more.


Lon. Do you not love at all?


Cle. Nor ever will; methinks love is like a smooth water, that Invites men to
Bath, and tumble in it with delight, until they be destroyed by Serpents,
which in the bottom undiscovered lie.


Lon. What means this similie?


Cle. This Serpents bite, has Metamorphized you into a whining lover, into the
shadow of a man, of late become a shape without a Soul; why must I busy my
head with such Chymeras, when I can please my self to my hearts wish, my own
way? -- Prithee sweet suppressed Prince, do not forsake me thus, for specious
shows of happiness, or vainer hopes of better days, then you will ever find
in Court; -- You are now safe, but when you grow wise, and serious, it will in
the Dukes head great jealousies create; and to let him see your virtue, may be
dangerous, and your pretense appear worthy of his fear.


Lon. That hazard is better, then what I now suffer, in the opinion of my best
Friends, who believe this wildness is my Nature, or such as may beget a habit
in me, which I can never put off; and thus my security in this disguise, may
become my ruin; -- I wish I could persuade you Clearcus to show forth that
virtue, all the World would wonder at.


Cle. To what end I pray? if the good Duke would give me employment fit for his
Kins-man* and worthy of my Sword, I could soon be my self: But now I have
nothing else to do, and therefore play away my time in folly; and it is a hard
question which is best, for we know that too much wisdom does undo more men,
then it advances, or else begets eternal slavery to State Affairs, where the
wisest ever walk on needles points; -- I have weighed these things, and do
believe it is better to maintain the peace, and the security I now live in,
unregarded.


Lon. But you will loose the Dukes favor, and become contemptable to the whole
Court, if you continue thus Extravagant, what design can I have, by my desire
to see you great and glorious?


Cle. Have I not tried, and been misled? yielded to your wise Maxims, against
my own better judgment, and been rejected in the height of my Endeavors, to
be (as you call it) great, and glorious, is not this true?


Lon. Yes, in part.


Cle. I will no more of your advice, till you can cure your self.


Lon. I have an Honorable Argument for my love.


Cle. Who has not, until he be dispis'd?


Lon. Was it not your own desire to be neglected? did you not declare against
all women, that you could conquer? you left Pandora no way for victory, but by
rejecting you; so that I can conclude a good success from what you raise
despair.


Cle. Ha! think you Pandora did reject me, in compliance with my humor only?


Lon. What else? can she be angry with you, for loving her too much?


Cle. You do surprise me with a discourse I looked not for; -- but I will be no
more abused; -- I will not see her.


Lon. How can you be reconciled then? shall she make love to you?


Cle. No, I abhor that thought beyond her anger, a woman Woo, that were
preposterous.


Lon. Will you treat by Ambassadors, and wed by Proxy?


Cle. Nor so, that is only fit for Princes, who cannot meet to treat.


Lon. Will you have her; if she declares she would have you?


Cle. I shall never like her change of mind.


Lon. Can you tell whether you would have her, or not?


Cle. That Is a harder question, then the other.


Lon. Will you have her by compulsion?


Cle. That were a Tyranny, would make her hate me ever.


Lon. Shall the Duke by his Prerogative Power, in spite of both your teeth,
compel you both to compliance?


Cle. Let me think on this alittle, at first sight, this looks likely to agree
us: -- if two impossibilities can make one possible, this might do our business.


Lon. Well, what do you resolve?


Cle. Nothing, why do you tempt me to farther evils? -- I know not what to
resolve, nor what to say; -- but will no more of love, my heart shakes at the
thought of my last trial; -- I blush to think how much less then man I was, and
how much more then woman I created her in those few hours I loved; --

Enter a Messenger.
Messen. The Duke calls for Lonzartes.


Lon. I Will attend his Highness presently.


Cle. I take you for my Friend Lonzartes; -- do not discourse me into a Ruin,
you will share in.


Lon. I have no Rule for friendship above my desire to see you happy.


Cle. I believe it Sir, and beg your pardon for my distracted language; -- I
must attend the Duke to.


Lon. And I.

[Exeunt. Enter Pandora, and Lindamira.
Pan. You tire me Lindamira, and chide me for a fault I cannot own; I had no
other way to free my self.


Lin. You might have checked his approaches, with somewhat less severity, your
rigor may beget despair in him.


Pan. Despair of what? my undertaking was only on the Dukes command, to afford
him civil visits, which I have done in hope of his conversion.


Lin. You did give over, before the work was perfected.


Pan. You speak as if the design to set him free, were to inslave me to the
humor of a mad man.


Lin. The wildest young men, do often prove the soberest at the last; and the
truth is Madam, we do all desire to see you and Clearcus convert one another;
so to beget that unity of hearts, which the World seeks most.


Pan. Do you believe that I who have a prejudice against the best of men, can
e're esteem the worst?


Lin. If Clearcus were under that notion, I should have other thoughts; but
when I consider such men reclaimed, do often make good Husbands; I have hopes
of him.


Pan. If his wildness were his only fault, time, and experience might reclaim
him.


Lin. If these be your only Exceptions Madam, I wish you would trust me to
manage this affair.


Pan. You must not talk me into an Intreque which I avoid; -- I do not love him.


Lin You will do, when you have him, I know many have done so after Marriage,
who did not before.


Pan. That is too bold a venture for me, who have no faith in men; and those
Examples you mention so rarely to be found, my courage dares not undertake it;
pray no more of this.


Lin. The Princess desires your company at Court this Evening.

I did intend to wait on her.

Enter Duke, Theodocia, and Lonzartes.
Duke. I have given you Arguments enough on his behalf, which his dejected
looks you see declare; -- Your favors Theodocia should not be restrained,
because his adoration is so great, he dares not beg 'um; come near Lonzartes.


The. Lonzarte's Worth is understood beyond the weak Rhetoric of flattering
words; he cannot wish to be more valued, then he is by me


Lon. Nor will I ever Sue for favors beyond these you now afford me Madam; --
may I confirm my hopes, by understanding what you say my own way?


The. You may, for since my Father does so much advise for Marriage, I may
alter my opinion when I find just cause to value men, above my resolves against
them.


Lon. For Heavens sake Madam say no more, my breast cannot contain these
spreading joys you give me, my hopes increase too fast for my dispairing
heart, to comprehend these honors you allow, without an Extacy.


Duke. Theodocia, I shall never revoke the freedom I have given, to make your
own choice, though I direct you to Lonzartes, to whom our Ancestors have done
wrong.


The. This your indulgence Sir makes me more cautious how I proceed; --
Marriage is a concern so great, I dare not at once resolve it, and the same day
choose the man: -- -- I can yet only say, that I have altered my opinion in
favor of Lonzartes.


Lon. My Amazement, and my concern are too great to answer Madam, my felicity
is above the reach of a reply.


Duke. Theodocia, I have given you my best council, and my full consent to
please your self.


The. I thank you Sir, and will endeavor to Regulate my heart to your advise,
and to Lonzartes wish; -- give me but time to examine and approve what I am
willing to submit to.

Enter Pandora, and Lindamira to them, with Silvander.
Duke. How is it Madam, that you quit the field? before your undertaking be
performed.


Pan. I have done my part Sir, which was on your command to allow him civil
visits, and to entertain the Princess, I complied with Lindamira to try how our
Raleary would work on him, which did produce so unlooked for an effect, that I
was forced to quit my part, to save my self.


Duke. Were you in danger to be lost then? -- I did not think Clearcus had
prevailed so far; but if he be reclaimed, he will be worthy your esteem.


Pan. Your Highness did mistake me, I was in no danger to be lost through love,
nor at all concerned; for a man who does declare against all worth in women,
where he can get an interest: pray Sir, make me understand what you would have
me do?


Duke. We would have you marry Clearcus.


Pan. Whether he will or no; -- If I consent, can you prevail with him?


Duke. Do you comply, we will try what we can do?


Pan. I would not be Treypand into a Marriage I am so much a verse to, in
confidence of his old humor, think my self secure, and be so lost.


Lin. You may ventute safely Madam, you see he is so great a Coward, that he
only dares pursue them that fly him, do but charge and he will run away.


Pan. If I were sure of that, I would seem any thing to be freed from farther
trouble.


Lon. Trust me Madam, he is now worse then ever.


Duke. Lonzartes, pray use your interest to bring him to us now.

[Exit Lonzartes.
The. Do you think Cousin, we have a design to harm you?


Pan. No, but your Highness disputes me into a condition your self does not
approve; pray show me the way to this felicity, that I may credit what you say,
by what you do.


The. Will you then engage to marry Clearcus, the same day I marry?


Pan. Shall I choose your man, as you would mine?


The. Suppose I have already chosen.


Pan. I thought your Highness had been of my opinion; But if provided, I give
you joy.


The. Now you run too fast the other way, I am only toward marriage.


Pan. That journey seldom proves long Madam, when we look toward it.


Lin. That was said like a sage Sibell, the quintessence of truth in few words,
tis'but a willing mind, and then.


Pan Prithee Lindamira help me to be rid of this uncertain man.


Lin. I know no better council, then to be in love with him, or to seem so; for
if he should take you at your word, and marry, that may do your work; for I
once knew a Lady, who chose to marry an importunate Suitor, that she might be
rid of him, and was so; for soon after marriage they parted, and never met more.


Pan. You are always in jest, I would have serious council now.


Lin. You have had my store twice over to no purpose.


Duke. By all my observations, I cannot judge, whether Clearcus, or you
Pandora, be most extravagant.


Lin Your Highness may do well to put them into the College of half mad Folks,
where they will either cure one another, or become quite mad together; when
their disease is known, some remedy may be found; it is now past judgment, what
either of them ayle.


The. Lindamira says well, it is very strange you will not declare so far, as
to let us see how we may serve you.


Pan. Do but leave me to my self, and I am well Madam.


The. Many sick people are of that opinion, when in most danger, and must
therefore by their friends be governed.


Pan. As many healthy people, think themselves sick when they are not, and by
seeking remedies for nothing, do create evils, they never can find cure for;
-- such high passions as Lindamira's, do never let us rest in peace, but do
create perpetual storms.


Lin. You argue well Madam, if a dull calm, were the only happiness appointed
us on Earth, then one degree from being asleep, would prove our greatest bliss;
-- sure no age did e're produce two such Icy-hearted Ladies, as the Princess
and you.

Enter to them Lonzartes and Clearcus.
Lin. Here comes a Homely, and a Jigg hand in hand; -- now for the second part
to the same tune, Of love me, and love me not.


Duke. Clearcus, it troubles me to see you delight in a retired darkness, or
else to walk in such clouds as we cannot see through; I would persuade you to
regain Pandora's good opinion.


Cle. Is the mystery of love to be discussed in public Sir?


Duke. With us, who are so near ali'd unto you both; I think it may, because we
all know what you both profess in private, and now desire to hear, what you
will face to face avow; and we entreat you Pandora, first to show, why you
threw off Clearcus.


Pan. You do amaze me Sir, to examine me as a Criminal!


Duke You have no cause for this displeasure Pandora, but mis-judge our love
and our respects; we know your worth, and would to the World Illustrate that
virtue you design to smother by a single life; I allow your purpose did become
your younger days, and did express an Angelical Innocense; but I question
whether now, on mature judgment, you may not do better for your self, and us,
to reclaim Clearcus.


Pan. You demand impossibilites from me, for if I should change my mind, he
will change his too; Pray show me a rule to reclaim him by, before you do
condemn me.


Duke. We only desire you will afford him the same civility, as did first
induce him to adore that virtue he despised before.


Pan. I have done this.


The. You did begin, but you gave over too soon.


Lin And all her kindness but in jest too Madam, which he discerned.


Duke. How do you answer this? Lindamira was of your council.


Pan. I undertook him but in jest, and was by him enjoined to such severity as
I performed, and 'twas then thought the only way to vindicate our Sex, and to
work his conversion, which he at first did counterseit so well, as to deceive,
and fright me from his farther visits.


Lin. Was his love so terrible?


Pan. To me it was, who thought him incapable of ever having Noble thoughts for
any of our sex.


Duke. But when you found him growing worthy, why did you not cherish that
virtue, as your own Creation.


Lin Because she feared her Virgin-vow might be defiled, by owning such a
Man-child of her own begetting; for he began to ask her blessing, till she
laughed him into so great anger, that one day he proffered to kill himself,
which gave end unto our Comedy.


Pan. If his cure had lain within the reach of Raleary I had gloried in my
part, but never shall consent to inslave my self unto the humors of a man, who
cannot be a minute in one mind; his imaginations are beyond the Moon, and would
have he knows not what.


Duke. Clearcus you have heard your charge; -- Guilty or not Guilty?


Lin. Guilty Sir.


Cle I shall never want your good word Madam; -- Lindamira tells you true Sir,
I am guilty.


Duke. Of what?


Cle. Of all the crimes, that offended Lady does object; pray Sir pronounce my
doom, and put me out of pain.


Duke. Will you submit then, and obey it?


Cle If it can put me out of pain, I will?


Duke. I doubt it not; -- my Sentence is, that you revive that love you showed
unto Pandora lately.


Cle. Oh Sir, the very name of love, puts me into a shaking fit; for Heaven
sake, give me Halters, Poisons, Daggers, any means to let out life, rather then
renew those torments which I felt that hour I loved.


Lin. Pray Sir, give me leave, to put him some Interogatories.


Duke. Do so.


Lin. Your Lordship has confessed, that you have loved one hour, and must have
some reason why you loved no longer; show us that reason, or for ever hold your
peace, and submit to judgment.


The. How Clearcus, nonplust by a Judge in Petticoates?

Clearcus stands mute.
Lin Why Madam? many of our Sex have pussled the wisest men; -- give him leave
to think a little; -- but if what I have said, has struck your Lordship dumb,
hold up your finger, -- it is He holds it up enough; -- He has nothing to say
for himself, but submits unto the mercy of the Court; -- I understand him Sir;
-- and have now found a remedy for both their evils; -- If you will trust me
with your hand my Lord, I will not harm it: -- and Clearcus gives his hand. if
I have credit enough Madam to be trusted with your hand too, pray lay it
without fear on mine, that I may try a charm I have, to conjure out the evil
Spirits that possess you both; -- you may at your own pleasure, take back your
hands; -- only let me hold 'um, while I pronounce my charm within.

Pandora turns away.
Duke. Pandora I entreat you to try Lindamira's charm, give her your hand, she
deals not with the Devil.

Pandora gives her hand
Lin. The Devil I work by Sir, is truth, dressed in her rich robe of Innocence;
-- if truth do not convince both these Delinquents, my charm will have no power
on them; -- My Lord you have in this great Assembly, often said, that you could
never value any woman you could win; -- if now you have found this Lady as
impregnable as you can wish, she is your fate; -- hold Sir, remember He
proffers to speak. you are dumb, till I have done; -- Now Madam, I must speak
serious sense to you, who stand here the expectation, and the wish of all the
Court; -- yet I know you must not consent to give your hand to him, nor in a
look, or word comply, with what I say; for if you yield, Clearcus will forsake
the Field; -- I shall therefore only put your hands together, no marriage, nor
no contract make, only desire that you will thus hand in hand retire a while
with me in private, to apply my charm, who now do pray, that all the evils
which ever did befall the most unhappy lovers, may light on him, or you, that
shall their hand remove, before my charm does work; now come with me.

[Exeunt hand in hand.
Duke. What the issue of this will be, I cannot guess; -- Now Theodocia, I must
remind you of Lonzartes, who dares not approach you on his own behalf, who is,
what you can wish, to make you happy; and I do again invite you to Crown his
unparalleled humility with a bliss, he presumes not once to mention, least it
offend you; I have also a State Argument you understand not Theodocia, your two
interests in this Dukedom, thus united, will make it flourish; -- Lonzartes has
been wronged.


The. I know his wrong Sir, and have observed his sufferings, or I had never
dallied with his love; Lonzarte's clear soul is adorned with more glories, then
this Crown will bring him.


Duke. If then your hearts agree, give me your hands; -- here Lonzartes is the
best reward I have, to encourage modesty and worth, when they do in one heart
combine, as now in thine.


Lon. Great Sir, I am so much surprised, so overloaden with my joys, that I
have naught but blushes to express my gratitude; -- nor know I how to welcome
this unlooked for honor from the Princess, who dains to raise her humblest
Servant from her feet, to set me on a Throne, incirculed with more joys, then
that you now restore me to.

[He kisses her hand.
The. Keep still your Character Lonzartes, as I will mine, high transports in
love are not long lived I fear.


Lon. I shall be Madam, whatever you direct, though this unlooked for
happiness, do raise my heart above my own command, for such an excess of joy,
is hard to manage.

[Kisses her hand. Enter Lindamira.
Lin. I may now wish your Highness Joy I hope, now your Fannatick love,
conforms to the Law of Nations; -- Now you may talk your pleasure against high
passions Madam; -- and methinks you Sir, do look as if you liked this better
then that wise Sect of ayrie lovers, whose Philosophy does teach not to desire,
what they can never reach.


Lon. You are Madam the best Philosopher I ever met, and do deserve to have a
Golden Statue in Loves-Temple set.


Duke. But how have you disposed of your Fantastic couple? it is that great
work must Crown all your undertakings Lindamira.


Lin. That goes on excellently well Sir, I have left them sitting on a Couch,
with their hands still fixed, eagerly gazing on each other eyes, as if through
them they could discern the inside of each others hearts; by their no motion,
and their stedy looks, I can foresee they will be of one mind suddenly.


The. Why could not we see this Experiment?


Lin. Oh Madam, my charm will not work in company; lovers will seemingly
despise, what they like most, only to deceive observing eyes; I believe they
held off thus long, for shame to own what they had so publicly declared
against, and to themselves will hardly dare to let their hearts appear these
two days; -- they must look themselves into an Argument, for no words can ever
reconcile their first Principles.

If their hands, do not their hearts discover,
I Will no more pretend to charm a lover.

The. May we not peep at the hanging, and stand unseen.


Duke. Let us not turn this serious work into a jest, unless Lindamira do
approve it; none shall stir that way.


Lin. I can place you so, as you may see and hear too.


The. Pray Sir be pleased to look on them, our Testimony may be of use.


Duke. Come then.


Lin. Your Highness must stand silent, or you will hinder my Projection.


The. We will, we will.

[Exeunt. They all Re-enter behind the Couch, and stand on each side of the
Stage; then is discovered Pandora, and Clearcus holding hands, and sitting on a
Couch, a while silent, looking on each other; then Clearcus proffers to kiss
that hand he holds, she puts him back with her other hand, and turns her face
from him, -- He sighs: --
Cle. Turn not away those beauteous lights have guided me to Heaven, nor look
as if you were in pain to see my heart thus changed from a rude Destraction, to
an Ecstasy of bliss; from a deformed Satyr, with a confused Chaos of dark
thoughts, and blacker actions, by your glorious beauties, and brighter virtues,
new formed into the Figure of a man, Emulating those Excellencies I admire in
you: -- Oh turn this way, and own what is your own Creation, by your
perfections raised from what was worse then nothing, to something now, too
worthy to be cast away; I should this happy hour believe my self were in in
Elysium; did not this fair, soft hand, and those bright eyes assure me I yet
live; from whence some divine instinct teaches my rude nature to adore, what I
never understood before.


Pan. I do not like to be thus long left alone, to be exposed unto your
passion, and the worlds censure; Lindamira has deceived my trust; -- I now see
your plot, and her design descover, but will no longer suffer the abuse.

[Offers to rise.
Cle. Be not so cruel unto your self and me, think on the curse hangs over us,
if we remove our hands till she return.


Pan. It Is too much foolery, to give faith too.


Cle. Remember we complied to what she said; by which her words are Registr'd
in heaven, and have engaged the gods by our consent.


Pan. 'Twas rashly done, and I repent; -- when will this subtle Sorcerress
return? my innocense will justify my blind consent, to which I was misled by
my fidelity and trust, and will no longer fear to take away my hand.

[Offers to rise.
Cle. Oh take not your hand away until the holy Charm have rectified your
heart, and therein created so much charity, as in a moment may remove your
scorns, and teach you love; for I, who so long slighted your neglects, and fled
all civil favors from your Sex, do now tremble at the thought of parting
hands, until our hearts like them, become united.


Pan. Do you believe Lindamira Mistress of such Magic? that her words have
power to reconcile dissenting hearts, like ours.


Cle. Yes, I find them work on me, and hope same effect on you, else why sit we
here obeying those commands she left? why fear we to offend those powers she
did invoke? -- when you consider this, I hope you dare not stir a finger
toward such impiety.


Pan. Though Lindamira's virtue be approved, I was surprised by her enticing
words, and by the Duke compelled to do, I know not what; -- and therefore will
no longer now obey.

[Offers to rise; He holds her.
Cle. Stay, oh stay, and let the fatal curse strike me alone; my guilts have
merrited what e're can fall on me; -- Do but command me to remove my hand, and
I Will obey; that you may see how much your power prevails, above my fear of
Lindamira's threats; If so, I may divert your harms; I will against my Nature
and my Faith destroy all hopes of future bliss, to pull this ruin on myself,
which else may light on you; -- Say, must it be?

[Pandora sits silent awhile.
Pan. If I command your hands remove, and her curse should after follow you, my
unblemished Innocense may suffer more then all your crimes can merit; -- I
have no faith in charms, nor cause to apprehend her curses can reach me; and
yet; --

-- My doubts and fears, my reason does dismay,
I know not what to do, nor what to say;
The Wonder is so great, I am afraid,
[Aside. Some god this Serpent, has an Angel made,
And now endowed him with Celestial Art,
To force obedience from my stubborn heart.

Cle. It Is worthy your consult, before you do destroy a body and soul; here a
ready Sacrifice to set you free, for now I find that Lindamira's charm does
higher work.

And now again, that dazzling light display,
Which did my heart inflame the other day:
Ye gods, I do implore your power to move,
[Aside. The bright Pandora, to allow my love;
'Twill be the same, if now Clearcus dies,
By Thunder struck, or by Pandora's eyes.

Pan. Lindamira's virtue, and her wit, are much more powerful, then her charms;
-- (which I contemn,) but you my Lord, have now by chance thrown out such
words, I shake to think on; -- Your body and your Soul are now at stake you
say; -- and by your looks I read, you think our Fortunes and our Fates, depend
on my reply; -- and so do I; -- this is then too great a work, for so few
minutes to dispatch; we must look up Clearcus, and from above seek aid: --

It Is piety, when we our hearts submit,
To undergo, what e're the gods think fit.

Cle. It Is so, let us hasten to the Temple then, there Celebrate: --

[They rise up. This happy issue of so strange contest,
Wrought by the gods, must by the gods be blessed.
He Kisses her hand, three or four times in Joy.
Cle. Where is this powerful Sibell gone? whose Sacred Charms do dis-inchant
fantastic hearts.


Lin. I am here Sir, with witness enough, to hold Pandora to her word.


Cle. Let me adore thy Divine virtue Lindamira? who has showed such skill, to
raise dead folks to life; for we were dead in follies, and are now become true
converts Sir.


Duke. This is great News, you are both well come to your wits again, which
does declare Lindamira a great Artist.


The. What says Pandora for her self?


Pan. I have both ways done too much, either to excuse or justify my self;
silence becomes me Madam.


Lin. Let the clock strike twice, before we credit what they say, or else make
all sure, by I Clearcus take thee Pandora, etc.


Duke. Lindamira is my Oracle; -- give me your hand Pandora, and yours Clearcus.

May they most wretched live, and cursed dye,
Who shall this knot endeavor to untye.

The. My prayers concur with yours Sir, and now dear Cousin, what I wished is
come to pass, that you and I might on the same day be Married.

Thus for our good, we see the Gods fulfill
What they design, though much against our will.

Pan. Your great Example Madam, is sufficient to lead me from all my own
resolves to follow you, and if now Clearcus be reclaimed, we must own all our
happiness to Lindamira's wit, who has conquered both, when neither of us could
subdue the other; And now Clearcus I hope will seek occasions to show the World
by his own actions the Noble Stock he is Descended from.


Cle. By your permission Madam, I shall set my heart toward my Prince his, and
my Countries Service; -- I beg employment Sir, on the next Galleys you send
out, least idleness corrupt my busy brain.


Lin. Mark that Sir, he is already wavering; Madam take heed how you take the
spirit of uncertainty, (in the habit of a man.)


Pan. You speak too late, the uncertain man, is now my certain fate.


Cle. Some diversions are necessary Madam, to look on the same objects ever,
dulls and tyres the best eyes; but Lindamira can say nothing, I dare contradict.


Duke. You shall command in Chief Clearcus, to show the world the vigor you
have too long hid.


Lon. Joys on joys, light on Clearcus head.

[They Embrace.
Cle. May those joys be Multiplied on yours Sir; my Redeemer, and now become
my Prince.


Duke. We must conclude this happy day Lindamira, by joining Silvanders hand
with yours, if your mirth will give us leave to be so serious?


Lin. That is a serious jest Sir, I have long looked for.


Duke. Come near Silvander; -- which of you two is most pleased now?


Both. I Sir.


Duke. Who spoke first?


Both. I Sir.


Duke. This is a good Omen to a joyful life; may you be both as happy as ever
love made any.


Sil. We are happy to our wish Sir.


Lin. He speaks for himself Sir, on hopes of more then he may find.


Duke. We Will Celebrate these weddings suddenly, and see that Lindamira's praise
be in loud Hymenealls sung through all the City, to encourage the like
Virtuous, and Noble undertakings.


Lin. I thank your Highness for your good opinion, but shall love you for this
gift of my Silvander, above all your other favors; Now Silvander.

Let us dwell Arm in Arm, and daily show
Our loves increase, that all the World may know
Our hearts; Now the fair Princess does confess,
That Wedlock may afford True Happiness.

EPELOGUE.
LADIES, our Author has so great Respect
To Your Fair Sex, he fears some gross Defect
In his best Characters, may prove so short,
Of Your perfections, he needs pardon for it.
If such sad fate, do now attend his Play,
In's Cloak, thus muffl'd, he will sneak away;
But You like't, he will on tip-toe go,
That all the World, may the proud Author know.
FINIS.

