blazon or coat of arms

Vera Effigies Richardi Kilburne Armigeri Topographiae Cantianae Authoris

Aetatis suae 52. 24. September 1657

J. Crose sculp



A TOPOGRAPHIE, OR SURVEY OF THE COUNTY OF KENT.

With some Chronological, Historical, and other matters touching the same: And
the several Parishes and Places therein.

By Richard Kilburne of Hawkherst, Esquire.

Nascimur partim Patriae. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb for Henry Atkinson,
and are to be sold at his Shop at Staple-Inn-gate in Holborne, 1659.

TO THE NOBILITY, GENTRY and COMMONALTY OF KENT.
Right Honorable, etc.
YOu are now presented with my larger Survey of Kent (promised in my Epistle to
my late brief Survey of the same) wherein (among several things) (I hope
conducible to the service of that County) you will find mention of some
memorable acts done, and offices of eminent trust borne, by several of your
Ancestors, other remarkable matters touching them, and the Places of
Habitation, and Interment of many of them. For the ready finding whereof, I
have added an Alphabeticall Table at the end of this Tract. My Obligation of
Gratitude to that County (wherein I have had a comfortable subsistence for
above Thirty five years last past, and for some of them had the Honor to serve
the same) pressed me to this Task (which being finished) If it (in any sort)
prove serviceable thereunto, I have what I aimed at; My humble request is; That
if herein any thing be found (either by omission or alteration) substantially
or otherwise different from my aforesaid former Survey, you would be pleased to
be informed, that the same happened by reason of further or better information
(tending to more certain truths) than formerly I had. Those differencies, and
the rectifying of the same, are contained in a parcel of this Tract (toward
the end thereof) which I now added; That thereby Correction may be made of my
former Survey, which will be more conveniently portable (for ordinary use) than
this. What is found defective herein, be pleased not to impute to wilful
error; But either to misapprehension, or misinformation (both which I
endeavored to avoid) And as to the distances of Parishes (herein specified) be
pleased to know that I mean the same by a straight line from Church to Church,
taking the Station for the view at Newenden, being the middle of the South Side
of the County, as they stand in that best Map thereof extant, made by Master
Phillip Symonson (sometime Resident therein) which I the rather doubt not to
call the best for that (by comparing the same with others) I find it so to be;
and the like Character (in effect) was long since set upon the same, by that
Learned, Judicious and Laborious Gentleman, William Lambard, Esquire, whose
Monument of Piety and Charity, in this County Directory to the peaceable
Government of the same, and painful and able performance of his Perambulation
thereof, have rendered and will perpetuate his Memory Famous. The last whereof
has left very little matter of addition (but much of imitation) both for my
self, and all others that shall succeed him in works of this nature, which was
the principal cause that I endeavored brevity herein, being unwilling too far
to lengthen this Tract with repetition of what has been better set forth by
others, though in works of this nature all ingenuous persons know, much use
must be made of the labors of our Predecessors. (There being no other way to
enable treating of matters long before our being) Now that the Errata's of the
Press may first be corrected by what is at the end of this Tract (for that
purpose) prepared, before the Tract be read, and that (in reading the same)
other smaller errors of the Press may also be corrected, and that the
passages herein may be well weighed, before censured, and the veil of love
cast over what is (either in truth or in the Readers conceit) defective, or
mistaken, is the humble desire of.

His Countries and your Servant, Richard Kilburne.

The Contents of this Book.
A General description of Kent. page 1. A particular description of the
several Parishes therein Alphabetically. page 8. A description of Canterbury.
page 300 The two divisions of Kent, and how to divide each of them from the
other in any Map of the County page 303. The five Laths and several divisions
of Justices in the same, viz. Sutton at Hone. page 304 Aylesford. page 307
Scray. page 310 St. Augustine. page 313 Shipway. page 315 The Bailiwicks and
extents of the same Alphabetically. page 319 The hundreds and extents of the
same Alphabetically. page 330 Towns (not being hundreds) having Constables of
themselves, and the extents of the same Alphabetically. page 348 The Liberties
in Kent, and extents of the same, and directions of writs of Habeas Corpus and
Sheriffs Warants to the same Alphabetically. page 351 The direction of Writs of
Habeas Corpus to the City of Canterbury. page 357 The Principal Rivers in
Kent, and the courses of them. page 366 The Corporations in Kent. page 369 The
Market Towns, and days of the Markets. page 370 The Months and days of the
same^ when the Fairs are kept. page 371 The Attendants at the Assizes. page 373
The days of the Quarter Sessions and Attendants at the same, viz. The West
division page 375 The East division. page 376 The Diocese of Canterbury, and
the Deanrie and Parishes in the same Alphabetically. page 377 The Di^cess of
Rochester, and the Dea^ries and Parishes in the same Alphabetically page 380
The Saints to whom the Churches were dedicated Alphabetically. page 382
Parishes ending in one termination Alphabetically. page 386 The Sheriffs of
Kent in the last five Centuries. page 388 The Judges, days and places of
Assizes in the last Century. page 398 Directions to amend my former Brief
Survey of Kent. page 415
A TOPOGRAPHIE: OR, Survey of the County of KENT.
THis County of Kent is situate at the South East part or corner of England,
and is bounded to the River of Thames toward the North, to the German Ocean
toward the North and East, to the narrow Seas toward the East and South, to
the County of Sussex toward the South and West, and to the County of Surrey
toward the West.

The length thereof (in a straight line) from the West part of Leusham to the
East part of Saint Peter's in Thonet is about 52. miles. But in the middle
length thereof from the West part of Bra^ed to the East part of Ringwold; it is
but about 47. miles.

And through the middle of this County from Newenden-Bridge in the South, to
the furthest part of the Isle of G^ean in the North, the breadth is about 27.
miles.

The circumserence of the County is thus, viz. from the West and of Dep^ford,
to the East end of the North Foreland in the Isle of Thanet, (round by the
river of Thames and the Sea) (being the North side of the County) is about 61.
miles, but in a straight line, the same is but about 51: miles.

From thence about to the corner of Dengenesse (being the East side) is about
38. miles, But (in a straight line) the same is but about 31. miles.

From t^ence about to the end of Cowden (being the south side) is about 39.
miles, but in a straight line, it is but about 33. miles.

And from thence about to the aforesaid end of Dep^ford (being the west side)
is about 24. miles, but in a straight line the same is but about 21. miles.

So the whole circum^erence (round about this County) is about 162. miles, but
in the straight lines aforesaid, the same is but about 136. miles.

I find several derivations of the names of this County, viz. of the ancient
name Cantium, and the now name Kent, but (with submission to better judgments)
I rather adhere to their opinion, that conceive the names to be derived from
the situation of the place (viz. in a nook or corner of England, anciently
called a Kant or Gantel.)

The Inhabitants of this County were sometimes called Eskins, which name arose
by Eske (second King of Kent) reigning over them many years, but (his memory
vanishing) the name also vanished.

The air of this County (other than the weald, and the marshes and places
adjacent thereunto) is accounted very healthy; but the marshes, for the most
part unhealthy, and the weald, and places adjoining to the marshes not
generally so healthy as the most part of the rest of the County.

The commodious situation of this County may justly compare with (if not
exceed) any other part of the Nation (the same being situate near) (but some
little distance from) London (the chief City) and the Thames (that Sovereign
River of Britain) watering the North side thereof about 33. miles in length:
The German and narrow Seas, watering the North East, and South sides thereof
about 73. miles in length, and the River of Rother likewise watering the South
side thereof about 11. miles in length.

It also having several good rivers and rivule^s in the bowels of the same,
and more especially (toward the West parts thereof) Ravensborne watering the
same 9. miles, Cray 8. miles, and Darent 16. miles; famous Medway toward the
middle (spreading it self into several branches) waters the same about 85.
miles, and Stoure toward the East parts thereof (likewise spreading it self
into several branches) waters the same about 60. miles; By which Rivers most
of the most eminent places of this County are watered, and navigation
maintained to the principal of them.

How far this County is otherwise equal to (if not excelling) any other County
of this Nation, I shall offer to the Readers judgment these considerations.

First, Concerning Religion, I know that Glastenbury in the County of Somerset
does pretend (and not pretend only) that about the 31th. year after the death
of Christ, 12. of the Disciples of the Apostle Philip (of which Joseph of
Arimathea was chief) came into this Nation, and tendered the knowledge of
Christian Religion to Arviragus then King thereof) (which though he consented
not to embrace) yet he permitted them to have a Church at this Glastenbury, and
there began the plantation of Christian Religion in this land (which being
admitted) yet it likewise appears* That (for many years) the same had but
little success of en^^^ale and no King of this Nation embraced the same, till
King Lucius (who reigned about 150. years afterward, and built a Church in
Dover Castle in this County, for the exercise of Christian Religion, from
whence may be inferred, that that Religion was the embraced here, But most part
of the Nation revolting from that Religion, and becoming Pagans till the year
596. (In the time of the Heptarchy) Augustine the Monk was sent from Pope
Gregory, to convert this Na^ion to the Christian faith, and first landed in
this County, and converted and baptized many of the people of the same, and
likewise converted Ethelbert, (then King thereof) who upon Whitsunday in the
year 597. was by him here baptized, was the first Christian Saxon King, and
this County was the first County that generally received the Christian faith;
afterward Edwin (King of the Northumbers Marrying from hence Edelburg
(Daughter of the said King Ethelbert) Paulinus (afterward Bishop of Rochester)
went from hence with her into her husbands Kingdom (for the conversion of the
people thereof) where in some part he prevailed, but in the year 633. ( Edwin
being slain) that people revolted from that Religion, and Paulinus was forced
to return again hither, and Christian Religion was again (as it were) confined
to this County, Nor were succession of Christian Bishops in this Nation (other
than of Canterbury and Rochester (both in this County) for many years
afterward, and instrumentally from thence sprang the after-conversion of the
rest of the Nation to the Christian faith; But the co^version of the West
Saxons (with in whose Dominion Glastenbury was) was not till about 40. years
after the conversion of this County (At which time Kingils their King was
converted and baptized by Byrinus an Italian Bishop.

This County (as before appears) had in it two Bishops Seas (one whereof,
viz. Canterbury, was the Primate and Metropolitan of all England: And his
Church very anciently called the Nurse and Metropolis of the same) By which,
and by what is hereafter said, may be collected that the rise of that common
proverb (Kent and Christendom) was not (as vulgarly mistaken) that Kent was
conceived diffinct from Christendom, but that it was famous as Kent, and
famous as Christendom.

Secondly, Concerning the ancient dignity and considerableness of this County:
In the time of Julius Caesar (about 1700. years since) it was in Four petty
Kingdoms, governed by Four Kings (viz. Cingetorix, Cavilius, Taximagulus, and
Segonax.)

Afterward King Vortigern (about 1200. years since) set over the same a
Guorong or Viceroy.

Afterward, this was the first of the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, and no one
County of England had a King of it self but this (whose Kingdom began about
the year 455. and continued about 372. years, in the succession of 17. Kings.)

By that learned Antiquary Mr. Camden, it is called the key of England, and in
it is Four of the Cinque ports of this Nation (viz. Sandwich, Dover, New
Romney, and Hith) as also that famous Castle of Dover, the confiderableness
whereof Phillip King of France well weighing, when (in the time of King Hen.
3.) Jews his son, had took diverse towns and fortes in England, and hearing
that he could not take this Castle (the same being valiantly defended by Hubert
de Burgh) protested that then his son had not one foot of land in England.

Thirdly, The civility of the people (still treading in the steps of their
Ancestors) who in the time of the aforesaid Julius Caesar were by him
accounted, and so styled, the most civilized people of all this Nation:

Fourthly, For the ancient valor of the people of this County, they claim,
and are allowed the front in Battles. And they only of all England obtained
and reteyne the name of VNCONQVERED: For (as if all the ancient English valor
were remaining in them) they only resisted King William the Conqueror, (when
all other Counties submitted) and (capl^ulating with him) reserved to
themselves and their posterity, their ancient Customs and Liberties.

Fifthly, Which is the next confideration offered, viz. Generally the tenures
of the lands in this County, are (if not the freest) yet as free tenures as any
in England.

Sixthly, The royal Navy usually riding in the Downs of this County, in which
County also are those three famous Shipdocks of Deptford, Woolwich, and
Chetham; in the two first whereof, the principal part of the Royal Navy is
usually repaired, and in the last, the same is usually also repaired, and laid
up.

Seventhly, Four houses lately belonging to the Kings of England, viz. East
Greenwich, Eltham, Otford, and Dartford.

Eighthly, The several good commodities for the use of man, with which it is
richly furnished and famous for, viz.

1. Plenty of Fowl and Fish of all sorts (by advantage of the aforesaid Seas
and fresh Rivers.)

2. Fertile lands, for feeding cattle of all sorts (and more especially those
famous levels of Romney, and Walland Marsh.)

3. The Drapery of this County, which has here continued for above three
hundred and twenty years; toward which the bowels of this County are well
stored with Fullers earth, and many fulling mills not far distant from the same.

4. The Fruit (plentifully sent from hence to the chief City, London, and
places adjacent.)

5. The great plenty of grain (of all sorts) growing therein, and more
especially in the North, and East parts of the same.

6. The Plenty of wood, but more especially in the Weald, wherein also are many
Iron mills, floring with Iron London, and the other places adjacent

Some Chronologers affirm that King Alfred divided this Nation (and among the
rest this part thereof) into Shires, Counties, or Provinces; but that is
controverted by others, and alleged that it was so divided shortly after the
inhabiting of this Island, and in the tra^^^ of the time of King Ina (which was
above 180. years before King Alsred) there is ^^ntion of Shires, and so that of
King Alfred may (as to this purpose) be only some plaine^ de^^ription of the
former division; And for this County, it appears (by what is before) That the
same was a distinct Province many hundred years before King Alfred was borne
(^ut his subdividing the same into hundreds, and them into Boroughs or (...) is
not denied.

(Before the time of this King Alfred) about 1000. years since (In the time of
E^comber^ the 7th. King of Kent) Honorius Archo^shop of Cant^rbury divided that
^ingdome into Parishes. And 45. Edward the 3. (upon occasion of raising a great
sum of money for aid of the King for the wars in France, by a Parochial tax
throughout England) the number of the Parishes therein were examined, and in
this County sound to be 393. Of so many whereof as are now extant, as also of
those which have been since added (being in all 404.) I shall now proceed to
treat Alphabetically.

ACRYSE.
Lies toward the South-East part of the County, by the River S^oure, about
one mile and a half (toward the South-East) distant from Eleham, in the
Bailiwick of of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath; It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese
of Canterbury; The liberty of Eleham claymeth over so much thereof as is in the
upper half hundred of Loningborough, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury claymeth over the Manor of Brandred in this Parish; Part thereof is
in the hundred of Folkstone, and the residue in the hundred of Loningborough;
The Church stands in the hundred of Loningborough, and was called Saint
Martin.

ADDINGTON.
Lies toward the middle of the West part of the County by the river Medway
about one mile and a half (toward the North West) distant from West Malling,
In the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkfeild, Lath of Aylesford, West division
of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the
Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rothester, and the Church was called Saint
Margaret.

ADISHAM.
ADesham, Eadesham, Edesham. Lies toward the East end of the County, about
four miles and a half (toward the East) distant from Canterbury; In the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Pe^ham, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the
County, and Division of Justices in that Lath: It was in the Deanery of Bridge,
and Diocese of Canterbury; The Manor of Adisham was in the year 616. given by
Ethelbald (son of King Ethelbert to Christ-Church Canterbury, was anciently a
hundred of it self, and (afterward coming to King Henry the 8.) he 33^. of
his Reign gave the same to that Church, and the liberty of the late Dean of
the Church aforesaid claymeth over the same but the liberty of Saint Augustine
claymeth over the whole Parish (the same being in the hundred of Downhamford,
which belongs to that Abbey) and the Church was called Saint Innocents.

ALCHAM.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, about 3. miles (toward the
West) distant from Dav^r, in the Bailiwick of Stowing, Hundre of Folkstone,
Lath of Shipway^ East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that
Lath, it was in the Deanery of Dovar, and Diocese of Canterbury, the liberty of
the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there, and the church was called
Saint Authony.

ALDINGTON.
ALdintune, lies toward the South-East part of the County, about four miles
and a half (toward the South-East) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick, and
Lath of Shipway, East Division of the County, and Division of Just^ces in that
^ath, it was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, the liberty of
the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there. But I find not this
Aldington among the Nomina villaram of that liberty; But do find that Thomas
(Archbishop of Canterbury) 2^. Martij 31^. Henry the 8. by deed (enrolled in
the Office of augmentations 32. Hen, 8. fol. 10) granted that Manor to that
King, and King Charles granted the Manor house and farm lands thereunto to
hold of his Manor of East- Greenwich in free Soccage. Part of this Parish is
in the hundred of Bircholt Franchise, and the residue in the hundred of Street,
the Church stands in the hundred of Street, and was, called Saint Martin.

In the time of King Hen. 8. There were two Parsons of this Parish much
different for repute. Erasmus of Roterodame, most eminent for Learning, and
Richard Master, infamous for adhering to Elizabeth Barton (of this Parish)
called the holy Maid of Kent) in treasonable practices, for which they two, and
five others, were (by Parliament 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 12) attainted of Treason, and
executed at Tiburne in April in that year, and six others attainted of
misprison of Treason.

The Archbishops of Canterbury had here a fair seat, upon repairing and
augmenting whereof, John Morton ArchBishop (in the time of King Henry the 7.)
bestowed much money.

In this Parish also was a Chapel (dedicated to the Virgin Mary) and called
the Chapel of our Lady of Court at Street.

ALL HOLLOWES.
ALl Saints lies at the North side of the County, near the Isle of Greane, in
the Bailiwick, and hundred of Hoo, Lath of Aylssord, West Division of the
County, and North Division of Justices in that Lath, it, was in the Deanery, and
Diocese of Rochester, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth
there, and the Church was called All Saints.

ALLINGTON.
ASlington, lies toward the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about
one mile (toward the North) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Hoo,
Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and
South Division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of Maidstone claymeth over
the same. It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, there are
ruins of an old Castle (where Sir Thomas Wyat Thelder, built a fair house)
The Castle was anciently built by the Noble Family of Columbarij: (in the time
of the Saxons) afterward razed by the D^nes, and (after the conquest)
rebuilded by Earl Warren, from whom it came to the Lord Fitz-Hughes, and by
his Daughter and heir to Sir Giles Astington (of whom both it and the Parish
took the Name) but before it was called the Castle of Medway; Sir Stephen of
Penchester (Constable of Dovor Castle in the time of King Edward ^.) was (for
some time) owner of this Castle, and built there a fai^e Tower called Solomen's
Tower.

St. ALPHAGE.
PArt of this Parish ( viz. the Borough of Stapl^gate otherwise Stablegate) is
in the County of Kent, Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate,
Lath of St. Augustine; East division of the County, Division of Justices in
that Lath, and liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, but the Church is
in the County of the City of Canterbury, and the whole Parish was in the Dean^y
and Diocese of Canterbury.

APLEDORE.
APuldore, Apuldre, Apultree, Apeldre, lies at the South Side of the County,
by the River Rother, about four miles and a half (toward the South-east)
distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the seven hundreds, part thereof (
viz. upon the Ree wall to Red hill) is in the liberty of the Town and Port of
New Romney, and division of Justices of that Town and Port, and the residue is
in the hundred of Blackborne, some small part whereof is in the liberty of
Romny Marsh, and division of the Justices of that Corporation, but the residue
of this Parish is in the lower division of Justices in the Lath of Scray, in
which Lath all the faid Parish is: it likewise is all in the West division of
the County, was in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Peter and Paul.

A Fare is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Barnaby (being the Eleventh day
of June.)

The Liberty of the I to Dean of Cunterbury claims over the Manor of
Apledore, which was given to that Church (as some affirm) by Edsinus
Archdeacon there in the year 1032. in the time of King Canutus, but others
affirm, that that King gave the same to that Edsinus to the use of the said
Church; and the same (afterward coming to King Hen 8.) he (33. of his Reign)
again gave the same to that Church.

This Liberty claims over all the parish (except so much thereof as is in the
Borough of great Kenarton) and has in it at Court Leet, extending it self,
over two Borought ( viz. Town-borough and Hoth-borough) the Borsholders thereof
are there chosen, (and not at the Court Leet holden for the Hunderd of
Blockborn) nor do the inhabitants of these Boroughs ow any service to the Court
Leet of the said Hundred (only at that Court a Constable may be chosen out of
either of those Boroughs for that hundred) in this parish stood a small Castle,
which in the year 892. (in the time of King Alfred) was taken and demolished by
the Danes, and (...) thereof, they there built and fortified a bigger, but what
became of the same afterward, I find not, only it is probable that the same
was ruined by the French, who 10th. August 13^0. burnt the Town and (by
tradition) upon the ruins of that Castle the present Church was builded (the
situation whereof renders the same probable.)

The Liberty of St. Augustine claymeth in this Parish, and the Marshes, about
the Town were inned in the year 1349.

ASH near SANDWICH.
Lies toward the East End of the County, about two miles (toward the West)
distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham, Lath of
St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath; the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there; it was
the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Nicholas, which Church (until the year 1282) was a Chapel to Wingham, and
Richborough was anciently a Chapel to this.

In this Church are, or lately were many ancient monuments, and memorials of
the interment of several ancient Families (viz Goshall and Liverick Knights,
Septvans, St. Nicholas, Harfleet, Clitherow, and Kiriell.

ASH near WROTHAM.
Lies toward the West side of the County, about three miles (toward the
North) distant from Wrotham, in the Bayliwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of
Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper
division of Justices in that Lath; it was in the Deanery and Diocese of
Rochester; the Church was called St. Peter and Paul, and the liberty of the
Duchy of Lancaster claymeth in this Parish.

ASHERST.
Lies at the South-west edge of the County, (adjoining to Sussex) about five
miles (toward the South west) distant from Tunbridge, in the Bailiwick of the
Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of Wachlingstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division
of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the
Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, and the liberty of the Duchy of
Lancaster claims at Chaford in this Parish.

The Church was once famous for a Rood or Crucifix miraculously growing (as was
pretended) of which who so desires to read more, I refer him to Mr. Lamberts
Perambulation in Ashyrst.

ASHFORD.
EShetisford, Echetiford, Etishford, Eshford, lies toward the South-east part
of the County, by the River (anciently called Eshe or Eshet) now Stoure, about
three miles and a half (toward the South) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick
of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and
division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

In this Parish is a pretty Town, wherein a Market is kept upon every Saturday,
and two Faires yearly, viz. one upon the day of St. John Port Latin (being the
sixth day of May) granted by King Edw. 4. in the fifth year of his Reign, to
the Dean and Chanons of St. Stephens Westminster (then owners of the Manor of
Ashford) and the other upon the day of the Decollation of St. John Baptist
being the nine and twentieth day of August.)

In this Town also is kept a Court of Record (upon every Tuesday three weeks)
sonactions, wherein the debt or damages exceed not twenty marks: the
jurisdiction of which Court extends it self over the Town, and all the
Parish. (except the Borough of Henwood, alias Hewet, over which the Liberty of
Wye claymeth) And the Borough of Rudlow (over which the Liberty of the late
Dean^ of Canterbury claymeth.) The aforesaid Town and Liberty of Ashford, have
a Constable of their own, but the rest of the Parish is in the hundred of Chart
and Longbridge. This Parish was in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of
Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Town, was called Saint Mary's, and was a Collegiate
Church founded by Sir Robert Fogg (a Knight of this County) who also founded a
College there (consisting of a Preb^nd and Priests) and in this Church are
interred several Knights, and others, of that ancient Family: In the same also
was interred the Countess of Atholl (about. 282. years since, The monument
whereof is or lat^ly was there remaining.)

The Lord of the Manor of Ashford, ought anciently to have repaired the house
in the corner of D^vor Castle, toward the long wall, next the Posterne.

In the night of the first of May 1580. here hap^ned a great Earth quake, which
much aff^ighted many of the inhabitants, and caused them to arise out of thi^
beds.

AYLESFORD.
EIlesford Ailesford, Ailsford, (...), Episford, Anglesford Aeglest^orpe
Eglesford. And in the British Langua^^ (...), Lies toward the middle of the
County by the River Medway about three miles (toward the North West) distant
from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of
the County, and South Division of Justices in that Lath.

That part of this Parish which lies at the North-side of the said River, is
in ancient Demesne, and has a Constable of it self, But the South side of the
Parish at the other side of the River (viz. the Manor of Preston and Milhale)
is in the hundred of Larkfield, the Church stands in ancient Demesne, was
called Saint Peter, and given by King Henry 1. to the Church of Rochester.

This Parish was in the Deanery, and Diocese of Rochester, the liberty of the
late Bishop of Rochester claymeth in the same, the liberty of Maidstone
claymeth over Milhale aforesaid; and a Fare is kept yearly in this Parish, upon
Saint Peter's day (being the 29th. day of June.)

The Manor of Aylesford is by some said to have been given by King Henry 3. to
Richard Lord Gray of Codnor, but I find that it was allened from the Crown
before the time of that King, for that in the time of King John, Osbert Gipford
was owner thereof; however it was once parcel of the Demesnes of the Crown,
Is to this day called ancient Demesne, and that Lord Gray in the year 1240.
founded there a house of White Friars Carmelites, to the honor of Saint Mary;
Which afterward came to be the habitation of Sir William Sidley) (who about
the year, 1607 (partly as executor to his brother John, and partly at his own
charge) erected an Hospital in this Parish for six poor people (each to have
10l. per. annum) the building whereof and the lands thereunto is said to have
cost 1800l. he likewise bestowed much charge upon the Bridge there.

In this Parish Vortimer King of Britain (about the year 454.) fought the
Saxons, and in that battle Catigern (brother of the said Vortimer) and Horsa
(brother of Hengist the Saxon Commander) in single fight slewea^h other, in
memory of which Catigern, a Monument of stones was there erected by the
Britains, and is now vulgarly called Kits, Cothouse: And in the year 892. King
Elfred fought and routed the Danes at Fernham in this Parish.

BADLESMER.
Lies toward the North-east side of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the South) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray,
East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the
liberty of St. Augustine (...) over the fame (for that it is in the hundred of
Feversham which belonged to that Abbey) A Fare is held here yearly upon the day
of St. Leonard (being the sixth day of November) this Parish was in the Deanery
of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Leonard.

Sir Hugh Crequer was (in the time of the Conqueror) Lord of Badlesmer, and
one of the eight chief Captains, or Lieutenant Governors of Dovor Castle
(under John Lord Fynes.)

BAPCHILD.
Lies toward the North-side of the County, aebout one mile and a half
(toward the South-ast) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Milton, Lath of Seray, East division of the County, and upper division of
Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sit^ingborne, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Laurence.

BAREFRISTON.
Lies in the East-part of the County, about five miles (toward the
South-West) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath
of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sandwieh, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Mary's.

East BARMING.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles
and a half (toward the South-West) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of
Eyhorn, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County,
and East division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Malling,
and Diocese of Rochester, the liberty of Maidstone claims over the same, and
the Church was called St. Margaret.

West BARMING.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about three miles
(toward the South-West) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhor^e,
Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East
Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Malling, and Dioeess
of Rochester, the liberty of Maidstone claymeth over the same, and some part
only of the ruins of the Church is remaining, but that there was such a Church
and a Churchyard to the same (near the Court-lodge there) is yet visible.

BEAKESBORNE.
Lies toward the East part of the County, by the River Stoure. About two
miles and a half (toward the East) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick
of Bridge and Petham, Lath of Saint Augustine, and East Division of the County,
it is a member of the Town, and Port of Hasting (and so was in the time of
King Richard 2. and it is in the Division of the Justices of that Town and
Port (the liberty whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same) it was
in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called
Saint Peter.

BECKENHAM.
Lies at the West part of the County adjoining to Surrey by the River
Ravensborne, about two miles (toward the West) distant from Bromley, a small
part thereof is in Surrey, and so much thereof as is in Kent, is in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, hundred of Bromley and Beckenham, Lath of Sutton
at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that
Lath, it was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, the liberty
of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth there, and the Church was called Saint
George.

BENENDEN.
Lies toward the Middle of the South Side of the County, about three miles
(toward the South-east distant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the Seven
hundreds, Laths of Scray, West Division of the County, and lower division of
Justices in that Lath, so much thereof as is in the Borough of Benenden is in
the hundred of Rolvenden, so much thereof as is in either of the Boroughs of
Hevenden or Ibornden is in the hundred of Barckley, so much thereof as is in
the North Borough, is in the hundred of Selbrittenden, and so much thereof as
is in the Borough of Crothall is in the hundred of Cranbrook, it was all in the
Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury; The Liberties of the late Dean of
Canterbury, and Saint Augustine claim in the same; The Church stands in the
hundred of Rolvenden, and was called Saint George, in which is a monument of
the ancient and eminent Family of Guldeford of Hempsted (near unto the
foundation of whose house here ( viz. at a place called the Merry-tree) is
reputed the highest place of any in that part of the Weald of Kent) and in this
Church is likewise a memorial of the interment of Moore (sometimes Lord of the
Manor of Benenden) The Steeple of this Church stands off from the same, and
is of rare and remarkable workmanship in the inside thereof, The same standing
very high, having a long spire or shaft, and the foundation thereof (for a
small part only of the height of the same) being of stone, and all the rest to
the top of Timber of exceeding great bigness, very full, and rarely compacted.

BERHAM.
BEreham, Barham. Lies toward the middle of the East part of the County, by
the River Stoure, about three miles and a half (toward the North-east)
distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St.
Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath;
the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, it was in the
Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. John
Baptist (in which are interred a Knight, and several others of the Family of
Diggs, a Family of great esteem in this County.)

Berham was anciently a Hundred, but is now in the Hundred of Kinghamford.

Julius Caesar about 54. years before the birth of our Savior (after his
conflict with the Britains upon their opposition of his landing) encamped at
Berham Down; here also (in the year 1212.) King John encamped with 60000, men
in opposition of the French (who prepared to land nere that part of the County)
where also (most unworthily) he then consented to resign his Crown to
Pandulphus the Popes Legate, likewise here (in the time of King Hen. 3.) Simon
Earl of Leicester (General of the Barons Army) prepared a very numerous Army
against that King.

In the year 809. King Kenulphus gave to the Archbishop and Church of
Canterbury 7. plough-lands in Berham, afterward (in the year 824.) Wulfred the
Archbishop gave to the said Church two Manors, in exchange for the same, and
(in the year 830.) Werhard (a powerful Priest) gave to that Church 36.
plough-lands here (formerly taken from the same.)

BERSTED.
Lies near the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles and
a half (toward the East) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorne,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices
in that Lath; part thereof is in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and the residue in the
Hundred of Maidstone, it was all in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of
Canterbury, the Church was called Holy-Cross, and star^eth in the Hundred of
Eyhorne* A Fare is kept there yearly upon the day of the Exaltation of the Holy
Cross (called holy R^^d day) being the fourteenth day of September.

BETHERISDEN.
BEatriciden, lies toward the South Side of the County, about four miles and
a half (toward the South-west) distant from Ashford; so much thereof as is in
the Boroughs of Hales, Bridge, Eng^ham, or (...), is in the Hundred of
Blackborne, Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, and West division of the County,
and the residue thereof (being part in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and
part in the Hundred of Calehill) is in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge,
and East division of the County, it is all in the Lath of Scray, division of
the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and was in the Deanery of Charing, and
Diocese of Canterbury, the Church stands in the Hundred of Chart and
Longbridge, and was called St. Bea^rice, In which are the arms of Surenden (a
principal inhabitant in this Parish in the time of King Edw. 2.) and owner of
the seat there, called Surenden (now the habitation of Chute, a Family of good
esteem in this County) the liberties of St. Augustine, and the late Dean of
Canterbury do claim in this Parish, the liberty of Wye claims over the
Borough of Snodehill in the same, and a Fare is kept yearly in this Parish upon
St. Margarets day (being the twentieth day of July.)

BETSHANGER.
Lies at the East Side of the County, about two miles and a half (toward the
South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of Eastry, Lath of
Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices, in that
Lath, the liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth there, it was in the Deanery of
Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and Sir Robert Potch. (one of the eight
chief Captains or Lieutenant Governors of Dovor Castle, under John Lord
Fynes, in the time of the Conqueror) was then Lord of the same,

BEWSFEILD otherwise WHITFEILD.
Lies at the East part of the County; about three miles and a half (toward
the North) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, hundred of
Beusborough, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division
of Justices in that Lath, the liberties of Saint Augustine, and the late
Archbishop of Canterbury claim there; It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter.

BEXLEY.
Lies toward the North-west part of the County, by the River Cray, about two
miles (toward the south-west) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton Dartford, hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of
the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery
of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury) but in the
Diocese of Rochester, in the time of King James that famous and learned
Chorographicall describer of Britain William Camden, Clarenceux King of Arms,
Founded an History Professor in Oxford, to which he gave the Manno^^ of Bexley.

BICKNOR.
Lies toward the north part of the County, about four miles (toward the
North-west) distant from Leneham; part thereof is in the Bailiwick and hundred
of Eyborne, Lath of Aylesford, and West Division of the County, and the residue
is in the Bailiwick and hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, and East Division of
the County; it is all in the East Division of Justices, in the Lath of
Aylesford, was in the Deanery of Sittingburne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and
the Church stands in the hundred of Eyhorne.

BIDBOROUGH.
Lies toward the South-west part of the County, about two miles (toward the
South west distant from Tunbridge, in the Baliwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge,
hundred of Wachlingstone, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and
South Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Malling, and
Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Laurence.

BIDDENDEN.
Lies toward the South part of the County, about four miles and a half
(toward the North-East) ^istant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the seven
hundreds, Lath of Scray, West Division of the County, and lower Division of
Justices in that Lath, So much thereof as is in the Boroughs of Ibornden,
Worsenden, Heveaden, Omenden Stepherst, or Wachinden, is in the hundred of
Barckley and the residue thereof (being in the Borough of the outbounds of
Smiths Ditch) is in the hundred of Cranbrook. the Borsholder of the aforesaid
Borough of Worsenden, is chosen at the Court Leet holden at Boreham in this
County, and the Borough of Wachinden has a Court Leet of it self holden in
this Parish, at which the Borsholder to that borough is chosen; So that neither
of these two last Borsholders are chosen at the Court Leete holden for the said
hundred of Barckley, Nor do the inhabitants of these boroughs attend at that
Court, but at that Court Leete may be chosen a Constable of that hundred, out
either of those boroughs?

The Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth in this Parish.

The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth over the Denns of
Biddenden, and Spelherst (as held of the Manor of Sherland.

The Liberty of Wye claymeth over the aforesaid borough of Wachinden.

And the Liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury claymeth over so much of this
Parish as is in the Manor of Godmersham.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Charing and Diocese of Canterbury.

A Fare is here kept yearly upon the day of Simon and Jude (being the eight and
twentieth day of October.

The Church stands in the hundred of Barckley, was called all Saints, and the
North Chancell thereof is reputed to have anciently belonged to the Family of
Mainey (owner of the house in the twne called the place) and afterward to
Henden (owner of that house from Mainey;) at the North side of that Chancell,
is a very ancient monument of John Mianey Esquire, but it appears not there
when he died; at the South Side of that Chancell is a monument of John Mainey
Esquire (who died high Sheriff of this County the 21th of May, 1566. and of
Wildegos, who died the first of September. 1541.

In the middle, or great Chancell, are memorials of the interment of Evernden,
Allard, and several Randolphs, and in the wall of the great window there
(toward the South) is a monument of one other of that Family of Randolph.

In the South Chancell are memorials of the interment of, Fleet, Boddenden,
and Seyliard.

And in the East window of that Chancell are the arms of Moyle (sometimes one
of the Justices of the Common pleas, the Free-schoole in this town was founded
by Mainey about the year, 1522.

BILSINGTON.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, near Romney Marsh, about
four miles and a half (toward the South East) distant from Ashford, in the
Bailwick and Lath of Shipway, hundred of Newechurch, and East division of the
County: the liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and Romney Marsh,
claim there; so much thereof as is not in the liberty of Romney Marsh, is in
the Division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and the rest is in the
Division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh; It was all in the
Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury; a Fare is kept here yearly upon
the feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist called Midsommer day (being the
24th. day of June) and is vulgarly called Woodcock Fare.

The Church stands out of the liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called Saint
Peter and Paul.

A Priory (of Black Canons of the order of St. Augustine, and dedicated to the
Virgin Mary) was in the 31th. year of King Hen. 3. here advanced by Sir John
Maunsell (Chief Justice and Lord Keeper of the great Seal in the time of that
King) of which Maunsell I find that he was Treasurer of the Church of York,
Provost of Beverley, Chaplain to the said King, and (by reason of his spiritual
promotions) could dispend yearly 18000. marks.

This Priory was (in the 26th. year of King Hen. 8.) valued at 81l. 1s. 6d. per
annum, Edmund Staplegate (Lord of the Manor of Bilsington did (by reason of
his tenure of the same) stand in competition with Richard Earl of A undel and
Surrey, for the office of chief Butler, at the Coronation of King Rich. 3.

BIRCHINTON.
BIrchingstone, lies at the North east side of the County nere the Sea, in the
Isle of Thaner, about six miles (toward the North) distant from Sandwich, in
the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of
the County, it is a member of the Town and Port of Dovor, and within the
division of the Justices of the same, the liberty of St. Augustine claims
there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much
thereof as is in the Manor of Brokesend (being given to that Church by King
Hen. 8. in the 33th. year of his Reign) but the liberty of the Cinque Ports,
and of the aforesaid Town and Port, claim over the same; it was in the Deanery
of west Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury.

In the time of King Hen. 8. it was questioned to be assessed to the Subsidies
(as lying in the foreign) but (to take away the question) that King, by
letters patents united the same to Dovor.

Gorend is in this Parish, and anciently had a Church standing at the Sea side,
but the decay of the Cliffe nere thereunto ruinated the same, and forced the
inhabitants to build the Church now standing (which was called All Saints.

Anciently this Parish was called sometimes Birchington in Gorend, and at other
times Gorend in Birchington, but now they are all one, and most usually called
Birchington.

This Gorend is conceived to have been the first place that was united to
Dover, and has so been ever since the time of King Edw. 1.

BIRLING.
BEarlinges, Berlinges, lies toward the middle of the County, by the River
Medway, about two miles and a half (toward the North) distant from west
Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford,
West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it
was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called All Saiuts.

Here is a fair seat anciently belonging to the Lord Aburgaveney, and formerly
to the Lord Say, and this Parish ought anciently to have joined in reparation
of the ninth Pere or Arch of Rochester bridge.

BISHOPSBOURN.
Lies toward the East part of the County by the River Stoure, about three
miles (toward the South-east) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and Petham (anciently in the Hundred of Berham) but now in the Hundred
of Kinghamford, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County and division
of the Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of
Canterbury, the Church was called St. Mary's, and the liberty of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Bishopbourn.

BLACKMANSTONE.
Lies toward the South-east side of the County, in Romney Marsh, about three
miles (toward the North) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the County, and division of
Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof claims over
the same) it was in the Deanty of Limpne, and Diocese of Conterbury, but the
Church is demolished.

BOBBING.
Lies toward the North-side of the County, about one mile and a half (toward
the West) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Leth of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that
Lath, the liberty of St. Augustine claims there, it was in the Deanery of
Sittingborne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Bartholomew (which Church was by King Hen. 3. in the 18th. year of his Reign,
granted to the Monastery of St. Mary, and St. Sexburgh in Sheppey, and
confirmed by King Hen. 4. in the first year of his Reign.

In this Church were interred an Esquire of the Family of Clifford, and several
Knights of the Family of Savage (most of which persons were so interred above
200. years fince) and a Fare is kept here yearly upon the day of St.
Bartholomew (being the 24th. day of August.)

BONNINGTON.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, near Romney Marsh, about five
miles (toward the South-east) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and Lath
of Shipway, Hundred of Street, and East division of the County, the liberty of
Romney Marsh claims there, and so much thereof as is in that liberty, is in
the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, an^ the rest
is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, it was all in the
Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church stands out of the
liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called St. Romwald.

Here was a Court Leet usually holden for the Boroughs of Bonington and Hamme
(at which the Borsholde^s of those Boroughs were elected) but the same has
been discontinued for about 77. years last past, only the memory thereof is
continued, by a great old Oak standing in the highway (at the place where that
Court was usually kept) and called the Lawday Oak.

BORDEN.
Lies toward the North-side of the middle of the County, about two miles
(toward the South-west) distant from Milton, in the Balliwick and Hundred of
Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of
Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul.

BOREHAM.
BVrham, lies toward the Middle of the County, by the River Medway, about
three miles and a half (toward the South) distant from Rochester, in the
Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery
and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Mary's.

BOUGHTON ALUPH.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, by the River Stoure, about
one mile and a half (toward the North-west) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick
of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, the liberty of Wye
claims over the same, it was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints.

BOUGHTON under the BLEAN.
BOctune, lies toward the North-east part of the County, about two miles and
a half (toward the South-east) ^istant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and
Lath of Scray, Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, East division of the
County, and upper division of Justices in that La^h, it was in the Deanery of
Ospringe, and Dioce^s of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and
Paul, in which Church are, or lately were memorials of the interment of Colkins
and Best (all about 200. years since) and the liberty o^ the late Archbishop of
Canterbury claims over the Manor of Boughton under the Blean.

BOUGHTON-MALHERBE.
BOcton Malherbe (conceived to be so called from the bad herbage proper to the
place) lies very near the middle of the County (...) one mile and a half
(toward the South) (...) ^eneham, in the Bailiwick and hundred (...) of
Aylesford, West division of the Coun^y, and East division of Justices in that
Lath, it was in the Dea^ry of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Nicholas.

Here is, and for long time has been, the seat of the noble Family of Wootton,
many of which were interred in the said Church, and one of them so interred
(viz. Sir Nicholas Wootton) was twice in sixteen years Lord Major of London
(viz. in the years 1416 and 1431.)

Near unto the aforesaid seat, the Castle of Colbridge, was (in the time of
King Edw 3.) founded by one Colbridge (a person then of eminency in this
County, and in the time of King Edw. 4. the same was given to Saint Stephens
Westminster, and the Archbishop of Canterbury was sometimes owner of the
Manor of Boughton M^lberbe.

BOVGHTON-MONCHELSEA.
VVlgarly called Boughton Quarry (in respect of the good Freestone there
dug and wrought) lies toward the middle of the County, about three miles
(toward the South) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Eyborn, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of
Justices in that Lath, the liberties of St. Augustine, and late Dean of
Canterbury claim there, it was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter.

BOXLEY.
BOxle, Boxele, lies near the middle of the County, about two miles (toward
the No^th) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn, Hundred of
Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of
Justices in that Lath, the liberty of Maidstone claims over the same, it was
in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church was called All
Saints, and the same was (by King Henry the first) given to the Church of
Rochester.

In this Parish upon Penenden (vul^grly Pickenden) Hoth is the Courthouse
where usually the County Court is holden.

In the year 1144. William of Ipre (Earl of Kent) founded here an Abbey (to
the honor of the Virgin Mary) for white Monks (of the Cistercian order)
brought from Claverail in Burgundy, and King Richard the first (in the first
year of his Reign) gave the Manor of Boxley to that Abbey (which Abbey (at
the suppres^ion) was valued at 204l. 4s. 11d. per annum) the Lord of the
Manor of Boxley ant^ently repaired the house in Dovor Castle next to the old
gate, or Port.

Those that desire to read the story of the Rood of grace, and of St. Rumwald,
in this Abbey; I refer them to Mr. Lomber's Perambulation in Boxley (where the
same is declared at la^ge.)

This Rood, and the falsity thereof was (upon Sunday 24th. Febr. 1538.) showed
openly at Paul's Cross London, and then, and there broken, and pulled in pieces.

BRABORNE.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County about four miles and a half
(toward the East) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick of Ch^rt and
Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and Division of
Justices in the Lath of Shipway, part thereof is in the Hundred of Bircholt
Barony, and the residue (viz. the Borough of Cocklescomb) is in the Hundred of
Wye, and the liberty of Wye claims over the same, it was all in the Deanery of
Elebam, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church stands in the hundred of
Bircholt Barony, and was called St. Mories, in which are interred several of
the ancient and eminent Family of Scot (one whereof was Controller of the
household of King Edw. 4. and another was a Knight buried about 300. years
since) there also was inter^ed Sir Robert Gower, and one Pashley (of a Family
of great Antiquity at Tiseherst in Sussex.)

BRASTED.
BRadestede, lies at the West Side of the County, n^er Surrey, about one mile
and a half (toward the North-east) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Ho^e, West division of the County, and lower
division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof (viz the Ville of Brasted) has
a Constable of it self, and the residue is in the Hundred of Westram and
Eatonbridge, it was all in the Dean^y of Shorebam (a peculiar to the late
Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Dioces^ of Rochester, the Church stands
in the Ville aforesaid an^ a Fair is kept here yearly upon Ascension day,
called Holy Thursday (being the Thursday sevenight before Whit sunday.)

BREDGATE.
BRadgate, Bredgar, lies toward the North part of the County, about two miles
and a half (toward the South-west) distant from Miltoit, in the Bailiwick and
Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper
division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and
Diocese of Canterbury, the Church was cal^ed St. John Baptist, and was made
Collegiate about 250. years since (at which time a College was there founded
by Robert of Bredgar, Thomas Ioseline, and John at Vies.

BREDHERST.
Lies toward the middle of the North part of the County, about four miles
(toward the South-east) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick and Hundred
of Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division
of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims
over so much thereof, as is in the Manor of Hollingborne, it was in the
Deanery of Sutlon, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Peter.

BRENEHLEY.
Lies toward the South-west part of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the North-west) distant from Goudherst, in the Bailiwick of Twyford,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South Division of Justices
in that Lath, part thereof is in the Hundred of B^en^hley and Ho^smanden, other
part thereof is in the Hundred of Twyford, and the residue (viz. the Borough of
Rugmerhill) is in ancient Demesne of Aylesford; It was all in the Deanery of
Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, the Church stands in the hundred of
Brenchley and Horsmanden, and was called All Saints.

BRENZET.
Lies toward the South-east side of the County in Romney Marsh, about four
miles (toward the North-west) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and
Lath of Shipway, and East Division of the County, part thereof ( viz. upon the
Reewall is in the liberty of the Town and Port of New Romney, and Division of
Justices of the Corporation of that Town and Port (the Liberty whereof, and of
the Cinque Ports claymeth over the same) and the residue is in the Hundred of
Ayloesbridge (over part of which residue the Liberty of Romney Marsh claymeth,
and that part is in the Division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney
Marsh, and the other part of that residue is in the Division of the Justices in
the Lath of Shipway, the Liberty of the Late Dean of Canterbury also claym^th
in this Parish, it was all in the Deanery of Limp^e and Diocese of Canterbury,
The Church stands in the Liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called Saint
Eanswyth.

BRIDGE.
BRegg, Lies toward the East part of the County, by the River Stoure, about
two miles and a half (toward the South-east) distant from Canterbury, in the
Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petha^^, Lath of Saint Augustine, East
Division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath, the Liberty of
Saint Augustine claymeth there, it was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint. Peter.

BROMFIELD.
Lies very near the middle of the County about two miles and a half (toward
the West) distant from Lene^am, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyborne, Lath
of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East Division of Justices in
that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called Saint Margaret.

BROMHILL otherwise PROMHILL.
Lies at the South part of the County, adjoining to the sea, about three miles
(toward the South-west) distant from Lid, most part thereof is in the County
of Sussex, but so much of the same as is in the County of Kent, is in the
Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, and liberty of the Cinque Ports, by the late
Charter of those Ports, it is said to be a member of the Town and Port of New
Romney, but is claymed by the Corporation of ^id to belong to them, it is in
the East Division of the County, and division of the Justices of that of the
two Towns of New Romney or Lid, that has right to the same, the Church is
demolished But stood in Sussex; it was anciently a pretty Town and much
resorted unto, but (about 370. years since in the reign of King Edward the
first) the sea drowned the same.

BROMLEY.
BRomlege, Lies at the West part of the County, near ^urrey, by the River
Raventhorne, about eight miles (toward the South) distant from London, in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Bromley and Beckenham, Lath of Sutton
at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that
Lath, the Liberty of the Late Bishop of Rochester claymeth over the same, it
was in the De^n^y of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called Saint Peter and Paul, a Market is kept here upon every Thursday, and two
Faires yearly, viz. one upon the day of Saint Blase (being the third day of
February) and the other upon the day of Saint James (being the five and
twentieth of July.)

King Edgar (about 700. years since) gave Bromley to the Church of Rochester,
and here was a Mansion house of the Bishops of that Sea.

BROOK.
BRoe, Lies toward the South-east part of the County about two miles toward
the South) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge Hundred
of Wye, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and ^ivision of Justices in
the Lath of Shipway, it was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury,
and the Church was called Saint Mary's, the Liberty of Wye claymeth over the
same, and the liberty of the late De^ne of Can^erbury claymeth over so much
thereof as is in the Manor of Brook (which Manor was anciently a hundred
of it self, and con^erred on that Church by King Henry the first (having been
formerly given thereunto by Karlemane a Priest) and the same was afterward
confirmed to the said Church by King Henry 2 and afterward (coming to King
Hen. 8.) he 33^. of his Reign, again gave it to that Church.

BRUCKLAND.
BRookland, l^eth at the South-east part of the County, about three miles and a
half (toward the West) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shipway, Hundred of Aloe^bridge, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Augustine, the liberty of the late
Deane of Canterbury claymeth there, and the liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth
over the Rectory of the same, a Fair is kept in this Parish yearly upon the
day of Saint Peter ad vincula, called Lammas day (being the first day of
August.)

BUCKLAND near DOVOR.
Lies at the East part of the County, by a River arising near thereunto, about
one mile and a half (toward the North-west) distant from Dovor, in the
Bailiwick of Stowting, ^ath of Saint Augustine, Hundred of Be^sborough, East
Division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath, the liberties of
the late Archbishop of Canterbury and Saint Augustine claym there, it was in
the Deanery of Dovor and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint
Andrew, a Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Saint Bartholomew (being the
24th. day of August) and the Parsonage was about 300. years since appropriated
to the Priory of Dovor (with the con^en^ of Simon Is^ip then Archbishop of
Canterbury.)

BUCKLAND near FEVERSHAM.
Lies toward the North part of the County, about three miles (toward the
West) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division
of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of
Saint Augustine, claymeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of
Feversham which belonged to that Abbey) and the liberty of the late Dean of
Canterbury claymeth over so much thereof as is within the Manor of Copton; it
was in the Deanery of^ Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury.

BVRMARSH.
BOroughmarsh, lies at the South-east part of the County, in Romney Marsh,
about three miles (toward the South-west) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick
and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the County, and
division of the Justices of the corporation of Romney Marsh, (the liberty
whereof, claymeth over the same) and the Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth
over the Manor of Burmarsh, This Parish was in the Deanery of Limpue and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints.

CAPELL near FOLKSTONE.
CApell Fern, lies toward the South-East part of the County, near the Sea,
about two miles, and a half (toward the North-east) distant from Folkstone, in
the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Folkstone, Lath of Shipway, East Division
of the County, and Division of Justi^ices in that Lath; the Liberty of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, claymeth there, it was in the Deanery of Dovor, and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Mary's.

CAPELL near TVNBRIDG.
Lies toward the South-West part of the County, about three miles (toward
the East) distant from Tunbridge, Part thereof is in the ^a^liwick, and Hundred
of Twysord, and the residue in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, in the
Hundred of Wa^hlingstone, and Hadlow B^rough; It is all in the Lath of
Aylesford, West Division of the County, South Division of Justices in that
Lath, and was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester; The Church
stands in Hadlow-borrough, and was called Saint Th^mas the Martry.

CHALK.
CHealkes, lies at the North part of the County, near the River of Thames,
about two miles and a half (toward the East) distant from Gravesend, in the
Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the
County, and North division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery and
Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Mary's (in which William
Martin Esquire (a good Benefactor to the same) was buried about 240. years
since) and the Tithes of this Parish were given to the Church of Rochester by
King Hen^y the first.

CHALLOCK.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, about two miles (toward the
North-west) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of
Felborough, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath
of Shipway, the liberties of Wye, and the late Death of Canterbury so claim
there, that what thereof is not in the one Liberty is in the other, the Leeze
is in the liberty of the said late Dean, and the Churchyard is part in that
liberty, and part in the liberty of Wye, all this Parish was in the Deanery of
Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church was called St. Cosmus, and
Damianus, and founded by one Apuldorefeild (whose arms are, or lately were in
the windows of the same) a Fair is kept here yearly (within the liberty of
Wye) upon the day of St. Cosmus and Damianus (being the seven and twentieth day
of September.)

CHARING.
CHerring, Cerringes, lies toward the South-east part of the County, about
four miles (toward the South-east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick of
Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Cale^ill, Lath of Scray, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and the liberty of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Gharing, this Parish
was in the Deanery of Charing, and Dioce^s of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul (which Church about the year 1590.) was much impaired
by fire, and the monuments of Brent (an ancient Family here) desaced, but the
arms of Hugh Brent Esquire (of that Family) do, or lately did remain carved in
the stones of the Belfree (which in the time of King Edward 4.) he founded (the
same being before of wood) Amy Brent (about the time of King Rich. 3.) built
the Chapel at the South Side of the Chancel there (which Chapel likewise was
much impaired by the said fire) but the same (with the ancient house of the
Brents in this Parish) coming afterward to the Family of Deering, it was by
them repaired.

Charing was very anciently belonging to the Archbishops of Canterbury, and
taken from Iannibert (Archbishop there) by King Offa (about 880. years since)
and about the year 789. (at the request of Aethelward the Archbishop) was
restored again by King Kenulphus, and Archbishop Morton (about 160. years
since) much repaired and augmented the house here, belonging to that Sea

Two Faires are yearly holden in this Parish, viz one upon the day of St.
George (being the 23. day of April) and the other upon the day of St. Luke
(being the 18. day of October.)

CHARLTON near DOVOR.
Lies at the South east side of the County (by a Rivulet arising near
thereunto) about one mile (toward the North) distant from Dovor, in the
Bailiwick of Stowting, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County,
part thereof is within the liberties of the Cinqu^-Ports, and Town and Port of
Dovor, and division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the residue is
in the Hundred of Bewsborough, and division of Justices in the Lath of St.
Augustine, the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims in this
Parish, it was all in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, the
Church stands in the hundred of Beusborough, and was called S. Peter.

CHARLTON near GREENWICH.
Lies at the North-west part of the County, near the River of Thames, about
two miles (toward the West) distant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton-Bromley, Hundred of Black Heath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division
of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the
Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Luke, a Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Luke (being the
eighteenth day of October) and vulgarly called Horn^^ Fair.

GREAT CHART.
CErt, lies toward the South-east part of the County, about two miles
(toward the South-west) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick of Chart and
Longbridge, Lath ^f Scray, East division of the County, and division of
Just^ces in the Lath of Shipway, it was anciently a Hun^red of it self, but now
part thereof is in the Hund^ed of Chart and Longbridge, and the residue in the
Hundred of Calehill, the libe^ty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims
over Chelmanton Borough, and the liberty of the late Dean of C^^terbury
claymeth over the Mannou^ of Great Chart (being given to the same by King Hen.
8. 33^ of ^is Reign) This Parish was all in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese
of Canterbury, the Church ^^andeth in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and
was called St. Mary's, in which is, or lately was, a memorial of the interment
of John Took of Goddinton in this Parish Esquire (there buried above 140. years
since)

The Family of Engeham (of Singleton in this Parish) was of good repute in
these parts (four of which, viz. Allen, Richard, Robert, and Moses) I find
succeeded one another as heirs, and lived 329. years ( viz. the two first each
79. years, Robert 85. years, and Moses 86. years)

In this Church also are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of
several Goldwells (there buried about 200. years since) by one of which (viz
James Goldwell Bishop of Norwich) the South Chapel of this Church was founded
(in the year 1477.) and of the interment of Thomas Twisden Gentleman, and
William Sharp (both above 150. years since) also in the North Chapel of this
Church were the portraitures and names of 16 men in glass, which (by tradition)
were the builders of this Church.

Chart was very anciently belonging to the Archbishops of Ca^^erbury, and taken
from Ianniber^ (Archbishop) by King Offa about 880. years since, and about the
year 78^. (at the request of Aethelward the Archbishop) restored again by King
Kenulphus, afterward it again went from that See, and in the year 839.
Ce^l^othus Archbishop bought the same of one Halethe a Noble man (with the
con^ent of King Aethelwolf) and gave it to Christ Church, Canterbury, and the
same again going from that Church, and coming to one Egelrick^ Big, he in the
year 1044. again gave the same thereunto.

A Fair is kept in this Parish yearly upon our Lady day (cal^ed the
Annunciation of our Lady) being the five and twentieth ^ay of March.

The Archbishop^ of Canterbury had anciently a mansion h^use in th^s Parish,
and near a place in this Parish called Goldwell arises one of the heads of
the River Medway.

In the night of the first of May 1580. there happened a great Earthquake in
this Parish, which much affrighted many of the inh^bi^ants, and caused them to
a rise out of their beds.

LITTLE CHART.
CErt, lies toward the South-east part of the County, by the River Stoure,
about four miles (toward the South-east) distant from Leneham, in the
Bailiwick of Chart and Lougbridge, Hundred of Calehill, Lath of Seray, East
division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, the
liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Little
Chart (being given to that Church by King Henry 8 33^. of ^is Reign) this
Parish was in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church was
called St. Mary's, and buil^ (or at least well repaired) by Stephen Norton
Esquire (who was buried there.)

CHART next SVTTON VALLANCE.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about four miles (toward the
South-east) distant from Maidstone, In the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorne,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices
in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and
the Church was called St. Michaell.

CHARTHAM.
CHertham, Certeham, Certaham, lies toward the East part of the County, by
the River Stoure, about two miles and a half (toward the Southwest) distant
from Canterbury, in the East division of the County, part thereof is in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, and Hundred of Felborough, and the residue is in
the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, and Lath of St. Augustine, it
is all in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and was in the
Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church stands in the hundred
of Felborough, and was called St. Mary's.

The liberty of the late Dean of Can^erbury claims over the Manor of
Chartham, which (in the year 871.) was given to that Church by Duke Elfred, and
confirmed by King Edward the Confessor, in the year 1052. and the same
afterward coming to King Hen. 8. he the 33^. of of his Reign gave it again to
that Church.

In this Parish was a Mansion House of the late Archbishops of Canterbury.

CHELSFIELD.
Lies toward the West End of the County, about two miles (toward the South)
distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of
Ruxley, Lath of ^utton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division
of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claymeth over
the Mannours of Chel^field and Goddington, Wood-lands called Charm-wood, and
the Rectory of Chelsfield, this Parish was all in the Deanery of Dartford, and
Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Mary's.

CHERITON.
Lies at the South-east part of the County, near the Sea, about one mile and a
half (toward the North-East) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of Stowting,
Hundred of Folkstone, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese
of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Martin.

CHESILHERST.
Lies toward the West end of the County, about three miles (toward the East)
distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at
Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath,
a small part thereof (lying toward Foots Cray) is in the Hundred of
Black Heath, and the residue is in the Hundred of Ruxley, it was all in the
Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, the Church stands in the
Hundred of Ruxley, was called St Nicholas, and the same was by King Henry the
first, given to the Church of Rochester, and in this Church of Chesilherst is
the burial place of the Family of Walsingham,

CHETHAM.
CHatham, lies at the North-side of the County, by the River Medway (at the
North-east side and very near unto the City of Rochester) in the Bailiwick of
Hoo, Hundred of Chetham, and Gillingham, Lath of Aylesford, and West division
of the County, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there, and
the liberty of the City of Rochester claims, from the high street of that
City to the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, and from thence cross the high way all
along the fields to the Farm called Horsted, so much thereof as is in the
liberty of the City of Rochester, is in the division of the Justices of the
Corporation of that City, and the residue is in the North division of Justices
of that Lath, it was all in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church
was called St. Marier^

A Fair is kept here yearly upon our Lady day (called the Nativity of the
Virgin Mary) being the eighth day of September.

Richard of Lucy gave Chetham to the Abbey of Feversham, and King Hen. 2.
confirmed it, as also did King John in the sixteenth year of his Reign.

An Hospital called the Hospital of St. Bartholomew (but since decayed) was
built here (^or relief of Lepers) by Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester (in the
time of the Conqueror) and confirmed by King Hen. 3. but the Hospital builded
here by Sir John Hawkins, and confirmed by Queen Elizabeth in the 36 year of
her Reign, is still in being.

Chetham is famous for the Royal Navy using to ride, be repalred, and laid up
there.

But as to the story of our Lady of Chetham, and the Clerk of that parish (for
which this place was once also famous, I refer him that desires to read the
same, to Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Chetham (where he may find the same at
large.)

At Horsted in this Parish (as is reported) was a Monument (long since defaced)
of Hors^ (brother of He^gest the Saxon) who in the time of Vortimer (King of
Britain) was (at Aylesford in this County) slain in single combat by Ca^igern
(Brother of the said King.)

CHEVENING.
Lies toward the West end of the County about three miles (toward the
North-west) distant from Sevenock in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of
Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in
that Lath, part thereof is in the Hundred of Codsheath, and the residue in the
Hundred of Sommerden The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth
in this parish, as also does the Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster at Morants
Court otherwise Madams Court (likewise in this Parish) it was all in the Dean^y
of Shor^ham (a peculiar to the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury) but in the
Diocese of Rochester, the Church stands in the Hundred of Godsheath, and a
Fa^r is kept yearly at Chepsted in this Parish, upon Tuesday in Whitsonweek.

CHIDINGSTONE.
Lies toward the South-west part of the County, by the River Medway, about
four miles (toward the South-west) distant from Tunbridge, in the Bailiwick
of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and
lower Division of Justices in that Lath so much thereof as is in the Borough of
Linckhill is in the Hundred of Ruxley, and the residue is in the Hundred of
Summerden, the Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claymeth in this Parish; it
was all in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church stands in the
Hundred of Somerden (in which Church about 110. years since was intered Sir
Thomas Willoughby (one of the Justices of the common Pleas in the time of King
Henry 8. and owner of Boreplace in this Parish (built by one Alphegh, and
enlarged by Read, several of whose Family are there also interred) one
whereof, viz. Sir Robert Read (chief Justice of the common Pleas in the time
of King Henry 7.) did in the year, 1516. build the North Chapel in this
Church, and dedicated the same to St. Katherine.

CHILHAM.
IVlham, Lies toward the East part of the County, By the River Stoure, about
three miles (toward the North) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of
Scray, Hundred of Felborough, East Division of the County, and Division of
Justices in the Lath of Shipway; the liberty of Wye claymeth there, it was in
the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Mary's.

In the year, 182. (where Chilham Castle now stands) was the seat of King
Lucius, (and afterward by the Saxon Kings of Kent, but more especially by King
Withred) above 950. years since made a Fort and (the Danes afterward shaking
the same) it lay desolate till the time of King William the Conqueror (who
gave the Lordship of Chilham to one Fulbert (one of the eight chief Captains
or Lieutenent Governors of Dovor Castle under John Lord Fines) and the said
Fulbert then built the Castle (which continued in his heirs males till the
time of King Henry 1.) At which time the heir Female of his Family married
Badlesmer (who builded a good seat in the midst of the Castle) and the same
continued in his name, and Family, till the time of King Richard the 2. at
which time it came to the Earl of Rutland, and remained in his Family till the
time of King Henry 8. and then it was sold to Sir Thomas Cheney (who defaced
and carried away part thereof, and afterward his son sold the same to Sir
Thomas Kempe (the aforesaid descent from Fulbert to Badlesmer I dare not avouch
for certain (the same being controverted by Mr. Camden in his Britania fo.
335.) But (being by me so found in an ancient Manuscript, and seeming specious)
I thought fit here to insert it (Leaving the Reader to judge as he sees cause)

The parsonage of Chilham belonged anciently to the Priory of Throwleigh, and
as concerning the camp of Julius Caesar here pitched, and the place and
derivation of the name of Iullaberies grave (near this place, I refer them that
desire further satisfaction therein to Mr. Camdens Britania, Fol. 336. Only I
do elsewhere find, that Quintus Laberus (a military Tribune to Julius Caesar)
was there slain, and buried, and the place thereby called Iulaber.

A Fair is kept in this Parish yearly upon the day of Simon and Jude (being
the 28th. day of October.

CHILLENDEN.
Lies toward the East end of the County, about four miles (toward the
South-West) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eastry,
L^th of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and division of Justices
in that Lath, the Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the same, it was in
the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called All
Saints.

CHISLET.
Lies toward the North-East side of the County, by the River Stoure about
five miles (toward the north East) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick
of Bridge and Petham, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the Connty, and
Division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of St. Augustine claims over
the M^nnour and Park of Chislet, but it claims more largely over all this
parish (for that it is in the hun^red of Blenga^e, which belonged to that
Abbey) the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claims in this
Parish, it was all in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and
the Church was called St. Mary's.

CHRIST-CHVRCH CANTERBURY.
THe name of the place shows in what part of the County it lies, it is in
the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham (if in any.)

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims there,

It is in the hundred of Westgate (if in any) in the Lath of St. Augustine, and
East division of the County.

It is claimed by the Justices of the City of Canterbury, and also by the
Justices of the county of Kent, in the Lath aforesaid, to be in their division,
but (though it be rather reputed, and the usage in the Precincts of this Church
in matters criminal and civil, do seem to make good, that the same is in the
division of the Justices, in the Lath aforesaid) I shall forbear to write any
thing positively therein.

Here are held yearly three Faires, viz. one on the feast day of the
Translation of Thomas Becket (being the seventh day of July, and called Becket
Fair; another on Michaelmass day (being the twenty nineth day of September;)
and the other on the day of the Passion of Thomas Becket (being the twenty
nineth day of December) and every of these Faires continue nine days.

This place was in the Diocese of Canterbury, in the year 600. Pope Gregory
sent Augustine the Monk, and other Monks with him into Britain, to convert the
Nation to Christianity, who converted King Ethelbert, and thousands of people;
That King gave them a House in Canterbury to Preach and Baptize in, with
liberty to convert whom they could; And Augustine (being consecrated by Bishop
Elutherius) buil^ this Church (upon the foundaon of an old Church, formerly
built by believing Romans) and dedicated the same to our Savior: And the
people flocked to him, and liberally contributed to the work. I shall forbear
further enlargement ^ouching this Church: the same having been fully written of
by several Persons already; and more especially by Mr. William Somner, in his
Survey of Canterbury, Printed 1640. (wherein he has most methodically and
largely written touching the same) and therefore thereunto I refer the Reader:)
Only this I add, that the Revenues of this Church were so great, that at the
suppression of Monasteries (in the time of King Hen. 8.) they were valued at
4838s. 3f 9d. ob. per annum.

CLIF near DOVOR
West Cliff, West Clive, lies at the East end of the County, about three
miles (toward the North east) distant from Dovor; in the Bailiwick of
Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in that ^ath; the Liberty of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury claims there; It was in the Deanery of Do^or, and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter, (the Advowson
whereof Eleanor (Daughter of Fardinando the 3d. King of Spain, and Wife of King
Edward the first) gave to Christ-church Canterbury (which gift the said King
Edward confirmed) and afterward (in the year 1327.) The Parsonage was assigned
to the Almnery of Canterbury.

CLIF near Gravesend.
CLive, Cliffe at Hoo, Cloveshoo; lies at the North side of the county, near
the River of Thames, about five miles (toward the North-east) distant from
Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamel, Lath of Aylesford, West
division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath; the
liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there; it was in the Deanery of
Shereham (a Peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocese
of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Helen.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Pelagius day (being the eighth day of
October.)

The Manor of Cliff did anciently belong to Christchurch Canterbury; The
Church and Town are large, And took the name from the Cliffe upon which the
Town is situate.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
nineth Peer, or Arch of Rochester bridge.

COBHAM.
Lies toward the North part of the county, about three miles and a half
(toward the South-east) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath
of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in
that Lath; part thereof is in the Hundred of Shamell, and the residue in the
hundred of Hoo, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claims at the
Stone-house, and Churchyard in this Parish; It was all in the Deanery, and
Diocese of Rochester, the Church stands in the hundred of Shamell, was a
Collegiate Church, called St. Mary Magdalen; in the same are very ancient
Monuments of the Honorable Families of Cobham and Brook (but much defaced)
many whereof are near 300. years old; and in this Parish for some hundred of
years was the habitation of those families; John Lord Cobham (the last of that
name) Son and Heir of Henry (Deputy of King Edward 1. whilst in his Fathers
life time, he was Constable of Dovor Castle) in the year 1362. founded here a
College (which at the suppression was valued at 128l. 1s. 9. ob. per annum.)
And the aforesaid Lord Cobham dying without issue male) the Honor and Seat
came to the Family of Brook (Lords Cobham.)

COLDRED.
Lies toward the East end of the County about four miles and a half (toward
the North-west) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of
Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division
of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Pancras.

COOK STONE.
CVcklestan, Cu^lestan, Cuokstane, Lies toward the North side of the County,
by the River Medway, about two miles and a half (toward the South west)
distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that
Lath, the Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth over the same, it
was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester and the Church was called Saint
Michael (which above 800. years since was given by King Aethelwolf to the
Church of Rochester.

This Parish ought Anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
first Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

COSMUS BLEANE.
Lies at the North side of the County, about three miles (toward the North)
distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of
Whitstaple, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division
of Justices in that Lath? The Liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Saint Augustine claim there, it was in the Deanery and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Cosmus and Damianus (which Church
was (about 530. years since appropriated to the Hospital (of Saint Thomas the
Marty^) of Eastbrigge, and the Vicarage was afterward founded, and endowed, in
the year 1375. by Simon Sudbury (Archbishop of Canterbury.)

In the year 1189. The Blean was (by King Richard first) granted to
Christs-Church Canterbury, and in the year 1270. The Nuns of Saint Sepulchers
Canterbury had 90. Acres thereof granted to them (which is called Minchenwood)
the like quantity also was granted to the Priory of Saint Gregory's Canterbury,
and to the Hospital of Herbaldowne (the last whereof was in that part which is
called Shoorth.)

COWDEN.
Lies at the South-West corner of the County, by the River Medway (adjoining
to Surrey and Sussex, about seven miles and a half toward the South-West)
distant from Tunbridge, In the Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the
County, and lower Division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof is in the
Hundred of Somerden, other part thereof in the Hundred of Westram and
Eaton-Bridge (and both in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley) and the residue (
viz. two houses and some small quality of land) is in the Hundred of Axstone,
and Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford; It was all in the Deanery of Malling, and
Diocese of Rochester, the Church stands in the Hundred of Somerden, was
called Saint Mary Magdalen, and a Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of
Saint Mary Magdalen (being the 22th. day of July.

COWLING.
COulings, Lies at the North side of the County toward the River of Thames
about four miles and a half (toward the North) distant from Rochester, in the
Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the
County, and North Division of Justices in that Lath; the Liberty of the Bishop
of Rochester claymeth there, it was in the Deanery, and Diocese of Rochester,
and the Church was called Saint James the Apostle (which Church Queen Ediva
otherwise Edgiva (Daughter and heir of Earl Sigeline Lord of Cowling) in the
year 960. gave to the Church of Rochester.)

John Lord Cobham (about 300. years since) built the Castle (which in the
year 1553. was assaulted by Sir Thomas Wyat, and the gate broke open with his
Ordinance, but defended by the Lord Cobham (owner thereof.)

CRAFORD.
CReyford, Crecanford, Ea^de, lies at the North side of the County, toward
the River of Thames, by the River Cray, about one mile and a half (toward the
West) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of
Little and Lesness, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and
upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a
peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

In the Church are, (or lately were) monuments of the interment of Apleton
(above 200. years since) Woodford (above 160. years since) and two Elhams
(above 170. years since.)

Touching the famous Battle fought here (about 1200. years since) between
Vortimer King of Britain, and Heugist the Saxon, and the admirable Chalk
caves in this place, I refer the Reader to Mr. Lambards Perambulation in
Crayforde.

CRANBROOKE.
Lies at the South Side of the County, about three miles (toward the
South-east) distant from Goudherst, in the Bailwick of the seven Hundred^, Lath
of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that
Lath, a little part thereof is in the North Borough of the Hundred of Great
Barnfield, another little part thereof is in the Borough of I^ornden, in the
Hundred of Barckley, and all the residue is in the hundred of Cranbrook.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Town and all the
Denn of Cranbrook (as parcel of the Manor of Godmersham) except the George
Inn with the appurtenances (which is out of that liberty and held of the late
King by Knights service) the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury
claims over the manor of Sissingherst, and the liberty of Wye claims over
the Borough of Frechisley, otherwise Abbot's Franchise (which Borough has a
Court Leet of it self) the Borsholder thereof is chosen there, and the
inhabitants of the same owe no service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred
(only at this Court a Cons^^ble (for the Hundred) may be chosen out of that
Borough.

This Parish was all in the Deanery of Ch^ring, and Diocese of Canterbury, the
Church stands in the Hundred of Cranbrook, and was called St. D^nstan (in
which Church are monuments of the Bakers of Siss^^gherst (one whereof is 100.
years old) and of Roberts of Glassenbury (a very ancient Family there) upon the
West head of the Steeple are the arms of three Families (anciently eminent in
this Parish) viz. Berham, sometimes owner of Sissingh^est aforesaid, Bettenham
(sometimes owner of Bettenham house) and Wilford (sometime owner of Hartredge
(all in this Parish.)

In Milkhousestreet in this parish (not long before the suppression of Abbeyes)
was built a Chapel Dedicated to the holy Trinity (which at the suppression
aforesaid was likewise suppressed, and only the ruins thereof now remaining.

The Parsonage was anciently appropriate, and belonging to the Archbishops of
Canterbury till Thomas Archbishop there 2^. Martij. 31^. Hen. 8. by grant
enrolled in the Office of Augmentation 32^. Hen. 8. so. 10^. granted the same
to that King, afterward 23^. Maij. 33^. Hen. 8. That King granted this
Parsonage to the Deane and Chapter of Canterbury.

A market is kept in this Town upon every Saturday, and is the greatest Market
in these parts, and two Fairs are kept there yearly ( viz. one upon Saint
Dunstans day (being the nineteenth day of May) and the other upon the day of
Giles Abbot (being the first day of September.

But a little part only of the Town being formerly paved, and the rest
(especially in Winter) very foul, worn low, and inconvenient for passage
(more especially upon the Market days) the same was begun to be paved, in the
year 1654. And by continuance thereof in the years 1655. 1566. and 1657. The
same was heightened and paved, from the Market cross to a little below the
turning from the Town toward Wi^sley (which has given advantage to the
standings in the Market to lengthen themselves almost as much more as formerly,
and the pavement is not only an ornament to the Town, but also of much
convenience to it and the Country.

FOOTES CRAY
VOtes Crey, lies toward the West side of the County, by the River Cray about
three miles (toward the South-West) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton Dartford, hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of
the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath, The liberty of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there, it was in the Deanery of Dartford,
and Diocese of R^chester, and the Church was called All Saints.

Saint MARY CRAY.
CRey, Lies toward the West side of the County, by the River Cray, about five
miles (toward the South-East) distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the
County, and Upper Division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the Duchy
of Lancaster claymeth there, it was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of
Rochester, and the Church was called Saint Mary's.

A Market is kept here upon every Wednesday, and a Fair kept yearly upon the
feast of the purification of the Virgin Mary (called Candlemas day) being the
second day of February.

North CRAY.
CRey, Lies toward the West end of the County, by the River Cray about two
miles and a half (toward he South-west) distant from Dartford, in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West
division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in
the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called
Saint James.

Robert Poynings (carver and Sword Bearer to Jack Cade in his Rebellion, after
his pardon for the same) made an insurrection here in the, 32th. year of King
Hen. 6. And Sir Richard Rooksley was sometimes owner of Rooksley house in or
near this Parish.

PAUL'S CRAY.
CRey, Lies toward the West end of the County, by the River Cray, about four
miles (toward the South-West) distan^ from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton a^ Hone, West Division of
the County, and Upper Division of Justices in that La^h, the liberty of the
Duchy of L^^caster claymeth over the Manor of Paul's Cray, this Parish was in
the Deanery of Dartford, and Dioce^s of Rochester, and the Church was called
Saint Paulinus.

CRUNDALL.
Lies toward the East part of the County, about two miles (toward the North
East) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of
Wye, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and Division of the justices,
in the Lath of Shipway, The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth there, but the
liberty of Wye claymeth over the same; It was in the Deanery of Bridge, and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint M^ries.

CVDHAM.
Lies near the West end of the County, about five miles and a half (toward
the North-West) distant from Sevenock, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley,
Hundred of Ruxley, Lat^ of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and
upper Division of Justices in that Lath, It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and
Diocese of Rochester and the Church was called Saint Peter and Paul (in which
is or lately was a memorial of the interment of Walleys above 150. years
^ince.)

DARENT.
DErente, Dairent, Dorquent, lies toward the North-side of the County, by the
River Darent, about two, miles (toward the South-east) distant from Dartford,
in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at
Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath*

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Margaret.

Lands here were given to the Church of Rochester by one Birtrick and Elfswith
his wife (near 700. years since) and the like was given to the same by Gefferey
of Hadenham very many years since.

The Manor of Darent did sometime belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury,

DARTFORD.
TArenteford, Darentford, Dorquentford, lies at the North-side of the County,
near the River of Thames, and by the Rivers Darent, and Cray, about six miles
(toward the West) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton-Dartford,
Hundred of Dartford, and Wilmington, Lath of S^^ton at Hone, West division of
the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the
late Bishop of Rochester, claims all the Market place, from the running
stream to the Market house, and most of that side of the Street where the Cock
Inn is, and the Mill (but not the Mill-land.)

This Parish was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, the
Church was called Holy Trinity, and was given to the Church of Rochester by one
Hamo (servant to King William the Conqueror) confirmed by the said King (who
was then owner of the Manor of Dartford) and the same was afterward also
confirmed by King Henry the 1. In this Church are or lately were memorials of
the interment of Hornley and Burlion, (each above 150. years since)

The Benefice was Appropriated about 400. years since.

A Market is kept here upon every Saturday.

And a Fair yearly upon the day of St. Mary Magdalen (being the two and
twentieth day of July.

The House of the late King here was (by King Hen. 8.) converted thereunto from
a Nunnery (which was founded for White Nuns, of the order of St. Augustine) by
King Edward 3. in the year 1355. And dedicated to St. Mary and St. Margaret;
and that foundation was enlarged by King Rich. 2.

Bridget (fourth Daughter of King Edward the 4.) was Prioresse there; So also
were the Daughters of the Lords Scroop and Be^umount: This Nunnery at the
suppression was valued at 380l. 9f. ^. ob per annum.

In the year 1330. King Edw. 3. held a Turnament at this Town.

In the year 1381. (In the time of King Richard the ^.) Tilers horrid Rebellion
began here, upon abuse of the daughter of John Tiler (a Tiler of this Town) by
a Collector of Pole Money; But others aver it to be at Deptford.

In the year 1452. Edward (then Duke of York (after King Edward the 4.)
encamped at Brentheath, otherwise Dar^ford Brent near this Town (against King
Hen. 6.

DEAL.
DOle, Lies at the East end of the County, adjoining to the Sea, about three
miles and a half (toward the South-East) distant from Sandwich, in the
Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County;
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there (the same
being given to that Sea by King Aethelw^lf in the year 839.

It is a member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, within the division of
Justices of that Town and Port, and the Liberties thereof, and of the Cinque
Ports, claim over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Dioc^sse of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Leonard.

This Parish (in the time of King Henry the 8. was questioned to be assessed to
the Subsidies (as lying in the foreign) but to take away that question) that
King by Letters Patens, united the same to Sandwich; which King also built the
Castle there about 120. years since; as he likewise did the Castle of Sandown,
(about one mile and a half, (toward the North) distant from the same.)

At this Deal Julius Caesar landed 54. years before the birth of Christ (where
he had feirce resistance from the Britains) of which who desires further to
read, I refer him to Cambdens Britannia fol. 343.

Here also 3. of July 1495. Perkin Warbiek arrived with his forces against King
Hen. 7.

DENTON near ELEHAM.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, about two miles and a half
(toward the North-east) distant from Eleham, in the Hundred of Kinghamford,
Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in
that Lath, part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Eastry, and the residue in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, the liberty of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury claims there, it was all in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of
Canterbury, the Church was called St. Mary Magdelen, and stands in the
Bailiwick of Eastry.

DENTON near GRAVESEND.
Lies at the North-side of the County, near the River of Thames, about two
miles (toward the East) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo,
Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North
division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery and Diocese of
Rochester, and the Church was called St. Mary's.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

A Nobleman called Birtrick or Brichrich and Elswith or Easwith his wife (near
700. years since) gave Denton to the Church of Rochester, afterward it was
unjustly taken from that Church, and Odo (Earl of Kent) deteining the same,
King William the Conqueror (after three days debate touching this and others
of the like nature) restored the same, and it was afterward confirmed to that
Church by King Hen. 1.

This Parish ought an^^ently to have contributed to the repair of the nineth
Peer or Arch of Rochester bridge.

DEPTFORD.
WEst Greenwich, Deptford Strand, lies at the North-west side of the County
(adjoining to Surrey) by the Rivers Raven^borne and Thames: About four miles
(toward the South-east) distant from London.

Part thereof is in the County of Surrey, and so much thereof as is in the
County of Kent, is in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Black heath,
Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of
Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, the Church
stands in the County of Kent, was called St. Nicholas, and in the same is (or
lately was) a memorial of the interment there, of one Weaver (long since Mayor
of the Staple.)

At the time of the Conquest one Cislebert Mamignot had Deptford for his share.

Here the Rebels under the conduct of Flammock and Joseph (in the time of King
Hen. 7.) were overthrown, and above 2000. of them slain.

In a Dock (near this place) the small Ship (in which Captain Drake sailed
about the World) was in the year 1580. (by the command of Queen Elizabeth) laid
up as a monument.

This place is also famous for the Shipdock, Storehouse and Corporation there
for the Navy (erected in the time of King Hen. 8.)

DETLING.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about two miles and a half (toward
the North-east) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyborne, Hundred of
Maidstone, Lath of Ayle^ford, West division of the County, and East division of
Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury
claims there, it was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and
the Church was called St. Martin.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was anciently owner of Detling, but (...) (Earl
of Kent in the time of King William the Conqueror) withheld the same from him,
and (after three days public debate touching this and other lands so
withholden) the Archbishop was restored to the same.

DEVINGTON.
DAvington, Daunton, lies at the North-side of the County (toward the (...)
of Sheppey) about one mile (toward the West) distan^ from Feversham, in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of
Justices in that Lath, the liberty of St. Augusti^^ claims over the same (for
that it is in the Hundred of Feversham which belonged to that Abbey) and the
liberty of the late Dean of Canterb^y claims over so much thereof as is in
the Manor of Cop^on* it was in the Deanery of Ospri^ge, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Mary Magdal^^.

Here was a Nunnery of black Nu^s (of the order of Saint Benedict) founded by
King Hen. 2. (about the second year of his Reign) dedicated to St. Mary
Magdale^, and confirmed by King Hen. 3. in the 39. year of hi^ Reign, the Nuns
are conceived to have been Frenchwomen, and had orders prescribed them in
French, by Walter Rey^old (Archbishop of Canterbury) above 340. years since.

DIMCHURCH.
DEmechurch, (...) at the South-east side of the County, in Romney Marsh,
adjoining to the sea, about three miles and a half (toward the North-East)
distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of
Worth, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation
of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof claims over the same) The liberty of St.
Augustine also claims there; It was in the Dean^y of Limpue, and Diocese of
Canterbury; and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. At this Parish the
Courts for the Corporation of (...) Marsh; as also the Court (called the Lath)
for the Lords of Romney Marsh, are usually holden (in the meeting place of the
aforesaid Corporation (which (...) about 100. years since, and called New-Hall.)

Romney Marsh is reputed to contain (of it self) 24000. Acres, but that with
Walland, and Guldford Marshes are reputed to contain 44200. Acres.

Laws (for Government of Romney Marsh) were made by (that Venerable Judge)
Henry of Bath (Associating to him Nicholas of Handl^ and A^ldred of Dene) upon
Saturday next after the Navity of St. Mary, in the 42th. year of King Henry the
third; (the Sheriff of Kent assisting) from which laws all England receive
directions for Sewers.

In the time of that King, it was governed by men (called the Twenty four
Jurors of Romney Marsh (chosen by the commonal^y there) which was confirmed 2^.
September. 36^. of that King at Romney.)

The admeasurement was taken 42^. Hen. 3. and John of Lovet^t, and Henry of
Apledoreseild (by Commission of 15^. November. 16^. Edward 1.) did 5^. December
following sit (as Justices of Sewers) there; but were opposed by the 24.
Jurors, the opposition allowed by those Justices, and a common Bailiffe agreed
to be chosen.

William of Walleyns and his F^llows (upon Monday after St. Mildred, 2^. Edw.
2. (at Newchurch) made Ordinances of Sewers (saving the former so made by Bath
and Lovetot)

Thomas of Lodelowe, Robert Belknap and Tho. Culpeper, 33^, Edw. 3. were
Commissioners by a Commission of 7^ February that year, and the meeting of the
Lords of Romney Marsh (by themselves or their Atturneyes) was ordained, to be
here, or at Newchurch, or other meet place, fifteen days after Michaelmass
yearly; and it was called the Principal assembly; but the same is now usually
here, yearly upon Thursday in Whitson week.

King Edward the 4. (at the beginning of his Reign) granted a Charter to
Romney Marsh, to be a Corporation of Bailiff, Jurats and Commonalty (of which
you may read more in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Romney.

DITTON.
DIctone, Dictum, lies toward the middle of the County, about two miles and a
half, (toward the Northeast) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of
Hoo, Hundred of Larkfeild, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and
South division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of M^lling and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Peter.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
fifth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

DODDINGTON.
Lies toward the middle of the North side of the County, about four miles
(toward the North-east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, Hundred of Tenham, East division of the County, and Upper division of
Justices in that Lath; the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury
claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Ospring and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. John Baptist.

DOVOR.
THis in one of the Cinque Ports, and lies at the east part of the County,
adjoining to the Sea, about five miles (toward the North-east) distant from
Folkstone, in the Bailiwick of Stow^ing, Lath of St. Augustine, East division
of the county; Incorporated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and Commonalty of the
Town and Port of Dovor (and before that by the name of Barons of the Town and
Port of Dovor) and in the division of the Justices of that Town and Port (the
liberties of which Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same.)

There have been seven Churches in this Town (all which were in the Deanery of
Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury) And five of them ( viz. St. John, St.
Nicholas, St. Peter, St. Martins Le Grand and St. Martins the less) are
demolished; So that at this present, there are but two Parishes and Churches
here ( viz. one which is called St. Mary's) and the other St. James the Apostle
(otherwise St. James of Warden-down (which Church of St. Mary's was built by
the Prior and Covent of St. Martins, and by them given to the Town, but the
Advowson thereof was given to Hubert de Burgh (founder of the Meason de Dieu)
to which he afterward gave the same.

The said Church of St. James was anciently belonging to the Castle of Dovor,
and in the same the Courts of Chancery, and Admiralty for the Cinque Ports, the
two ancient Towns and their members are still usually holden.

A Market is kept in this Town every Wednesday and Saturday; and a Fair yearly
upon St. Martins day (being the eleventh day of November) which holds nine
days.

Now in respect that several others (and more especially Mr. Camden in his
Brit^nia fol. 344. And Mr. (...) in his Perambulation in Dovor) have written so
largely of this Town, and of the Churches, and old Religious Houses therein;
and of the Castle lying above the same; I had thoughts of forbearing
enlargement thereupon; yet (for that I find not several things touching the
same, there fully set down, and find also some other things omitted) I shall
therefore therein give the Reader some further account.

And first touching that which is of most dignity (the Castle) The same in the
time of Cassibelanus, Governor of Britain (about 1700. years since) was (by
the command of Julius Caesar) built according to the Roman order (to keep the
Britains in subjection) and thereupon was called Caesar's Castle, and the Romans
Court, and so continued for about 80. years; at which time (the same being in
decay) Arviragus (King of Britain) having possessed it, reedified and enlarged
the same, and fortified it against the Romans (calling it Ledonnegio) and he
stopped the ancient Haven (whereby the name of the place was afterward called
De a Fore, or stopped before, or stop out; and since (by contraction) Dovor; yet
I find by others the name to be derived from the British word Dufyrr^ae
(signifying a place steep and upright) as the ^cituation of the same is) and by
others, Dur or Dour the common name (among the Britains) for all Waters
(touching which, I leave the Reader to his election.)

This Castle after falling to decay, was repaired by Withred King of Kent
(about 950. years since) and at the coming in of King William the Conqueror
was (on the behalf of King Harold) kept against him by Stephen Ashborneham (a
Baron) and Alan of Evering his Lieurenant, but (the same being taken by the
Conqueror) they were both beheaded, and afterward that King made John Lord
Fynes (his kinsman) Constable thereof by inheritance, gave him very many
Knights fees, for his better mainteyning of the same, and the said Constable
afterward made the work on the hanger of the hill there, and also made eight
chief Captains or Lieutenant Governors of this Castle whose names do follow)
and to them such Knights fees were assigned, and for the same they warded in
this Castle yearly as follows, viz.

Sir William of Albrance, otherwise Albrank had one and twenty Knights fees,
and warded twenty eight weeks.

Sir William of Arsick had eighteen Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks.

Sir Fulbert of Dovor had fifteen Knights fees, and warded twenty weeks.

Sir Iefferey Peverell had fourteen Knights fees, and warded twenty weeks.

Sir William Mamouth had twenty four Knights fees, and warded thirty two weeks.

Sir Robert Porth had twelve Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks.

Sir Hugh Crevequer had five Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks.

And Sir Adam Fitzwilllams had six Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks.

And by this means there were always 1000. men in the same for the Guard
thereof (which Guard was so kept for fear of the Danes, and by reason of the
distrust which that King had of the men of this County) and these Captains
built and repaired their several Towers in this Castle.

King John afterward recompensed the heir of Fynes for the same, and took it
into his hands, and afterward (in the time of King Hen. 3.) this personal
service of Castle-guard was turned into a contributory payment of money
(toward guarding the Castle) and sworn Warders were appointed for that
service, and in those days there belonged to the same many Soldiers (both
Horse and foot) and therefore the Arches, Vaults, and Barbicans were made there
for them to issue out at.

This Castle afterward fell again to decay, but (in the times of King Hen. 4.
King Edw. 4. and Queen Elizabeth) much cost was bestowed in repair thereof (and
more especially in the time of King Edw. 4.

In the same is a Church, founded by King Lucius (otherwise Lucius Coilus)
above 1400 years since, in which Sir Robert Asheton (who was a person of great
honor, Constable of this Castle, and gave the best Bell of that Church to the
same) was above 270. years since interred, as was also Henry Earl of
Northampton (Lord Warden of the Cinque Po^ts above forty years since.)

In this Castle were also anciently two Chapels, a College of Chanons,
several streets of houses and Markets kept.

The College aforesaid is said to have been begun in the time of the said King
Lucius, but more certain it is that Eadbald (King of Kent) erected the same,
and it was afterward removed from thence by King Withred into the Town,

There were anciently in this Castle a Commissary (who held his Court there)
and these other Officers, viz. a Lieutenant, Marshall, learned Steward, Clerk
of the Exche^quer, Gentleman Porter, four Yeomen Porters, a Serjant at arms,
Boder, Serjant of the Admiralty (being anciently the Marshal's Deputy) Serjants
to arrest, a Serjant of the Artillery, a Serjant to serve process from the
Castle-gate Court, an Armorer, Smith, Plummer, Carpenter, two Warrenners, and a
Priest (whose house there was called Cocklecoe) all which had particular
salaries, and in the same also was an Exchecquer Office.

In this Castle likewise anciently was to be seen, a Tower (called Caesar's
Tower) afterward the Kings lodgings (excellent for workmanship, and very high)
a spa^ious Hall (called King Arthur's Hall) with a fair gallery or entry,
great Pipes and Ca^kes (bound with iron hoopes) wherein was liquor (supposed to
be wine) which by long lying became as thick as Treackle, and would cleave like
Bird-lime; Salt congealed together as hard as stone, Cross-Bowes, long Bows,
and Arrows to the same (to which was fastened Brass in stead of feathers) and
the same were of such bigness, a^ not fit to be used by any men of this or late
ages; several deep wells, sounding places, and vaults under ground, and a
curiously engraven brass piece of Ordnance ^eer twenty four foot long (called
the Basilisco) reported to be given to King Hen. 8. by the Emperor.

This Castle (esteemed the most important Castle of England, and key of the
same) was valiantly defended by Hubert de Burgh (Constable thereof) against
Jews son of Phillip King of France (who besieged the same 22^. Iulij 1216.
and continued the siege (...) October. following (about which (...) the same was
raised) and 6. April 1580. (by reason of an (...) happening) a piece of the
(...) Castle stands) and a piece of the wall of the (...) the Sea.

Now as touching the Town^ (which shortly after the coming of King William the
Conqueror was much defaced by fire, and afterward in the year 1295. was again
spoiled, and part thereof burned by the French) I find that (in the time of
King Edward the Confessor) the Townsmen were called Burgesses, and it is
conceived that they were anciently incorporated by the name of Mayor and
Commonalty (out of which Commonalty the Mayor was chosen) and then the Mayor
(out of the Commonalty) chose Assistants for his year (who were sworn for that
purpose) and that from thence the word Jurat (now common to the Magistrates in
the Cinque Ports) was derived, and in the Reign of King Edward the first this
Corporation was styled Mayor and Commonalty.

The ancient (and yet) time of election of the Mayor was, and is, yearly in the
afternoon of the ninth day of September (being the next day after the day of
the Nativity of St. Mary) anciently in St. Peter's Church, but (that Church
decaying) it was afterward, and still is, in St. Mary's Church.

The Town (at the first beginning of the same to flourish) began to be much
builded on the South-westside thereof, whereas before the stopping of the haven
by King Arvi^agus (as is before set forth) the Town was under the Castle, the
Market at a place called Vpmarket, and the hous^s were where the closes of a
house called the Horse shoo, the Garnet-close, Pigeon-house, and gardens late
we^e.

(...) Town was wall I and gated as fol^oweth, viz. from (...) place called
Maunsfield's corner to Peer gate, from the (...) to Vp^all, from thence to
Cow-gate, from thence (...) and from thence (along St. Mary's Churchyard) to
the River.

The g^tes were in number ten (the names whereof were,)

1. E^t-Brook gate (which stood near Maunsfield's corner, under the E^st Cliff.)

2. St. Hel^^ gate (next to the former, toward the South-west, (...) Copthall
(otherwise Moorehall) and St. H^llen^ Cross.)

3. The Postern, otherwise Fisher's gate (next to the last, near the Bridge
made by Mr. Garret in his Majoralty.)

4. Butchery gate (which opened toward the South, and by which (in ancient
time) the fi^th was carried to the Sea.)

5. Snar gate (which was toward the South west) where sometimes was Pennile's
bench, and is still so called, but is now made like a Platform paved with
stone, where Merchants usually resort each day between eleven and one, and
(over the entry into the same) the Custom house is built.

6. Severus gate (South west toward the Peer (built by one Severus a Roman
1450. years since.)

7. Adrians gate (afterward called Vpwall) at the hanger of the Hill, on the
West part above the other gate.

8. Common gate (being large, and going out to the then Common) which (by usage
of driving Cows out of the Town through the same) was afterward called Cow
gate.

9. St. Martins gate (otherwise Monks gate, otherwise Postern gate) toward the
Hill.

10. Biggin gate (taking the name of the street near thereunto) but antienly
called North gate.

The College (before mentioned) to be in the Castle was (above 950. years
since) removed thence (by With^ed King of Kent) into this Town, called St.
Martins le grand, and dedicated to St. Mary and St. Martin; and a Church was
there also founded (which Church King Hen. 1. (in the year 1130.) gave to
Christ-church Canterbury; It was the Mother Church, and had to it three other
Churches, viz. St. Martins, the less, St. Nicholas and St. Peter; It had in it
Cannons and 22 Prebends and the now Marketplace was the Churchyard to the same.

This Church, being forsaken by the Monks, King Hen. 2. founded another House
in this Town, called St. Martins Hospital; but afterward commonly called the
New-warke.

At the end of this Town, in the time of King Henry the 3. a large House was
founded by Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, for an Hospital, called, Meson de
Dieu; dedicated to the honor of St. Mary, and by the said Hubert, afterward
given to that King.

After the suppression, this Hospital was (by King Hen. 8. and Queen Mary
appointed for the Victual^ng of the Navy, and Offices there built accordingly.

At the Peer was a small Chapel, builded by a Nobleman, whose life, after
shipwreck, was there preserved, which Chapel was by him dedicated to the
honor of St. Mary, and afterward called the Lady of Pities Chapel.

This Peer (at very great charges) was made by King Hen. 8. And a^terwards
repaired by Queen Elizabeth (In whose reign several acts of Parliament were
made toward the reparations thereof, and of the harbor there, and one act was
(for that purpose also made) in the time of King James (who incorporated the
Governors thereof by the name of the Warden and assistants of the Harbor of
Dov^r (which Warden is the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports (for the time being)
and his Lieutenant, and nine others are Assistants; there are but two of the
Quorum ( viz. the Lord Warden and his Lieutenant, the assistants are ten in
number (whereof the Major of Dovor (for the time being) is one, So the Number
is in all eleaven, six make a Session, and (in vacancy of assistants) they new
elect at a Session.

At the West part of the Pee^e is a fo^t called Archliffe Fort (where anciently
was a house of Knights Templers (long since demolished.)

And in the Cliffe (under the Castle) is a fort called Motes Bulwark (Both
which Forts are under the Government of the Castle.

The Ea^le of North^mpton (late Lord Warden of the Ci^que Ports) had (granted
to him by the King) all the Lands from the Peeregate to the Peer) and he gave
the same to the harbor of Dovor; most part thereof was then wast, but is since
built upon, and the builders thereof pay small rents for the same to the Peer.

A Tower was long since made (at the other side of the C^stle hill) for a light
for direction of Ships, which Tower was by some called Breden stone, and by
others (but vainly) the devils drop of Mo^ter.

About two miles (toward the North-west) distant from this Town (upon the
hill) was a l^ttle Monastery (called the Abbey of B^adsole) founded by Hugh the
first Abbot for White Chanons Premonstra^enses, and dedicated to St. Radigund
(which at the suppression was valued at 142l. 8s. 9d. per annum.

DOWN.
Lies at the West end of the County, toward Surrey; about four miles (toward
the North West) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of Sutton, Bromley,
Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and
upper Division of Justices in that Lath, and was in the Diocese of R^chester.

In this Church are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of Down
Esabque; of Bederenden, buried above 200 years since, and of Philip^^, and
several Petlies.

Saint DUNSTANS.
Lies toward the North-East side of the County, by the River Stoure, within
one mile, toward the West distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge
and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the
County, and Division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury claymeth over so much
thereof as is in the Manor of Westgate.

It was in the Deanery, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called
Saint Dunstan (...) side Chapel or Chancel whereof, belonging to the Ropers,
are interred several of that Family, one above. 200. years since and others
about 100. years since.

At the North side of this Church, is a little Chapel ^ounded by one Henry of
Canterbury, in the year, 1330. and dedicated to the Holy Trinity.

The Church was appropriated to the Prior and Covent of Saint Gregory, and the
Vicarage endowed by Walter Reynold, Archbishop of Canterbury 1322. and
afterward, in the year, 1342. augmented by John of Stratford, likewise
Archbishop.

EARITH.
EArd, Earhede, Lesnes alia^ Erith, Lies at the North side of the County,
adjoining to the River of Thames about two miles toward the North-West,
distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Durtford, Hundred of Little
and Lesness, Lath of Sutton at Ho^e, West Division of the County, and upper
Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanty of Dartford, and
Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called Saint John Baptist, in the
South Isle whereof is, or lately was, a fair monument of Elizabeth Countess of
Shrewsbury, daughter and heir of Sir Richard Walden Knight Lord of this Town,
as also memorials of the interment of several of that family of Walden, and of
Stone, Criell, and Senteler, there buried, ^00. years since, the Manor was
anciently belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and whosoever defireth to read
an ancient way of Trial of right of Land, may in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in
Eareth, read of such a T^iall at this place.

At Lesnes, otherwise Westwood, in this Parish; was an Abbey founded, in the
year 1178. by Richard Lucy, Chief Justice, and sometimes Protector of England,
in the absence of King Henry the 2. dedicated to St. Thomas the Martyr, for
black Cannons of the Order of St. Augustine, and at the suppression, 17. Hen.
8. valued at 186l. 9s. 0d. per annum, The foresaid Founder forsook his honors,
and became a Canon regular in this House, and there died, in the year 1179. and
was sumptu^usly intombed in the Quire of the Church of the said House; and to
this Abbey, Godfrey Lucy, son of the said Richard and Bishop of Winchester, was
a great Benefactor.

Two Fai^es are yearly kept in this Parish, one upon Ascension day, called Holy
Thursday, being the Thursday seven night before Whitsunday, and the other upon
Michaelmass day being the 29th. day of September.

EAST-BRIDGE.
Lies at the South-east part of the County in Romney Marsh, about four miles,
toward the North, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the County, and division of
Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claims over
the same; it was in the Deanery of Limpue, and diocese of Canterbury, but the
Church is demolished.

EAST-CHURCH.
Lies at the Northside of the County, toward the Sea, in the Isle of Sheppey,
about four miles, toward the east, distant from Queenborough, in the
Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of S^ray, E^st
division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in
the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called
All Saints.

Sir Robert Sherland, a man of a great power in this County, was owner of
Sherland, in this Parish.

EASELING.
Lies toward the middle of the County, toward the East part thereof, about
four miles and a half (toward the North-east) distant from Le^eham, in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of
Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.)

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

EASTRY.
EStrey, Eastrege (called Eastry, to distinguish the same from Rye, otherwise
West Rye, in Sussex) lies at the East part of the County, about two miles,
toward the South-west, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Eastry, which was given to that Church by King Egelred, otherwise Ethelred, in
the year 979. And afterward coming to King Hen. 8. He (33^ of his reign) again
gave it to that Church. This Parish was in the Deanery of Sandwich and Diocese
of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary's (which Church was, about
480. years since) appropriated to Christchurch Canterbury (to the use of the
Almnery there) by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury; but was taken away by
Archbishop Baldwin, his Successor; and afterward, in the year 1365. again
appropriated to that Church by Archbishop Simon Islip.

And if any desire to read of the cruel Murder of two Noble Youths (at this
Town of Eastry) the miraculous discovery thereof, and other miracles subsequent
thereunto; I refer them (for that purpose) to Mr. Lambards Perambulation in
Eastry.

A Fair is kept yearly in this Parish upon St. Matthews day being the 21. day
of September.

EASTWELL.
Lies toward the middle of the County (toward the South-east part of the
same) by the River S^oure, about two miles, toward the South-west, distant
from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of
Shipway, the Liberty of Wye claims over the same; It was in the Deanery of
Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary's.

In this Parish is the seat of the honorable Family of Finch.

EATON-Bridge.
EDen-bridge, lies at the South-west side of the County, by the river Medway,
adjoining to Surrey, about four miles (toward the south) distant from
Westram, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West
division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the hundred of Westram and Eatonbridge, and the residue in
the hundred of Somerden.

It was all in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, the Church
stands in the hundred of Westram and Eaton-bridge, and was called St. Peter
and Paul.

A Fair is kept yearly in this Parish, upon the day of St. Mark, being the 25.
day of April.

EBENEY.
Lies at the South part of the County, by the River Rother, about three miles,
toward the South east, distant from Tenterden, part thereof is in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred and Isle of Oxney, East division of the
County, division of Justices in that Lath, and the liberty of the late Dean of
Canterbury, claims there: And the residue thereof is in the Borough of
Reading, Bailiwick of the seven hundreds, Hundred of Tenterden, Lath of Scray,
West division of the County, and Division of Justices of the Corporation of
Tenterden, the Liberties whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury; the Church
stands in the Hundred of Oxney, and was called St. Mary's (which Church was
anciently far larger than now it is; the foundation whereof is yet discernable.
But, about 100. years since, it was burned by Lightning, and instead thereof,
the little Church, now standing, was built upon part of the former foundation.

In the year, 832. King Aethulphus (otherwise Aethelwolfe) gave Ebeney to
Christ-church Canterbury; and in this Parish anciently was a Priory, long since
demolished.

EGERTON.
Lies about the middle of the County, by the river Stoure, about three miles
(toward the south east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick of Chart and
Longbridge, Hundred of Caleill, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Charing and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

ELEHAM.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, by the River Stoure, about
five miles and a half (toward the North) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick
of Stowting, Hundred of Loningborough, Lath of Shipway, East-division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Eleham claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

The Manor of Eleham was the inheritance of the Honorable Lady Julian
Leyborn (wife of William Clinton, Earl of Huntington.

A Market is here kept upon every Monday, and four Faires yearly, viz. one
upon Palm Monday, being the Monday before Easter; another upon Easter Monday;
another upon Whit^on Monday, and the other upon the day of St. Dionyse, being
the nineth day of October.

ELMSTED.
EAlmstede, Lies toward the South-East part of the County, about three miles
(toward the South-west) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East Division of the County, and Division of
Justices in that Lath.

The Liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and St Augustine claim
there, and the liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claymeth over so much thereof
as is in the Manor of Hastingligh, it was in the Deanery of Eleham, and
Diocese of Canterbury, the Church was called Saint James, and a Fair is kept
here yearly upon the day of Saint James (being the five and twenty day of July.)

In the year 811. Wolfred (Archbishop of Canterbury) bought Elmsted of King
Kenulphus (to the use of his Church.)

ELMSTONE.
Lies toward the East end of the County, by the river Stour, about four
miles (toward the north-west) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and Petham, hundred of Preston, Lath of Saint Augustine, East division
of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the Manor of Elmstone.

This parish was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury.

ELTHAM.
Lies toward the North-West side of the County about two miles and a half
(toward the South) distant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromly,
Hundred of Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and
upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanery of Dartford, and
Diocese of Rochester, And the Church was called Saint John Baptist (wherein are
(or lately were) memorials of the interment of Roper, Morton, Pierle, and Pashey

Here is a house which belonged to the late Kings of England (built by Anthony
B^ck Patriarch of Jerusalem, and by him given to Queen Eleanor (wife to King
Ed. the 1.) But anciently the inher^tance of the Veseyes.

I refer him that desires to read more touching this house to Mr. Lambards
Perambulation, in Eltham, where he may be satisfied at large, only I shall
add, that John, second son of King Edw. 2. was borne there (in the year,
1315. So also was Bridget. the 4th. Daughter of King Edward the 4. In the year
1480.

Leo (King of Armenia) came thither to the Court of King Richard. 2. And was
there nobly entertained.

King Hen. the 6. (in the year 1429.) kept a royal Christmas there, As also
did King Edw. the 4. (in the year 1482.) where 2000. persons were served each
day. Likewise King Hen. the 8. here also kept his Christmas (in the year 1527)

EMLEY.
Lies toward the North side of the County, adjoining to the Isle of Sheppey,
about two miles (toward the North-east) distant from Milton; It is an Island
of it self, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East
division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

EWELL.
Lies toward the South-east part of the County, by a Rivolet arising near
thereunto, about two miles and a half, toward the North-west, distant from
Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St.
Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same:

It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

EYNSFORD.
EInesford, Aynsford, lies toward the middle of the West part of the County,
by the River Darent, about four miles, toward the East, distant from St. Mary
Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton
at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that
Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Eynsford: This Parish was in the Deanery of Shoram (a peculiar to the late
Archbishop of Canterbury: But in the Diocese of Rochester: The Church was
(about 480. years since) appropriated to Christchurch Canterbury, to the use of
the Almnery there, by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury: and in the same are, or
lately were, memorials of the Interment of Donat, and Eckisford (many years
since.)

EYTHORN.
EYhelthorne, lies toward the East Side of the County about five miles
(toward the South-west) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury and St: Augustine claim
there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims in the upper
part thereof.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Peter and Paul.

In the year 824 Wolfred Archbishop of Canterbury gave Eythorn to Christchurch
Canterbury, (In exchange for Berham*)

FAIREFIELD.
Lies at the South part of the County, about four miles and a half (toward
the West) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway,
Hundred of Aloesbridg, East division of the County, and division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Fairefield (being given to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33^ of his Reign.)

It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Thomas the Martyr (which Church Edmund of Abingdom (Archbishop of
Canterbury) above 420. years since) gave to Christ Church Canterbury.

FANT.
Only a small part thereof is in Kent, and the residue is in Sussex.

That part thereof which is in Kent, lies toward the South part of the
County, about four miles (toward the South) distant from Tunbridge, in the
Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of Wachlingstone, Lath of
Ayle^ford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that
Lath (but the Church stands in Sussex.)

EAST-FARLEY.
FEarn^ge, Fernlege, Farnleigh, lies toward the middle of the County, by the
River Medway, about two miles (toward the South-west) distant from Maidstone,
in the Bailiwick of Eyhorne, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West
division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Maidstone claims over the same, and the liberty of the late
Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of East-Farley.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

In the year 960. Queen Ediva, otherwise Edgiva, gave this Farley to Christ
Church Canterbury.

WEST-FARLEY.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by the River M^dway, about three miles
(toward the South-west) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred
of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division
of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the (...) D^^n of Canterbury, claims over the Manor of
West-Farley.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called All Saints.

In the year 960. Queen Ediva, otherwise Edgiva, gave this Farley to Christ
Church Canterbury, and Queen Eleanor wife of King Edward the first gave the
Manor of West-Farley to Christ Church aforesaid.

The Borsholder of the Borough of West-Farley is chosen at a Court Leet holden
for that Manor, and does not ow service to the Court Leet holden for the
Hundred, nor do the inhabitants of that Borough ow any service to that Court,
but at that Court may be chosen a Constable of the said Hundred out of this
Borough.

FARN BOROUGH.
Lies toward the West end of the County, about two miles and a half (toward
the South-west) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton ^romley,
Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and
upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims over the Rectory of
Farnborough.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Gyles.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Giles (...)* (being the first day
of September.)

FARNINGHAM.
FRemingham, Fermingham, lies toward the West-part of the County, by the
river of D^rent, about four miles (toward the East) distant from St. Mary
Cray, in the Bayliwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton
at Hone, West division of the County* and upper division of the Justices in
that Lath.

The Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster, and late Dean of Canterbury claim
there.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

I the year 1010. Elphege (Archbishop) gave the same to Christ church
Canterbury.

In the year 1225. Stephen (Archbishop of Canterbury) gave the Church of
Farmingham to Christ Church aforesaid (to the use of the Almnery there) and the
Manor of Farmingham belonged to that Church.

Robert Poynings (that had bee^ Sword-beare* and Ca^v^r to Jack Cade in his
rebellion, and wa^ pardoned for the same, afterward (in the 23th, year of
King Hen. the 6th.) made an Insurrection at this place.

FAWKEHAM.
FAlcheham, Falcham, Falkenham, lies toward the North West part of the
County, about four miles (toward the South west) distant from Gravesend, in
the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone,
West division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Mary's: (in the Churchyard whereof the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester
claims.)

Brichrich (otherwise Birtrick) a Nobleman, and E^^with (otherwise Elfswith)
his wife gave Faukeham to the Church of Rochester, and the same being taken
from that Church, King William the Conqueror restored it threunto.

This Parish anciently ought to have contributed toward the repair of the
third Arch or Peer of Rochester bridge.

FEVERSHAM.
FAveresham, Faureshame, Fefresham, Lies at the North side of the County
(toward the sea) about six miles (toward the South East) distant from Milt^n,
in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, and east division of the County.

The Town of Feversham, is a member of the Town and Port of Dovor
(incorporated by the Name of Major, Jurats and Commonalty of the Town of
Feversham* and before that, by the name of Major, and Commonalty of the town of
Feversham, and before that, by the name of Barons of the Town of Feversham.)

The liberties of that Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the
same, and it is in the Division of the Justices of that Corp^ration, also the
liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the Rectory there.

The residue of this Parish is in the upper division of Justices in the Lath of
Scray, and the liberty of Saint Augustine claims over the same (for that it
is in the Hundred of Fev^rsham which belonged to that Abbey.)

All this Parish was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, the
Church stands in the Town and was called St. Mary's (in which are, or lately
were) ancient memorials of interments, viz. of Thorn (about 250. years since)
Tongue (above 240. years since) Feversham (230 years since) Vpton (above 220.
years since) Rust, and Norton (about 190. years since) Wigmore (above 160 years
since) Norton, Hatcher, and Read (above 150. years since) Colwell (above 120.
years since) and Finch (many years, but no certainty how many years since.)

The Advowson of this Church was given to the Abbey of St. Augustine by King
William the Conqueror, and the Church was appropriated to that Abbey by Pope
Alexander, about the year 1168.

A Market is kept in this Town upon every Wednesday and Saturday, and two
Faires yearly ( viz. one upon St. Valentine's day (being the 14. day of
February) the other upon the day of St. Peter ad Vincula, called Lammas day
(being the first day of August) and each of these Faires last ten days.

A Parliament was held in this Town (in the year 903.) by King Athelstan.

William of Ipre (Lord of the Manor of Feversham) granted the same (in
exchange for other lands) to King Stephen, who afterward (in the year 1148.)
founded an Abbey thereupon, and gave the Manor to the same (which Abbey was
dedicated to the honor of our Savior) and one Clarenbald (Prior of Bermondsey
in Surrey) and twelve other Monks all of that Priory, and all of the order of
Clunia^s, were taken out of that Priory, and placed in this Abbey, and the said
Clarenbald became the first Abbot thereof, and he, and the Monks, became
Benedictines.

This foundation was afterward confirmed by King Henry the second, King John,
and several other succeeding Kings, and King Henry the second granted thereunto
the aforesaid Fair (still holden at this Town on the first day of August) to
continue yearly eight days.

The aforesaid King Stephen, Matilda his wife, and Eustace his son, were all
buried in this Abbey (which at the suppression was valued at 2861. 12^. 6d. ob.
q per. annum.) but the body of the said King, (for Lucre of the Lead wherein it
was coffined) was taken out of the same, and cast into the River.

FOLKESTON.
Lies at the South-East side of the County, adjoining to the Sea, about five
miles (toward the South-west) distant from Dovor; in the Bailiwick of Stowting,
Lath of Shipway, and East Division of the county.

The Town of Folkstone is a member of the Town and Port of Dovor, and
incorporated by the name of Major, Jurats, and Commonalty of the Town of
Folkstone, and before that by the name of Barons of the Town of Folkstone, the
Mayor was anciently elected yearly upon the day of the Nativity of our Lady
(being the 8. day of September.

The liberties of that Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the
same; and it is in the division of the Justices of that Corporation, the
residue of this Parish is in the Hundred of Folkstone, and division of the
Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

All this Parish was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury.

There were anciently five Churches in the same (in one of which) John Lord
Fynes (Constable of Dovor Castle, in the time of King William the Conqueror)
was buried.

The names of three (of these five Churches) were St. Peter, St. Mary, and St.
Paul (all which, and one more (whose name I find not) are long since
demolished) and only one of the said five is now remaining, which was founded
in the said Town by one Nigellus of Munevile (Lord of the same) in the year
1095. and dedicated to St Mary and St. Eanswith.

A Market is kept in this Town upon every Thursday.

The aforesaid St. Eanswith was Daughter of (...) (King of Kent) and (from her
in^an^y renouncing the world, her father did here build a Nunnery for her
(consisting of black Nuns) and de^icated the same to the honor of Saint Peter
(which Nunnery was sc^tuated about 28. rods from the sea, and she became the
first Pr^o^esse thereof, and so continued many years, and about the year 673.
died, and was there buried.

The Pagans afterward much ruinated this Nunnery, and the sea beginning to
swallow up the remains (as afterward it totally did) John Segrave, and Julian
his wife (daughter, and heir of John Sandwich (Lord of this Town) and John
Lord Clinton (in the time of King Hen. the 3d.) built a Priory here, and
dedicated the same to the honor of Saint Peter, and Saint Eanswith, and
translated her relics to this Prio^y (which was a ce^l to the Abbey of Lolley
in Normandy, was of the order of Benedictines, and suppressed in the second
year of King Hen. 5th.)

The Town was anciently a flourishing place, and in the year. 927. was given
(by King Athelstan (to Christ Church Canterbury (but being afterward taken
from the same) King Knute (in the year 1038*) restored it to that Church.

William of Albrance (a Norman) one of the eight Captains, or Lieutenant
Governors of Dovor Castle in the time of King William the Conqueror) was then
Lord of this town, (which has had several misfortunes, but more especially
the spoiling thereof by Earl Goodwin (about 600. years since) at which time
four (of the aforesaid five) Churches were ruined) and the burning of the same
by the French. In the time of King Edw. 3. The aforesaid King Ead^ald (about
1000. years since) built a Castle at the South part of this Town, which
falling into decay, the aforesaid William of Albrance, about the year. 1068.
built a fort, upon the foundation of the decayed Castle, and upon the hill
here, called Castlehill, was anciently a watch tower, but now ruinated, and in
this Parish King Hen. 8. about 120. years since, built the Fort called Sandgate
Castle.

FORDWICH.
FOrdwi^, Fordich, or the Town upon the Ford, lies toward the North-east part
of the County, by the River Stoure, about two miles and a half (toward the
North east) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham,
Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County,

It is a member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, incorporated by the name of
Mayor, Jurats and Commonalty of the Town of Fordwich, and before that by the
name of Barons of the town of Fordwich,

The Mayor was anciently elected yearly upon the Monday after St. Andrew,

The liberties of that Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the
same, and it is in the division of the Justices of that Corporation,

The liberty of St. Augustine also claims over the Manor of Fordwich (which
was given to that Abbey by King Edward the Confessor) it was in the Deanery and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary's, this town is
famous for excellent good trouts there taken.

FRINDSBURY.
FRendesbery, Frendsbyry, Freondesbiry, (anciently Ae^^ingham) lies toward
the North side of the County, by the River Medway, about one mile toward the
North, distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices
in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called All
Saints.

In the year 764. Offa King of the Mercians, by the consent, and license of
Erbert (King of Kent) and Sigered also King of Kent* gave Frindsbury to the
Church of Rochester, and King Hen. 1. afterward confirmed it, and Laurence of
St. Martin (Bishop of Rochester) about 400. years since, by li^cense of the
Pope, appropriated this Church.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
first land Peer or Arch of Rochester bridge.

Queen Elizabeth, (in the third year of her reign) built here the Fort called
Vpno^ Castle.

Frinsbury Clubs is an ancient byword, the reason and story whereof, who so
desires to read, may find the same in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in
Frendsbury.

FRINSTED.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about three miles toward the North,
distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Dunstan.

FRITTENDEN
Lies toward the South part of the County, about three miles and a half,
toward the North-east) distant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the Seven
Hundreds, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of
Justices in that Lath.

So much thereof as is in the Borough of Stepherst, is in the Hundred of
Bar^kley, and the residue is in the hundred of Cranbrook.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof, as
is within the Manor of Hollingborne.

It was all in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Cranbrook, and was called St. Mary's.

GILLINGHAM.
GEldingeham, Gelingham, lies toward the North part of the County, by the
River Medway, about two miles, toward the North-east, distant from Rochester,
in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County.

Part thereof, viz. the Grange, otherwise Grench, is a member of the Town and
Port of Hasting, in the Division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the
liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the same.

And the residue is in the hundred of Chetham and Gillingham, and North
division of Justices in the Lath of Aylesford.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Gillingham.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a Peculiar to the late Archbishop
of Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Chetham and Gillingham, and was called
St. Mary's (which Church King Hen. 1. gave to the Monastery of Sheppey) And in
this Church are (or lately were) diverse monuments of the family of Beaufits
(who^e seat was Grange Court in this Parish) some whereof were there buried,
250. years since, others 230. years since; and others above 220. years since;
and of Bamme, also above 220 years since.

This Parish is famous for the Navy royal riding in the same, and was
anciently also ^amous for a Rood there, the story whereof, who so desi^eth to
read, may find the same at large in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Chetham.

GODMERSHAM.
GOdmeresham, lies about the middle of the East end of the County* by the
River Stoure, about two miles toward the North, distant from Wye, in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Felborough, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Godmersham, the liberty of Wye also claims there.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury; and the
Church was called St. Laurence, which Church Archbishop Thomas Arundell (in the
year 1397.) by license of King Richard the second, and of the Pope)
appropriated to Christ-church Canterbury.

In the year 822. King Kenulphus gave Godmersham to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and in the year 1036. Egelnothus, the Archbishop, gave the same to
Christ-church Canterbury.

GOODNESTON near FEVERSHAM.
GOodwineston, lies at the North side of the County, toward the Sea, about
one mile (toward the (...)) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath
of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justice in that
Lath.

The Liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey) it was in the Deanery of
Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Bartholomew.

GOONESTON near SANDWICH.
Lies toward the East end of the County, about four miles, toward the South
west, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham,
Lath of St. Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in
that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called Holy Cross, This Church was anciently a Chapel to Wingham, which in the
year 1282 was divided into four Parishes, whereof this is one.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Holy Rood day, being the 14th. day of
September.

GOUDHERST.
Lies at the South side of the County, adjoyn^ng to Sussex, about three miles
(toward the West) distant from Cranbrook, in the West Division of the County,
and lower Division of Justices in the Lath of Scray.

So much thereof as is in the Borough of Fairecrouch, is in the Bailiwick of
the seven Hundreds, Hundred of Cranbrook, and Lath of Scray.

So much thereof as is in the Boroughs of Pattenden, Lilsden, Combwell,
Chingley, or Bromley, is in the Bailiwick, of Twyford, Hundred of little
Barnefield (otherwise West Barnefield) and Lath of Aylesford, and the residue
is in the said Bailiwick of Twyford, Hundred of Marden, and Lath of Scray.

The Borsholder of the aforesaid Borough of Pattenden is chosen at the Court
Leet holden at Loose, and the Borsholder of the aforesaid Borough of Lilsden,
is chosen at the Court Leet holden at East Farley, and the inhabitants of
neither of these two Boroughs ow service to the Court Leet holden for the said
Hundred of little Barnefield, only at that Court may be chosen a Constable of
that Hundred out of either of these Boroughs.

The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth at Winchet Hill and the liberty of the
late Dean of Canterbury claims, over the aforesaid boroughs of Pattenden, and
Lilsden.

It was all in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Marden, and was called St. Mary's,
(which Church is very large, stands upon avery highhill, and had to the same
a very large, and tall spire or shaft; but upon Wednesday the 23. day of August
1637 (about eleven of the clock at night) there happened a most fierce, and
sudden storm of thunder, and lightning, which set on fire the said steeple,
and broke, and melted five great bells in the same, and burnt, and consumed
four lofts, and all the timber and woodwork of the steeple, and the stonework
of the same was thereby so shaken and rent, that it was feign afterward to be
pulled down, and the Church, and leads, by fall of the timber, was much
impaired.

In the year following a collection (by way of Brief) was in this, and several
other Counties (for repair of this mishap) and a parish tax also made for that
purpose, and the foundation of the steeple begun anew of stone (almost up to
the Roof of the Church) but (by the falsity of the Collectors abroad, and
dissension of the inhabitants at home) the work went no further (only a small
low wooden top is set upon the stone-work, and one great Bell only hung there,
and so it now remains.

In this Church is a memorial of the interment of John (Son of John of
Begebure) above 230. years since, his daughter, and he^re (by marriage with one
of the ancient family of Colepepyr) brought her inheritance (called Begebure)
in this parish to that family, and in this Church are also several monuments
of that family of Colepepyr (near 200. years old) as also a Monument of Campion
of Combwell (herein after mentioned) and (in the East wall of the North
Chancell) is a memorial of the interment of Roberts.

A market is kept in this Town upon every Wednesday, and the market place was
(about, 7. years since) removed from the flat place in the Town (a little
below the place where now it is) unto that place (viz) at the top of the hill
adjoining to the Church yard. And one Fair is there yearly holden upon the day
of the Assumption of our Lady (being the fifteenth day of August.)

Another Fair is also holden yearly at Combwell in this parish upon the day of
St. Mary Magdalen (being the two and twentieth day of July) Near whereunto
Robert of Thuru^am, in the time of King Hen. 2. founded a Priory (called
Combwell) for black Chanons of the order of St. Augustine, and dedicated the
same to the honor of St. Mary Magdalen (which King Hen. 3. afterward
confirmed, and granted the Fair last before mentioned to be there yearly kept,
upon the day aforesaid, and the day following (The value of which Priory at the
suppression was 80l. 17^. 5d. q. per. annum.

GRAVENEY.
GRavene, Lies at the North side of the County, near the sea, about two miles
(toward the North east distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of
Scray, Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, East division of the County, and
upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Mamour of
Graveny, it was in the Deanery of Ospring and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called All Saints, in which are, or lately were, ancient memorials
of the interment of the Fevershams (sometimes Lords of Graveney) of Beteler,
almost, 250. years since, Borgeris (above 200. years since) and of several of
the Martins (about 200. years since) one whereof was one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in the time of King Henry 6.

In the year 811. Archbishop Wolfred bought Graveney of King Kenulphus, for the
use of Christchurch Canterbury, but (it being afterward taken from the same)
Werhardus a potent Priest withholding it, in the year 830 he by the command of
Archbishop Fegeldus, restore^ the same, and it was afterward in the year 941^
confirmed thereunto by King Edmund, E^dred his brother, and Edwin his son, and
Sir Adam Fitz-Williams (one of the eight chief Captains, or Lieutenant
Governors of Dovor Castle, in the time of King William the Conqueror) was
then Lord thereof.

GRAVESEND.
Lies at the North side of the County, adjoining to the River of Thames, about
six miles (toward the North-east) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of
Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County,
and division of Justices of the Corporation of Gravesend and Milton (the
liberty whereof claims over the same)

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Mary's.

A Market is kept here upon every Wednesday and Saturday, and a Fair yearly
upon the day of the Translation of St. Edward, being the thirteenth day of
October, and holds a week.

In the year 1380. the French and Spanish Galleys burnt most of this Town, and
carried away many of the inhabitants prisoners.

Also in the time of King Richard the third, diverse of the Gentry of this
County (with 5000. men) attempted great matters here, but dispersed without
action.

At this place also the seventh of October 1552. three great Fishes (called
Whirlepooles) were taken, and drawn upto Westminster bridge.

EAST-GREENWICH.
Lies at the North-west side of the County, adjoining to the River of Thames,
about four miles (toward the South-east) distant from London, in the Bailiwick
of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Black heath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West
division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called Saint Alphage (which Alphage was Archbishop of Canterbury) and taken by
the Danish Pagans, and afterward brought hither, and the nineteenth of April
1012. (after cruel handling) was by them stoned to death, at, or very near the
place where this Church stands, wherefore he was afterward Canonized a
Saint, and this Church dedicated to him.

King Edward the third here founded a Monastery of Friars Minorites, Aliens,
belonging to the Abbey of Gaunt in Flanders (which was suppressed in the second
year of King Hen. 5.)

Here was also a Chauntry called Holy Cross, of observant Friars, founded by
King Edward the fourth, for which Friars King Henry the seventh buil^ed a house
adjoining to his Stately Palace here (which Palace was built by Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester, and nam^d Placentia; and afterward magnificently enlarged by
King Hen. 7. and King Henry 8. And rendered famous for the birth there of
several great Princes, viz. King Hen. 8. Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth; and
for the deaths there, of others viz. King Edward 6. and Thomas Beaufort (son of
John of Gaunt, and Duke of Exceter) King Hen. 8. at Christmas (as well as
other times also) kept Court here, and more particularly in the year 1511. He
kept here a royal Christmas, as also he did in the year 1543. At which time
he royally feasted, and delivered (without ransom) 21. of the Scotch Nobility,
whom he took Prisoners 24^. November before, in a battalle at Salom Moss
beyond Carlisle.

Here also on Shrove Twesday 1526. and 1^. May 1536. That King held several
solemn Justs.

11. August 1534. The aforesaid observant Friars here were suppressed, and for
the present Augustine Friars put in their places (who being also suppressed)
Queen Mary put others in their room. But 1^. Eliz they also were suppressed.

King Henry 8. (in the year 1515.) much enlarged the Town, and King James
walled the Park with Brick.

That famous learned and charitable William Lambard Esqui^e (mentioned in my
Epistle to this Book) about the year 1560. here ercted an Almeshouse or
College for 20. poor people (with allowance of 18d. per week to each) which
was named the College of Queen Elizabeth's poor people.

West Greenwich See Deptford.

GUSTON.
Lies at the South-east end of the County, about two miles, toward the North,
distant from Dovor, in the Baliwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath
of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, and the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Guston.

It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Martin.

HACKINGTON otherwise St. STEPHENS.
Lies toward the East part of the Coun^y, by the River Stoure, about one mile
(toward the North distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and
Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Bridge and Petham, other part ( viz. the
Borough of Shourt) is in the Hundred of Downhamford, and the residue is in the
hundred of Westgate, it was all in the Deanery, and Diocese of Canterbury, the
Church formerly a poor Chapel, stands in the Hundred of Westgate, was called
St. Stephens, and begun by Baldwyn (Archbishop of Canterbury) about. 470. years
since, to the honor of St. Stephen, and St. Thomas of Canterbury, But he was
inhibited by the Pope to proceed therein.

In this Church are fair monuments of Sir Christopher Hales and Sir Roger
Manwood, persons of great account in their times, the last whereof built 7.
Almeshouses in this Parish (in the year, 1573.) and endowed the same.

The Parsonage was annexed, and united, to the Archdeaconry of Canterbury (In
the year, 1227) the seat of the Archdeacon of Canterbury was here, and Lord
Andomar de Rupy an Alien was Archdeacon, and held the same then valued at 20*
marks per annum.

The image of St. Stephen standing in this parish, where the garden of the said
Sir Roger Manwood was) and being much sought to by Pilgrim^, occasioned this
Parish to be also called St. Stephens.

HADLOW.
HAudelo, lies toward the South-West part of the County, by the River Medway,
about three miles toward the North-west, distant from Tunbridge, in the Lath
of Aylesfrrd, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in
that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Twyford, and Hundred of Littlefeild, and
the residue is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, and Hadlow Borough.

It was all in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, the Church
stands in Hadlow Borough, and was called St. Mary's.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Whitson monday.

Hadlow came under the custody of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of
Boniface Archbishop there (about 400. years since.)

HALDEN otherwise HIGH HALDEN.
Lies toward the South side of the County, about two miles and a half
(toward the North) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the seven
Hundreds, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of
Justices in that Lath.

So much thereof as is in the Borough of Omenden, is in the Hundred of
Barckley, and the residue is in the Hundred of Blackborne.

The liberties of the late Dean of Canterbury, and St. Augustine claim there,
and the liberty of Wye also claims there over the Denn of Romden.

It was all in the Deanery of Charing and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Blackborne, and was called St. Mary's.

HALLING.
HEallinge, lies toward the middle of the North side of the County, by the
river Medway, about three miles (toward the South west) distant from
Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West
division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath,

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
John Baptist. In the year, 838. Ecbert (King of Kent) gave the Manor of
Halling to the Church of Rochester, and Hamo of Hith Bishop there, and
Confessor to King Edw. 2. about 340. years since, built a house here, for
himself, and his successors, which house was afterward the habitation of that
Pious, and (...) William Lambard Esquire, before mentioned.

This parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
third peer, or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

HALSTED.
Lies about the middle of the West end of the County, about three miles
(toward the South) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hon^, West division of the
County, and Lower division of Justices in that Lath.

The l^berty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculia^ to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

Thomas Watson Esquire (sometimes of this Parish) in the time of King James (in
the year 1609) new built a fair Chapel of Freestone from the ground on the
Northside of the Church here, and adorned the East end thereof with a very
fair and curious glass window, wrought in rich colors, he likewise new
builded the Steeple of the said Church, with stone from the ground, repaired
and new tiled both the said Church and the Chan^ell thereof, built a Porch to
the said Church, gave to the same four fair new Bells, a Reading-Desk and a
Pulpit, and made a wall from the North side of the Churchyard to the West side
thereof.

HALSTOW.
HAlegestow, lies toward the North-side of the County, about three miles
(toward the North-west) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called Saint Margaret, which Church Hubert Archbishop (about 450
years since) gave to Christchurch Canterbury (toward the repair of the Library
thereof) and endowed the Vicarage with 3l. 6^. 8d. yearly stipend, all which
Boniface the Archbishop (about 50. years afterward) confirmed.

HIGH-HALSTOW.
Lies at the North-side of the County, about four miles and a half (toward
the North) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Hoo, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester* and the Church was called St.
Margaret.

HAM.
Lies near the East end of the County, about two miles (toward the South)
distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St
Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. George.

In the year, 934. Aelfled gave Ham to Christ-church Canterbury.

HARBLEDOWNE.
HErbaldon, Lies toward the North side of the County by the River Stoure,
about one mile and a half (toward the West) distant from Canterbury, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine,
East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Michael.

Lanfranck (Archbishop of Canterbury) about the year 1089* founded here an
Hospital for Lepers (which was afterward used for the aged poor, and (in the
year, 1371.) William Whittlesey (likewise Archbishop founded a Chauntrey in the
same (to the honor of St. Nicholas) which Thomas Arundell (also Archbishop)
afterward (in the year 1402.) confirmed, which Hospital at the suppression
was valued at 109l. 7s. 2d.. per. annum.

But touching the story of a shoe offered usually by the Hospitallers to be
kissed by Passengers that way, I refer the reader to what is written by Mr.
Lambard touching the same in his perambulation (in Harbaldowne.)

Upper HARDRES.
GReat Hardress, Lies about the middle of the East side of the County, about
three miles and a half (toward the North-West) distant from Eleham, in the
East division of the County, and division of the Justices in the Lath of St.
Augustine.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, and Lath
of St. Augustine, and the residue is in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of
Lonningborough and Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims there, and the liberty of Eleham
claims over so much thereof as is in the Hundred of Loningborough.

It was all in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the hundred of Bridge and Petham, and was called St.
Peter and Paul, here is the seat of that ancient, and eminent family of
Hardress, who held the Manor of Hardress, by Knights service of the Castle of
Tunbridge.

Nether HARDRES.
LIttle Hardres, lies about the middle of the East side of the County, about
two miles and a half (toward the South) distant from Canterbury, in the
Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East
division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Mary's.

HARIETSHAM.
Lies very near the middle of the County, about one mile and a half (toward
the Northwest) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eyhorn,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices
in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof as is
within the Manor of Hollingborn.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. John Baptist.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist,
called Midsommer-day being the 24, day of June.

HARTLEY.
Lies toward the North-west end of the County, about four miles (toward the
South) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of
Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and Upper
division of Justices in that Lath: it was in the Deanery and Diocese of
Rochester, and the Church was called All Saints.

HARTLIP.
Lies at the Northside of the middle of the County, about four miles (toward
the West) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that
Lath. It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Michael.

HEARTY.
Lies at the North side of the County, in the Isle of Harry, adjoyneth to the
Isle of Sheppey, and is about two miles and a half (toward the North) distant
from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the
County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham; which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Thomas the Apostle.

A Battle in a Writ of Right for a message, and 190. acres of land in this
Parish (wherein Simon Low and John Keyme were demandants, against Thomas
Paramore) Henry Naylor (Champion for the demandants) and George Thorn
(Champion for the tenant) was appointed to be fought (before the Justices of
the Common Pleas) at Tuthill near Westminster, 18o. Iunij in Trinity Term
1571. and the Court being there set, and the Champions appearing ready to
fight, in the presence of at least 4000. persons, the demandants were non suit,
and so the Battle was spared.

Who so desires to read the record hereof, and the solemnity of preparation to
the Battle, and oath of the Combatants, I refer him to Coke's Entries fol. 182.
A. the Lord Dier's Reports fol. 301. pl. 40. Speed's Chronicle fol. 878. A. or
How Is Chronicle fol. 669. A. and the last leaf of Crompton's Justice of the
Peace (where he may be fully satisfied.)

This case happening in this County, I have the rather here inserted, for the
rarity thereof.

HASTINGLIGH.
Lies toward the South-East) part of the County, about three miles (toward
the South-East) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge,
Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the
Lath of Shipway.

So Much thereof as is in Town Borough is in the Hundred of Wye, and the liberty
of Wye claims over the same, and the residue thereof is in the Hundred of
Bircholt Barony.

The liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims over the Manor of
Hastingligh.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Bircholt Barony, and was called St.
Mary's.

HAWKEHERST.
IN respect I find not any description of this Parish, or other matter
concerning the same, offered to the public, and it having been the place of
my habitation for above twenty eight years last past (Gods Providence having
also there lent me an inheritance) I thought fit to enlarge my self upon this
place, thereby to preserve the memory of some things which may be useful, at
least for the Owners and Inhabitants in the same.

It lies at the South side of the County, by a Rivulet running into the River
of Rother, about three miles and a half (toward the South) distant from
Cranbrook.

A small part thereof (called Haselden, viz. two houses, and a small quantity
of land to each) is in the Hundred of Shoyswell, and County of Sussex, and the
residue thereof lies in Kent, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Lath of
Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath.

So much thereof as is either in the Borough of Hawkeherst, otherwise South
Borough, anciently called the half of Barnfield (and lately, but without
ground, the whole Hundred) or in the North Borough (truly called the half
Hundred) is in the Hundred of great Barnfield (where the liberty of St.
Augustine claims over the Denns of Ockley, Cillenden and Parock, in that
North Borough.)

So much thereof as is in the West Borough, is in the Hundred of Selbrittenden,
and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Denns of
Foxhole, Little Hensell, Pipsden, Congherst, and Little Riseden in the same.

And the residue, viz. so much thereof as is in the Borough of Crothal (which
is but a very small part) is in the hundred of Cranbrook.

The aforesaid Borough of Hawkherst has a court Leet of it self (where the
Barsholder of that Borough is chosen, and the inhabitants of the same owe no
service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred of great Barnfeild, but at
that Court an inhabitant of this Borough may be chosen Constable of that
Hundred, and the liberty of Wye claims over this Borough.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of great Barnfeild, and was called St.
Laurence.

This Parish is very populous, and one of the greatest Parishes in the County
(not having a Town therein) and it so appeared to be, for that anciently upon
Collection of the number of Communicants in every parish in the County (only
four Parishes in the same) viz. Maidstone Cranbrooke, Feversham, and Goudherst
(all which have Towns in them) were found to have more Communicants in them
than this, and the same had (within 20. years last past) at the least, 1400.
Communicants, but it has very many poor therein (the charge whereof in the
year, 1653. was 209l. 9s. 3d. whereas in the year 1549.) it was but, 7s. 2d.
and although the parsonage of the same be of very good yearly value, yet it
has for many years past been, and for the future will be a great cause of
sadness to the place, that the allowance for the maintenance of the Minister
thereof is very small, which thus happened.

The Abbot of Battle was Patron of the Church, and (till the dissolution, or
surrender of that Abbey) there was always a Rector incumbent, of one of which
number (viz. John Crane) a monument in brass (mentioning the same) was till of
late times, upon a fair tombe-stone, in the great Chancell of this Church, and
one Henry Simons (at the time of the appropriation herein after mentioned) was
Parson incumbent there, But ( Trint. 30. Hen. 8. The Abbey being surrendered to
the King) be 19. Mar^ij that year granted the Patronage and Presentation of the
Rectory to Charles Brandon (Duke of Suffolk) and that King (11. December. 38.
of his reign) granted the Parsonage to the Dean, and Chapter of Christ-church
Oxford, and appropriated the same thereunto (immediately after the death of the
said Simons the incumbent) and appointed that the said Dean and Chapter should
present an able Clarke to the Ordinary (who should be named perpetual Vicar of
this Church) and should bear all charges (except reparation of the Chancell)
and should have a dwelling, 12l. 10s 10d. yearly pension, and should pay the
King yearly, for his tenths, 258. 1d. and be charged with first fruits (which
being done without the consent of the said Duke, and no act done by him therein
(that appears, no Vicar was endowed) but the Office of Curate, was (ever
since) given by the said Dean and Chapter as a Donative, and no first fruits
were paid, but only 118. 8d. as a stipendiary.

Afterward the said Dean, and Chapter (10. Febura^ 2. and 3. of King Phillip,
and Queen Mary) granted to Sir. William Peter, 81 per. annum. out of the
Parsonage (so to be employed) that the Churchwardens of this Parish might
receive, and pay it to the Vicar) But Edward Godwin (the late Stipendary
incumbent) had of the said Dean and Chapter (for his Salary) 20l. per. annum,
the profits of the Easter book (which then was of some value) some rooms in
the Parsonage house (called the Vicarage rooms) a small croft (called the
vicarage croft) and the herbage of the Churchyard (all which was of so
inconsiderable value, that upon his being sequestered about 13. years since) no
other would accept of the place, but the Parish was destitute of a minister by
the space of 14. months following, and then the Pa^ishioners were enforced (to
their great charge) to provide a Minister: But (not being able to bear that
charge longer) an augmentation was procured from the state (which in few years
afterward was taken away) and the former allowance left to the Minister for
his maintenance, which (by reason that the Easter book is become of no value)
is but 24l. per. annum. (at the most) whereupon how this Parish has since been
supplied with a Minister, and is like to be for the future) the Reader may
judge.

The Church was founded by the Abbot of Battle (in the reign of King Edw. 3.)
whose arms, and his sonns are at the top of the furthest of the three North
windows in the North chapel or chancell there, and the arms of the Abbey of
Battle; and of Etchingham, and Pashley, two ancient (and then eminent family*)
in the Parishes adjoining (viz Etchingham, and Tiseherst) are in glass at the
top of the first of the said three windows, and upon the great beam, at the
top of the said Chancell, was carved the arms of Congherst (a very ancient
family in this Parish) whose house, of that name, and inheritance in this
Parish (about 100. years since) came to the family of Scot, by the marriage of
Thomas Scot with Mildred (daughter and heir of Thomas Congherst) and is still
remaining in that family, But ^^e more ancient seat of that family of
Congherst, was at a place, in this Parish (near the County of Sussex) yet
called old Congherst (which was burned by the Danes) and the Mote and manner of
situation of the house is still there extant.

In this Chapel also (in the North Windows of the same) are the pictures in
glass, of twelve men and their wives kneeling. viz. three at the bottom of
each of the said three Windows, and three at the top of the middle of the said
three windows.

These windows having been broken, and more especially of late, what was
written under most of them is not legible, only it appears; that the
Christian name of the first was Robert, and that the second of them was Ioane,
wife of the said Robert, and Simon their son, principal Founder of that
Chapel, who the third was, is not legible, the fourth was Ockley, the fifth
was Delmynden, the sixth was Siesley, the seventh was Cockshot, the eighth was
Badcock, and the ninth was Bartilt, but who the other three were, viz. those at
the top of the middle window, is not legible; By tradition, these twelve are
reported to be owners of the twelve Denns, which are held of Wye, but that
cannot be, for that only seven of the said twelve, are in this Parish, and it
is (as aforesaid) yet discernable, That three of them were Ockley, Cockshot and
Badcock, none of which were of the said twelve Denns (though very ancient
inhabitants in this Parish) but I rather conceive them to be twelve principal
inhabitants in this Parish, at the time of the foundation of that Church.

In the great Window of the middle Chancell, were lately the pictures (well
made in glass) of the good Kings of Israel, and of the Prophets in their times
(but lately spoiled, and defaced.)

There is also in this Church, a memorial of the interment there of the family
of Boys, a family of chief esteem in this Parish, both at present, and for
several discents before, whose ancestor (about 88. years since) came into this
Parish to a fair seat (near this Church) by him purchased of Edmund Roberts
(whose father John Roberts was above 100. years since) buried at the foot of
the reading deske in this Church, with an effigies, and inscription of brass
upon him lately taken away.

In the South Chancell of this Church was anciently the image of the Virgin
Mary, and several tapers or lights were also in this Church (called the beam
light, the paschall light, Judas candles, St. James light, and Saint Laurence
light, over the North Porch of this Church, is a room (anciently called the
Treasury) wherein were and still are (laid up in a chest) several ancient
writings concerning the tenants of the twelve Dens (in and near this Parish) in
Wye liberty, and concerning lands and other rights, belonging particularly to
this Parish.

The Chest aforesaid had anciently three locks, and the keys of the door of
the room, and of two of the said three locks, were kept by three Parishioners
(t^^ants of Wye liberty) and the other key of the chest, was kept by one of the
Churchwardens.

In this Church also is a box fastened upon a post, and called the Poor man's
box, which anciently had four lock^ thereunto (the key of one of which was kept
by the present Minister, the keys of two other of them by the two Church
wardens, and the key of the other by one of the Parishoners) and in this box
were kept the moneys given to the use of the poor, and securities taken for
moneys lent thereof by the Parish to poor Parishoners.

In this Parish (among other customs, or manners of tything) there is a
custom to pay to the Parson yearly (by the acre) for Tithe of grass (cut in
the lands at, or near the Moore) and for sore-Pasture, and after-Pasture of the
same, two pence; and for the like in all other places of the Parish, three half
pence by the acre.

Also three half pence for the Ty^he of every ten bushels of Apples.

For the profit of each Milch-Cow (besides the Calfe) a penny, and a half
penny for every Calfe; all payable y^ar^y at Easter.

And Suite being between Sir John Wildegos (Farmer of the Parsonage) and John
Gibbon (Parishoner of this Parish) in the Ecclesiastical Court, (touching this
manner of Tything) Gibbon, in Michaelmas Term 5^. Iacobi Regis 1607. obtained
a prohibition thereupon (out of the then King's Bench) which was tried at the
Assi^es holden at Rochester, upon Thursday in the second week in Lent that
year, before Justice Waimsley and Justice Croke (then Judges) and the verdict
passed for the said Gibbon, and in Easter Term following judgment was given
accordingly in the King's Bench.

The suggestion, and deposi^ions are entered in that Court, Trin 4^. of King
James, Roll 692.

Most of the lands in this Parish are within the liberty of Wye (anciently
belonging to the Abbey of Battle in Sussex) and Od^ Abbot of Battle, and the
Covent there, by Charter without date, granted to the owners of the said lands
(by the name of his men of Hawkeher^) and their heirs, the Vi^^e of Hawkeherst
paying yearly ten Pounds, twenty Hens, and two hundred and fifty Eggs, with
diverse restrictions.

But afterward 5^. December, 14. Edw. 1. Henry, Abbot of Battle, and the Covent
there, g^a^ted to them and their heirs (by the name of their tenants of
Hawkeherst) all the tenements there, which they held of his fee, viz. in the
Denns of Hawkeherst, Amboldesse^s, Delm^^den, Sessele, Be^^tylts, Fissendenne,
Markdenne, Freehele, Wynesle, Wyn^hinden, Chittenden, and Witheringhope; in
Houses, Gardens, Lands and Woods, Plains, Meadows, and P^stures, Waters, and
Mills, with the appurtenances (to hold freely, and in peace) paying yearly ten
Pounds, twenty five Hens, and two hundred and fifty Eggs: And reserved suite to
his Court of Wye, from three weeks to three weeks, by two men only, and for
that the Abbot took into his hands Anglingle, which formerly was parcel of
this tena^cy, he by composition abated the tenants forty shillings per annum of
the ten pounds, and (for the Hens and Eggs so reserved) they compounded to
pay him yearly eight shillings, and for the said suit of Court six shillings
eight pence; So the moneys by them paid yearly ever since (to to the Abbey, and
the since owners of Wye) is eight pounds fourteen shillings eight pence.

And the Tenants usually kept here a three weeks Court (called Slipmill,
otherwise Moorhouse Court) for determination of matters under forty shillings,
and accordingly such a Court was (in my memory) there kept, though now
discontinued.

They also had power by the grant last before mentioned, to have a Reve of
their own, and they had at least once in every year a Court (which was also
called by the name aforesaid) where they did apportion the rent aforesaid
payable to the Abbey, and choose their Reve, which Court is still there kept
(usually once in the year, about Easter) but for sixty years last past, was
styled the Court Baron of the Lord, and there they presented the alterations of
tenancies, and elected two Bedels to gather the rent.

3^. Iunij, 33^. Hen. 8^. that King granted the Royalty and Rents at Hawk^herst
belonging to Wye, to Sir John Baker, and 20^. Martij 1^. Elez. she granted Wye
to Henry Lord Hunsdon.

Afterward controversy arose between the tenants at Hawkeherst and Sir Richad
Baker (heir of the said Sir John) touching the validity of their former
grants, and 31^. Ian. 10^. Eliz. the tenants obtained a decree against the said
Sir Ri^hard, for quiet enjoying their tenements aforesaid, as formerly, and
12^. Febr. following, the said Sir Richard released his claim to them, and
after suites between the heir of the said Sir John, and the heir of the said
Lord Hunsdon (touching the Royalties and rent aforesaid) the said heir of
Baker, 10o. November. 17o. Iacobi Regis, granted his right in the same to the
said heir of the said Lord Hunsdon, so that now the Lord of Wye is owner of
the said Royalties and rent there:

This parish has several lands belonging thereunto, to be employed to pious
uses, viz. Henry Parson, and William his son, 13o. Iunij 22o. Edw. 4.
conveyed (to their use for ever) a message and acre of land (which message
was of late times called the Church house, and adjoyneth to the Churchyard)
the rent thereof, and of the land thereunto, is employed toward reparation of
the Church, and upon part of the land was erected an Almeshouse (which is
employed to the use of the poor of this Parish) and in the close of the said
message, is another house, usually called the Sexton's house, the same having
been, for about sixty years past, used for the habitation of the Sexton of this
Parish, and these messuages and lands are enjoyed accordingly.

Likewise Thomas Iddenden 3. April 1556. willed several messuages and lands
(lying at and near a place in this Parish called High Street) to be for ever
employed for Pious uses, in that Parish (and the same being deteyned from the
Parish several years) at length, upon an inquisition taken before
Commissioners for charitable uses, 12. December. 14. King James, the aforesaid
Will, and charitable uses were found, and the said messuages and lands (by
those Commissioners 29. April following) decreed to be enjoyed, and employed
accordingly, the trustees, and manner of employment thereby settled, and the
same are enjoyed accordingly.

Also Thomas Gibbon, 3o. December. 15o. Eliz. granted to trustees for ever, an
annuity of forty three shillings four pence per annum, out of his message and
three pieces of land, upon Amboldesherst in that Parish, containing seven
aacres, which annuity was purchased from him by the Parishoners, to be employed
toward the maintenance of the said Church, and the same is enjoyed and
employed accordingly,

A Market (by the grant of King Edw. 1. 5. of his Reign, to the Abbey of
Battle) was anciently kept in this Parish upon every Tuesday (upon the green
at the Moore, against the mansion house now of William Boys Esquire) but (for
many years past) the same has been discontinued, yet within the memory of men
lately living a Market cross stood there, and very lately there also stood a
little house (called St. Margarets cross) since quite demolished, wherein when
the Market was in being, the corn unsold was usually put, and the memory of
that Market is partly retained by the name of a place near thereunto (yet
called the Market place) and old shops there yet standing.

A ^air is kept yearly in this Parish (near the Church upon the day of St
Laurence (being the tenth day of August) and was granted by the aforesaid King
Edw. 1. (3. Mar^ij. 5. of his reign) to the Abbey of Battle, to hold for three
days ( viz. in the Vigill, day, and morrow of St. Laurence aforesaid) but the
same now usually begins upon the aforesaid day of St. Laurence, and lasts
one day following.

There was also in this parish another fair kept yearly upon St. Valentines day
(being the 14th, day of February) in the field, at the next gate beyond Moore
house (at a place where lately stood a pound) but for many years past, this
fair has been discontinued.

In this Parish also anciently stood five crosses, or watch-houses, one upon
Badcocks green, (called Badcocks Cross, (long since fallen down, another in
the high way, between High-gate, and High Street aforesaid, at the West corner
of the turning toward Slipmill anciently called Cooks Cross, but lately
Philpots Cross, part whereof was lately standing there, another at Skelcrouch
(lately standing at the turning there from the highway from Kentbridge, to
Hawkherst Church) called Skelcrouch Cross; another at High-gate aforesaid
called Highgate Cross yet standing, and the other at four Trowes (called four
Trowes) otherwise Pipsden-crosse (yet also standing.)

The place aforesaid called Highgate, took its name in respect, that several
gates anciently stood at several places in this Par^sh to enclose the commons
belonging to the aforesaid Tenants of Wye; and one of the said gates standing
at this place (being upon a high hill in respect of the rest) ^he same was
called High-Gate.

This Parish was (within memory) divided from Saleherst in Sussex, by a bridge,
called Kentbridge, under which the river ran, about ^ix rods at the Narrow
entering into the way beyond the now bridge, which old bridge being taken away,
and the river turned to run under the now bridge, the broad place (between the
now b^idge, and that narrow place) seems to be in Saleherst in Sussex, But in
truth is in Hawkherst in Kent.

In the west hedge (...) field (called Beacon field) near the highway (called
Beacon lane) leading between Four Trowes aforesaid, and Foxhole, lately stood a
Beacon and Watch house, both since down.

I beg pardon for so long insisting upon the matters in this Parish (which I
did for the reasons aforesaid) and now further proceed as before.

HAWKING.
Lies at the South East part of the County, near the sea, about four miles and
a half (toward the North East) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of
Stouting, Hun^red of Folkstone, Lath of Shepway, East division of the County,
and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there.

It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Michael.

HAYES.
Hese, Lies at the West end of the County, near Surrey by the River
Ravensborne, about one mile and a half (toward the South-West) distant from
Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton
at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

HEDCORNE.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by the River Me^way, about five miles
(toward the South-West) distant from Leneham, so much the^eof as is in the
Borough of Stepherst, is in the Hundred of Barckley, and Bailiwick of the Seven
hundreds.

So much thereof as is in the North Borough, is in the Hundred of Cranbrook,
and Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds.

Part also of this Parish is in the Hundred, and Bailiwick of Eyhorne.

Other part thereof is in the Hundred of Tenh^m, and Bailiwick of Scray.

And the residue is in the Hundred of Calehill, and Bailiwick of Chart and
Longbridge.

So much thereof as is in the Hundreds of Barckley, or Cranbrook, is in the
Lath of Scray, in the West division of the County,

So much thereof as is in the Hundred of Eyhorne is in the Lath of Aylesford,
and West division of the County.

And so much thereof as is in the Hundreds of Tenham, or Calehill, is also in
the Lath of Scray, But in the East division of the County

This Parish is in the East division of the Justices in ^he Lath of Aylesford,
and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claymeth over the Den of
Habenbury in the same.

It was all in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was called St. Peter and Paul,
and foun^ed by one Culpeper (whose monument, and arms, are in the South wall
of the same, and his arms also over the West door of the Belfree there.)

A Fair is kept yearly in this Parish upon St. Peter's day (being the nine and
twenti^th day of June.)

And in this Parish was a Rel^gious house called Motinden (otherwise Mod^^en,
otherwise M^tynden) dedicated to the ho^y T^nity (founded by Sir Robert
Rookesley (In the year 12^ 4.) Consisting of Crouched Friars (the chief
w^ereof was called Minister, and the Friars were called Brethren of the
redemption o^ Captives imprisoned by Pagans for the truth of Christ)

This house was at the suppression valued at 60l. 13s. 0d. 0b. per annum.

And he that desires to read touching the yearly putting the Devil to flight
(by the men of this house) upon their festival day (called Trinity Sunday) I
refer him to Mr. Lambards per ambulation (in Motindene.)

HERNE.
Lies at the North side of the County, near the Sea, about four miles and a
half (toward the North) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge
and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, claymeth there, but the
liberty of St. Augustine claymeth not, only particularly near the Church
there, but generally over the whole Parish, the same being in the hundred of
Blengate, which belonged to that Abbey

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Martin, which Church was anciently a Chapel to Reculver, and
Robert of Winchelsey (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 350. years since,
erected, and endowed, a perpetual Vicarage in the same.

In this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interments of Phillips
(above 180. years since) several Fineuxes (above 150. years since) and
Loverick, above 140. years since.

HERNEHILL.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about two miles and a half, toward
the Southeast, distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of S^ray,
Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, East division of the County, and Upper
division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Michael.

HERST.
Lies toward the Southeast part of the County, about four miles (toward the
West) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, hundred of
Street, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the
Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Leonard, but is demolished.

HEVER.
Lies toward the Southwest part of the County, by the River Medway, about
five miles (toward the Southeast) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower
division of Justices in that Lath.

Most part thereof is in the hundred of Somerden, and the residue viz. the
Borough of Linckhill, is in the hundred of Ruxley.

It was all in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church stands in the
hundred of Somerden.

Here was a Castle, of which Sir Thomas Boleyn (Sheriff of Kent 3. Hen. 8.) was
owner.

HIGHAM.
HEigham, Heah^am, Heyham, Lies at the Northside of the County, near the River
of Thames, about four miles, (toward the Northwest) distant from Rochester,
in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamel, Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. The liberties of the
late Bishop of Rochester, and late Dean of Canterbury claim there.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Mary's.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Michaelmass day (being the 29. day of
September) In this Parish was a Nunnery of Black Veyled Nuns, Founded by King
Stephen) and this Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the
repair of the ninth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

HINCKSELL.
HInxhill, lies toward the Southeast part of the County, about two miles,
toward the Northeast, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division
of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. It was in the Deanery of Limpne* and Diocese
of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. M^ries, in which is a mo^ument of
Sir Robert Edolph, sometimes owner of the Manor of Hinxhill.

HITH.
HEth, Head, This is one of the Cinque Ports, lies at the Southeast part of
the County, near the Sea, about three miles and a half (toward the Southwest)
distant from Folkestone, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and East
division of the County (incorporated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and
Commonalty of the Town and Port of Hith; before that, by the name of Jurats,
and Commonalty of the Town and Port of Hith, and before that, by the Name of
Barons of the Town and Port of Hith.

It is in the division of the Justices of that Corporation, The Liberties
whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same. The Liberty of the late
Achbishop of Canterbury also claims there, and it was anciently a Hundred of
it self.

It was all in the Deanery of Ele^am, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Leonard (which Church was anciently a Chapel to Saltwood.

There were also formerly four other Churches in this Town ( viz. St. Mary, St.
Nicholas, St. Michael, and St. Bernard, all demolished.

Among other losses which this Town suffered, the principal were, the Sea
forsaking the same, and a very great loss by pestilence and Fire about 250.
years since.

In the year 849. King Aelfred, gave Hith to Christchurch Canterbury, but
afterward is came into other hands. For in the year 1036. one Halden, a
Prince, gave the same again to that Church, and afterward (in the time of King
Henry 2.) it was in that Kings hands.

Here are two Hospitals (both under the government of the Majors and Jurats of
this Town (the one called St. John's, and the other St. Bartholomews) the last
whereof was founded (about 300 years since) by Haymo of Hith (born in this
Town, and sometimes Bishop of Rochester) for ten poor men.

Anciently the Archbishop of Canterbury did yearly appoint to this Town, a
Bailiff, to govern with their Jurats, and afterward the Town obtaining a
Charter to choose a Mayor; He was (and still is) chosen yearly upon Candlemass
day, being the second day of February, and anciently the E^ection was in St.
Bernards Church.

Upon Wednesday in Easter week (being the sixth day of April 1580.) was so
great an Earthquake in this Town^ that it caused the Bells of ^he Church to
sound.

A Market is kept in this Town upon every Saturday, and two Faires are kept
the^e yearly ( viz. one upon St. Peter's day, being the 29. day of June, and the
other upon the day of St. Edmund the King, being the 20. day of November.

West HITH.
Lies at the Southest part of the County, near the Sea, about one mile and a
half, toward the West, distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shepway, and East division of the County.

Part thereof is a member of the Town and Port of Hith, in the division of the
Justices of that Town and Port, and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque
Ports claim over the same, which in truth was (of it self) once a Port, till
the Sea fell from it, and caused the rise of the before mentioned Port of Hith.

The residue is in the Hundred of Worth, and division of the Justices in the
Lath of Shipway.

The Liberty of Wye also claims in this Parish.

All this Parish was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stood in the Hundred of Worth, and was called St. Mary's, but is
demolished.

In or very near this Parish, is Shipway (a place anciently famous for the
great Court there kept, by the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports (of which Court,
I re^d, that the same could be holden but once in every year; And that then the
Lord Warden also must be personally present.

At this place also the said Lord Warden did antie^tly take his Oath (for
execution of his Office, which was not taken upon a Book (as is usual) but
upon his Allegiance and Honor.

HOLLIN GBORNE.
HOlingeburn, lies about the middle of the County, about three miles, toward
the Northwest, distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyhorne,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the county, and East division of Justices
in that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Hollingborn. This Parish was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints.

In the year 980. or (as another reports) 1015. one Athelstan, gave
Hollingborn to Christchurch Canterbury, and afterward King Henry 2. gave to
the same lands upon the Hill in this Parish.

HOO.
ST. Warburgh, lies toward the Northside of the County, by the River Medway,
about three miles, toward the Northeast distant from Rochester, in the
Bailiwick and hundred of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the county,
and North division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Warburgh.

HOPE.
HOpe All Saints, lies at the Southeast part of the County, in Romney Marsh,
about one mile and a half, toward the Northwest distant from New Romney, in
the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and East division of the county.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of St. Martin, and the residue in the hundred
of Langport.

It is all in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh,
the liberty whereof claims over the same; the liberty also of Saint Augustine
claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the hundred of Langport, and was called, All Saints.

HORSMANDEN.
Lies toward the Southside of the County, by the River Medway, about one mile
and a half, toward the Northwest, distant from Goudherst, in the Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that
Lath. So much thereof as is in the hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, is in
the Bailiwick of Twyford.

Other part thereof is in the hundred of Larkefeild, and Bailiwick of Hoo.

And the residue, viz. the Borough of Rugmerhill is in ancient Demesne of
Aylesford, and aforesaid Bailiwick of Hoo: It was all in the Deanery of Malling,
and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the hundred of Brenchley and Horsman^en, and was called
St. Margaret: A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Swithin, being
the fifteenth day of July.

HORTON-KIRBY.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, by the River Darent, about three
miles, toward the Southeast, distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford, hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims there, and the liberty of the
^ate Dean of Canterbury claims over the lands, late of S^. Anthony Roper in
this Parish.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

One William Kirby, was sometimes owner of Horton-Kirby, which occasioned the
addition of Kirby to Horton, the ancient name of this Parish, to distinguish
the same from the other Horton in this County, next following.

MONKS-HORTON.
Lies toward the Southeast part of the County, by the River Stoure, about
three miles toward the Northwest, distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and
Hundred of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division
of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter. In this Parish was a Priory (a Cell to Jews) consisting of
black Monks of the order of Cluniacs (founded by Robert Ver Constable of
England, son of Bernard Ver) to the honor of God, the blessed Mary, St. John
the Evangelist, and St. Pancras, the Charter of the Foundation is without date;
but I conceive the same to be in the time of King Hen. 2.

The Priory (at the suppression 26. Hen. 8.) was valued at 95l. 12s. 2d. per
annum, and the Manor belonged to the same.

This Priory occasioned the addition of the word Monks to Horton, (the ancient
name of this Parish) to distinguish the same from the Horton last before
mentioned.

HOTH.
Lies at the Northside of the County, near the sea, about five miles and a
half, toward the Northeast, distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, for that it is in the
Hundred of Blengate (which belonged to that Abbey.)

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary Holy Cross.

HOTHFEILD.
Lies toward the middle of the Southeast part of the County, by the River
Stoure, about two miles and a half, toward the Northwest) distant from Ashford.

In the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray East division of the
County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. Part thereof is in the
hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and the residue in the hundred of Cal^hill.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there; It was in the
Deanery of Cha^ing, and Diocese of Canterbury; the Church stands in the
Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and was called St. Mary's.

Alexander Eden (a Gentleman of this county) here took and killed that
execrable Rebel Jack Cade, in the year 1450. For which he had 1000. Marks
reward from the then King Hen. 6.

HOUGHAM.
Lies at the southeast side of the county, adjoining to the sea, about two
miles and a half (toward the southwest) distant from Dovor. In the Bailiwick
of Stowting, and East division of the County. Part thereof is in the liberty of
the Cinque Ports, and of the Town and Port of Dovor, and in the Lath of St.
Augustine. Other part thereof is in the Hundred of Bewsborough, and Lath of St.
Augustine. And the residue is in the hundred of Folkestone, and Lath of Shipway.

All this Parish, other than what is (as before) in the liberty of the Cinque
Ports is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of St. Augustin^, and that
is in the division of the Justices of the Town and Port of Dovor. The Liberty
of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claims in this Parish.

It was in the Deanery of Dovo^, and Diocese of Canterbury, and Robert of
Hougham, was sometimes Owner of the same.

The Church stands in the hundred of Bewsborough, and was called St. Laurence.

HUCKING.
Lies toward the North part of the middle of the County, about four miles
and a h^lf, toward the Northeast, distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick,
and hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Ayl^ford, West division of the County, and East
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the ^a^e Dean of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Margaret.

HUNTON.
HVntington, Huntindune, lies toward the middle of the County, by the river
Medway, about four miles toward the southwest, distant from Maidstone, in the
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices
in that Lath.

So much thereof as is either in the hundred of Larkfeild, or Ancient Demesne
of Aylesford, is in the Bailiwick of Hoo.

So much thereof as is in the Hundred of Maidstone, is in the Bailiwick of
Eyhorn, and the residue, being in the Borough of Hunton, is in the Bailiwick
and hundred of Twyford, which Borough has a Court Leet of it self, where the
Botsholder is chosen; and the Inh^bitants thereof, ow^no service to the Court
Leet of the Hundred: Only, at that court a Constable of that hundred may be
chosen out of this Borough.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Shoreham, a peculiar to the late A^chbishop
of Canterbury, but in the Diocese of Rocheste^. The Church stands in the
hundred of Twyfo^d; (...) at the Northside of the Chancel of the same, is a
Fa^^ monument of Fane of Buston (otherwise Burri^estune, otherwise
B^rgericestune) in this Parish.

At the southsi^e of that chancell, is a memorial of the Interment of Clinton
(a noble Family, and Lord of Hunton (whose seat* called the Courtl^dge, near
this Church, is ruinated, but the ^cite thereof and Mote to the same are yet
visible) and in the south Isle of this Church is a memorial of the Interment
of Head, sometimes owner of Buston aforesaid. The Manor of Hunton was
anciently belonging to Christ church Canterbury.

St. JAMES.
Lies at the Northside of the county, ^n the Isle of Greane, adjoining to the
sea, about three miles, toward the Northwest, distant from Queenborough, in
the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Chetham and Gillingham, La^h of Aylesford,
West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath: It
was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar^) the late Archbishop of Canterbury)
but in the Dio^es^e of Rochester.

ICKHAM.
I^ham, Iiecham, Yecham, Ikham, Iecham, lies toward the east end of the
county, by the River Stoure, about three miles and a half toward the East,
distant from Cant^rbury, in the Bail^wick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St.
Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.
The libe^ty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor, of Ickham
and Brampling in Ickham, being granted to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33. of
his reign. But the liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Parish (the same
being in the hundred of Downhamford, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in
the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
John Evangelist, in which Church is, or lately was, a memorial of the
Interment of Ba, a Knight, very ancient.

In the year 791. Offa, King of the Mercians, gave Ickham to Christchurch
Canterbury, but the same afterward coming to other hands, in the year 958.
Aethelward gave the same again to that Church.

IFIELD.
Lies toward the Northside of the county, about two miles toward the
southeast, distant from Gr^vesend, In the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of
Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division
of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there. It wa^ in the
Deanery of Shoreham, (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in
the Diocese of Rochester.

IGHTHAM.
EIghtham, Itham, Igtham, Lies toward the middle of the West part of the
County, about one mile and a half, toward the southwest, distant from Wrotham,
in the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Aylesford, West division
of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of Wrotham claims over the same, it was in the Deanery of
Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocese
of Rochester.

In this Church is, or lately was, a very ancient monument of Marble, reputed
by some to be the Monument of Haw^e, a knight, sometimes Owner of the Mo^e; and
by others of one Cawne, but the certainty of which of them I find not.) There
also are, or lately were, memorials of the Interment of Clement, a Knight,
about 130 years since; and of Astall, above 110. years since.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Wednesday in Whitsonweek, and vulgarly called
Coxcombe Fair.

St. JOHN'S.
Lies at the Northeast end of the County, in the Isle of Th^net, adjoining to
the Sea, about six miles, toward the North, distant from Sandwich, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the
County. It is a member of the Town and Port of Dov^r, within the division of
the Justices of that Town and Port, and the liberties thereof, and of the
Cinque Po^ts claim over the same.

The liberty of St. Augustine also claims over the Vi^arage of St. John's and
M^rgate.

It was in the Dean^y of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury; and the Church
was called St. John Baptist.

Two Fairs are kept here yearly, one upon the Feast of the N^tivity of St. John
Baptist, called Midsummer day, being the 24 day of June, and the other upon
Bartholomew day, being the 24. day of August.

Mergate is in this Parish, and was the ancient entrance from the sea there; a
member of Dovor in the time of King Edw. 1. And the Justices of the County
taking upon them to assesse the rest of this Parish, as lying in the Foreign,
King Hen. 8. to put the same out of question, by letters Patents united it to
Dovor.

IVECHURCH.
Lies toward the Southeast part of the County, about two miles, toward the
Northwest, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, and
East division of the County.

Part thereof ( viz. that upon Ree wall) is in the liberty of the Town and Port
of New Romney; other part thereof is in the hundred of Aloesbridge, and the
residue in the hundred of St. Martins, and that part thereof is in the division
of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and the residue is in the division of
the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claims
over the same; the liberty of St. Augustine also claims in this Parish, and
the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof as is
within the Manor of I^kham.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the hundred of St. Martin, within the Liberty of Romney
Marsh, and was called St. George. In which are (or lately were) Memorials of
the interment of At Capels (otherwise C^pels) Knights, very ancient.

IWADE.
Lies at the Northside of the County, about two miles toward the Northwest,
distant from Milton, in the Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and
upper division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, and the residue is in
the Hundred of Tenham, and B^iliwick of Scray. The liberty of the late Dean of
Canterbury claims in this Parish

It was all in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury. The Church
stands in the hundred of Milton, and was called, All Saints.

KEMSING.
Lies about the middle of the West part of the County, about three miles,
toward the North, distant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley,
Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and
lower division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Sevenoke claims
there. And the liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims over the Manor of
Kemsing, of which Fulk of Brent, was anciently owne^.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham, (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Eadith.

By the grant of King Hen. 3. a Market was anciently kept here, upon every
Monday, and long since discontinued; but a Fair is kept here upon every Easter
Monday.

Who so desires to read touching the frequenting the Image of St. Eadith, in
this Churchyard, I refer him to Mr L^mba^d, Perambulation in Kemsing.

KENARTON.
KEnardington, lies toward the Southeast side of the County, about five
miles, toward the Southeast, distant from Tenterden.

Most part thereof is in the hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray, West division
of the County, lower division of Justices in that Lath, and the liberty of St.
Augustine claims in the same; and the residue is in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shepway, Hundred of Ham, East division of the County, and division of the
Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof claims over
the same:) Also the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so
much of this Parish as is within the Manor of Apledore.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church
stands in the hundred of Blackborn, and was called St. Mary's, which Church
was anciently far larger than now it is. The foundation whereof still
appears, but the same was fired by lightning, about one hundred years since,
after which the now little Church was builded, whereunto one Horn, a principal
owner in this Parish, was a good benefactor.

KENNINGTON.
Lies toward the southeast part of the county, by the river Stoure, about one
mile and a half, toward the North, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and
hundred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of S^ray, East division of the county,
and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor and Rectory of
Kennington.

It was in the Deanery of Charing and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's. In which are or lately were, memorials of the Interment of
Brent, an Esquire, and Walkesley a Knight very ancient.

KESTON.
Lies toward the West part of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the Southwest) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims there. It was in the Deanery of
Shoreham, a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury, but in the Diocese
of Rochester.

KINGSDOWN near Sittingborne.
Lies toward the middle of the Northside of the County, about three miles and
a half (toward the southeast) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and
Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper
division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury; and the Church
was called St. Katherine, which Church was founded by Roger of Chichester, the
51. Abbot of St. Augustines, about 380. years since.

KINGSDOWN. near Wrotham.
Lies toward the middle of the Northside of the County, about three miles,
toward the Northwest, distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Edmund the King, which Church was anciently a Chapel, and given by King Hen.
1. 10 the Church of Rochester.

KINGSNOTH.
Lies toward the Southwest part of the County, about one mile and a half,
toward the south, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Chart
and Longbridge, Lath of S^ray, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of Wye claims over the same: It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Michael.

KINGSTONE.
Lies toward the middle of the East part of the County, by the river Stoure,
about three miles and a half, toward the Northeast, distant from Eleham, in
the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Kinghamford, Lath of St.
Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, It was in the Deanery of
Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Giles.

KNOWLTON
Lies toward the East end of the County, about three miles (toward the
Southwest) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath
of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church is supposed to have been founded, or at least reedified, by one
Langley (of an ancient family in this place) and in the same are (or lately
were) very ancient memorials of the interment of the Family of Ringley.

LABORNE.
LEyborne, Leibourn, lies toward the middle of the West part of the County,
by the river Medway, about one mile toward the North, distant from West
Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford,
West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

Sr. William of Arsick (one of the eight chief Captains, or Lieutenant
Governors of Dovor Castle, in the time of King William the Conqueror) was
then owner of L^ybourn, and in the same was a Castle, of which the Lord
Leybourn, an ancient and eminent Family there, was owner. This Parish ought
anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the fifth Arch or Pere of
Rochester bridge.

LAMBERHERST.
Lies at the Southside of the County, adjoining to Sussex, and a great part of
the same, viz. from the River Medway, at Lamberherst bridge in the Town
(toward the Southeast) to the river at Beulbridge, is in Sussex, and the
residue is in Kent, about two miles and a half (toward the Southwest) distant
from Goudherst.

So much thereof as is in Kent, is in the Bailiwick of Twyford, Hundred of
Brenchley and Hors^^nden, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and
South division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in Kent and was called St. Mary's.

A Fair is kept here yearly, upon our Lady day, being the five and twentieth
day of March.

East LANGDON.
Lies toward the East end of the County, about three miles, toward the
Northeast, distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cornilo,
Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of East Langdon.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Augustine.

West LANGDON.
Lies toward the east end of the County, about three miles and a half,
toward the North, distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stow^ing, Hundred of
Bewshorough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division
of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's.

Here was an Abbey founded by Sir William Aberfeild, Knight dedicated to St.
Thomas the Martyr, consisting of While Channons, Premonstratenses, which at the
surrender was valued at 56l. 6s. 9d. per annum.

LANGLEY.
Lies near the middle of the County about three miles, toward the Southeast,
distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

In the year 1472. in the Park in this Parish did newly break out the Bourn or
Spring there.

St. LAURENCE.
Lies at the Northeast side of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, about four
miles and a half, toward the Northeast, distant from Sandwich, in the
Bai^iwick of B^idge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the
County.

Part thereof viz. Ramsgate, (otherwise Romans gate) adjoining to the Sea, is a
member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, within the division of the Justices
thereof, and the Liberties of that Town and Port, and of the Cinque P^rts claim
over the same.

And the residue is in the division of the Justices of the Lath of St.
Augustine, and the liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it
is the hundred of Ringslow, which belonged to that Abbey.)

It was all in the Deanery of West Bear, and Diocese of Canterbury. The Church
stands in the hundred of Ringflow and was called St. Laurence, which Church
is conceived to have been founded by the Family of Mau^ston (many of which
Family lie interred in the same:) And several of the Family of St. Nicholas
are there likewise interred.

The Justices of the County taking upon them to assess Ramsgate aforesaid, as
lying in the Foreign, King Hen. the 8. to put it out of question, united the
same by Letters patents to Sandwich.

LAYSDOWN.
Lies at the Northwest side of the County, in the Isle of Sheppey, adjoining
to the Sea, about four miles and a half, toward the North, distant from
Feversham, in the Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Mannours of
Laysdown and Boyeton, in and near this Parish, being given to the same by King
Henry 8. 33. of his reign. It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of
Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Clement.

LEEDS.
Lies near the middle of the County, by the river Medway, about three miles
and a half, toward the Southeast, distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and
Hundred of Fy^orn, Lath of Ayle^ford, West division of the County, and East
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof, as
is within the Manor of Hollingborn. It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas.

In this Parish is part of a Castle ( viz. the Outmost gates, and the old
Mill.) But the rest of the same is in Bromfield: Touching the foundation of
which Castle, I find, That one Ledian (a chief Counselor of King Ethelbert
the second) about 800. years since, raised there a Pile or Fort for his safety
(which was afterward wasted by the Danes) and so continued till the time of
King William the Conqueror; and then Sir Hugh Crevequer (a Norman Nobleman,
and one of the eight chief Captains or Lieutenant Governors of Dovor Castle)
having that place allotted to him (about the year 1071.) began the building
thereof the Castle, and called it, by the old name, Leeds.

At the Northwest part thereof, he built a Chapel; in which he put three
Channons, which afterward were (by Sr. Robert Crevenquer his son) removed into
the Priory in this Parish: And Adam Crevequer (son of the said Sir Robert)
finished that Castle (which flourished till the time of King Edward the second)
who took the same from Bartholomew Lord Badlesmer (to whom he had formerly
given it, in exchange for other lands) which taking away thus happened. In the
year 1321. about Michaelmas, Queen Isabell (wife of King Edw. 2.) in her
journey in this County, personally desired lodging in this Castle; but in the
absence of the Lord Badlesmer, Owner thereof; then being in Arms for the Barons
against that King, she was, by the then present Governor) denied entrance, at
which that King, hearing thereof, was incensed, and laying siege thereunto
(about the end of October following) took it: And therein Thomas Culpeper (the
Governor) whom he hanged, with five more of the chief persons which he found
therein; and the Lord Badlesmers Wife and Children he sent to the Tower, and
seized his Estate; and it continued in the Crown till the time of King Hen. 8.
(at which time it being run to ruin) Sr. Henry Guldeford, at that Kings
charge, reedified the same; and it came afterward to be the possession of St.
Ledger (by grant from the Crown) in the year, 1417. Queen Dowager Ioane (second
wife of King Hen 4. was (upon a charge of Treason) committed to this Castle;
And King Rich. 2. (after resignation of his Crown) was first committed hither,
before he was sent to Pomfret.

A Priory was built and endowed in this Parish by the aforesaid Sir Robert
Crevequer, and Adam his son, about 550. years since, who dedicated the same to
the honor of our Savior and St. Nicholas, and placed therein black Channons
regular, of the Order of St. Augustine, (which at the suppression was valued at
362l. 7s. 7d. per annum. And Thomas Haselwood (one of the Channons of this
Priory) was famous for the Chronicle written by him.

LEE.
Lies near the Northwest end of the County, about three miles, toward the
Southwest, distant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred
of Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper
division of Justices in that Lath: It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and
Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Margaret.

In the morning of the 4. Aug. 1585. the ground suddenly did sink so much, in a
Lane at Nottingham in this Parish, that three great Elms (the tops falling
downwards) sunk out of sight; the whole was 80. yards about, and above 50.
Fa^homs deep.

LENEHAM.
LEanham, Lenham, lies very near the middle of the County, about seven miles,
toward the southeast, distant from Maidstone, in the East division of
Justices, in the Lath of Aylesford, part thereof is in the Bailiwick, and
Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County; and the
residue (called East Leneham) is in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge,
Hundred of Cale^ill, Lath of Scray, and East division of the County.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there; and the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Leneham (which was given
to that Abbey by Kenwulfe King of Mercia, and Cuthred King of Ken^, in the year
804.)

It was all in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury. The Church
stands in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and was called St. Mary's. In which Church
are, or lately were) memorials of the interment of Apuldorfield (about 460.
years since) and of Barret, Mary's and Horn (all about 200. years since.) A
Market is kept here upon every Twesday, a Fair yearly upon the day of the
translation of St. Augustine (being the six and twentieth day of May) and a
Market for Bullocks at Sandway in this Parish, upon every Twesday after
All-Hollanday, being the first day of November, until Christmas.

LEVELAND.
LIveland, lies toward the East side of the middle of the County, about four
miles, toward the South, distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Leveland, but the liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Parish (for that
it is in the hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.)

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Laurence.

LEUSHAM.
LEvesham, lies at the Northwest side of the County (adjoining to Surrey) by
the river Ravensborne, about three miles and a half, toward the Northwest,
distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of
Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper
division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Mary's, in which Church is (or lately was) a memorial of the
interment of Hatecliffe (Lord Treasurer of Ireland) about 140. years since.

Sir John Merbury, Knight, founded a Priory in this Parish (consisting of black
Monks Aliens) belonging to the Abbey of Gaunt in Flaunders; King Hen. 3.
confirmed the same: And it was suppressed 2. Hen. 5.

The Manor of Leusham belonged to this Priory.

At this Parish (in the year 1472.) a great Spring newly brake out of the
earth. At Black-^eath (in or near this Parish) are many Trenches, and other
signs of Camps (a^tiently pitched there) is in truth there were ( viz. upon
Wednesday after Whitson week) in the year 1381. here appeared 40000. Horsemen
for King Richard the second, against Wa^ Tyler, Jack Straw, and their adherents.

In the year 1451. Jack Cade, that grand Rebel against King Hen. 6. encamped
here by the space of a month; and from hence sent his Traitorous demands (or
rather commands) to that King. Here also in the year 1452. King Hen. 6. pitched
his Royal Pavillion, in his preparation against his Cosen Edward Duke of York
(afterward King Edward the 4.)

Here likewise the Bastard Faulconbridge encamped three days against King
Edward the 4.

And here also in the year 1496. encamped the Lord Audley, Flammock and Joseph
the Blacksmith, and their adherents in their Rebellion against King Hen. 7.
(where the King fought and overthrew them, slew above 2000. of their
companions, and took 1500. prisoners, and among them the aforesaid Lord Audley,
Flammock, and Joseph, who were all three executed.

This place has also anciently been famous for several great and solemn
meeting, viz. 21. December. 1411. The Emperor of Constantinople was here
magnificently met by King Hen. 4.

In the year 1415. The Mayor and Aldermen of L^ndon, and 400. Citizens in red
(with red and wh^^e hoods) here me^ King Hen 5. at his return out of France
(after his great Battle at Agincourt,) and from hence conducted him to London.

Likewise 7. May 1416. The Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, here met
the Emperor Sigismund, and conducted him to their King Hen. 5.

Also the 28. of September. 1474. The Mayor and Aldermen of London, in Scarlet,
and 500. Citizens in Murrey, here met King Edward the 4. at his return from
France.

Upon Monday 27. Septem. 1518. The Lord Admiral of France, and the Bishop of
Paris (Ambassadors from the King of France) with above 1200. Attendants, were
here met by the Lord Admiral of England, from King Hen. 8. with above 500.
Gentlemen.

In the year 1519. Cardinal Campeius (Legate from Rome to King Hen. 8.) was
brought hither by the Gentry of this County; and here met and received by the
Duke of Norfolk, and many of the Gentry and Prelates, where (in a Tent of cloth
of Gold) he shifted himself into his Cardinals Robes (edged about with most
rich Ermin) and from hence rode to London.

And 3. of Ianua. 1539. The Lady Anne Cleave was here met (with great state)
from King Hen. 8.

In this Parish of Leusham Abraham Colf (late Minister of the same) in his life
time founded two Free-Schools (The one for teaching of youth English, and the
other for teaching them Latin) with several yearly allowances to the
Schoolmasters of the same. And also yearly allowance toward the maintenance of
some of the said Scholars at the Universities, whenever they should become
fit for those places: the oversight and government whereof he committed to the
Company of Leather-sellers, London.

LID.
Lies at the Southside of the County, adjoining to the Sea, about two miles
and a half (toward the southwest) distant from new Romney. It is a member of
the Town and Port of new Romney, and incorporated by the name of Bailiff,
Jurats, and Comonalty of the Town of Lid; and before that by the name of Barons
of the Town of Lid: the election of which Bailiff was anciently (and still is)
upon St. Mary Magdalens day, being the two and twentieth day of July.

The liberties of this Town, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the same^

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claims there. And the
liberty of Wye claims over the Borough of Dengemarsh there (which was a
member of Wye in the time of King William the conqueror) It is all in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Langport, East division of the
County, and division of Justices of the Corporation aforesaid.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called All Saints (in which is (or lately was) a memorial of the interment of
the Deerings, about 270. years since, and of Godfrey above 220. years since.

A Market is kept here upon every Thursday, and a Fair yearly upon the day of
St. Ana^letus, being the thirteenth day of July.

In the Beach (near Stone end) at the East side of this Parish, is to be seen a
great heap of stones, which the Inhabitants call the Tomb of St. Crespin and
Crispianus, supposed to be buried there.

Near the Sea also (at the southside of this Parish) is a place called
Holmestone, consisting of Beach and Pibble stones, yet Holme trees grow
plentifully upon the same.

LIDDON.
Lies toward the East part of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the Northwest) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, East
division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. Part
thereof is in the Hundred of Bew^borough and Lath of St. Augustine, and the
residue in the Hundred of Folkstone and Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there. It was all in
the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury. The Church stands in the
Hundred of Folkestone, and was called St. Mary's.

LIMINGE.
LImege, lies toward the southeast part of the County, about two miles
(toward the south) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred
of Loningborough, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Liminge claims over so much thereof as
is in the lower half Hundred of Loningborough; The liberty of Eleham claims
over the residue of the same, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury claims over the Manor of Liminge.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary and St. Eadburgh (which Church in the 25. year of King Edw. 3.
was held by the Lord Andomar de Rupy (Archdeacon of Canterbury, and valued at
20l. per annum.

King Eadbald gave to Eadburgh his sister (surnamed Tace) second wife and
widow of Edwin (King of the Northumbe^^) Liminge, where she built a Monastery
(of the Order of St Benedict) and there died and was buried.

LIMPNE.
LImeane, Limen, Leman, Lime, lies toward the south east side of the County,
about two miles (toward the West) distant from Hith, in the Lath of Shipway,
and East division of the County.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Stowting, and Hundred of Heane, other part
thereof is in the Bailiwick of Shipway and Hundred of Street, and the residue
is in the Bailiwick of Shipway and Hundred of Worth.

The liberty of Romney Marsh claims there, and so much thereof as it so
claims, is in the division of Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh,
and the residue is in the division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, the Church
stands in the Hundred of Street (out of the liberty of Romney Marsh) and was
called St. Stephen.

In, or near this Parish was an ancient Castle, called Stu^fall, built by the
Romans, but long fince ruinated.

LINSTED.
Lies toward the North part of the County, about three miles (toward the
southeast distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of
Tenham, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that
Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there. It was in the
Deanery of Ospringe and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Peter and Paul.

LINTON.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about three miles and a half, toward
the south) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn, Hundred of
Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of
Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Maidstone claims over the same. It was
in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called
St. Nicholas.

LITTLEBORNE.
Lies toward the East part of the County, by the River Stoure, about three
miles (toward the northeast) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and ^^tham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, but the
Liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Littleborn (given to that
Abbey by King Withered, above 950. years since) and likewise claims over all
this Parish, for that it is the Hundred of Downhamford (which belonged to that
Abbey.)

It was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Vincent.

LONGFIELD.
LAngefield, lies toward the north-side of the County, about three miles
(toward the southwest) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over part thereof, which
was given to that Church by a Nobleman, called Birtrich, and Easwith his wife
(above 650. years since) it was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the
Church was called St. Mary Magdalen.

LOOSE.
LOse, Hlose, lies toward the middle of the County, by the River Medway,
about two miles (toward the south) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of
Eyhorn, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County,
and East division of Justices in that Lath.

The Liberty of Maidstone claims over the same, and the liberty of the late
Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Loose, given to the same by one
Suet, a Widow, and her daughter, who had the same of King Aethelwulfe (above
800. years since) and the same afterward coming to King Henry the eighth, he
the 33. of his Reign did again give it to that Church.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton and Diocese of Canterbury.

LUDDENHAM.
Lies toward the north-side of the County near the Isle of Sheppey, about two
miles and a half (toward the northwest) distant from Feversham, in the
Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division
of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham which belonged to that Abbey)

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's.

LUDDESDON.
LVdsdowne, Hludesdun, lies toward the north part of the County, about four
miles (toward the south west) distant from Rocheher, in the Bailiwick of Hoo,
Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and
north division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Peter and Paul.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
nineth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

LULLINGSTONE.
Lies toward (the middle of the West part of the County, by the River Darent,
about three Miles and a half (toward the South-East) distant from St. Mary
Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton
at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper divisio^ of Justices in that
Lath.

The Liberty of the Duchy of Lanchaster claymeth over the Manor of
Lullingstone.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Buttolph.

In this Parish was anciently a Castle (the seat of a Family of that name) but
since of the family of Heart.

LYGHE near TUNBRIDGE.
Lies toward the South-West part of the County about two miles (toward the
West) distant from Tunbridge, in the West Division of the County, and lower
Division of Justices in the Lath of Sutton at Hone.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of
Wachlingstone, and Lath of Aylesford, and the residue, (part whereof is in the
Hundred of Codsheath, and other part in the Hundred of Somerden) is in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, and Lath of Sutton at Hone.

The Liberty of Sevenoke claymeth there, it was in the Deanery of Malling, and
Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Codsheath, and was called St. Mary's.

MAIDSTONE.
MEdwayes Town, Meidestane, Medestane, Medwegston, Caer, Megwag, Madus Town,
Lies toward the Middle of the County, by the Riverr Medway, about four miles
and a half (toward the East) distant from West Malling, in the Bayliwick of
Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and division of the
Justices of the Corporation of Maidstone.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the ancient
Parish Church was called St. Faith, But is now disused, other than by the Dutch
Inhabitants (who make use thereof for their Congregationall meeting) And the
Church (now reputed the Parish Church) was a Collegiate Church, called
All Saints, and stands near the College there.

In this Parish is a sweet, large and populous Town which (with the whole
Parish) is incorporated.

The Town is accounted the Shire Town, And the Assizes for the County, have (in
the time of the late King Charles and since) been holden here above ten times
oftener, and (in the time of the late King James.) three times ofter then in all
other places of the County, But (in the time of Queen Elizabeth) the same were
holden, almost twice as often in other places of the County, as here, and
oftener at Rochester, than in this Town.

The Town, and Parish have a Constable of their own. And the liberty of the
aforesaid Corporation claymeth over the same.

But the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury likewise claymeth over
the Manor of Maidstone (which Manor was antiertly a hundred of it self).

A Market is kept here upon every Thursday, and four Faires yearly ( viz. One
upon Candlemas day) being the second day of February, another upon the feast of
Philip and Jacob (being the first day of May) Another upon the day of St Edmund
the King (being the ninth day of June) and called Garlic Fair: And the other
upon St. Faiths day (being the sixth day of October.)

Boniface of Savoy (Archbishop of Canterbury) about, 400. years since) built
here an Hospital (then called the New Work) To the honor of St Peter, and
Paul, and Thomas the Martyr, which hospital William Courtney, likewise
Archbishop (about 130. years afterward) pulled down, and erected there a
college (for secular Priests) to the Honor of All Saints, And also erected
the Collegiate Church aforesaid (in which he was intombed) and this College
(at the suppression) was valued at, 159l. 7s. 10d. per. annum.

John Vfford (otherwise Offord) also Archbishop (about 300. years since) began
the foundation of the Palace here (but dying before he finished the same) Simon
Islip (his Successor) finished it, and the same being (about, 130. years
afterward) out of repair, John Morton (likewise Archbishop) repaired, and
augmented it.

Thomas Arundell (also Archbishop) about 240. years since, built here a
Chaunt^y for the Brothers of Corpus Chrisli (now used for a Free School) To
which School William Lamb (Cloathworker of London) was a good benefactor.

This Town was governed by a Portreve, until the time of King Edward the 6.
(By whose incorporation the same became Governed by a Mayor) which privilege
being lost (by adhearing to the Rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyat (in the time of
Queen Mary) Queen Elizabeth afterward rest^red the same, and (for further
addition of honor) made it a Borough.

The Town in respect of the situation, and convenience of receipt, has been
accounted the fittest place for public meeting of the County; And that this
part of the County was long since accounted the most convenient place for the
whole County to assemble at, appears by the County Court, most usually kept at
Penenden, otherwise Pickenden Hoth (about one mile distant from this Town)
where also the Knights of the Shi^e (to serve in Parliament) have been usually
elected (as is before set forth in Boxley) which Hoth was also (in the time of
King William the Conqueror) esteemed the most indifferent place of assembly of
the Inhabitants of the County, for dispatch of public business, as may appear
by the great assembly there in his days for debate of the Controversy between
Odo Earl of Kent, and the Bishops of Canterbury and Rochester.

This Town (as an indifferent place of the County) has the custody of the
public Standards committed to it, by the Statute 11^. Hen. 7^. Ca. 4^ and one
of the two Counnty Gaoles is here kept, and although (as I have before set
forth) the Assizes were in the time of Queen Elizabeth, very often holden out
of this Town; yet I also observe that in those days the same were here holden
much oftener than in all the places of the County, ( Rochester excepted) where
the truth is, the same were in those days holden two or three times at the
most oftener than here: But for how much the same were oftener here, than at any
other place in the County, since the death of that Queen, which is above fifty
five years since, I refer the Reader to what I have before set forth.

The whole building, where the Court for trials of Nisi Prius is kept, was
raised from the ground about fifty years since, there being no building at that
place before, but that Court kept near that place under a shed, for that
purpose, from time to time set up.

The Archbishops of Canterbury were great Benefactors to the Stone Bridge here.

Wat Tiler (that Idol of Clownes, and famous Rebel, in the time of King
Richard the second) was of this Town and in the year 1206. about this Town was
a Monster ^ound stricken with lightning (with a head like an Ass, a belly like
a man, and all other parts far different from any known creature (but not
approachable nigh unto, by reason of the stench thereof.)

This Town ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the fifth
Arch or Pere of Rochester bridge

East MALLING.
ESt Mallinges, lies toward the middle of the County by a little Rivulet
running into the River Medway about one mile and a half (toward the East)
distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkfeild, Lath
of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of Maidstone claims over new Hith, in this Parish.

It was all in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Mary's (which Church King John 5. April 7. of his reign, gave to West Malling
Abbey: And in the same are or lately were memorials of the interment of the
Ere^ies, about 180. years since.

A Fair is kept yearly at Larkefield in this Parish, upon the day of St.
James, being the five and twentieth day of July.

West MALLING
TOwn Malling, Malinge, Mealling, lies toward the middle of the County, by a
small Rivulet, running into the River Medway, about three miles and a half
(toward the Southeast) distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that
Lath.

The Town and all the Parish (except St. Leonards Borough) has two Constables
of it self; and that Borough is in the Hundred of Larkefield.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Town, and was called St. Mary's.

A Market is here kept upon every Saturday, and three Faires yearly ( viz. one
upon Lammas day, being the first day of August; another upon St. Matthew's day,
being the one and twentieth day of September; and the other upon St. Leonard's
day, being the sixth day of November.

King Edmund, about 710. years since, gave this Malling to the Church of
Rochester, and afterward, in the time of King William the Conqueror, in the
year 1078. Gundulphus (Bishop there) founded here an Abbey for black Nuns, of
the order of St. Benedict (to the honor of the Virgin Mary) which was
confirmed by the same King, and afterward by King Henry the first: And at the
suppression was valued at 218l. 4s. 2d. ob. per annum, and about 31. Hen. 8.
was by that King granted to the Archbishop of Canterbury. This Nunnery,
together with the Town, was burnt in the time of King Rich. 1.

Francis Tresse of this Town, about twenty six years since, Willed 40l. for
building a Free School here (which was afterward built) and he also willed
13s. 4d. per annum for ever, toward repairing of that School.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
third Arch or Pere of Rochester Bridge.

MARDEN.
Lies toward the South part ^f the County, by the river Medway, about four
miles and a half (toward the North) distant from Goudherst.

In the West division of the County and lower division of Justices in the Lath
of Scray.

So much thereof as is holden of the Manor of Hunton, is in the Borough of
Hunton, Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, and Lath of Aylesford; A small part
thereof (called Tilden) is in the Hundred of Maidstone, another small part is
in the Hundred of Eyhorne; and both these last, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn and
said Lath of Aylesford; and the residue is in the said Bailiwick of Twyford,
Hundred of Marden, and Lath of Scray.

The liberties of St. Augustine, and late Dean of Canterbury claim there.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Marden, and was called St. Michael; and
a Fair is kept here yearly upon Michaelmass day (being the nine and twentieth
day of September.)

St. MARGARETS near Dovor.
ST. Margrets at Cliff, lies at the East side of the County, adjoining to the
sea, about three miles and a half (toward the Northeast) distant from Dovor,
in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine,
East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Margaret.

A Fair is kept here yearly, upon the day of Rufine and Justin, being the
nineteenth day of July.

St. MARGARETS near Rochester.
Lies toward the North part of the County (adjoining to the City of
Rochester) in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the
County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of that City, (the liberty
whereof claims here from Horsted Farm, cross the woods, to the high way
leading from Rochester to Maidstone, and from thence, cross the Lands to
Windmill hill near Massenden Farm, and from thence, over the Feilds, cross
the way between this Parish, and Aylesford, down to a farm called, Rings, and
from thence into the River Medway. The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester,
claims also in this Parish. It was all in the Deanery of and Diocese of
Rochester. And the Church was caled St. Margaret.

St. MARY'S near New Romney.
Lies near the South-East side of the County, about two miles (toward the
North) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, East
division of the County, and division of Justices of the corporation of Romney
Marsh, The liberty whereof claymeth over the same.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of New-church, and the residue in the Hundred
of St. Martin* It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of St, Martin, and was called St. Mary's.

Saint MARY'S near Rochester.
Lies at the North side of the County, about five miles (toward the
North-East) distant from Rochester, In the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Hoo, Lath
of Aylesford, west Division of the County, and North Division of Justices in
that Lath.

The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

It was in the Deanery, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Mary's.

MEOPHAM.
MEpeham, Mepham, Meapeham, Mepaham* lies toward the Northside of the County,
about four miles (toward the South) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick
of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County,
and North division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Meopham (which in the year 940.) was given by Duke Eadulph to that Church, and
is likewise said to be given to that Church by Queen Ediva (otherwise Edgiva)
Mother of King Edmund, and Daughter and Heir of Earl Sigeline, (Lord of
Meopham) in the year 960.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St John
Baptist, which was built, or at least much repaired by Simon Mepham (Archbishop
of Canterbury) about 320. years since. And in the year 1385. repaired by
William Courtney (likewise Archbishop) and by him appropriated to Christchurch
Canterbury. But I elsewhere find, That the same was appropriated to the
Almnery of that Church, by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury about 480. years
since.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
nineth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge. And a Fair is kept here yearly upon
St. Peter's day, being the 29th. day of June.

MEREWORTH.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by a Rivulet running into the River
Medway, about one mile and a half, toward the South, distant from West
Malling, in the Bailiwick of Twyford, Hundred of Littlefield, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Laurence.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
fifth Arch, or Peer of Rochester Bridge; and here is a fair Seat of the
honorable Family of Fane.

MERSHAM.
MErseham, lies toward the Southeast part of the County, by the River Stoure,
about two miles and a half (toward the Southeast) distant from Ashford, in the
East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.
Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and Hundred of Bircholt
franchise, and the residue is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Chart and
Longbridge, and Lath of Scray.

The liberty of Wye claims there, and the liberty of the late Dean of
Canterbury claims over the Manor of Mersham, which was given to that
Church, in the year 1051. by one Siward and Matilda his wife, and the then King
Edward the Confessor, confirmed the same; and afterward it coming to King Hen.
8. He 33. of his reign, gave the same again to that Church.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and was called St.
John Baptist.

MERSTON.
Lies at the Northside of the County, about three miles (toward the
Northwest) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices
in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury.) But in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Giles, but is demolished.

MIDLEY.
Lies at the Southeast side of the County, about two miles (toward the
Northwest) distant from Lid, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of
St. Martin, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof, as
is parcel of the Manor of Aghne (otherwise Agonhee) which was given to that
Church by Offa (King of Mercia) in the year 791. And afterward coming to King
Hen. 8. He 33. of his reign gave the same again to that Church.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, but the Church is
demolished.

MILSTED.
Lies toward the North part of the County, about three miles (toward the
South) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and hundred of M^lton, Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary and Holy Cross.

MILTON near Canterbury.
MIddletone, Miletune, lies toward the East part of the County, by the River
Stoure, about one mile and a half (toward the Southwest) distant from
Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of
St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, and the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor and Rectory of Milton, which
Manor was the Seat and Inheritance of Brown, and the said Rectory was
appropriated to that Abbey by Pope Alexander, above 450. years since.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury, and one Lyschild (in the year
822.) gave this Milton to Christchurch Canterbury, and King Kenulphus confirmed
the same.

I find likewise that one Egel^ick Bigg gave the same to that Church, in the
year 1044.

MILTON near Gravesend.
MElton, Meletun, lies at the Northside of the County, adjoining to the River
of Thames, about one mile (toward the East) distant from Gravesend, in the
Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of Milton, and
Gravesend, the liberty whereof claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Peter and Paul.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of the Conversion of St. Paul (being
the five and twentieth day of January) and it holds a week.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
nineth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

Here King Hen. 8. raised a Platform or Block-house for the Defense of this
Town and Gravesend, and Command of the River.

MILTON near Sittingborne.
MIddleton, Lies at the North part of the County, nere the Isle of Sheppey,
about six miles (toward the North-West) distant from Feversham, In the
Bailiwick, and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County,
and upper Division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborne and Diocese of Canterbury, And the Church
was called Holy Trinity. In this Church are or lately were memorials of the
interment of the Family of Norwood of Norwood in this Parish (one above 250.
years since, and another above 160. years since) of Norton (to whom Norwood
aforesaid came by marriage) above 120. years since, And of Alefe (likewise
almost 120. years since.)

Hasting, the Danish P^rat, (in the year 893.) fortified a Castle at Kemsley
Down, in this Parish (long since demolished.)

This Town was anciently called the Kings Town, where they had a house which
(in the time of King Edward the Confessor) was burned by Earl Goodwins party:

A Market is here kept upon every Saturday.

MINSTER in Sheppey.
Lies at the north side of the County, In the Isle of Sheppey, Adjoining to
the sea, about four miles (toward the North East distant from Queenborough,
In the Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of Scray, East
Division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Mary, and St. Sexburgh (which Church was above 450. years
since appropriated to the Abbey of St. Augustine) And in the same is (or lately
was) a memorial of the interment of Norwood (before the Conquest) of Shurland,
of Shurland; near this place (very ancient,) of Soole, and Ware (above 130.
years since) And of Sir Thowas Cheney, Knight o^ the Garter (about a 100. years
since.)

The Liberty of St. Augustine claims there, And a Fair is kept here yearly
upon Palm Monday (being the Monday before Easter) Sexburgh (widow of
Ercombert, King of Kent, (about, 950. years since) Founded here a Mo^astery for
Nuns, of the order of St. Benedict, which about 120. years afterward was burnt
by the Danes, and 60. years afterward, reedified by William of Corveil
Archbishop of Canterbury, And (in the reign of King Henry, 1. it was dedicated
to the Honor of St. Mary, and St. Sexburgh, (which was afterward confirmed by
King Henry the 4.)

At the suppression, it was valued at, 129l. 7s, 10d. ob. per. annum.

MINSTER in Thanet.
MEn^re, Lies toward the North-East side of the County, In the Isle of Thanet
about three miles and a half (toward the North) distant from Sandwich, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East Division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Ringslow, which belonged to that Abbey.)

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's (the foundation whereof herein after appears) and in
the same is (or lately was) a very ancient monument of one Thorn or Shorn.
Domneva, Daughter of Erme^red, Son of King Eadbald, had issue by Mervald (son
of Peud^, King of ^ercia) a Daughter named Mildred (which she placed in a
Monastery in France.) And (above 950. years since) obtained of Egbert (King of
Kent) as much ground in Thanet, as a tame Do (which she had) would run over at
a course, which was granted, and the course (according to the description of
the same which I have seen the original whereof is said to remain in Trinity
College in Cambridge was thus.

The Dear was put out, at about the middle of the North side of the Isle at a
place called Westgate Bay, and after a straight course of a bout a quarter of a
mile, she made dow^e toward Birchingto^, almost half a mile, but then went
with some Windings, southwards again, about three quarters of a mile, and with
several winddings) went upwards, and beyond Woodchurch (at the Northside
thereof) about two miles and a half, and then made down again (toward the
Southwest) about a mile and a quarter, and went again, with several windings
(toward the West) about two miles and a ha^f, and then went (with some
windings) to the Southside of the Isle, to a place lying between Serreves Hope,
and Dockwerd Hope, so that this course included (of the East and Southsides of
the Isle) the now Parishes of St. John, St. Peter, St. Laurence, Stonar, and
this Parish of Minster (In which Parish the said Domneva built a Monastery for
Nuns (to the honor of the Virgin Mary) and called her said Da^ghter out of
France, and made her Abbess thereof (wh^ dying Abbess, was there interred) and
Eadburgh (the succeeding Abbess (after Mildreds death) built another Monastery
(of the order of St. Benedict) near to the former, to the honor of St. Peter
and Paul; And translated the body of Mildred thither. And after her death, in
the time of Sigebert, who was the succeeding Abbess (about the year 751) Danish
Pirates spoiled the Monastery so built by Domneva. And afterward (in the time
of Leofrina, Abbess of the said new Monastery, in the year 1011. the Danes by
fire, destroyed both that Monastery and the Nuns therein: (But the monument of
the said Mildred escaped their fury.) And the ruins of the Monastery was
c^nverted to the now Parish Church. And afterward King Canutus (in the year
1033. translated the ashes of this Mildred, to the Abbey of St. Augustine.

At Ippersfleet (n^w Ebsfleet) in this Parish 9000 Saxons (under the Conduct of
Hengist, and Horsa) landed about the year 447. (in aid of Vortiger King of
Britain against the forces of Valentinian the Roman Emperor.

King Hen. 1. granted a Market to be holden in this Parish, but the same was
long since discontinued.

MOLASH.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about three miles and a half (toward
the Northwest) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of
Felborough, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath
of Shipway.

The liberty of Wye claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge* and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter.

Great MONGEHAM.
Lies at the East side of the County, about three miles and a half (toward
the Southeast) distant from Sanwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of
Cornilo, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Martin.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon St. Lukes day (being the 18th. day of October.

Little MONGEHAM.
Lies at the East side of the County, about three miles and a half, toward
the South, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Handred of
Cornilo, L^th of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Dea^ry of Sandwich and Diocese of Canterbury: but the Church is
demolished.

MONKTON.
MVn^betun, Munketu^e, lies at the Northside of the County, in the Isle of
Thanet, about four miles and a h^^f, toward the Northwe^t, distant from
Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, Ea^^
division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Ma^nour of
Monkton, being given thereunto ^^y King Hen. 8. (33. of his reign) And the
^iberty of st. Augustine claims over this Parish, for that it is in the
Hundred of (...)* which (...) that Abbey.

It was in the De^nry of West B^^r, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was (...) St. Mary Magdalen, which Church (...) ((...) 480 years (...))
appropriated to the (...) by Richard Archbishop there (...) away (...) the said
Richard) And so (...) time of Archbishop Simon Is^p, He (39. Edw. 3.) restored
the same. And in this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interment of
the Families of Blenchenden and Crispe, very ancient.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Apolina^is, being the 23. day
of July. Queen Ediva, otherwise Edgiva, widow of King Edward (surnamed the
elder) about the year 960. gave Monk^on to Christ^hurch Canterbury.

MURSTON.
MVnston, lies toward the Northside of the County, about one mile, toward
the East, distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of
S^ray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sit^ingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called Al^-saints.

NAKINTON.
Lies toward the East part of the County, about one mile and a half, toward
the southeast, distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham,
Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in
that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Bridge and Petha^, and the residue in the
Hundred of Whitestaple.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there: And the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Nakinton. It was in the
Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury: The Church stands in the Hundred of Bridge
and Petham. And was called St. Mary's.

NETTLESTED.
NEitherlestede, lies tow^rds the middle of the County, by the River Medway,
about three miles toward the south, distant from West Malling, in the
Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the
County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of R^chester, and the Church was
called St. Mary's*

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
fifth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

NEWCHURCH.
Lies toward the southeast side of the County, about three miles and a hal^
(toward the North) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shipway, East division of the County, and division of the Justices of the
Corporation of Romney Marsh, (the liberty whereof claims over the same.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Aloesbridge, other part in the Hundred of
Newchurch, other part in the hundred of St. Martin, and the residue in the
Hundred of Worth.

It was a^l in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Newchurch, and was called St. Peter and
Paul.

NEWENDEN.
ANdreds Chester, Anderida, Lies at the southside of the County, by the river
Rother, adjoining to Sussex, about four miles toward the southeast distant
from Cranbrock, in the Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, Lath of Scray, West
divisi^n of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of S^lbrittenden, and the residue is in the
Township of Newenden, which Township has an Officer of (...) (called the
Bailiffe) Who is in this place as a Constable is in other parts of the County,
and this Bailiffe has also under him an Officer (called the under Bailiffe)
who is likewise in this place as a Bo^sholder is in other parts of the County.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth over the Manor of
Newenden (But I find not the same in the Nomina Villarum of that liberty, and
do find that Thomas (Arcbishop of Canterbury) 2o. Marti. 31o. Hen 8. by grant
enrolled in the Augmentation Office 32. Henry 8. granted the same to that King.

It was all in the Deanery of Charing, and Di^cess of Canterbury.

The Ch(...)death in the Township of Newenden, and (...) called St. Peter.

The (...)house of Friars Carmilities in England, was at a place called
Lossenham in this Parish where Sir Thomas All^^er (in the year 1241.) Founded
for them a Priory, and dedicated the same to the Virgin Mary.

In the Parish, near the Priory, stood a Castle, which (...) by the Danes (in
the year ^^^ And not (...) thereof are extant. Only the memory (...) is
preserved, by a place there, st^ll called Castle T^^^.

This Town was antien^ly a famous City, accounted the chief defensible place
in all this Southern part, but Aella (the first King of the South Saxons)
about the year 488. beseiged the Britans here, and (after long fie^e) entering
by assault, put all to the sword, raced the City to the ground, and the place
continued desola^e, till the found^tion of the aforesaid Priory, at which time
it began a little to revive, but at present is, and for many years past, has
been very mean.

NEWINGTON, near Hith.
Lies at the southeast part of the County, about two miles (toward the
northeast) distant from Hith in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of
Folk^tone, Lath of Shipway, ea^t division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Nic^olas.

NEWINGTON besides Sittingborn.
NEwenton, Lies toward the North side of the Coun^y, about two miles and a
half (toward the west, distant from Mil^on, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of
Milto^, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Newington.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's (All the Customs in which Church, belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, were by King William the Conqueror (in the year
1073.) confirmed to Lan^ranck then Archbishop.

NEWNHAM.
Lies toward the North part of the County, about four miles and a half
(toward the southwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

St. NICHOLAS.
Lies at the Northeast ^ide of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, about five
miles and a half, toward the Northwest, distant from Sandwich, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the
County.

Sarre was anciently in the decayed Parish of St. Giles, but is now reputed to
be in this Parish; And is a member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, within the
division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the liberties thereof, and
of the Cinque Ports, claim over the same.

The residue of this Parish is within the Division of the Justices in the Lath
of St. Augustine, and the liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, for
that it is in the Hundred of Ringslow, which belonged to that Abbey.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claims in this Parish.

It was all in the Deanery of West Beer and Diocese of Canterbury, and one St.
Nicholas was anciently Owner of the same.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Ringslow, was called St. Nicholas, was
anciently a Chapel to Reculver, and Robert of Winchelsea (Archbishop of
Canterbury) about 350. years since erected and endowed a perpetual Vicarage in
the same.

In the time of King Hen. 8. (controversy arising touching assessing Sarr
aforesaid, as lying in the Foreign) That King to put an end thereunto, by
Letters Patents, united the same to Sandwich.

NOCKHOLT.
Lies toward the middle of the West part of the County, about four miles and
a half (toward the Northwest) distant from Sev^nock, in the Ba^liwick of
Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Ho^e, West division of the
County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Shor^ham (a peculiar to the ^ate Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

NONINTON.
Lies about the middle of the East part of the County, about five miles
(toward the southwest) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath
of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Eastry, and the resi due in the Hundred of
Wingham.

The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury and St. Augustine claim
there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much
thereof as is within the Manor of Eastry.

It was all in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Wingham, was called St. Mary's, and was
anciently a Chapel to Wingham, But in the year 1282. (upon dividing of Wingham
into four Parishes) this was one of them.

NORBURN.
Lies near the East end of the County, about two miles and a half (toward the
south) distaut from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cornilo,
Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, and the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Norburn (which about
1000. years since, was given to that Abbey by Eadbald, King of Kent.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Augustine.

NORTON.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about three miles (toward the
southwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East
divivision of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanery of
Ospringe and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary's.

NORTHFLEET.
Lies at the Northside of the County, adjoining to the River of Thames, about
one mile (toward the West) distant from Gra^esend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo,
Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and
North division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Bo^olph. In the Churchyard whereof the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester
does claim: And in this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interment
of Lacy, above 280. years since: Of the Rikhils (one above 250. years since,
and another above 220. years since) Of Lie above 260. years since Of Wangdeford
(above 230. years since) Of H^silt, a Baron of the Exchequer of King Hen. 6.*
about 230. years since. Of the Da^yes, above 160. years since. Of Bredon, a
bo^e 140. years since. And of Hunt, about 140. years since.

A Market is kept here upon every Tuesday after Easter Tuesday, till Whitson
Tuesday; and three Fairs yearly, viz. one upon St. Botolphs day, being the 24*
day of March, another upon Easter Tuesday, and the other upon Whitson Tuesday.

The Manor of North Fleet, was anciently belonging to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and this Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the
repair of the nineth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge.

St. Mary NORTHGATE.
Lies toward the East part of the County, and is in, and adjoining to the
City of Canterbury, part thereof viz. the Borough of Staplegate, (otherwise
Stablegate) is in the Co^nty of Kent, Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred
of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, division of
Justices in that Lath; and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury
claims over the same.

It was all in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury. The Church stands in the
County of the City of Canterbury, and was called St. Mary of Northgate.

NUTSTED.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about three miles (toward the
South) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Tolting^row,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices
in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Mildred.

OFHAM.
OFfeham, lies toward the middle of the County, about one mile and a half
(toward the West) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred
of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South
division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Michael.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

ORE.
Lies toward the north side of the County, about one mile and a half (toward
the northwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East
division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Peter.

ORGARSWICK.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the northeast) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of
Shipway, Hundred of Worth* East division of the County; and division of
Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, The liberty whereof claymeth over
the same, but the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury also claymeth there.
(The sa^e being given to that Church by King Hen. 8.) 33. of his reign)

It was in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury, (But the Church is
demolished.)

ORLESTONE.
ORalanston, Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about four miles
and a half (toward the south) distant from Ashford, In the Bailiwick, and Lath
of Shipway, Hundred of Ham, and east division of the County.

Part thereof is in the Division of the Justices of the Co^poration of Romney
Marsh (The liberty whereof claymeth over the same) and the residue is in the
division of the Justifies in the Lath of Shipway.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

Sir Robert Orlans^on, was sometimes owner thereof.

The Church stands out of the liberty of (...) Marsh, and was called St.
Mary's.

ORPINGTON.
ORpintone, D^^pendun, Orpin^un, Lies toward the West end of the County,
about one mile (toward the South) distant from St. Mary ^ray, in the Bailiwick
of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of
the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

The liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claymeth there, also the liberty of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Orpington (which was
given to that Church by Edsin (Arch Deacon of Canterbury) in the year 1032. in
the t^me of King Canu^us: At Newell in this Parish arises the head of the
River Cray.

OSPRINGE.
Lies toward the north side of the County about two miles (toward the
southwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, East
division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, The Town
of Ospringe has a Constable of it self, and the liberty of St. Augustine
claymeth over the residue of the Parish (the same being in the Hundred of
Feversham) which belonged to that Abbey.) It was all in the Deanery of Ospringe,
and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Town of Ospringe, and was called St. Peter and Paul.

OTFORD.
O T^anford, Ot^eford, lies toward the middle of the West part of the County,
by the River Darent, about three miles, toward the North, distant from
Sevenoke. In the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of
Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims there, and the liberty of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Otford.

It was in the Deanery of S^oreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of R^chester.

The Church was called St. Bartholomew, and was anciently a Chapel to Shoreham.

Offa King of the Mercians (in the year 791. gave Otford to Christchurch
Canterbury (which being afterward taken away) We^hard (a potent Prelate) by
command of Feolagildus, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 830. restored the
same to that Church.

Here was a sumo^uous building, raised by William Warham, (Archbishop of
Canterbury) about 150. years since: B^t Thomas Cranmer (his Successor) passed
away the ^ame* by exchange to King Hen. 8.

A Fair is kept here ^early, upon the day of St. Bartholomew, being the 24.
day of August, which Saint was here holden in great Veneration: The offerings
unto whom here, and the pretended successes thereof, you may read in Mr.
Lambards perambulation in Otford.

In the year 1016. at this place, Canutus the Dane pitched his tents, where
King Edmund fought him, and put him to flight (with loss of 4500. Danes.

Here also (about the year^ 793. was a cruel battle fought between Offa (King
of Mercia) and Alrick (King of Kent) wherein Offo prevailed, and himself slew
the said Alrick.

OTHAM.
OTeham, Lies toward the middle of the County about two miles (toward the
South-east) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Ey^orne,
Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East Division of Justices
in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth there, and the liberty of Maidstone
claymeth over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Nicholas: In which is or lately was a memorial of the interment of
Constenton, above 230. years since.

Ralph of Dene founded a Monastery here of Chanons Regular (to the honor of
St. Laurence) but they growing weary of the place, pretended great and
intolerable scar^ities of provision for sus^enance there: And thereupon were by
Aela (daughter and heir of the said Dene) removed to Begham (otherwise Bayham,
otherwise Beulin) in Fant in Sussex (near Lamberherst) where (upon land given
for that purpose by Sir Robert of Thurnham, in the time of King Ri^h. 2.) a
Priory was built to the honor of the Virgin Mary.

OTTERDEN.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about three miles, toward the
Northeast, distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyhorn, Lath
of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East division of Justices in
that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbu^y, and the Church
was called St. Laurence.

PADLESWORTH near Eleham.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles (toward the
southeast) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of
Loningborough, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Eleham claims over of much thereof as is in the upper half
Hundred of Loningborough: The liberty of Liminge claims over so much thereof
as is in the lo^er half Hun^red of Loningborough; and the liberty of the late
Archbish^p of Canterbury also claims there.

It was in the Deanery of E^eham and Diocese of Canterbury: And the Church was
called St. Oswald.

PADLESWORTH near Snodland.
PEadlesworthe, lies toward the Northside of the County, by the river Medway,
about three miles, toward the North, distant from West Malling, in the (...)
of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County,
and south division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Roche^^er: but the Church is
ruinated.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
nineth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

PATRICKSBORN.
Lies toward the East part of the County, by the ^iver Stoure, about two
miles and a half (toward the southeast) distant from Canterbury, in the
Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East
division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

The Manor of Patri^ksborn did in the sixth year of King Edward the 3. belong
to the Abbey of Bello loco in Normandy, by the gift of John of Pratellis, made
to the same in the time of King John. And confirmed by that King; As also did
the Priory sometimes standing here, but suppressed in the second year of King
Hen. 5.

St. PAUL.
THe Borough of Longport in this Parish, is in the County of Kent, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

It h^th a Constable of it self, And the liberty of St. Augustine claims over
the same: But the Church and re^idue of this Parish, is in the County of the
City of Canterbury; and it was all in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury.

East PECKHAM.
GReat Peckham, Pecham, lies toward the middle of the County, about two miles
and a half (toward the south) distant from West M^lling, in the Ba^liwick of
Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of
Justices in that La^h P^^t thereof is in the Hundred of Twyford, and the
residue in the Hundred of Littlefield.

It was all in the Deanery of Shoreham (a pecul^ar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Twyford, and was called St. Michael.
This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the fi^th
Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

West PECKHAM.
LIttle Peckham, Pecham, lies toward the middle of the county, about three
miles toward the southwest, distant from West Malling, in the Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that
Lath.

So much thereof as is in the Borough of Oxen^oth, is in the Bailiwick and
Hundred of Hoo, and the resi^ue is in the Bailiwick of Twyford, and Hundred of
Littlefield.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, the Church stands
in the Hundred of Littlefield, and was called St. Dunstan.

In the year 960. Edgiva (widow of King Edward, surnamed the elder) gave this
Peckham to Christchurch Canterbury*

John Peckham, 1. King Henry 3: was Lord of Peckham.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

And here was a Preceptory or Free-Schoole founded (in the year 1408.) by John
Culpeper (one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the time of King Hen. 4.)
And by him endowed with 63l. 6s. 8d. per annum.

PEMBURY.
P^pingbury, Lies near the South side of the County, about three miles
(toward the South East) distant from Tunb^idg, in the Lath of Aylesford, West
division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, part
thereof is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, and Hund^ed of
Wachlingstone, and the residue is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Twyford.

It was all in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Wachlingstone, and was called St. Peter.

PENSHERST.
PEnchester, Lies toward the South-west side of the Coun^y, by the river
Medway, about three miles (toward the South-west) distant from Tunbridge, in
the West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in the Lath of
Sutt^n at Hone.

Part thereof (viz. Hall Borough) is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge,
Hundred of Wachlingstone and Lath of Aylesford, and the residue is in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Sommerden, and Lath of Sutton at Hone.

The liberty of the Duchy of Lanchaster claymeth at Chaford in this Parish.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham and (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Ro^h^ster.

The Church stan^eth in the Hundred of Sommerden.

In this Church are or late^y were monuments of Sir Steven Pensherst (otherwise
Pencherster) Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in the times of the Kings Hen. 3.
and Edw. 1. And of several of the Noble Family of Sidney, who have a fair seat
in this Parish.

Saint PETER'S.
Lies at the North-east side of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, adjoining
to the Sea, about six miles (toward the North-east) distant from Sandwi^h, in
the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices of the Town and Port of Dovor, (of which it
is a member) and the li^erties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the
same.

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Peter.

Two Fairs are kept here yearly (one upon our Lady day (being the 25th. day of
March) and the other upon St. Peter's day, being the 29th day of June.

And question arising, between the Justices of the County and this Parish,
touching assessing the same (as lying in the ^oraigne) King Hen. 8. took that
question away by uniting the same (by Letters Patents) to Dovor.

The Ninth of July 1574. In this Parish (under the Cliff, a monstrous fish shot
himself on shore, where (for want of water) he died, the next day, before which
time his roaring was heard above a mile; his length was 22. yards long, the
ne^her Jaw opening 12. foot, one of ^is eyes was more than a car^, with six
horses, could draw, a man stood upright in the place from whence his eye was
(...), the thickness from his back to the top of his ^^lly (which lay upward)
was 14. foot, h^s tail of the (...) breath, between his eyes 12. foot: three
men stood upright in his mouth, some of his ribs were sixteen foot long, his
tongue fifteen fo^t long, his Liver two Cart loads, and a man might creep into
his nostrils.

PETHAM.
PEteham, lies toward the middle of the East part of the County, about three
miles and a half (toward the south) distant from Canterbury, In the Bailiwck
and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and Division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Petham.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called All Saints.

PLAXTOOLE.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about three miles (toward the
southwest) distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Wrotham,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south Division of Justices
in that Lath.

The liberty of Wrotham claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and was anciently part of the
Parish of Wrotham. But (about thirteen years since) taken off from the same,
and made a Parish by Parliament.

PLUCKLEY.
P^^ckele, Plokele, L^eth towar^s the middle of the (...), about (...) and a
ha^f toward the (...), in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbrid^^, (...) of
Cal^hill, La^h of S^ra^, East division of ^he Coun^y, and Division of (...) in
the Lath of Shipway.

The liber^^ of he ^ate Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth over the Ma^n^^ (...)
P^u^kly and Sher^land, and the Liberty of W^e cl^ymeth over the Borough of West
Kingsnoth.

It was in the Deanery of Ch^ring and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
cal^ed St. Nicholas (in which are) or latel^ we^e memor^als of the in^erment of
Malema^n^s ((...) 220. ye^rs since) also near o^r Ladies Ch^ppell, f^unded by
Richard Deering Esquire (in the time of King Hen. 6.) are ^emorial^ o^ the
interment of several of the an^ient, and eminent Family ^f Deering, (^wo of
them about 130. years since, and another of them (...) ^10. years since) and in
that Ch^ppell likewise a^e (or lately were) memor^^ls of he intermen of
^everall others of that family (one above 230 years since another about 200.
years since, and another above 100. years since.

Lanfranck (Archbisho^ of Canterbury) in the time of King William the
Conqueror, gave Pluckley to ^ne John of Cobham, whose poste^^ty (assuming
their Surname of the place) flour^shed there 200 years, t^ll Sir William
P^uck^ey left one^y issue (...) married to John of Surrend^n (who ^^unded a
fair seat there (called Surrenden) upon he ^ld Foundation of the M^nnou^
house) from that Fa^^ly it came (by Marriage) to Hau^e, and from him (by
Marriage) to the aforesaid Family of Deering, (where it still remains, and is
called Surenden Deering.

At Pevington in this Parish was a Chapel, dedicated to the Virg^n Mary (now
ruinated) and a Fair is kept in this Parish yearly upon the day of St. Nicholas
(being the sixth day of December.)

PLUMSTED.
Lies ^t the North-west side of the County, adjoining to the River of Thames,
about one mile (toward the North east) distant from Woolwich, in th Bailiwick
of Su^ton Dartford, Hundred of Little and Lesnes, Lath of ^utton at Hone, West
division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of P^umsted given to
that Abbey by King Edgar (about 690 years since) but taken away by Earl Godwin,
and restored by King William the Conqueror.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Nicholas.

POSTLING.
Lies toward the southeast side of the County, about two miles and a half
(toward the North) distant from Hi^h, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of
Heane, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices
in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's, at which Church arises one of the heads of the River Stoure.

PRESTON near Feversham.
PRestetune, Prestan, lies toward the North side of the County, about one
(...) (toward the lo^th) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and La^h ^f
S^ray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty o^ the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Pre^on, and so much of the Parish as is within the Ma^no^rs of C^pton,
Hammema^sh, or Selgra^e (they being given to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33. of
his reign.) And the (...) of St. Augustine claims over the Par^sh (for that
it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.)

It was in the Dea^ry of Osp^inge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Katherine.

PRESTON near Fordwich.
Lies toward the East end of the County, by the River Stoure, about two miles
and a half (toward the East) distan^ from Fordwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge
and Petham, Hundred of Preston, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims there: And the liberty of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the M^nnour (...), which anciently
^elonged to (...) but being, taken away) was in the year 941 (...) King E^m^nd:
And a^terwards the same being, in the time o^ King William the Co^quer^ur)
(...) (Ear^e of Kent, and Brother of tha^ King) (...) was restored to the same.

It was in the De^^ry of Bridge and Diocese of Canterterbury: And the Church
was cal^ed St. Mildred.

Promhill see Bromhill.
QUEEN BOROUGH.
Lies at the N^rth side of the County, in the Isle of Sh^pp^y abo^t four
miles (toward the North distant from Milton, in the B^iliwick of Milton, ^ath
of Scray, and East division of the County.

It is a Corporation, and within the division of the Justices thereof (the
liberty of which Corporation claims over the same)

It was made a Borough by King Edward the 3. in the honor of Philip his wife.

And was in the Deanery of Sittingborn* and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called Holy Trin^ty.

A Castle was here of an ancient foundat^on (but becoming ruinous) 42. of Edw.
3. that King r^edified and enlarged the same. The fortifi^ation whereof was (by
the appointment of King Hen. 4) s^rveyed, and repaired by William Wi^kham
(af^erwards Bishop of Wincheste^) And the same afterward becoming ruinous was
again repaired by King Hen. 8, but was la^ely demolished.

RAINHAM.
Lies toward the North si^e of the County, about ^o^re miles (toward the
E^st) (...) In the Bailiwick and Hun^re^ o^ Milton, ^ath o^ S^ray, East (...)
of the County, and up^e^ division of Just^ces in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of S^^tingborn and D^ocess of C^nt^rbury, and the Church
was (...) St. Margaret: In the Chapel of which Church is or late^y was, a
memorial of the inter^e^t there of Blor (foun^er of that Ch^ppel) above 130.
yea^s since: And in that Church likewi^e are or lately were memoria^s of the
Inter^ent of Donet, I ^ost 250. years since. And of ^ai^^er above 110. years
since.

RECULVER.
REculure, Racui, Raculfre, Raculfe, Reclife, Racuulf, Lies at the North si^e
of the County, near the Isle of Thanet, adjoy^i^g to the ^ea, about seven miles
toward the Northeast, distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and
Petham, ^ath of S^. Augustine, East division of the County. And division of
Justices in that Lat^.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Reculver, and the liberty of St. Augustine cla^meth over the Parish (for that
it is in the Hundred of ^lengate, which belonge^ to that Abbey. But anciently
Reculver was a Hundre^ of it self.

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's, (which Church was a C^llegiate Church: Has been famous
for the two lofty spired Steeples thereof, (serving for Sea marks.) And at the
upper end of the south Isle of the same Church, is (or lately was) an antique
Monument (mounted with two spires) of Ethelbert the thirteenth King of Kent,
about 900. years since. There likewise is (or lately was a memorial of the
interment of Sandwey 220 years since.

The Parsonage was about 380 years since appropriated by Robert Kilwarby
Archbishop to the Hospitals of Herbaldown, and St. John's without Northgate; and
afterward John of Stratford upon Avon, Archbishop, got the same appropriated
by King Edw. 3. to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. Robert of Winchelsey
(likewise Archbishop having before (about the year 1294) erected here a
perpetual Vicarage.

Severus Emperor of Rome, about the year 205 built here a Castle, which he
fortified against the Britains; afterward Ethelbert (the first Christian King
of Kent) about 1060 years since, built a Palace here for himself and his
successors: And E^elbert King of Kent, about 860 years since, built here a
College (to the honor of the Virgin Mary) and was there buried under an Arch
in the North wall thereof.

Egbert King of Kent (about 960. years since, gave to one Bassa an English
Saxon, land in this Parish, whereupon he built a Monastery, to the honor of
the Virgin Mary, and replenished it with Monks, of the order of St. Benedict.

Afterward, in the year 949. King Eadred (in the fourth year of his reign)
gave this Monastery to Christchurch Canterbury; notwithstanding which, it
continued a Monastery to the time of Aegelnothus Archbishop of Canterbury,
which was about the year 1020. And the name of the Governor (from the name
Abbot) was altered to a Dean.

A Fair is here kept upon the day of Giles Abbot, being the first day of
September.

REVER.
Lies near the South-east side of the County, by a Rivulet arising near the
same, about two miles and a half (toward the North-west) distant from Dovor,
in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of B^usborough, Lath of St. Augustine,
East division of the County, and division of ^ustices in that Lath.

The liberty of St Augustine clayme^h there.

I^ was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

RIDLEY.
Lies toward the West side of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the North) distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartfrrd,
Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and
upper division of Justices in that Lath, and was in the Dea^ry and Diocese of
Rochester.

RINGWOLD.
Lies at the E^st side of ^he County, ^djoyning to the sea, about five miles
(toward the Northeast) distant (...)

(...) of King Hen. 8.) (...) this Parish with Kingsdown^ the some) ^s lying in
the (...) that King (to t^ke awa^ the questi^n) ^y Lette^s ^aten^s, un^te^ the
(...) Dovor, as the (...) to have been (...) formerly, in the times of the
Ki^gs. Hen. 7. and Edw. 1.

RIPPLE.
Lies near the East end of the County, about four mi^es and a half (toward
the South) distant from Sandwich, in the B^iliwick (...) Eastry. Hundred of
Corn^l^, ^ath of St Augustine, E^st division of the County, and division of
Just^ces in that Lath.

The liberty o^ the ^^te Archbishop of Canterbury cla^meth there, and ^he
l^^erty of St. Augustine claims over the Manno^r^^ of R^pole.

It was in the Dea^ry of Sandwich and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

ROCHESTER.
THis is a City incorporated, and lies toward the N^^th side of the County,
by the river Medway, about six miles and a half, toward the North, distant
from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and division of the Justices of that City (The liberty whereof
claims over the same:) And the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester also
claims over the Precincts of the late Cat^edral there.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Parish Church was
called St. Nicholas.

A Market is kept here upon every Friday: And two Fairs yearly (one upon St.
Dunstans day being the 19th. day of May*) and the other upon St. Andrews day,
being the 30th* day of November.

Here are several things worthy to be enlarged upon, viz. the Castle, the City,
the Cathedral and Priory, and the Bridge; of all which in order.

And first of the Castle,
Julius Caesar about 1700. years since, in the time of Cassibelanus Governor
of Britain, commanded the same to be built (according to the Roman order) to
awe the Britains, and the same was called the Castle of Medway, but time and
tempests utterly decaying the same; Oes^ or Vske, King of Kent, about 1150.
years since, caused Hroff one of his chief Councillors, and Lord of this
place) to build a new Castle upon the old foundation, and hereupon it took the
name of Hroffes Cester.

About 350 years afterward Hasting the Dane besieged, and much impaired the
same: And it afterward lay desolate, till the time of King William the
Conqueror (who caused it to be new built, and put 500. soldiers (for a guard)
therein: To which work Odo (Earl of Kent, and brother of that King) was a
great Bene^actor.

Afterward, in the year 1088. in the time of King W. Rufus, That Odo and other
Barous held this Castle against him: (the same being then accounted the
strongest, and most important Castle of England.) And his subjects being
backward to assist him: He proclaimed him to be accounted a Niding (which was
then a word of high reproach) that came not to his assistance: whereupon
multitudes came* and the resistants were forced to yield the same to the King:
And Gun^ulphus, a Norman, then Bishop of Ro^hester, repaired and fortified the
same, and built the great Tower therein.

Afterward in the 17. year of King John the Barons held this Castle against
him, but he took the same: And in the year following Jews (son of Philip King
of France) likewise took the same: And King Hen. 3. afterward gave it to Guy
of Rochford (a P^ictovin) who was afterward banished, and thereby lost the
same.

Afterward (in the year 1264.) Simon Earl of Leicester besiedged the same,
and won the Bridge and first gate, and then left the siege.

Afterward 5. Rich. 2. the Commons of this County strongly besieged this
Castle, and by force took a prisoner out of the same: And thus this Castle ran
to decay, and (the old walls afterward f^lling) King Edw. 4. repaired both the
same and the Castle.

As concerning the City.
I find it to have been of very great Antiquity, but has had several great
misfortunes; for about 980. years since, the same was wasted by Ethelred, King
of the Mercians.

About 200. years afterward, it was assaulted by the Danes (who made a st^ong
Castle before the gate thereof, but were chased away by the then King Aelfred.

About 1^0. years afterward, it was assaulted, and subdued by King Ethelred,
the West Saxon King.

Afterward 7. May 1130. the same was much defaced by fire (King Hen. 1. and
many of his Nobles then being present at the Consecration of the Cathedral
Church there.)

3. June 1137. the same was again (almost all) consumed with fire.

The like again happened there 3. April. 1177. So that It continued desolate
till the time of King Hen. 3. at which time it was again repaired.

I find but one Parish and Church to have been here, more than now is, and
that was called St. Clement, which in the time of King Edw. 6. was, by
Parliament, united unto the aforesaid Parish of St. Nicholas.

I find also three Mint Houses, to have been granted by King Ethelstan, about
the year 930. to be in this City, viz two for the King, and one for the Bishop.
And 8. December. 1251. King Hen. 3. held a Just here.

As concerning the Cathedral and Priory.
The same were built by King Ethelbert (in the year 600.) and dedicated to the
honor of God, and St. Andrew, Endowed with lands called Priest Feilds, and
Channons were put into the same. But the several devastations aforesaid of the
City, by the Mercians, Danes, and West Saxons, also caused the decay both of
this Church and Priory, both which were new builded by the aforesaid Gundulphus
(being Bishop there) about the year 1080. And instead of six Priests (at his
coming found therein) he placed there 60 black Monks (of the ord of St.
Benedict.) And transl^ted into the new Church the bodies of Paulinus (a Roman
by Birth) and others his Predecessors Bishops of that Sea) which were buried in
the former (to which new Church Earnulphus Bishop there in the time of King
Hen. 1. was a great Benefactor.) And to make this Church more famous (about the
year 1087) The aforesaid Paulinus (who had been dead 440. years before) was
Canonized for a Saint, and inshrined in Silver by Lanfranck (then Archbishop of
Canterbury) and many Devotions and Oblations were made to the same. But by the
aforesaid seve^all fires, Siege of King John, and long contentions and suits
be^ween Gilbert Glanvill Bishop there, and the Monks of the same (wherein the
Monks were driven to such necessity, that they made out the aforesaid Shrine
into mo^ey,) The aforesaid Church and Priory fell into great decay and
di^esteem, and ran much in deb^.

A^terwards, in the year 1250 Laurence of St. Martin, becoming Bishop of that
Sea, one William of Hoo (being kee^er of the Treasury of the Church) built
(...) whole Quire thereof.

Richard Walden (a Monk there) built the south Isle.

Richard Eastgate (another Mo^k) began the North Isle, And (...) William of
Axenh^m almost finished the same.

Ie^fry of ( Haddenham Prio^ the^e) paid most of the debts and built the Dorter
of the P^iory, and St. Edmunds Altar in the Church; and thus it was again
reedified an^ began to come into esteem, and (the more to increase the repute
thereof) whereas one William (a Scot) was murdered near this City (in his
jou^ney toward the Holy Land) and buried in that Church, he was by the
aforesaid Bishop Laurence (about the year 1256.) procured to be Canonized for a
Saint (to whose Shrine, was great resort and gifts) and the wealth, and repute
of this Church was much increased, so that (at the suppression of Monasteries)
This Priory was valued at 486l. 11s. 5d. per an. and (in stead of a Prior, and
Covent) was placed in this Church, a Dean, and six Prebends.

The aforesaid Bishops Gundulphus, and Gilbert, were buried in this Church, as
was also Haymo of Hith, John of Sh^ppey, and John Low (all Bishops of that Sea)
and likewise Walter of Merton, Bishop there, and Lord Chancellor to King Hen.
3. (Who 27^. October. 1277.) ^assing over the River of Medway here in a boat
(there then being no Bridge) was unfortunately drowned, and (to whose memory,
Merton College in Oxford, where he was Founder) did about 60. years since set
up a monument in his Church.

And as concerning the Bridge.

There was anciently a very strong Timber Bridge (with nine Arches) over the
River of Medway, a little distant (toward the North) from the pla^e where the
St^ne-brid^e now is to the mai^tenance whereof several Persons, Parishes, and
Tenements we^e liable, Some of which Parishes are (in this tract) named to be
for that purpose chargeable.

That Bridge al^^ h^d a Tower of tim^er standing upon the same, but (about the
year 1264) both of them were in the Barons wars, sp^ile^ by fire (as King John,
in the year 1215. had attempted to spoil the same.)

Afterward in the year 1281., there happening ^o great, and so long, a Frost, and
Snow, that people passed on foot over this River from Rochester to Stroud, and
that Frost suddenly breaking, the remains of the aforesaid old bridge was
borne down, and carried away, with the stream.

Afterward another bridge was builded, which 10. Rich. 2. upon rumor of the
coming of the French, was beaten down.

Afterward (in the time of that King) Sir Robert Kno^^es built the Fair Stone
Bridge now ^here, and Sir John Cobham, and diverse Lords, Bishops, and Gen^lemen
of great quality, whose names Ant^ently hung in a table in the Chapel,
founded by the said Sir Robert, as some relate, but as others, and that more
probably, by John Co^ham (about the ye^r 1394) at the east end of the said
Bridge, called Trinity Chapel, contributed money and lands, toward the same,
and the mainten^nce thereof, also William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury,
about 150* years since made the iron work upon the coping thereof.

Afterward much of the revenue belonging ^o the maintenance thereof, being
either concealed, or detained, and the work decaying: A Commission from Queen
Elzabeth) for inquiry thereof, was executed, much of the (...) discovered, and
by two^Acts of Parliament subsequent thereunto, viz. 18. Eliz. ca 17. and 27.
Eliz. ca. 25. good laws and provisions were ma^e for the perpetual
maintenance of this Bridge.

In this City also is an Alms house (for relief of poor Travelers) founded by
one Wats about 80. years since, and without the East gate of this City (which
in some Records is called Che^ham.) In the year 1078. was an Hospital founded
by the aforesaid Gundulphus (Bishop of Roch^ster) and dedicated to the honor
of St. B^rtholomew for Le^ers, which was afte^wards confirmed by King Hen 3 and
King Edw. 3. discharged the same of Taxes, Tallages, etc.

RODMERSHAM.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about two miles (toward the
southeast) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Nicholas.

ROLVENDEN.
Lies at the south side of the County, by the river Roth^r, about two miles
(toward the southwest) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the seven
Hundreds, Hundred of Rolvenden, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and
lower division of Justices in that La^h.

The liberty of the late De^n of Canterbury claims there, and the l^berty of
the la^^ Bishop of Rochester claims over the Re^tory of Rolv^nden.

It was in the Deanery of Charing and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
cal^ed St. Mary's.

In the first of the five Windows ^n the great Chancel of which Church, is the
Effigies of Ca^^w E^q^ire, in the second, the Effigies of Sir John Guldeford,
wh^t was ^n the third, is quite defaced, in the fourth is the Effigies of
Aucher, and in the fi^th of Moore, all formerly great owners in this Parish.

The Heir of Halden of Halden, in this Parish married Guldeford, by which
ma^ch, that Seat came into that Family, one whereof, viz Edward Guldeford
Esquire afterward upon the day of St. Tiburtius and Valerianus Martyrs, being
the fourteenth day of April, in the year 1444. founded the South Chapel of
this Church, and dedicated the same to the honor of St. Anne and St.
Katherine, (which appeared so to be founded and dedicated, by a memorial of
the same engraven in brass, fastened to the south wall of the said Chapel, but
late^y taken away from that place.

At Forsham (in this Parish) are the ruins of an ancient stone structure, of
the shape of a little Ch^ppel: And supposed so to have been, to an ancient
Seat, near thereunto (called Forsham) l^ng since dilapidated; but the site
thereof, and how the same was moted, is yet visible.

New ROMNEY.
RVmen, Romenal, lies at the southeast side of the County, a^joyning to the
sea, about two miles and a half toward the Northeast, distant from Lid, in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and East division of the County.

The Town of New Romney, is one of the Cinque Ports, and ^^corporated by the
name of Mayo^, Jurats and Comm^nal^y of the Town and Port of New Romney, before
that, by the name of Jurats and Commonalty of the Town and Port of New Romney*
before that by the name of Iurats and comonalty of the Town an^ Port of Romney,
and before that by the name of Barons of the Town and Port of Romney.

It is wi^^^n the division of the Justices of that Corporation, and the
liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same.

The residue of this parish is in the Hundred of St. Martins, and part thereof
in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty
whereof claims over that part) And the residue is in the division of the
Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury; and here were
anciently five Churches (called St. Laurence, St. Martin, St. John Baptist, one
other whose name I find not; and St. Nicholas) of all which only the last is
now in being, is the Parish Church, and stands in the Town.

This Town (at the time of the Conquest) was in a flourishing condition (having
in it twelve Wards, five Parishes, a Priory (of Priors Aliens) and a Hospital,
and Sir R^bert of Romney was then owner of the same.

It had also a good Haven, at the West side thereof, but (about the fifteenth
year of King Edw. 1. the Sea breaking in upon the same, made a great
destruction both of man and Beast, spoiled the Haven, and afterward (by
degrees) forsook the same, whereby the repute, and profit of this Town, beca^^^
is decayed.

Two great meetings of the Cinque Ports, called the Gelling, for all the Ports,
and the two ancient Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and their members; and the
Brotherhood or Brother yield for the five Ports and the said ancient Towns
only, are usually (once in the year) held at this Town upon Tuesday after St.
Margaret, which St. Margaret is the twentieth day of July.

The Mayor of this Town was anciently (and still is) Elected upon our Lady day
(being the five and twentieth day of March.) And the Priory aforesaid was (in
the year 1257.) ^ounded by Sir John Mansell (a Privy Counselor to King Henry
the 3.) for Chanons regular, Aliens: And suppressed in the second year of King
Henry the 5.

A Market is kept in this Town upon every Saturday, and a Fair yearly upon the
day of St. Laurence, being the 10. day of August.

Old ROMNEY.
Lies at the southeast side of the County, about one mile and a half (toward
the West) distant from new Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and
East division of the County. It was anciently a principal Port: and its
antiquity gave occasion of giving the addition of the word New to the other
Port of Romney. And that this was such a Port, in the time of King Edw. the
Confessor (above 600. years since) appears, for that Earl Goodwin came then,
into the Harbor here, and seized and carried away diverse ships there riding:
And in the time of King Hen. 2. Thomas Becket (Archbishop of Canterbury) upon
his endeavor of flight to Rome, took Boat here. But by the seas withdrawing it
self from hence, and a fearful Tempest happening in the night of St. Clements
day (being the 23. day of November) in the year 1334. This town was very much
impaired, and impoverished, and as to any of the purposes aforesaid, is obscure.

So much thereof as is in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, is a member of the
Town and Port of New Romney, in the division of the Justices of the same (only
the Bo^o^gh of Or^elston) in this Parish, is within the liberty of the Cinque
Ports, and claimed to belong to the Corporation of Lid, (though reputed a
member of the Town and Port of New Romney, and is in the Hundred of Langport,
and division of the Justices of that of the Corp^rations aforesaid, which ^ath
right to the same.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much of this
Parish as is in the Manno^r of Ag^^ne, (otherwise Ag^n^ee) which was granted to
that Church by King Offa (in the year 791. And the same afterward (...) to
King H^n 8. ^e 33. of this reign) did again give the same to that Church.

The liberty also of Romney Marsh claim^th over part of this Parish: and that
part is in the division of the Ju^^ices of the Corporation of Rom^e^ Marsh.

And the residue of this Parish (which is our of all the Cor^orations
aforesaid) is part in the Hundred of Langport, and part in the Hundred of St.
Martins. And this residue is all in the division of the Justices in the Lath of
Shipway.

It was in all the Deanery of Limpne, and D^^cess of Canterbury, the Church was
called St. Clement, and is within the aforesaid liberty of New Romney, as are
also the Houses and street adjacent.

RUCKING.
ROcinges, Ro^ing, Lies toward the southeast side of the County, about five
miles toward the Northwest, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath
of Sh^wey, and East division of the County.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Ham, and the residue in the Hundred of
Newchurch.

The liberties of Romney Marsh, and Wye, claim there; and the liberty of the
late Dean of Canterbury clai^eth over so much thereof as is in the Mannours of
Ickham or Rucking, the same being given to that Church by King Hen 8. 33. of
his reign.

So much thereof as is in the liberty of Romney Marsh, is in the division of
the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, and the residue is in the
division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the hundred of Newchurch, (out of the liberty of Romney
Marsh) and was called St. Mary Magdalen.

In the year 791. Offa King of Mercia) gave Rucking to Christchurch Canterbury.

RYARSH.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by the river Medway, about one mile
(toward the North) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred
of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south
division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester: And the Church was
called St. Martin.

SALTWOOD.
Lies near the southeast side of the County, about one mile toward the
Northwest distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Heane,
Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Saltwood (being given to that Church by a Prince, called Halden, in the year.
1036.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

Oesc (otherwise Vske) son of Hengist King of Kent, built here a Castle
(which was called the Honor of Saltwood, and held of the Archbishop of
Canterbury by Henry Essex (who by Treason forfeited the same to King* Hen. 2.
And it was thereupon seized by that King.) But King John afterward restored
the same to the said Church.

Henry Mountford (Constable of Dovor Castle) about 430 years, since repaired it.

William Courtney (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 270. years since much
repaired and enlarged the same.

And 6. April 1580. (by reason of an earthquake then happening) part of this
Castle fell down.

SANDHERST.
Lies at the middle of the southside of the County, by the river Rother,
adjoining to Sussex, about four miles toward the southeast) distant from
Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred of Selbrittenden,
Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Betherinden, (otherwise Sandherst) in this Parish, being given to that Church,
by Offa King of Mercia, in the year 791.

It was in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Nicholas, in the East window o^ the North Chapel or Chancell of
which Church, was the Picture and Arms of Betherinden, Owner of the principal
Seat in this Parish, anciently called by his name; before Sanaherst, and now
Sandherst Place, which Picture and Arms we^e lately defaced.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Nicholas, being the sixth day
o^ December.

SANDWICH.
SAndwic, This is one of the Cinque Ports, and so was at the time of the
Conquest, and lies at the East side of the County, near the Isle of Thanet,
very near the Sea, about eight miles and a hal^ (toward the East) distant from
Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of
the County and division of the Justices of the Corporation of the Town and Port
of Sandwich: The liberties whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the
same: The liberty of St. Augustine also claims there.

It was anciently a Hundred of it self, and (in the time of King Edward the
Confessor) there were 307. houses in the same.

It now is, and for many years past, has been a Corporation, Incorporated by
the name of the Mayor, Jurats; and Commonalty of the Town and Port of Sandwich;
And before that, by the name of Barons of the Town and Port of Sandwich.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwish and Diocese of Canterbury, and there were
anciently four Churches in this Town, called St. James, St. Clement, St Peter*
and St. Mary; of which the first is demolished, and the other three are yet
standing.

The Lord Andomar de Rupy, an Alien, in the time of King Edward the 3. was
Archdeacon of Canterbury, and held the aforesaid Church of St. Clement, (then
valued at eight Marks per annum.) And the aforesaid Church of St. Mary (then
valued at eight pounds per annum) both which Churches then belonged to tha^
Archdeaconry

In the year 851. Ethelstane the younger (son of King Egbert) at this place
gave a memorable overthrow to the Danes, and took nine of their ships.

In the year 959. King Egelred gave Sandwich to Christchurch Canterbury, and (
Stonar and Richborough being rui^ated) the foundation of this Town was begun
(in the time of Swanus the Dane) from whom some would have the name of the same
to be Swanes ditch or Port: But more probably the name was derived from the
Salt Sands or Sandwyke.

Here Canu^us the Dane (son of the said Swanus) in the year 1015. acted in
inhumane Tragedy upon King Ethelreds friends, by slitting their Noses, and
cutting off their Hands and so leaving them: but he (afterward obtaining the
Kingdom) finished this Town: And gave thereunto a Charter (with many
Privileges.) And in the year 1023. gave the Port thereof, and Royalties
belonging thereunto to Christchurch aforesaid, all which King Hen. 2.
afterward renewed and enlarged.

But in the year 1290. the Monks of Christchurch surrendered all their right in
this Town (except some houses, and the K^yes) to King Edw. 1. And afterward
all (by way of exchange, for a Manor in Essex) was in the year 1364 conveyed
by the Monks of that Church to King Edw 3.

At his place (in the time of the Ken^ish Saxons) a noble Lady (named Domneva,
above 900. years since (by the help o^ Egbert then King) founded a Monastery
(near a place, afterward called Canterbury Gate) and dedicated the same to the
honor of the Vir^in Mary (which Monastery was afterward wasted by the Danes,
afterward (...) by Queen Emma, and afterward destroyed by the French) and in
the twentieth year of King Hen 18 A Sanctimonial or Anchorisse was ^ounded, near
the place where the old Monastery stood, and out of the ruins of that
Monastery was the aforesaid Church of St Mary Builed.

Henry Cowfeild (An A^naigne) in the year 1272. founded here a house of White
Frie^s Carmelites, and dedicated it to St. Mary, in which were buried John of
Sandwich (sometimes Prior there) above 250. years since; Thomas Legate (a^ out
250. years since) Thomas Hadlow (about 240. years since) William Be^klee (about
220. years since) and Dionyle Plumcooper (about 170. years since) all Friars of
that h^use.

There are also in this Town three Hospitals, viz. St. B^rtholomew (^ounded by
Sir Simon of Sandwich) and St. John, and St. Thomas, founded by one Ellis
(above 250 years since) which Ellis, and his Wife, ly buried in the North (...)
of St. Peter's Church af^resaid, he also appointed three Priests, viz. two (...)
his said two Hospit^ls, and one for a common School, founded there by him, and
a^tiently called St. Peter's School.

Sir Roger Manwood, late Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, about the year 1563
new built a Free-schoole in this town; And for encouragement of Scholars of
that School, Robert Trapes, and his wife, gave maintenance for two Scholars to
be sent out of the same to Lincoine College in Oxford.

An Ho^p^tal (...) to St. Thomas, was also ^ounded in this Town by Thomas
Rabing, William Swan, John Goddard, and Richard Lo^^.

This Town has had several misfort^nes, viz. in the year 1048. the Danish
(...) entered and spoiled the same.

Afterward, in the year 1217. Jews son of the King of France, landed here
with 600. sail of ships, and burnt the Town

And afterward about the year 1457. In the time of King Hen. 6. 15000.
Frenchmen, under the Conduct of Sir Peter Bressy, landed here^, killed the
Mayor and other Officers, and robbed, burnt and spoiled the Town. In that Kings
time also the Earl of Warwick ransackt the same.

And 6. of April 1580. here happened a great Earthquake, and the Sea so foamed
therewith, that the ships here tot^ered.

The Mayor of this Town was anciently (and still is) elected yearly upon the
Monday after St. Andrews day, in St. Clements Church: And a Bell was there
anciently, (but now in St. Peter's Church) rung for summons to the, Election:

A Market is kept in this Town, upon every Wednesday and Saturday, and a Fair
kept yearly upon St. Clements day (being the 23. day of November) and by the
space of three days in all.

Near this Town (toward the North) are the ruins of Richborough (alias
Richberge, alias Repisborow, alias Ropcester) a famous City in the time of the
Romans Government here; where they had a Ga^rison, and it was the common Port
of arrival out of France.

This place flourished after the coming of the English Saxons: And King
Ethelbert the first Christian Saxon King of Kent, had here a Palace Royal. To
which at the coming of Augustine the Monk, above 1050. years since, he removed
from Canterbury) for his better conference with the said Augustine (who then
lay at Stonar near thereunto. But this City and the Castle there (hereafter
mentioned) were above 650. years since destroyed by the Danes; So that now,
where the City stood, is a plain field (yet some ruins of the Castle, of rough
Flint are still standing.

In this City were buried two Presidents or Provost Governors of the Britains,
under the Roman Emperors, viz. Claudius Contentus (above 1450. years since)
And Fla^ius Sanctius (about 50. years afterward.)

In the year. 991. As^hwin (a Bishop) gave this Richborough to Christ-church
Canterbury.

About 1600. years since, Arvirdgus (being King of Britain) denied subjection
to the Romans, and thereupon Claudius (the Emperor) sent Vespatian (one of
his Councillors) to reduce him, who endeavoring to land at this place,
Arviragus resisted him for the present, and began to build the Castle here
which afterward was finished at the charge of Soverianus (or Severus) Affri.
(who as a Consul governed Britain for the Romans. And King Arthur (above 1100.
years since) at this Richborough fought Mordred (who usurped his Kingdom, in
his absence beyond the sea.)

SEAL.
Lies toward the middle of the West part of the County, about two miles
(toward the North) distant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley,
Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and
lower division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Sevenoke claymeth there, and the liberty of the Duchy of
L^ncaster claims over the Manor of Seal.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Peter (which was sometimes a Chapel to Kemsing) And in the same is
or lately was) a memorial of the interment of Thomas Breuton (Bishop of
Rochester and Confessor to King Rich. 2.) And of Bryene (a Knight) both above
260. years since.

SEASALTER.
SEsaltre, lies at the North side of the County adjoining to the Sea, about
four miles (toward the northeast) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and Pe^ham, Lath of St. Augustine, East Division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

It is in no Hundred, but has a Constable of it self.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Seasalter (being given to the same by King Hen. 8. 33. of his reign.)

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Alphage (which Church was appropriated to Christchurch
Canterbury, by Pope Gregory in the year 1234.)

Here are kept yearly four fairs, one upon our Lady day, being the five and
twentieth day of March) another upon Midsummer day (being the four and
twentieth day of June) another upon Michaelmus day (being the nine and
twentieth day of September) and the other upon Christmas day, being the five
and twentieth day of December.

SELLINDGE.
Lies toward the southeast side of the County, by the river Stoure, about
three miles and a half (toward the Northwest) distant from Hith. In the Lath
of Shipway, East division of the County and division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Stowting; and the residue is
in the Bailiwick of Shipway, and Hundred of Street.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Street, and was called St. Mary's.

SELLING.
Lies toward the North part of the County, about two miles and a half
(toward the southeast) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Feversham; and the liberty of St. Augustine
claims over the same (because that Hundred belonged to that Abbey.) That
liberty also claims over the Manor of Selling* and the residue of this
Parish is in the Hundred of Boughton under the Blean.

It was all in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Boughton under the Blean: and was called
St. Mary's.

SEVENOKE.
SEnnok, lies toward the middle of the West part of the County, about four
miles and a half (toward the Northeast) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwi^k
of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division
of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Sevenoke claims over the same, and the liberty of the Duchy
of Lancaster claims at Bradbourn in this Parish.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Nicholas (in which are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of Law
(above 250 years since) of Haymund above 180. years since: of Bourchier above
160. yea^s since: of Potkins above 150. years since: of Brook, Totleherst, and
Gregby, above 140. years since: And of Yardley above 130. years sin^e.

In this Church also is a Chapel, which was dedicated to the Virgin Mary.

A Market is kept in this Town, upon every Saturday, And two Faires yearly (
viz. one upon St. Peter's day, being the nine and twentieth day of June, and the
other upon the day of St. Nicholas, being the sixth day of December. Toward
the end of the reign of King Edw. 3. A Child being found in this Parish, and
the Parents not known, It was named William Sevenoke: Afterward (in the year
1418. he becoming Lord Mayor of London, founded the Hospital and Free-schoole,
in this Town: To which School, John Potkins in the time of King Hen. 8. was a
liberal Benefactor. And the same, and the revenue thereof being (about the
beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth) settled and increased, it became to
be called, as now it is, The Free-Schoole of Queen Elizabeth.

Thomas B^urchier (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 200. years since, bought
Knoll, in this Parish of the Lord Say and Seal, and there built a fair House,
which John Morton (his ^ext successor in that Sea, much enlarged; As also did
William Warham (another successor in that Sea) about twenty years afterward;
and it was afterward more enlarged, and beautified by the Lord Treasurer
Dorset.

In this Parish also (about the year 1450. Jack Cade after long fight, slew Sir
Humphrey Stafford, William Staf^ord, Esquire, and other Gentlemen (sent by King
Henry the sixth to suppress his Rebellion.)

SEVINGTON.
Lies toward the Southeast side of the County, by the river Stoure, about two
miles (toward the southeast) (...) from As^ford, in the Bailiwick and Hundred
of the Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of Wye claims over the same, by the name of the Yoke of D^^eland.

It was in the Deanery of Limp^e and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's, in which are or lately were, several memorials of the
interment of the Family of Barry (of the Mote, in this Parish) some of them
Knights; Most whereof are about 250. years since, and of Finch above 210. years
since.

SHADOXHERST.
Lies toward the southeast side of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the South) distant from Asbford, in the lower division of Justices, in
the Lath of Scray: so much thereof as is in the Borough of old Herlackenden, is
in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray,
and West division of the County.

Other part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Chart and Longbridge,
Lath of Scray, and East division of the County.

And the residue thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of
Ham, and East division of the County.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Blackborne, and was called St. Peter and
St. Paul.

SHEBBERTSWOLD.
SYbertsweld Sibbertswood, Lies toward the east end of the County, about four
miles and a half (toward the North east) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick
of Stowting, Hundred of Beusborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of
the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberties of St. Augustine, and late Archbishop of Canterbury claim there.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Andrew, in which Church are or lately were ancient memorials of the
interment of the family of Philipots of Vpton Court in this Parish.

SHELDWICH.
SCheldwihe, Shelwich, Lies toward the North side of the Coun^y, about three
miles toward the South, distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the same, for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Augustine James (in which are or lately were memorials of the
interment of At Leese, a Knight (above 260. years since) of Cely above 230.
years since, and of Lisle, and Deyre very ancient.

SHIPBORNE.
Lies toward the middle of the West side of the County, about three miles and
a half toward the South-West distant from W^otham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo,
Hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Wrotham claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Giles.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Giles Abbot, being the first day of
September.

SHOLDON.
Lies the East side of the County, adjoining to the sea, about three miles
toward the South-east distant from Sandwich; in the Bailiwick of Eastry,
Hundred of Cornilo, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberties of St. Augustine, and late Archbishop of Canterbury, claim
there.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Nicholas.

SHORAM.
SHorham, lies toward the middle of the West side of the County, by the river
Darent, about four miles toward the Northwest) distant from Sevenoke, in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West
division of the County, and lower division of justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

Thomas Buckland, founded a Chapel in this Church, and was interred in the
same.

SHORN.
Lies toward the North side of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the southeast) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo,
Hundred of Shamel, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Peter and Paul. Near the place of the High Altar, (...) which Church is, or
l^tely was, a monument of the i^terment of Sir Henry Cobham (Lord of the
Manor of Roundall in this Parish) very ancient: And in this Church likewise
are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of two of the Family of Smith,
one of them 230. years since; and the other 200. years since; of Sharp above
160. years since. And of Hernden 130. years since.

Shorn was anciently holden by Sir Roger Norwood.

SITTINGBORNE.
Lies at the middle of the Northside of the County, about one mile (toward
the south) dista^t from Milton, In the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborne and Diocese of Canterbury; and the Church
was called St. Michael. In which are or lately were, memorials of the interment
of Bourne above 250. years since: of Septvans 200. years since: of several of
the Family of Garrard (one of them 170. years since; another above 160. years
since, another above 120. years since: of Crowmer (almost 120. years since; and
of Poode very ancient.

Two Faires are kept here yearly (one upon Whitsonmonday (which lasts three
days.) And the other upon Micha^lmass day, (being the nine and twentieth day
of September) and lasts five days.

SMARDEN.
Lies toward the middle of the County, by the river Medway, about five miles,
toward the South, distant from Leneham, in the Lath of Scray, and division of
Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

Such part hereof as is in the Borough of Povenden, is in the Hundred of
B^ackborn,; and such part thereof as is either in the Boroughs of Omenden, or
Stepherst, is in the Hundred of B^ckley; and both the said parts in the
Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds and West division of the County. And the
residue of the said Parish is in the Bailiw^ck of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred
of Cal^hill, and E^st division of the Coun^y.

The liberties of the late Dean of Canterbury and St. Augustine claim there;
and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, claims over the Den of
Holnherst, in this Parish, as held of the Manor of Sherland.

It was all in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Calehill, and was called St Michael.

In which Church was a Rood loft: and in the year 1558 (one Drainer of this
Parish, being a Justice of the Peace) to get advantage of his Neighbors, made
in that Lo^t nine holes (through which he looked into the Church, and saw who
observed not the Popish Ceremonies at Mass there; and them he afterward
punished, whereby he got the name of Justice nine Holes (which name is yet in
memory thereabouts:) who so desires to read the further story hereof, may
find the same at large, in the third part of the Acts and Monuments of the
Church, fol. 971. A.

A Market is kept here upon every Friday, and a Fair yearly upon Michaelmass
day, being the nine and twentieth day of September.

SMEETH.
SMede, lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a
half (toward the southeast) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shipway. Hundred of Bircholt Franchise, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese
of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary's.

SNARGATE.
Lies toward the southeast side of the County, about four miles, toward the
Northwest, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway,
Hundred of Aloesbridge, and East division of the County.

Part thereof is within the division of the Justices of the Corporation of
Romney Marsh, and the liberty thereof claims over the same.

Other part thereof, viz. upon the Ree wall, is in the liberty of the Town and
Port of New Romney, and division of Justices of that Town and Port.

And the residue is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liberty also of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims in this Parish.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in Romney Marsh, and was called St. Dunstan.

SNAVE.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the Northwest) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Shipway, East division of the County, and division of the Justices of the
Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claims over the same.

The liberty of St Augustine claims over the Manor of Snave, and the
liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much of this Parish as
is within the Manor of Ickham.

Part thereof is in the hundred of Aloesbridge, other part in the hundred of
Ham, and the residue in the Hundred of New Church.

It was in all in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Aloesbridge, and was called St.
Augustine.

SNODLAND.
SNodiland, Snodesland, lies toward the North side of the County, by the
river Medway, about four miles and a half toward the Northwest) distant from
Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford,
West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same (it being
given to that Church by King Ecbe^t, in the year 838. It is said also to be
given to the same by one Birtrick and his Wife, above 700. years since.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called
All Saints: in the Porch whereof is or lately was, a Memorial of the interment
of William Alisander (who gave a weekly stipend of Bread to the Poor here for
ever: And died above 180. years since. And in that Church likewise are or
lately were memorials of the interment of Palmer 250. years since, and of Pole
170. years since.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
nineth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

SOUTHFLET.
SVthflete, Suthfle^t, lies at the North side of the Coun^y, about two miles
(toward the south) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Su^^on at Hone, West division of the
County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claims over the same: It being
given to that Church by Gundulphus, Bishop of that Sea, about 550. years since;
and confirmed thereunto by King Hen. 1.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester; and the Church was called St.
Nicholas.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
third Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

SPELDHERST.
Lies at the southwest side of the County, adjoining to Sussex, about three
miles (toward the southwest) distant from Tunbridge. In the West division of
the County, and lower division of Justices in the Lath of Sutton at Hone.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of
Wachlingstone, and Lath of Aylesford.

And the residue is in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundreds of Codsheath
and Somerden, and Lath at Sutton at Hone.

The liberty of Sevenoke claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester. The Church stands
in the Hundred of Somerden, and was called St. Mary's.

In this Parish are those famous Waters (called by some F^nt W^lls, and by
others Tunbridge Wells) so much resorted unto, and drunk of by the Nobil^ty and
Gentry of th^s Nation: coming thither for that purpose from several parts
yearly in the Summer, and more especially in the months of July and August.

At Grombridge (in this Parish) is a Chapel called St. Charles: And there is
also a Fair yearly, upon the day of St. John Port Latin, being the sixth day of
May.

STALISFEILD.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about four miles (toward the
Northeast) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East
division of the Coun^y, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's.

STANFORD.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about two miles and a half
(toward the Northwest) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called All Saints.

B^rtram of Cryoll, was antienly Own^r of Ostenhanger, (otherwise Westenhanger)
in this Parish, which building was beautified by Sir Edward Poinings.

Some suppose the name to have been Oes^inghangar, and to have been first
builded by Oesc (son and successo^ of Hengist, first Saxon King of Kent) and to
have afterward come to the said Bertram Cryoll (but of this I find no
certa^nty^) This Ostenhanger, is said to have been antienly a Parish of it
self: but is now reputed to be (as aforesaid) in this Parish of Stanford.

STANSTED.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about two miles, toward the
Northwest, distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Wrotham,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County and south division of Justices
in that Lath.

The liberty of Wrotham claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

This Parish was formerly parcel of the Parish of Wretham: and the now Church
here a Chapel to that Parish Church: But (about thirteen years since) this
Stansted was made a Parish by Parliament.

STAPLE.
Lies toward the East end of the County, about three miles (toward the
southwest) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath
of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and late Dean of
Canterbury claim there.

But the liberty of St Augustine claims over the same for that it is in the
Hundred of Downhamford, which be^longed to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury; and the Church was
called St. James.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of St. James, being the five and
twentieth day of July.

STAPLEHERST.
Lies toward ^he Southside of the County, about four miles, toward the
North) distant from Cranbrooke, in the West division of the County, and lower
division of Justices in the Lath of Scray.

So much thereof as is in the Northborough, Boroughs of Kings Franchise,
Faire^rou^h, or Loveherst, is in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred
of Cranbrooke, and Lath of Scray. Other part thereof is in the Bailiwick of
Tw^ford, Hundred of Marden, and Lath of Scray.

And the residue is in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn and Lath of Aylesford (viz. part
thereof in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and the other part called Detling Borough)
in the Hundred of Maidstone.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims in this P^rish

It was ^ll in the Deanery of Sutton and Diocese of Cant^rbury. The Church
stands in the Hundred of Cranbrook and was called All Saints.

The aforesaid Borough of Loveherst, has a Court Leet of it sel^ (holden at
the Manor of Loveherst:) And the inhabitant^ thereof ow no service to the
Count ^eet holden for the Hundred of Cranbrooke: but at that Court a Constable
for that Hundred may be chosen out of that Borough.

STELLING.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about two miles and a half
(toward the Northwest) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Lath
of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Loningborough, and the residue in the
Hundred of Stowting.

The liber^y of Eleham cl^imeth over so much thereof as is in the upper half
Hundred of Loningborough, and the liberty of St. Augustine claims also in
this Parish.

It was all in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's.

Two Faires are kept here yearly, one upon Ascension day (being the Thursday
seven nigh^ before Whitsunday,) and the other upon Al^ollanday, being the first
day of November.

St. Stephens, see Hackington.
STOCKBURY.
Lies toward the Northside of the County about four miles (towa^ds the
southwest) ^istant from M^lton, in the East division of Justices in the Lath of
Aylesfo^^.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, ^ath of S^ray, and
East division of the County and the residue is in the Ba^liwick and Hundred of
Eyhorne, Lath of A^lesford, and West division of the County.

It was all in the Deanery of Sittingborne and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stand (...) the Hundred of Eyhorn, and was called St. Mary
Magdalen: And a Fair is here kept year^y, upon the day of St. Mary Magdalen,
being the two and twentieth day of July.

TODMARSH.
Lies toward the Northeast side of the County, by the River Stoure, about
four miles (toward the Northeast) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick
of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the
Hundred of Downh^mford, which belonged to that Abbey:) It was in the Deanery of
Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury: and the Church was called St. Mary's, (which
Church, about 400. yea^s since was (by the then Abbo^ of St. Augustine) given
to the late Hospital of poor Priests in Canterbury.)

STOKE.
STokes, Stoches, Andschohesham, li that the North ^ide of the County, near the
Isle o^ Great, about five miles and a half (toward the No^^heast^ (...) from
Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the
County, and North divisio^ of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Hundred of Hoo, and the residue in the Hundred of
Shamell.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same; which was
given to that Church by King Eadbert (in the year 738.) And being afterward
taken away, was restored by King William the Conqueror, and confirmed by King
Henry the first.

It was in the Deanery and D^ocess of R^chester, the Church stande^h in the
Hundred of Hoo, and was called St. P^ter.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon our Lady day (being the five and twentieth day
of (...))

This Parish ought anti^n^ly to have contributed toward the repair of the
first Arch or Peer of Rochester bridge.

STONAR.
STonore, Stonhor, Lapis Ti^uli, Lies at the East si^e of the County, in the
Isle of Than^t, near the sea, at the other side of the River, from Sandwich, in
the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine; East division of the
County, and division of the Justices of the Town and Port of Sandwich (whereof
it is a member) and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over
the same.

It was (as I conceive) in the Deanery of West Beer, and Dioce^s of Canterbury,
but the Church is demolished.

This was an ancient Town, and Haven (made desolate by the Danes) and here
Augu^tine the Monk, in the time of E^^elbert (King of Kent) ^anded, and staid,
t^l that King sent hither to him, and treated with him; touching converting his
people to the Christian faith. H^re also about 640 years since) landed Canu^us
the Dane, an^ afterward (21^, Maij. 1215.) Jews son of the King of France
when they severaly came to invade this Nation.

It was anciently compassed with the water, then called St^ner, and by the
Br^^ain^s the Dowe

It belonged a^tiently, to the Abbey of St Augustine, which^y the ^rant of King
Hen. 1. had a Fair here holden ye^rly, five days before, and after the
translation of S^ Augustine (being the 26th day of May) but long since
^i^continued.

Vo^timer King of Britain (about 1200. years since) after his great victory
over the Saxons, At this place caused his Monument to be erected, and commanded
his ^ody to be buried in the same, for a future terror to the Saxons; but he
failed in his end therein, dying shortly afterward, and buried elsewhere.

STONE near Dartford.
Lies at the Northside of the County, adjoining to he river of Thames, about
two miles and a half (toward the Northeast) distant from Dartford, in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West
division of the County, and upper div^si^n of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was cal^ed St.
Mary's. In which are o^ lately were memorials of the interme^t of (...) (almost
260. years (...)) Of Lumbard and Lak^n (both almost 250. years since^) Of
So^ewell, near 220 years since: Of Bon^fant Owner of Stonehouse (otherwise
Stone Castle) in this Parish almost 200. years since: Of Payname near 120.
years Of dive^s of the Family of Chapman (sometimes owners of Stonehouse
aforesaid) and of Dew (all very antien^^) And in a Ch^ppel there, founded by
Sir John Wilshire Knight (likewise Owner of Stone-house a foresaid) is or
lately was a memorial of the interment there of the said Sir John Wilshire and
his Wife, above 130. years since.

STONE near Feversham.
Lies near the North side of the County, about two miles (toward the
southwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East
division of the Coun^y, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof as is
in the Mannours of Copton, Selgrave, or Hamme Marsh. The same being given to
that Church by King Hen. 8. 33. of his reign.) But the liberty of St. Augustine
claims over the same. For that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which
belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Diocese of Canterbury; the Church is demolished, But in what
Deanery this Parish was, or by what name that Church was called, I find not.

STONE in Oxney.
Lies at the Southside of the County, adjoining to Sussex, by the river of
Rother, in the Isle of Oxney about four miles (toward the southeast) distant
from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Oxney, East
division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury (...)eth there; and the liberty of
St. Augustine claims over t^^ Rectory and Vicarage of Stone.

It was in the Deanery of Limpn^, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St Mary's (which Church belonged to the Abbey of St. Augustine, and the
Vicarage was endowed 29 of April 1360. in the time of Simon Islip Archbishop of
Canterbury: About the year 994. this place was burnt and spoiled by the Danes.

Near the side of the Marsh here, at a place called Abdale (alias Ap^^^e) are
the ruins of a great structure of Stone, supposed by some to have ^ee^ a
Castle, but reported by others (and that more probably) to have been only
storehouses for Merchants, when the sea came near the same (as anciently it
did)

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Ascension day, (being the Thursday seven
night before Whitsunday.)

STOWTING.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the southwest) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of
Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

In the year 1044. Egelricus Big, gave Stowting to Christchurch Canterbury.

STROVD.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, adjoining to Rochester Bridge, by
the River Medway, in the Ba^liwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of
Aylesford, and West division of the County.

Part thereof is in the division of the Justices of the City of Rochester, and
the liberty of that City claims over the same, viz. from the High Street of
Rochester over the Bridge to the Mill, called Stroud Mill (including the M^ll,
and from thence all along the High Street) at the right hand side thereof to
the sign of the Angel, and all Little Borough; and so beyond the Church, to
the way between Friendsbury and Cookestone, and up the way leading to
Friendsbury, to the House called the Ship (including the Church of Stroud.

And the residue is in the North division of Justices in the Lath of Aylesford.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester also claims there, and the
liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims over the Manor of Godington in
this Parish.

It was in the Deanery and Dio^ess of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Nicholas.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of the Assumption of our Lady (being
the fifteenth day of August.)

Gilbert Glanvill, Bishop of Rochester, about 450. years since, founded here an
Hospital, (to the honor of the Virgin Mary: but as others report, to the
honor of St. Andrew, which at the suppression, was valued at 52l. 9s. 10d. ob.
per annum.

STURMOUTH.
Lies toward the Northeast part of the County, by the river S^^ure, about
four miles, (toward the Northwest) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there; but the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that it is in the Hundred
of Bl^ngate, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Deanery of Bridge and
Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints.

STURREY.
Lies toward the North side of the County, by the river Stoure, about two
miles toward the North-east di^tant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of
Bridge and Pet^am, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same (for that is is in the
Hundred of Blengate,) which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was called St.
Nicholas.

SUNDRISH.
SVndriche, Sunderh^rsce, lies toward the West end of the County, about two
miles and a half (toward the Northeast) distant from West^^^, in the Bailiwick
of Sutton Br^^ley, Hundred of ^odsheath, Lath of Sutton at Ho^e, West division
of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Sundrish.

It was in the Deanery of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury,) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

SUTTON near Dovor.
Lies at the East side of the County, about five miles (toward the Northeast)
distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cor^^lo, Lath of St.
Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury and St. Augustine claim
there.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury; and by an
Earthquake happening 6. April 1580. a piece of this Parish Church fell down.

SUTTON at Hone.
SVttune, lies toward the Northside of the County, by the river Darent, about
two miles toward the southeast, distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of
Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of
the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there; and the liberty of
the late Dean of Canterbury, claims over the lands late of Sir Anthony Roper
in this Parish.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester: And the Church was
called St. John Baptist, which Church was given to the Church of Rochester by
King Hen. 1.

East SUTTON.
Lies about the middle of the County, about four miles toward the southwest,
distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices i^ that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

SUTTON VALLENCE.
Lies about the middle of the County, about four miles and a half (toward
the southeast) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorn,
Lath of Aylesford, west division of the County, and East division of Justices
in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's

A Fair is kept here yearly, upon the day of St. Edmund the King, being the
twentieth day of November.

William Lamb, Clothworker of London, erected a Free-Schoole here, with
allowance to the Master of 20l. per annum, and of 8l. per annum to the Usher,
and he also built here 6. Al^ns-houses, with allowance of 10l. per annum to the
same.

Here also are the ruins of an ancient Castle, built (as is conceived) when
the Sea came up the Valley under the same; which that it so did, appears by
an Anchor there found (not far from the Castle) in the memory of men lately
living: but when, or by whom this Castle was built, or how ruinated, I find
not.

SWANSCOMBE.
Lies at the Northside of the Coun^y, near the River of Thames, about two
miles toward the West distant from Gravesend; In the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and up^er division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was called St.
Peter and Paul, in which are (or lately were) memorials of the interment of
Thomas, above 160. ^ears since: and of Bonevant, above 140. years since.

This place is famous, for that here the men of this County with boughs in
their hands (like a moving wood) enclosed King William the Conqueror: and
(casting down their boughs) prepared for battle, demanding the enjoyment of
their ancient Customs and Franchises, which he thereupon granted.

The ancient and noble Family of M^n^eusies were antient^y Owners hereof; and
(as is conceived) this place took its name from the Camp of (...) the Dane,
pitched near this place.

But who so desires to be satisfied touching St. Hildeferth, sometimes famous
here for Curing Madmen: I refer him to Mr. Lamberts Perambulation in
Swanscombe.

SWAYCLIFFE.
Lies at the Northside of the County (adjoining to the Sea) about five miles
toward the North) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and
Petham, Hundred of Whitstaple, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor of Swaycliffe, and the
liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury claims over so much of this Parish,
as is within the Manor of Shourt.

It was in the Deanery of West Beer and Dioces^ of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. John Baptist:

SWINGFEILD.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles (toward the
southeast) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of
Folk^one, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of
Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Dovor, and Diocese of Canterbury, an^ the Church was
called St. Peter: in which is, or lately was a memorial of the interment of
Tongue (who made one of the Windows thereof.

Here also was a religious Foundation (called a Preceptory) valued at the
suppression at 87l. 38. 3d. ob per annum.

Robert Fineux was Lord of Swingfield at the time of the Conquest.

TENHAM.
TEneham, lies toward the Northside of the County (near the Isle of Sheppey)
about two miles and a half (toward the East) distant from M^^^^n, in the
Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Tenham, East division of the County,
and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Tenham (which was given to that Church by King (...), in the year 791.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's (which Church was in the year 1227. annexed and united to
the Archdeaconry of Canterbury, and 35. Ed. 3. The Lord Andomar de Rupy (an
alien) was Archdeacon there, and held this Church then valued at 130l. 6^. 8d.
per annum. And in the same are or lately were, memorial^ of the interment of
Froge^^^ll (above 210. years since, and of Mareys, very ancient.

TENTERDEN.
Lies toward the south side of the County, by the river Rother, about six
miles (toward the East) distant from Cranbrooke, in the Bailiwick of the seven
Hundreds, Hundred of Tenterden, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and
division of the Justices of the Corporation of Tente^den (^he liberties
whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same; The liberty of St.
Augustine claims over the Rectory of Tenterden: And the liberty of Wye
claims over the Den of Chepredge in this Parish (which Parish and the
aforesaid Hundred are incorporated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and Commonal^y
of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden) before that, by the name of Bailiffe and
Commonalty of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden, and before that, by the name
of Barons o^ the Town, and Hundred of Teuterden.

It is a member of the ancient Town of Rye, and was annexed to the same in the
time of King Hen. 6. (in whose time this Town and Hundred was first
incorporated.)

The Election of the Bailiffe, and afterward of the Mayor anciently was (and
still is) in the Town Hall on the day of the Decollation of St. John Baptist
(being the nine and twentieth day of August.)

This Parish was in the Deanery of Charing, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Mildred (in which was anciently an Altar to St. John
Baptist) and there is yet in the same a fair monument of Whitfield (an ancient
Family in that Parish.) And memorials of the interment of Austen and Short
(likewise two ancient Families there.)

In this Church were likewise la^ely memorials of the interment of Phillips and
Curtis (also ancient families) here (But the inscription of the first is
defaced, and the other gone) The steeple of this Church is famous for the
fair, lo^ty, and well building of the same (out of which formerly hung ^ a
Beacon) there are several relations touch^ng the rise of that common report
that this steple was the cause of Goodwin Sands (some whereof are ridiculous,
and impossible) but the most probable relation of the rise of the same is thus.

Goodwin Earl of this County, and father of King Harold) was in the time of
King Edward the Confessor owner of a great quantity of flat Lands in this
County (near the Isle of Thane^) defended from the sea by a great wall, which
lands afterward (in the year 1099.) was parcel of the possessions of the
Abbot of St. Augustine (but retained the name of Goodwin, formerly owner
thereof) and that Abbot, being then also owner of the Rectory of Tenterden, and
having begun the building of this steeple and the t^me of year for such purpose
being much spent, the thoughts, and actions, of him, and his agents were so set
upon the finishing of that work, that they neglected the care of watching, and
preserving the aforesaid wall, and (3. of November in that year) the sea broke
over, and ruined the same, and drowned the aforesaid lands (overwhelming the
same) with a light sand, (there st^ll remaining) and the place thereby obtained
the name of Goodwin Sands, and became (as still it is) dreadful, an^ dangerous
to Navigators, and thus (accidentially) this Tenterden steeple is said to be
the cause of Goodwin sands.

One Heyman (Ancestor of the late Sir Peter Heyman) very anciently founded the
Free School of this Town, and William Marshall Clerk about the year 1521. gave
ten pound per. annum, out of lands in this parish (toward the maintenance of
the Schoolmaster there.

In this parish at Smalhith, is a Chapel (still used, and maintained) and (by
Tradition) is said to have been founded by one Shepherd.

A Market is kept in this town of Tenterden, upon every Friday, and a Fair
yearly upon the day of St Mark (being the five and twentieth day of April.)

TESTON.
TErstane, Lies toward the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about
two miles and a half toward the South-east) distant from West Malling, in the
Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford West division of the
County, and South division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

The Manor of Teston, was given by Elianor (Wife of King Edward they.) to
Christ-church Canterbury (which gift was confirmed by that King.

This parish is a Borough, and has a Court Leet of it self (where the
Borsholder is chosen) and the inhabitants thereof owe no service to the Court
Leet holden for the Hundred of Twyford, but at that Court, may be chosen a
Constable for that Hundred out of this Borough.

THANINGTON.
Lies toward the Northside of the County by the River Stoure, about one mile
(toward the South-west distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and
Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there.

It was in the Deanery, and Diocese of Canterbury and the Church was called St.
Nicholas.

THROWLEY.
THroughley, Trewligh, Lies toward the North part of the County, About four
miles toward the South distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, for that it is in the
Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Ospringe, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was cal^ed St. Michael.

Sir William of Dene, was (at the time of the Conquest) owner of Throwley, and
here anciently was a Priory of Priors Aliens (a Cell to St. Bertins) and
suppressed 2. Hen. 5.

THURNHAM.
Lies toward the middle of the County, about two miles and a half (toward
the Northeast) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyho^ne,
Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices
in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's.

Here was a Castle founded (in the time of King Stephen) by Sir Leonard Goddard.

TILNESTONE.
TIlemannestune, Tilesmannestune, Lies toward the East side of the County,
about four mile^ (t^wa^ds the South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwi^k,
and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustin^, East ^^v^sion of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims there, and the liberty of
the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Tilnestone.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Andrew.

TONGUE.
THong, lies toward the Northside of the County, about one mile and a half
(toward the East) distant from Milton in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton,
Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in
that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St Giles (which Church was by King Edw. 1. appropriated to West
Langdon Abbey.) Near the Mill here (about a quarter of a mile distant from this
Church) are the ruins of an old Castle, built by Hengist the Saxon (about
1200. years since, upon this occasion, viz. This Hengist being sent for by
Vortiger (King of Britain) to assist him against his Northern enemies, and
giving them the overthrow, obtained of that King so much ground as might be
en^losed with a B^ls Hide (to build him a Seat upon) which Hide he cut into
very small Thongs (left fast one unto the other.) And within the compass
thereof, built that Castle (which he called Thong Castle) from whence also this
Parish afterward took its name.

In this Cast^e he afterward feasted that King, who (in drinking of a
Wassaile, in a Cup of Gold, presented then and there, to him at Supper, by the
Lady Rowen^ (^therwise R^xina) daughter, or as others more credibly report,
Niece of the said Hengist (he being then too young to have such a daugh^er) was
so surprised and besotted, with her beauty and behavior, that (to the great
dis^ontent, and prejudice of the Nation) he divorced himself from his then
lawful Wife, and married this Lady: And (upon that marriage) Hengist got the
government of this County (which afterward gave advantage to him to erect a
Kingdom here) and to other Saxons to erect other Kingdoms in this Nation,
whereby the Heptarchy was framed.

This Castle afterward and since the Conquest, became the Seat of the noble
Family of Badlesmer.

TROTTISCLIFFE.
TRosclif, Trottesclive, lies toward the middle of the West part of the
County, about two miles (toward the Northeast) distant from Wrotham, in the
Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the
late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same, being given to that Church by
Offa (King of Mercia) in the year 764.

It was in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Peter and Paul.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
third Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

TUDELEY.
Lies toward the southwest part of the County, about two miles (toward the
southeast) distant from Tunbridge, in the Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, and the residue in
the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, and Hundred of Wachlingstone.

It was all in the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Wachlingstone, and was called All Saints.

TUNBRIDGE.
TOwn of Bridges, lies toward the southwest part of the County, by the river
Medway, about five miles (toward the southeast) distant from Sevenoke, in the
Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the
County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Tunbridge, which (in the time of Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, about 310.
years since, came to that Sea.

Part thereof is in Southborough, other part in the Town of Tunbridge, and the
residue in Helden Borough (every of which has a several Constable of it self.)

It was i^ the Deanery of Malling and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in Tunbridge Town, was called St. Peter and Paul and
bu^lded by Richard o Clare (Earl of Hertford and Gl^cester) in the time of
King Hen. 3. And was appropria^ed to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem.

In this Church are (or ^ately were) memorials of the inter^ent of ^he Lords
Stafford and Audley (sometimes Lords of that Manor) about 300. years since.

A Market is kept here upon every Friday, and three Fairs yearly (one upon
Ashwednesday, (being the Wednesday after Shrovesunday) another upon
Midsummerday, being the four and twentieth day of June; and the other upon St.
Lukes day, being the eighteenth day of October.

In the time of King William Rufus, Richard (beir of the Lords of the Seigniory
of Briony in Normandy) had (in exchange for the same) this Town, and the Lowy
about it, (containing by measure, three miles every way from the Center,
answerable to that Seigniory) and at this Town he built the Castle (holding the
same of the Archbishop of Canterbury, by a Knights Fee, and the Office of
Steward, at his Inthronization, and had within the same re^urn of Writs,
creation of Off^cers, and especial Sessions in Air (long since discontinued)

His Posterity (surnamed of Clare) were Earls of Gloucester and Stafford, and
Dukes of Buckingham, and made this Castle their chief residence; but by
attainder of Treason (in the year 1520.) lost the same.

King Stephen (in the Year 1088.) took this Castle, as also did King John.

King Hen. 3 granted to Richard of Clare (Earl of Gloucester) license to w^ll
and embattaile this Town, but that King afterward (in the year 1264. seized
this Castle, and therein the Countess of Gloucester, which he let go, but
garisoned the Castle.

The aforesaid Richard of Clare, about the year 1241. near this Castle founded
a Priory of black Channons (of the order of St. Augustine. To the honor of St.
Mary Magdalen, which at the suppression 17. Hen. 8. was valued at 169l 10s. 3d.
per annum.

Sir Andrew Iud Lord Mayor of London in the year 1550 and son of John Iud of
this Town, Founded here a Freeschool, in the year 1551. with allowance to the
Schoolmaster of 20l per annum, and to the Usher of 8l. per annum (The oversight
and government whereof, he committed to the Company of Skinners, London, (of
which Company himself was F^^ee.) And as is reported, that Company (in
faithful discharge of that trust) expended 4000l. for defense and maintenance
of this School.

TUNSTALL.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about two miles (toward the south)
distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray,
East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. John Baptist (the Patronage of which Church was about 450. years
since) granted by Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and in this Church is (or lately was) a memorial of the interment
of Crowmer, above 160. years since.

ULCOMB.
HVlecombe, Olecombe, Wolecumbe, Lies near the middle of the County, about two
miles and a half (toward the southwest) distant from Leneham, in the East
division of Justices, in the Lath of Aylesford.

Part thereof viz. (the Borough of Kingsnode) is in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and the liberty of St. Augustine claims
over the same, (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to
that Abbey.

And the residue is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford,
and West division of the County.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claims there.

It was all in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Eyhorn, and was called All Saints, it
belonged anciently to Christ-church Canterbury, and being taken from the same;
It was (in the year 941.) restored by King Edmund: And (about 430. years since)
made a Collegiate Church (by Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury) and the
head thereof was called Arch Presbyter.

In this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interment of several of
that ancient and eminent Family of St. Ledger, whose ancient Seat was in this
Parish, one of them above 210. years since, and another above 180. years since.

UPCHURCH.
Lies toward the Northside of the County, about three miles and a half
(toward the Northwest) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of
Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of
Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's. In the wall of which Church (as is reported) was long
since interred one Woodokes.

WALDERSHARE.
Lies near the East side of the County, about four miles and a half (toward
the south) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath
of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called All Saints (which Church was about 340. years since, appropriated to
West Langdon Abbey, by Walter Reynolds (Archbishop of Canterbury.

Sir William Mamouth was at (the time of the Conquest) Lord of Waldershare.

WALMER.
Lies at the East side of the County, adjoining to the Sea, about four miles
and a half (toward the south-east) d^stant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of
Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of
Justices of the Corporation of the Town and Port of Sandwich, (whereof it is a
member, and the liberties of that Town and Port, and of the Cinque Ports claim
over the same.

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Mary's.

Here King Hen. 8. about 120. years since, built a Castle, and (in his time)
question arising between the Justi^es of the County, and this Parish (touching
assessing thereof.) That King took away the question, by uniting the same by
Letters Patents to Sandwich.

WALTHAM.
LIe^h toward the middle of the East part of the County, about three miles
(toward the East) distant from Wye, in the East division of the County, and
division of Justices in the Lath of St. Augustine.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, and Lath of
St. Augustine.

Other part thereof (viz. so much as is in Townborough) is in the Bailiwick of
Chart and Longbridge, Hunred of Wye, and Lath of Scray, and the liberty of Wye,
claims over the same.

And the residue is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Stowting, and Lath of
Shipway.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

It was all in the Deanery of Bridge, and D^ocess of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Bridge and Petham, and was called St.
Bartholomew.

St. Warburgh see Hoo.
WARDEN.
Lies at the Northside of the County, in the Isle of Sheppey, adjoining to the
sea, about five miles and a h^lf (tow^rds the North) distant from Feversham, in
the Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of Scray, East
division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury.

WAREHORNE.
VVErehorne, lies toward the southeast part of the County, about five miles
and a half, toward the south) distant from Ashford.

So much thereof as is in the Boroughs of great Kennarton, or old Herlackenden;
is in the Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, Hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray,
and West division of the County.

And the residue is in the Bailiwick of Shipway, Hundred of Ham, Lath of
Shipway, and East division of the County.

The liberty of Romney Marsh does claim over part thereof, and that part is in
the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh. And the
residue of this Parish is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of
Shipway.

The liberties of Wye, and the late Dean of Canterbury, claim in this Parish.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Ham, and was called St. Matthew.

In the year 1010. Aelphege Archbishop of Canterbury, adjoined Warehorne to his
Church.

Two Faires are kept here yearly (one at Ham, upon the day of finding of the
Holy Cross, being the third day of May) and the other near the Church, upon St.
Mathews day, being the one and twentieth day of September.

WATRINGBVRY.
WOtringbery, Wateringbyrie, Oteringaberig, Lies toward the middle of the
County, about two miles (toward the south) distant from West Malling, in the
Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the
County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. John Baptist.

This Parish ought anciently to have contributed toward the repair of the
fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.

WEST BEER
Lies toward the Northeast side of the County, by the river Stoure, about
three miles (toward the Northeast) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick
of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there* but the
liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same. For that it is in the Hundred
of Blengat^, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called All Saints.

WESTGATE.
IS part ^n the County of the City of Canterbury, and the residue in the County
of Kent, (adjoining to the said City) in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham,
Hundred of Westgate* Lath of St. Augustine* East division of the County, and
division of Justices in that La^h.

The liberty of the la^e Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Westgate.

The whole Parish was in the Deanery and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in that City, and was called Holy Cross.

WESTRAM.
WEsterham, lies at the West side of the County, adjoining to Surrey, about
five miles (toward the West) distant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
B^oml^y, Hundred of Westram and Ea^onbridge, Lath of Sutton at ^one, West
division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath.

It was i^ the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester* and ^he Church was
called St. Mary's, the Advowson whereof was by Elianor (wife of King Edward the
first) g^ve^ to Christchurch Canterbury, and that King confirmed the ^^me.

A Ma^ket is kep^ here upon every Wednesday: And a Fa^re yearly upon our Lady
day, (being the eighth day of S^p^^mber)

This Parish ought anciently t^ have cont^ibuted toward the (...) of the fif^h
Arch or Pee^ of Rochester Bridge.

At Squirryes in this Parish, arises the Head of the river Darent.

About a mile and a half, from this Town, toward the south, not far from the
side of the Highway, called Oakeham, Two Closes lying together, separated with
a hedge, of Hollow Ashes, 18. December 1596. Part thereof, 12. rods long sunk,
six foot and a half deep: the next morning 15. foot more, and the third morning
80. foot more, and (so from day to day for eleven days) that great Trench of
ground (in length about 80. rods, and in breadth 28. rods, moved, slid and shot
southwards. And the whole measure of the breaking ground, was at least nine
acres.

WESTWELL.
Lies about the middle of the County, toward the southeast part thereof;
about three miles toward the Nor^h, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick of
Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County a^^ division
of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The (...) of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over ^he Manor of Westwell.

The (...) of the l^te Archbishop of Canterbury also claims (...) Perish.

The (...) and Dean, are in the Hundred of Wye, and the (...) of Wye claims
over the same.

And the (...) P^rish is in the Hundred of Cul-^ill.

It was all in the Deanery of Charing and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Calehill, and was called St. Mary's,
which Church was in the year 1397. (by license of the then King and Pope)
appropriated to Christchurch Canterbury, by Thomas Arundell (Archbishop of that
Sea) But I find elsewhere that the same was so appropriated in the year, 1400.

Whitfeild see Bewfeild.
WHITSTAPLE.
Lies at the Northside of the County, adjoining to the Sea, about five miles
(toward the North) distant from Cante^bury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and
Petham, Hundred of Whitstaple, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Borough of
Tankerton in this Parish; and the liberty of St Augustine claims over the
residue of the same.

It was all in the Deanery of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called All Saints.

A Fair ^s kept here yearly upon Goodfriday, being the Friday before Easter.

WICHLING.
Lies about the middle of the County, about two miles (toward the North)
distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that
Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Sittingborn, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Margaret.

WICKHAM near Fordwich.
WIckham Breaux, lies toward the Northeast part of the County, by the River
Stoure (about one mile toward the East) distant from Fordwich, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division the
County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the same, for that it is in the
Hundred of Downhamford, which belonged to that Abbey.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Andrew.

East WICKHAM.
Lies at the Northwest side of the County, near the river of Thames, about
two miles and a half (toward the southeast) distant from Woolwich, in the
Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Little and Lesnes, Lath of Sutton at
Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Michael.

West WICKHAM.
Lies at the West end of the County, adjoining to Surrey, about ^hree miles
(toward the southwest) distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The l^berty of the Duchy of Lancaster claims over the Manor of West
Wickham, and the Message and Lands called Spring Park, Old Parkes, Friths
Wood, and Chamkers Grove.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. John Baptist.

WILLESBOROVGH.
WIvelisbergh, lies toward the southeast part of the County, by the river
Stoure, about a mile and a half (toward the southeast) distant from Ashford,
in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East
division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Manor and Rectory of
Willesborough, and the liberty of Wye claims over the Borough of Henwood.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Mary's, in which Church are or lately were memorials of the
interment of Barry (above 190. years since) and of Ellis, very ancient.

WILMINGTON.
WILMVNTVNE, lies toward the Northwest part of the County, about one mile
(toward the south-west) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton
Dartford, Hundred of Dartford and Wilmington, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West
division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims there.

It was in the Deanery of Dartford, and Diocese of Rochester, and the Church was
called St. Michael (which Church, was by King Hen. 1. given to the Church of
Rochester.)

WIMLINGSWOLD.
Women's Would, lies toward the middle of the East part of the County, about
four miles and a half (toward the Northeast) distant from Eleham, in the
Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division
of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church was anciently a Chapel to Nonington, and called St. Margaret.

WINGHAM.
WEngam, Wingeham, lies toward the Northside o^ the County, by the river
Stoure, about three miles (toward the southeast) distant from Fordwich, in the
Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division
of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of
Wingham, (being anciently belonging to that Church) And afterward taken away
from the same: but restored by King Edmund (in the year 941.)

The liberty of St. Augustine claims over the Rectory of Wingham.

This Parish was in the Deanery of Bridge, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the
Church was called St. Mary's, which was made Collegiate, and a College founded
thereunto, in the year 1282. by John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein
he placed 6. Prebends (Secular Channons) the Governor whereof was called a
Provost.

This College at the suppression was valued at 84l. per annum.

WITTERSHAM.
WHitrischeham, lies at the southside of the County, in the Isle of Oxney, by
the river Rother, adjoining to Sussex, about three miles (toward the south)
distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Oxney,
East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, and the
liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over the Mannours of Palster,
and Wittersham, in this Parish.

It was in the Deanery of Limpne and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. John Baptist (which Church is reputed to have been a Collegiate
Church, and near the same was a College (the foundation or suppression whereof
I find not.) Only the memory of the same is retained, by the Manor house of
Wittersham, being yet called the College of Wittersham.

In the East Window of the North Chancel, or Chapel of this Church (called
Acton Chancel, but more truly Palster Chancel) is the arms of Watton,
(sometimes Owner of the said Manor of Palster.)

In the first of the three of the North windows in this Chapel also is a
memorial of Petlesden (an ancient family in those parts:) and near unto the
going into that Chapel from the Church, is a memorial of the interment of
Audyan (but more truly Odiarne) sometimes Owner of Acton, and of a very ancient
Family in this Parish (there buried above 130 years since.)

In the year 1032. Edsin (Archdeacon of Canterbury) with the consent of King
Canu^us, gave Wittersham, and the aforesaid Manor of Palster (otherwise
Palstre) to Christchurch Canterbury, but elsewhere I find that (in the year
1035.) King Canutus gave the same to the said Edsin, (to the use of that
Church.)

A Fa^r is kept here yearly upon the day of Philip and Jacob (being the first
day of May.

WOLDHAM.
WLdeham, Vldeham, lies toward the North part of the County, by the river
Medway, about two miles and a half (toward the southwest) distant from
Rochester, in the Bailiwick, of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford,
West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claims over the same. (It being
given to that Church by King Ethelred about 900. years since) and confirmed by
King Hen. 1. It was in the Deanery and Diocese of Rochester and the Church was
called All Saints.

WOOD otherwise Woodchurch.
Lies at the Northeast side of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, near the
Sea, about five miles (toward the North) distant from Sandwich, in the
Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the
County, and division of Justices of the Town and Port of Dovor (of which it is
a Member) and the liberties thereof, and of the C^^que Ports, claim over the
same.

This Parish was in the Dea^ry of West Beer, and Diocese of Canterbury, but the
Church is demolished, and the Parish laid to Bi^chinton.

Controversy arising (in the time of King Hen. 8.) between the Justices of the
County, and this Parish of Woodchurch, touching assessing the same. That King
took away the question, by uniting the same (by Letters Patents to Dovor.

WOODCHURCH.
Lies toward the southeast part of the County, about three miles (toward the
East) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred
of Blackborn, Lath of Scray. West division of the County* and lower division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Wye, claims over the Den of Plurenden in this Parish, and the
liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much of this Parish as
is within the Manor of Apledore.

It was all in the Deanery of Limpne, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called All Saints. The south Chapel or Chancel of which Church, was
founded by Herlackenden (a very ancient family in this Parish) whose ancient
seat is still here (called Old Herlackenden) and held by Thomas Herlackenden
Esquire.

In that Chapel is a memorial of the Interment of William Herlackenden
Esquire, in the year 1081. Of Margaret Herlackenden (Daughter and Heir of Guy
Ellis) in the year 1479. Of Roger Herlackenden Esquire in the year 1523. And
of Martin Herlackenden Esquire, in the year 1584.

In the same is also a Monument of Sir Edward Waterhouse, there buried (in the
year 1591.) And in the East Window of that Chapel is the Arms of Ellis.

At the North wall of the great Chancel in this Church, is a monument of Thomas
Herlackenden Esquire there buried in the year 1554.

In the East Window of the North Chancel there, are several effigies of the
Clerks: And in the North Window of that Chancel, is the Effigies of William
Harey.

WOODNESBOROUGH.
Lies at the East side of the County, about one mile and a half (toward the
southwest) distant from Sandwich, In the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St.
Augustine, and East division of the County.

The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there.

Part thereof ( viz. the lands heretofore parcel of the Manor of Boxley) is
within the division of the Justices of the Town and Port of Sandwich.

And the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports, and St. Augustine claim
over the same.

And the residue is in the Hundred of Eastry, and division of Justices in the
Lath of St. Augustine.

It was all in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Eastry, and was called St. Mary's.

This Parish is conceived (by Verstegan) to take its name from the worshipping
there of Wooden the Pagan Saxons Cod.

WOOLWICH.
WLewich, lies at the Northwest part of the County, adjoining to the river of
Thames, about five miles and a half (toward the North) distant from Bromley,
in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at
Hone, Went division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath,
part thereof lies at the other side of the river of Thames, at Essex shore,
but is in Kent.

It was all in the Deanery of Dart^ord and Diocese of Rochester, And the Church
was called St. Mary's, which Church was given to the Church of Rochester by
King H. 1.) and in the same one William Prene founded a Chapel, and was there
interred (above 190. years since) he also founded the Belfree of the said
Church.

In this Church also is (or lately was) a monument of the interment of Colin
(260. years since.)

A market is kept here upon every Friday. 13th August 1627. a fish (called a
Grampas of 10. yards long, about five foot high and of the like breath, was
shot with Muskets and taken near this Town.

And in this Parish is one of the famous Ship-docks for the royal navy.

WOOTTON.
VVOdetone, lies toward the middle of the East side of the County, about
three miles (toward the Northeast) distant from Eleham, in the hundred of
Kinghamford, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division
of Justices in that Lath.

Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, and the residue in the
Bailiwick of Eastry.

The liberties of the late Archbishop, and late Dean of Canterbury claim there.

It was in the Deanery of Eleham, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Church stands in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, and was called St.
Martin.

In the year 687. King Cedwald, gave Woot^on to the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, and Alpheg (Archbishop of Canterbury) in the year 1010. adjoined
the same to Christchurch there.

WORD.
VVOrth, Lies at the East end of the County, near the Sea about one mile
(toward the South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of
Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County and division of
Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury, claims over so much thereof, as
is in the Manor of Lydecourt (the same being given to that Church by King
Hen. 8. 33. of his reign.)

It was in the Deanery of Sandwich, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church
was called St. Peter and Paul.

WORMSELL.
Lies near the middle of the County, about three miles and a half (toward the
northwest) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyborne, Lath
of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in
that Lath.

The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth there.

It was in the Deanery of Sutton, and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Giles

WROTHAM.
VVRoteham, Wirtham, Lies toward the middle of the West part of the County,
about three miles and a half (toward the west) distant from West Malling, in
the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Aylesford, West division of
the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath.

The liberty of Wrotham claims over the same, and the liberty of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury claims over the Manor of Wr^tham.

It was in the Deanery of Sh^reham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of
Canterbury) but in the Diocese of Rochester.

In the Churchyard here is or lately was, an ancient monument of Peck^am, and
in the Church several memorials of the interment of that Family, one above 160.
years since; another above 150. years since; another above 140. years since;
another above 130. years since: and another above 120. years since. Also of
Ieames (a good benefactor to this Church) above 150. years since. And of
St^atton, Burgony, and Gawge, very ancient.

A Market is kept here upon every Tuesday, and a Fair yearly upon the day of
St. George, being the 23. day of April.

In this Parish was anciently a Mansior-house of the Archbishops of Canterbury,
which Simon Is^^p Archbishop about 300. years since, pulled down, and carried
to Maidstone, toward building of the Palace there.

This Parish ought anciently to have contribu^ed toward the repair of the
fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester bridge.

In the year 1572. was a very great and long frost and Snows; so that the arms
and boughs of Trees in and near this Parish, being overcharged with Ice, brake
off, and fell from the stocks (but more remarkably in this Parish.)

WYE.
WI Lies toward the southeast part of the County, by the river Stoure, about
three mlies and a half (toward the Northeast) distant from Ashford, in the
Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East division
of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.

The liber^y of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claims there, but the
liberty of Wye claims over the same (where is h^ld a Court of Record, upon
every Monday three weeks, for determining all actions, both real, personal and
mixed.

It was in the Deanery of Bridge and Diocese of Canterbury, and the Church was
called St. Gregory and St. Martin, which Church was Collegiate, so made by
Archbishop John Kempe (herein after mentioned) about 210. years since; And in
the same is, or lately was, a memorial of the interment of Thomas Kempe, and
Beatrice his wife (Father and Mother of the said Archbishop) about 230. years
since. And of one Andrew very ancient.

The Steeple of this Church, had anciently a long spire, which was fired by
lightning to the stone-work.

King William the Conqueror, having o^tained victory over King Harold (at a
place then called Herst in Sussex) founded there a Monastery, which (upon that
occasion) he named (as still it is called) Battle. And to the same he gave the
Manor of Wye aforesaid, by the name of his Royal Mann^ur o^ Wye, which then
had 22. hundred^ and a half, subject to the same, and royal liberties and
customs. And his grant mentions the same to have been of the Demesnes of his
Crown (which gift King Hen. 1. confirmed.) And at this Manor house King Edw.
2. in the first year of his reign, kept a royal Christmas.

The aforesaid John Kempe, born in this Parish, whose Father was mean (though
descended from a younger brother of a good Family) became Doctor of the Laws,
Archdeacon of Durham, Dean of the Arches, Vicar general to Archbishop Stafford
(his predecessor in the Sea of Canterbury) Bishop of Rochester, afterward of
Chichest^r, afterward of London, and afterward Archbishop of York; twice Lord
Chancellor of England, and Cardinal of St. Balbin, afterward 11. of December.
1452. Archbishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal of St. Rufine; and in the time of
King Hen. 6. founded here a College of Secular Priests (the head whereof was a
Prebend) These he appointed for divine Service, and to teach the youth of that
Parish, which College at the surrender thereof 36. Hen. 8. was valued at 93l.
2s. 0d. ob. per annum.

Much has formerly been boasted of a precious fountain in this Parish (working
miracles) touching which I refer them that desire further satisfaction to Mr.
Camdens Britannia fol. 335.

A Market is kept in this Town, upon every Thursday, and a fair yearly upon
the day of St. Gregory, being the 12. day of March.

YALDING.
Lies toward the middle of the West part of the County, by the river Medway,
about fou^e miles, toward the south, distant from West Malling, in the
Bailiwick of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south
division of Justices in that Lath.

Most part thereof is in the Hundred of T^yford, and the residue ( viz. the
Borough of Rugmerhill) is in the ancient (...) of Ayle^ford.

So much of this Parish as is held of the Manor of West Farley, is in the
Borough of West Farley: The Borsholder whereof is chosen at the Court Leet
there; and so much thereof as is held of the Manor of Hunton, is within the
Borough of Hunton, and the Bo^^h^lder there^ ^f is ch^sen at the Court Leet
there; and the inhabitants of neither of these Boroughs, ow service to the
Court Leet holden for the Hundred of Twyford, (within which Hund^ed they both
are:) But at that Court a Constable for that Hundred, may be chosen out of
either of these Boro^ghs.

This Parish was all in the Deanery of Malling, and Diocese of Rochester.

The Church stands in the Hundred of Twyford, and was called St. Peter and
Paul.

A Fair is kept here yearly upon Easter Tuesday;

And thus having treated of the aforesaid several Parishes, and places in this
County of Kent, and considering that the City of Canterbury, and the County
thereof, is compassed about with the County of Kent, and was formerly parcel
of the same (as still the Castle there is) I though fit likewise to treat
something thereof. But in respect so much, and so fully, h^th been formerly
written of the same, and of the said Castle, and more especially by the
aforesaid Mr. Lambard, in his peram^ulation of Kent, and Mr. William Somner, in
his antiquities of Canterbury (printed in the year 1640.) the last whereof has
so elaborately, judiciously and fully wrote of the same That there is lest but
little (if anything observable) that I know of not there set down, I shall
therefore only briefly touch upon the same.

And first of the City, which lies toward the Northeast part of Kent, by the
river S^oure, about seven miles toward the East, distant from Feversham: And
doubtless is one of the most ancient Cities, now in the Nation, and a^tiently
called Caergant, or the Court of Ken^ish-men.

It is reported by some to have been founded (with Winchester in Hampshire, and
Sha^tsbury in Dorse^s^ire) by (...) (otherwise (...)) King of Britain, almost
2500. years since. The truth whereof may be questionable, for that it is
believed for certain, that Shaf^^bu^y was founded by King Alfred many hundred
years afterward; But as certain as it is that this City of Canterbury, was
famous in the time of the Ro^ane Government here: and in the time of Ethelbert
King of Ken^, above 1050. years since: This was his chief City, and place of
residence, which afterward was by Aethel^stan, enriched with seven Mints viz.
four for himself, two for the Archbishop, and one for the Abbot.

And for diverse Centuries afterward) this City was the chief place of Kent,
(governed by a P^ae^ect, Por^reve, Bailiffe, or Provest, until that (in the
year 1449.) it came to be governed by a Mayor, and so has ^ver since
continued: And in the year 1461. it was made a County of it self.

It is an ancient Corporation (anciently a Hundred) and within the division of
the Justices of the same:

A Market is kept here upon every Wednesday and Saturday.

Twenty Churches were anciently in this City and the Suburbs thereof; seventeen
whereof, viz. St. Alphage, St. Andrew, St. Mary Bredman, St. Mary Breeden, Holy
Cross Westgate, ^t George, St. Margaret, St. Mary Magdalen, St. Mary No^^hg^te,
St. Mildred, St. Peter, All Saints, St. Mary Castle, St. Edmund, St. John, St.
Mary Queeningate and St. Michael, were in the City.

And the other three, viz. St. Dunstan, St. Martin, and St. Paul, were in the
Suburbs.

All which Parishes were in the De^nry and Diocese of Canterbury, and are still
in being, except, St. Mary Castle, St. Edmund, St. John, St. Mary Queeningate
and St. Michael, which are demolished.

The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims i^ the said Parish of St.
Martin.

This City has had several disaster^, viz. by Fire above 900. years since, the
like about 740. years since.

By Burnings by the Danes (above 640. years since) by burning again about 150.
years afterward. But that which is conceived to have added to the decay
thereof (of latter times) was the suppression of the famous Monastrie of
Christ-church, and St. Augusti^e, and the other religious houses there (which
occasioned much frequenting of the same.)

To which also may be added, the late ruin of the Cathedral, and other
app^^tenances thereof, which (as is to be feared) will more eclipse the glory,
and welfare of the same.

And touching the Castle here, which is, and always has been (without
scruple) in the County of Kent, many questions have been made touching the
foundation thereof, but I shall only briefly touch thereupon.

I find it was by (the command of Julius Caesar the Roman Emperor) at his
coming into this Nation (about 1700 years since) built according to the Roman
order) and Hengist (King of Kent) about 200. years since, committed the
Government thereof to one L^dias (a Saxon) who governing the same many years, it
gained the name of Lodias Castle, (which name it retained until, and in the
time of King Ethelbert, who, (about 150. years afterward) upon his conversion
to the Christian faith, giving to Augustine (the Monk) his chief seat at
Canterbury, reserved (by name) Lodias Castle.

Afterward the Danes (as aforesaid) burning this City, also raced this Castle,
which continued ruined, till the co^ing of King William the Conqueror (who
built, and fortified a Castle, upon the old foundation, called the same the New
Castle, and gar^isoned therein 700. men.

Afterward King Stephen, committed the custody thereof to William of Ipre
(Earl of Kent) and since (by length and changes of times, and by tempests) the
same is become much ruined, yet the general Sessions of the peace for the
County, is here usually holden, twice in the year ( viz in July, and January.)

The place is reported to be in the aforesaid Parish of St Mildred (but in no
hundred) and now (for the reasons aforesaid) I forbear further enlargement,
either touching this City, or Castle.

By what is before written, it appears that this County of Kent, is divided
into two divisions ( viz. West, and East.)

Which West division abutteth to the river of Thames toward the North, to the
County of Surrey toward the West, to the County of Sussex toward the West and
South, and to the East division toward the East.

It contains both the Laths of Sutton at Hone, and Aylesford, and the lower
division of the Lath of Scray.

The East division does abut to the German Ocean toward the North, and East to
the narrow Seas toward the East and South, to the County of Sussex toward the
South, and to the West division toward the West.

And contains the upper division of the Lath of Scray, and both the Laths of
St. Augustine and Shipway.

These two Divisions may in any Map of the County, be divided each from other,
by pricking a line from the Top of the East side of the Isle of Greane, down to
the Channel; and exc^u^e from the West division the Churches of Queenborough,
Iwade, Halstoe, Vpchurch, Rainham, and (...).

Then prick the line down the East heads of the Chur^hes of Stockbury and
Bicknor.

Then prick the line from the bottom of Bicknor Church Eastward over the
Churches of W^^msell and Frindsted, and under the Churches of Milsted,
Kingsdown, Dodington, and Newynham.

Then between the Churches of Easeling and O^^rynden, and at the East side of
the Church of Ot^rynden, and under that Church Westward to the top of the East
head of the Church of Leneham, and down the East head of that Church, by the
East side of the Church of Bo^ghton, Malherbe, To the East head of the Church
of Hedcorne, and down that East head, and Eastward to the West head of the
Church of Smarden, and down that West head, and Eastward to the West head of
the Church of Betherisden, and down that West head, and Eastward to the top of
the East head of the Church of Shadoxherst, and down that East head, to the
West head of the Church of Warehorne, and down that West head to the Westside
of the Church of Snargate, and then Westward under the Church of Apledore, and
from thence along the Channel over the Church of Ebeney, and down as the river
goes to the East side of the Church of Newenden, and so into the Channel.

Note, That in all places where the line to part the Divisions or Laths, i^ by
this Book directed to be drawn down the head of any Church (either East or
West) that there that Parish, is in b^th the Divisions or Laths; but the Church
is in that Division or Lath, where the body of the same is.

This County has in it five Laths, viz Sutton at Hone, Aylesford, Scray, St.
Augustine and Shipway, which do severally contain, and may be divided each from
other as follows.

The Lath of Sutton at Hone.
Lies at the West side of the County, and abutteth to the River of Thames,
toward the North, To the County of Surrey, toward the West, to the County of
Sussex toward the South; and to the Lath of Aylesford, toward the East.

From which Lath of Aylesford, it may be divided in any Map of the County, by
drawing a line from the river of Thames, between the Ch^rches of Swanscombe and
Northfleet, and between the Churches of Southfleet and Ifeild, and down between
the Churches of Fawkham and (...), and between the Churches of Hartley and
Mep^^^, from thence down the Eastsides of the Churches of (...) an^ Ash, then
between the Churches of Kings^^^^ and (...) then dow^ by the East Side of the
Church of (...), from thence down, between the ^hurches (...) and Ightham, and
between the Churches (...) and (...) from thence down to the top of (...) East
head of the Church of Lyghe, from thence to the (...) the Church of Pensherst,
and down that Ea^^ head, to the top of the East head of the Church (...) and
down that East-head, and under that Church (...) over the Church of Asherst, to
the point a litt^e above the ^^eeple of the ^ame Church.

This Lath has in it two divisions of Justices of the Peace, of the County of
Kent.

I. The Upper Division, having in it these Parishes, viz.

Charleton near Greenwich, Deptford, Eltham East Green^ich, Lee, Leusham and
Woolwich, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of
B^ackheath.

Craford, Earith, Plumsted, an^ East Wickham, To summon which they command the
Constable of the Hundred of Little and Le^nes.

Dartford and Wilmington, To summon which, they command the Constables of the
Hundred of Dartford and Wilmington.

Bromley and Beckenham, To summon which they command the Constable of the
Hundred of Bromley and Beckenham.

Bexley, Chesilherst, Chelsfeild, Foots Cray, St. Mary Cray, North Cray, Paul's
Cray, Cudham, Down. Farnborough, Hayes, ^eston, Nockbolt, Orpington and West
Wickingham, To summon which they command the Constable^ of the Hundred of
Ruxley.

Ash near Wrotham, Darent, Eynsford, Farningham, Fawkeham, Hartley, Horton
Kirby, Kingsdown near Wrotham, Longfield, Lullenstone, Ridley, Southfleet,
Stone near Dartford, Sutton at Hone and Swanscombe. To summon which, they
command the Constables of the Hundred of Axstone.

II. The Lower Division, having in it these Parishes, viz.

Brasted, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Ville of Brasted.

Chevening, Halsted, Kensing, Lyghe, Otford, Seal, Sevenoke, Shorom and
Sundrish. To summon which, they command the Const^bles of the Hundred of
Codsheath.

Eatonbridge and West^^m* To Summon which, they command the Constable of the
Hun^red of Westram and Eatonbridge.

Chidingstone. Cowden, Hever, (...) To summon which (...) the Constables of the
Hundred of Somerden.

The Lath of Aylesford.
A Butteth to the River of Toames toward the North, to the Lath of Sutton at
Hone, toward the West; To the County of Suss^x, toward the south, and to the
Lath of Scray toward the East.

The dividing of the same from the Lath of Sutto^ at Hone, is already described
in that Lath.

And this Lath of Aylesford may (in any Map of the County) be divided from the
Lath of Scray,

By drawing a line from the top of the East side of the Isle of Greane, down to
the Channel, and exclude from this last of Aylesford, the Churches of
Queenborough, Iwade, Halst^e, Vpchurch, Rain^am: and Hartlip: Then draw the
line down the East heads of the Churches of Stock^bury and (...): Then draw the
line from the bottom of Bicknor Church, Eastward, over the Churches of
W^rm^ell, and Frinsted, and under the Churches of M^lsted, Kingsdown,
Doddington, and Newynham: then between the Churches of E^seling and Ottrynden,
and under the Church of O^^rynden, westward to the top of the East head of the
Church of Leneham, and down the East head of that Church, by the East side of
the Church of Boughton Malbe^be, to the East head of the Church of Hedcorn, and
down that East head, under that Church westward to the top of the West head of
the Church of St^p^e^erst, and down that West head to the top o^ the West head
of the Church of ^^^den, and down that West head, to the top of the West head
of the Church o^ Goudher^t, and down that Westhea^ to the (...) ^t Flimweil,
about half way between the Churches of Lambertherst and (...).

This Lath has in it three Division of Justices of the Peace of the County of
Kent:

I. The South Division, having in it these Parishes, viz.

Addington, Allington near Maidstone, Birling, Boreham, Ditton, Laborne, East
Malling, Osham, Padlesworth near Snodland, Ryarsh, Snodland, Trottiscliffe and
Woldham. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of
Larkefield.

Aylesford. To summon which, they command the Constable of the Town of
Aylesford.

Ightham, Plaxtoole, Shipborne, Stansted and Wrotham. To summon which, they
command the Constables of the Hundred of Wrotham:

West Malling, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Town of West
Malling.

Mereworth and West Peckham, To summon which, they command the Constable of the
Hundred of Littlefield.

Copell near Tunbridge and Ha^low, To summon which, they command the Constable
of the Borough of Hadlow.

Tunbridge, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Town of
Tunbridge.

Asherst, Bidborough, so much of Fant as is in Kent, Pembury and Tud^ley, To
summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Wachlingstone.

West Fa^ley, Hunton, Nettlested, East Peckham, Teston, Watringbury and
Yalding, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Twyford.

Brenchley, Horsmanden and Lamberherst, To summon which, they command the
Constables of the Hundred of Brenc^ley and Horsm^^den.

II. The North division, having in it these Parishes, viz.

Ifield, Luddesdon, Meopham, Northfleet, Nu^^ted, To summon which, they command
the Constables of the Hundred of Toltingtrow.

Alhollowes, High Halstow, Hoo, St. Mary's and Stoke, To summon which, they
command the Constables of the Hundred of Hoo.

Chalk, Cliffe near Gravesend, Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, De^ton near
Gravesend, Frindsbury, Halling, Higham, Merston, Shorn, and part of Stroud, To
summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Shamell.

Part of Chetham, part of Gillingham, St. James in Greane, To summon which,
they command the Constables of the Hundred of Chetham and Gillingham.

III. The East division, having in it these Parishes, viz.

East Barming, West Barming, Boxley, Detling East Farley, Linton and Loose, To
summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Maidstone.

Bersted, Bicknor, Boughton Malherbe, Boughton Mon^helse^, Bredherst,
Bromfield, Chart next Sutton Vallance, Frinsted, Harietsham, Hedcorne,
Hollingborne, Hucking, Langley, Leeds, Leneham, Otham, Otterden, Stockbury,
East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, Vlcombe, Wichling and Wormsell. To
summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Eyborne.

This Lath has also in it these divisions of Justices, exempt from the
divisions aforesaid, viz.

The Corporation of Gravesend and Milton, which has in it Gravesend and Milton.

The City of Rochester, which has in it the City of Rochester, part of
Chetham, St. Margarets, part of Stroud.

The Corporation of Maidstone, which has in it Maidstone.

The Corporation of Hasting, which has in it part of Gillingham.

The Lath of Scray, otherwise Sherwinhope, otherwise Showinghope.
A Butte^h to the German Ocean, toward the North; To the Lath of Aylesford,
toward the West, To the County of Sussex, toward the South; And to the Laths
of St. Augustine and Shipway, toward the East and South.

The dividing of the same from the Lath of Aylesford, is already described in
that Lath, and this Lath of Scray, may be divided (in any Map of the County)
from the Laths of St. Augustine and Shipway, by drawing a li^e, from the Sea
between Graveney and Sea^alter, and from thence, down at the East sides of the
Churches of He^ne^^ll, and Boughton Blean, and from thence to the top of the
East head of ^he Church of (...), and down that East head, by the West side of
the Church of Petham, to the top of the West head of the Church of Waltham, and
down that West head, between the Churches of Hostingligh and ^lmsted, and
between the Churches of B^aborne and Stow^^g, and under the (...) of (...),
toward the West over the Church of ^^ee^, to the top of the West head of the
Church of ^ersham, and down that West head, to the t^p of the East head of the
Church of (...), and down that East head (by the West (...) of the Church of
O^l^ston^) to the top of the West head of the Church of Warehorne, and down
that West head, to the West side of the Church of Snargate, and then Westward
under the Church of Apledore, and from thence (along the channel) over the
Church of Ebeney, and down (as the ch^nnell goes) to the East side of the
Church of Newenden, and so into the channel.

This Lath has in it two divisions of Justices of the Peace of the County of
Kent, viz.

I. The lower division, having in it these Parishes viz.

Goudhe^st and Marden, To summon which, they command the Constable of the
Hundred of Marden.

Part of Apledore, Halden, part of Kenar^on, Shodoxhorst and Woodchurch, To
summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Black^orn.

Cranbrook^, Frittenden and Staple^erst, To summon which, they command the
Constable of the Hundred of Cranbrooke.

Biddenden, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of
Barckley.

Hawkeherst, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of
Great Barnefield

Benenden and Rolvenden, To summon which, they command the Constable of
Rolvenden.

Sandherst, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of
Selbrittenden.

N^wenden, To summon which, they command the Bailiffe of the Tow^ship of
Newenden.

II. The upper division having in it these Parishes, viz.

Bapchild, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, Emley, Hal^^w, Hartlip, Iwade, Kingsdowne
near Sittingb^rn, Milsted, M^^on near (...) bor^ Murston, Newington near
Sitting^orne, Ra^nham, Rodmersham, Sittinghorn, Tongue, Tunstall and Vpchurch. To
summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Milton.

Eastchurch, Laysdown, Minster in Sheppey and Warden, To summon which, they
command the Constable of the Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey.

Doddington, Linsted and Tenham. To summon which, they command the Constables
of the Hundred of Tenham.

Boughton under the Blean, Graveney, Hernehill and Selling. To summon which,
they command the Constables of the Hundred of Boughton under the Blea^e.

Badlesmer, Buckland near Feuersham, D^vington, Easeling, part of Feversham,
Goodnoston near Feversham, Har^y, L^veland, Luddenham Newnham, Norton, Ore,
Pr^ston near Feversham, Sheld^ich, Stalisfield Stone near Feversham and
Throwleigh, To sum mon which, hey command the Constables of the Hundred of
Feversham.

Ospringe. To summon which, they command the Constable of the Town of Ospringe.

This Lath has also in it these divisions of Justices, exempt from the
divisions aforesaid, viz.

The Corporation of Tenterden, which has in it Tenterden and part of Ebeney.

The Corporation of Feversham, which has in it so much of Feversham as is
within the liberty of that Corporation.

The Corporation of Queenborough, which has in it Queenborough.

The Corporation of New Romney, which has in it part of Apledore.

The Corporation of Romney Marsh, which has also in it part of Apledore.

And the Hundreds of Felborough, Calehill, Wye, Birch^lt Barony, and Chart and
Longbridge, and the Town of Ashford being all in this Lath, are now used as
within the division of the Justices of the Lath of Shipway (as I shall further
show, when I come to that Lath.)

The Lath of St. Augustine, otherwise Hedelinth.
AButteth to the German Ocean toward the North and East, to the Lath of
Shipway, toward the West and South, and to the Lath of Scray, toward the West.

The dividing the same from the Lath of Scray, is already described in that
Lath, by the dividing line, that comes down from the Sea (between Gravaney and
Seasalter) to the top of the west head of the Church of Walttham.

And this Lath of St. Augustine may be divided from the Lath of Shipway (in any
Map of the County) by drawing a line, from the line aforesaid, from the
aforesaid top of the West head of the Church of Wal^ham, upwards, between
Petham, and upper Hardresse, and from th^nce to the top of the West head of the
Church of upper Hardress, and down that West head a little short of the top of
the Church of Stelling, and so Eastward, over the Church of Eleham (between
Acryse, and Denton) and so upwards between Wootton, and Liddon, and upwards to
the top of the East head of the Church of Liddon, and down that East head, by
the West side of the Church of Ewell, and from thence by the East sides of the
Churches of Swingfeild, Alkham, to the top of the West head of the Church of
Hougham, and down that West head to the Sea.

This Lath has in it only one division of the Justices of the Peace of the
County of Kent (having in it these Parishes.

Seasalter, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Town of
Seasalter.

Part of St. Laurence, Minster in Thanet, Monkton and part of St. Nicholas, To
summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Ringslow.

Cosmus Bleane, Swaycliffe and Whitstaple, To summon which, they command the
Constables of the Hundred of Whitstaple.

Chis^et, Herne, Hoth, Reculver, Sturmouth, Sturrey and West Beer, To summon
which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Blengate.

Elmstone, and Preston near Fordwich, To summon which they command the
Constable of the hundred of Preston.

Part of St. Alphage, St. Dunstans, Hackington, Harbledown, Melton near
Canterbury, part of St. Mary Northgate, Thanington, and part of Westgate^ also
Christ-church Canterbury, is claimed, To summon which they command the
Constables of the hundred of Westgate.

Adisham, I^kham, Littleborne, Staple, Stodmarsh, and Wickham Breaux, To summon
which they command the Constables of the hundred of Downhamford.

Part of St. Paul, To summon which they command the Constable of the Borough of
Longport.

Ash near Sandwich, Goodnestone near Sandwich, Nonington, Wimlingswold and
VVingham, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Wingham.

Barefriston, Batshanger, Chillenden, Eastry, Eythorne, Ham, Knowlton,
Tilnestone, VValdershare, part of Woodnesborough and Worth, To summon which
they command the Constables of the hundred of Eastry.

Bridge, upper Hardress, nether Hardress, Nackington, Patricksborne, Petham and
W^ltham, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Bridge
and Petham.

Berham, Bishopsborne, Denton near Eleham, Kingstone and Wootton, To summon
which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Kinghamsord.

East Langdon, Great M^ngeham, Little M^ngeham, Northborne, Ripple, Sholdon and
Sutton next Dovor, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred
of Cornilo.

Bew^field, Buckland near Dovor, Part of Charlton next Dovor, Cliffe near
Dovor, Coldred, Ewell, Guston, part of Hougham, West Langdon, St. Margarets
near Dovor, Rever and She^^ertstwold, To summon which they command the
Constables of the Hundred of Beusborough.

This Lath has also in it these divisions of Justices, exempt from the
divisions aforesaid, viz.

The Corporation of Sandwich, which has in it Sandwich, Ramsgate in St.
Laurence, Sar in St. Nicholas, Walmer, part of Woodnesborough, Deal and Ston^r.

The Corporation of Fordwich which has in it Fordwich.

The Corporation of Dovor, which has in it Dovor, Birchington, part of
Charlton near Dovor, part of Hougham, St. John's, St. Peter's, Ringwold and
Woodchurch in Thanet.

The Corporation of Hasting, which has in it Beakesborne.

The Lath of Shipway, otherwise Shepway.
AButteth to the German Ocean toward the East; To the narrow Seas toward the
East and South; To the County of Sussex toward the South; To the Lath of Scray
toward the West and North; And to the Lath of St. Augustine toward the North
and East.

The division of the same from the Lath of Scray is already described in that
Lath, by the dividing line that comes to the top of the West head of the
Church of Waltham, and so goes into the channel at Newenden, and the division
of this Lath of Shipway, from the Lath of St. Augustine, is already described
in that Lath.

This Lath of Shipway, has in it only one division of Justices of the peace
of the County of Kent, to which division is also added five hundreds, and one
Town in the Lath of Scray (as is hereafter mentioned) so this division of
Justices has in it these Parishes, viz.

In the Lath of Shipway.
Acrise, Eleham, Liminge, Padlesworth, near Eleham and S^elling, To summon
which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Lonningborough.

Elmsted, Monks Horton, Stanford, and Stowling, To summon which they command
the Constables of the hundred of Stowling.

Postling, and Saltwood, To summon which they command the Constable of the
hundred of Heane.

Alcham, ^apell-neer Folkstone, Cheriton, part of Folkston, Hawking, Liddon;
Newington near Hith and Swingfeild, To summon which they command the Constables
of the hundred of Folkstone.

Hastingligh and Smee^h, To summon which they command the Constable of the
hundred of Bircholt Franchise.

Aldington, part of Bonington, part of Limpne and Sel^indge, To summon which
they command the Constables of the hundred of Stre^e.

Part of Orlestone and Part of Warehorne, To summon which they command the
Constable of the hundred of Ham.

Part of West Hith, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred
of Worth.

Part of Bilsington and part of Rucking, To summon which they command the
Constable of the hundred of New^^urch*

Part of Ivechurch, Midley, and part of New Romney, To summon which they
command the Constable of the Hundred of St. Martins Pountney.

Part of Brenze^, Brookland, Fairefeild, and part of Snargate, To summon which
they command the Constable of the hundred of Alo^sbridge.

Part of Ebeney, Stone, and Wittersham, to summon which they command the
Constable of the hundred of Oxney.

In the Lath of Scray.
Challock, Chartham, Chilham, Godmersham, and Molash, To summon which they
command the Constables of of the hundred of Felborough.

Charing, Little Chart, Eger^on, Pluckley, Smarden and Westwell, To summon
which they command the Constables of the hundred of Calehill.

Boughton, Aluph, Brook, Crundall, Eastwell and Wye, To summon which they
command the Constables of the hundred of Wye.

Ashford, To summon which they command the Constable of the Town of Ashford.

Bra^orne, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of
Bircholt Barony.

Betherisden, Great Chart, Hinxhill, Hothfeild, Kennington, Kingsnoth, Mersham,
Sevington and Willesborough, To summon which they command the Constables of the
hundred of Chart and Longbridge.

This Lath of Shipway has also in it these divisions of Justices (exempt from
the division aforesaid.) viz.

The Corporation of Romney Marsh, Which has in it Part of Bilsington,
Blackmanstone, part of Banington, part of Brenzet, Burmarsh; Dimchurch,
Eastbridge, Herst, Hope, part of Ivechurch, part of Kenerton, part of Limpne,
St. Mary's, Newchurch, Orgarswick, part of Orlestone, part of New Romney, part
of Old Romney, part of Rucking, part of Snargate, Snave, and part of Wareborne

The Corporation of Folkstone, which has in it, so much of Folkstone, as is
within the liberty of that Corporation.

The Corporation of Lid, which has in it, Lid, and claims part of Old
Romney, and so much of Promhill as is in Kent.

The Corporation of New Romney, which has in it so much of New Romney as is
within the liberty of New Romney, and part of Old Romney (and the same claims
also those parts of Old Romney, which are so claimed by the Corporation of Lid)
part of Brenzet, part of Ivechurch, part of Snargate:

The Corporation of Hith, which has in it Hith, and part of West Hith.

Note, that where a Parish is in two Hundreds, the Justices of the County of
Kent do usually take that Parish into their division by the Hundred where the
Church of that Parish stands.

This County has in It 14. Bailiwicks, viz.

1. Sutton Bromley, and 2. Sutton Dartford, in the Lath of Sutton at Hone, 3.
Hoo 4. Eyhorne, 5. Lowy of Tunbridge, in the Lath of Aylesford, 6. Twyford,
part in the Lath of Aylesford, and part in the Lath of Scray, 7. Seven
Hundreds, in the Lath of Scray: All these in the West division of the County.

8. Milton, 9. Scray, 10. Chart and Longbridge, In the Lath of Scray, 11.
Bridge and Petha^, 12. Eastry, in the Lath of St. Augustine, 13. Stowting, part
in the Lath of St. Augustine, and part in the Lath of Shipway, 14. Shipway, in
the Lath of Shipway. All these in the East division of the County.

Of all which Bailiwicks and the extents of the same, I shall now treat
Alphabetically.

Bridge and Petham.
Has in it Adisham, Part of St. Alphage, viz. the Borough of Staplegate,
Beakesborne, Berham, Birchington, Bishopsborne, Bridge, part of Chartham,
Chislet, Christ church Canterbury, Cosmus Blean, Part of Denton near Eleham,
St. Dunstans, Elmstone, Fordwich, Hackinton, Harbledowne, part of upper
Hardress, nether Hardress, Herne, Hoth, Ickham, St. John's, Kingstone, St.
Laurence, Littleborne, Milton near Canterbury, Minister in Thanet, Monkton,
Nackington, St. Nicholas, part of St. Mary Northgate, viz. the Borough of
Staplegate, Patricksborne, part of St. Paul, viz. the Borough of Longport, St.
Peter's, Petham, Preston near Fordwich, Reculver, Seasalter, Staple, Stod^arsh,
Stonar, Sturmouth, Sturrey, Swaycliffe, Thamington, part of Waltham, West Beer,
part of Westgate, Whitstaple, Wickham Breaux, Woodchurch in Thanet, part of
Wootton.

And the Churches of,

Adisham, Beakesborne, Ber^am, Birchington, Bishopsbourne, Bridge, Chislet,
Christchurch Canterbury, Cosmus Bleane, D^nton near Eleham, St. Dunstans,
Elmston, Fordwich, Hackinton, Harbledowne, upper Hardress, nether Hardress,
Herne, Hoth, Ickham, St John's, Kingstone, St. Laurence, Littleborn, Milton near
Canterbury, Minster in Thanet, Monkton, Nackinton, St. Nicholas, Patricksborne,
St. Peter's, Petham, Preston near Fordwich, Reculver, Seasalter, Staple,
Stodmarsh, Sturmouth, Sturrey, Swaycliffe, Thanington, Waltham, West Beer,
Whitstaple, Wickham Breaux and Wootton.

But as to the acting of the Bailiffe of the said Balliwick, these Churches
following (being in the Cinque Ports) are exempted, viz.

Beakesborne, Birchington, Fordwich, St. John's, St. Peter's.

As were likewise Stonar and Woodchurch whilst they were standing.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

Bridge and Petham, Blengate, Downhamford, all Kinghamford ( except part of
Wootton) Preston, Ringslow, Westgate and Whitstaple:

And these places and Towns having Constables, viz.

Longport Borough and Seasalter.

It has also in it these Towns and places having Constables, viz.

Beakesborne, Birchington, Fordwich, St. John's, Ramsgate in St. Laurence, Sar
in St. Nicholas, St. Peter's, Stonar and Woodchurch.

But they all being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, are exempted from the
acting of the Bailiffe of that Bailiwick.

Chart and Longbridge.
Has in it Ashford, part of Betherisden, Boug^ton Aluph, Braborne, Brook,
Charing, Great Chart, Little Chart, Crundall, Eastwell, Egerton, Hastingligh,
part of Hedeorne, Hincksell, Hothfield, Kennington, Kingsnoth, part of Leneham,
part of Mersham, Pluckley, Sevington, part of Shadoxherst, part of Smarden,
Westwell, Willesborough and Wye.

And the Churches of,

Ashford, Betherisden, Bough^ton Aluph, Braborne, Brook, Chating, Great Chart,
Little Chart, Crundall, Eastwell, Egerton, Hastingligh, Hincksell, Hothfield,
Kennington, Kingsnoth, M^rsham, Pluckley, Sevington, Smarden, Westwell,
Willisborough, Wye.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz. Bircholt Barony, Calehill,
Chart and Longbridge and Wye.

As also the Town of Ashford (which has a Constable of it self.)

Eastry.
Has in it Ash near Sandwich, Barefriston, Betshanger, Chillenden, Deal, part
of Denton near Eleham, Eastry, Eythorne, Goodnestone near Sandwich, Ham,
Knowlton, East Langdon, Great Mongeham, Little Mongeham, Nonington, Norburne,
Ringwold, Ripple, Sandwich, Sholdon, Sutton next Dovor, Tilnestone,
Waldershare, Walmer, Wimlingswold, Wingham, Woodnesborough and Worth.

And all the Churches of these Parishes (except Little Mongeham, which is
demolished.)

But as to the acting of the Bailiffe of the said Bailiwick, these Churches
following (being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted, viz.

Deal, Ringwold, Sandwich and Walmer.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

Corn^lo, Eastry, so much of Kinghamford as is in Wootton-Wingham.

And these Towns following (which are in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) and
have Constables of themselves, viz.

Deal, Ringwold, Sandwich, Walmer.

All which (as also so much of Wood^esbury as is in the liberty of the Cinque
Ports) are exempted from the acting of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick.

Eyhorn.
Has in it East Barming, West Barming, Bersted, part of Bicknor, Boughton
Malherbe, Boughton Monchelsea, Boxley, Bredherst, Bromfield, Chart next Sutton
Vallance, Det^ing, East Farley, Frinsted, Harietsham, part of Hedcorne,
Hollingborne, Hucking, part of Hunton, Langley, Leeds, part of Leneham, Linton,
Loose, Maidstone, part of Marden, Otham, O^^erden, part of Stapleherst, part of
Stockbury, East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, Vlcomb, Wichling and
Wormsell.

And all the Churches of these Parishes except,

Hunton, Marden and Stapleherst.

And except West Barming, which is demolished.

This Bailiwick has also in it the Hundreds of Eyhorn and Maidstone,

As also the Town of Maidstone, which has a Constable of it self.

Hoo.
Has in it Addington, Allhollowes, Allington, Aylesford, Birling, Boreham,
Chalk, Chetham, Cliffe near Gravesend, Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, Denton near
Gravesend, Ditton, Frindsbury, Gillingham, Gravesend, Halling, high Halstow,
Higham, Hoo, part of Horsmanden, part of Hunton, St. James, Ightham; I field,
Laborne, Luddesdon, East Malling, West Malling, St. Mary's, St. Margarets near
R^chester, Meopham, Merston, Milton near Gravesend, Northfleet, Nutsted, Osham,
Padlesworth near Snodland, part of West Peckham, Plaxtoole, Rochester, Ryarsh,
Shipborne, Shorn, S^odland, Stansted, Stoke, Stroud, Trottiscliffe, Woldham
and Wrotham.

And all the Churches of those Parishes except,

Horsmanden, Hunton and West Peckham.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

Chetham and Gillingham, Hoo, Larkefield, Shamell, Toltingtrow and Wrotham.

And the City, Towns and places following, which have Constables of
themselves, viz.

Aylesford Town, the Grange in Gillingham, West Malling Town, and the City of
Rochester.

And as to the acting of the Ba^liffe of this Bailiwick, the Grange aforesaid
(being in the liberty of the Cinque ports) is exempted.

Lowy of Tunbridge.
Has in it Asherst, Bidborough, part of Capell near Tunbridge, so much of Fant
as is in Kent, part of Hadlow, part of Lighe near Tunbridge, part of Pembury,
part of Pensherst, part of Speldeherst, part of Tudeley, Tunbridge.

And the Churches of,

Ash^rst, Bidborough, Capell near Tunbridge, Hadlow Pembury, Tudeley, Tunbridge.

This Bailiwick has in it only one Hundred, viz. Wachlingstone.

And the Town and places following having Constables of themselves, viz

Hadlow Borough, Helden Borough, South Borough, and Tunbridge Bridge Town.

Milton.
Has in it, Bapchild, part of Bicknor, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, East Church,
Emley Halstow, Hartlip, part of Iwade, Kingdowne near Sittingborne, Laysdown,
Milsted, Milton near Sittingborne, Minster in Sheppey, Murston, Newington
besides Sittingborne, Queenborough, Rainham, Rodmersham, Sittingborne, part of
Stockbury, Tongue, Tunstall, Vpchurch, and Warden.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Bicknor and Stockbury.

It has also in it the Hundreds of

Milton and the Isle of Sheppey, over both which i^ a Court Biron.

And the Town of Queenborough (which has a Constable of it self)

Scray.
Has in it Badlesmer, Boughton Bleane, Buckland near Feversham, Challock, part
of Chartham, Chilham Devington, Doddington, Easeling, Feversham, Godmersham,
Goodnestone near Feversham, Graveney, Hartye, part of Hedcorne, Hernehill, part
of Iwade, Leveland, Linsted, Luddenham, Molash, Newnham, Norton, Ore, Ospringe,
Preston near Feversham, Selling, Sheldwich, Stalisfeeld, Stone near Feversham,
Tenham and Throwley.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except,

Hedcorne, and Iwade.

But the Church of Feversham (standing in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) is
exempted from the acting of the Bailiff of this Bailiwick.

This Bailiwick has also in it these hundreds, viz.

Boughton under the ^lean, Felborough, Feversham, and Tenham.

It has also in it these Towns of,

Feversham and Ospringe, which have Constables of themselves.

And as to the acting of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick, the Town of
Feversham, being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports is exempted.

The Seven Hundreds.
Has in it Apledore, Benenden, part of Betherisden, Biddenden, Cranbrook, part
of Ebeny, Frittenden, part of Gondherst, Halden, Hawkherst, part of Hedcorne,
part of Kenarton, Newenden, Rolvenden, Sandherst, part of Shadoxherst, part of
Smarden, part of Stapleherst, Tenterden, part of Warehorne, Woodchurch.

And the Churches of,

Appledore, Benenden, Biddenden, Cranbrook, Frittenden, Halden, Hawkherst,
Kenarton, Newenden, Rolvenden, Sandherst, Shadoxherst, Stapleherst, Tenterden
and Woodchurch.

But the Church of Tenterden, (standing in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) is
exempted from the acting of the Bailiff of this Bailiwick.

This Bailiwick has also in it these hundreds, viz.

Barckley, great Barnefield Blackborne, Cranbrooke, Rolvend^n, Selbrittenden,
Tenterden.

And the Township of Newenden, which has an Officer of it self (in the nature
of a Constable, but called a Bailiffe.)

And (as to the acting of the Bailiffe of the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds)
so much of Apledore upon the Ree Wall, as is within the liberty of New Romney,
and the whole Town and Hundred of Tenterden (being within the liberty of the
Cinque Ports) are exempted.

Shipway.
Has in it Aldington, B^lsington, Blackmanstone, Bounington, Brenzet, so much
of Bromhill as is in Kent, Bruckland, Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Eastbridge, part of
Ebeney, Fairefield, Herst, Hith, West Hith, Hope, Ivechurch, part of Kenarton,
Lid, part of Limpney, St. Mary's near New Romney, part of Mersham, Midley,
Newchurch, Orgarswick, O^lestone, New Romney, Old Romney, Rucking, part of
Sellindge, part of Shadoxherst, Smeeth, Snargate, Snave, Stone in Oxney, part
of Warehorne, Wittersham.

And the Churches of,

Aldington, Bilsington, Bonnington, Brenze^, B^uckland, Burmarsh, Dimchurch,
Ebeney, Fairefield, Hith, Hope, Ivechurch, ^id, Limpney, St Mary's near New
Romney, Newchurch, Orlestone, New Romney, Old Romney, Rucking, Sellinge,
Smeeth, Snargate, Snave, Stone in Oxney, Warehorne and Wi^^ersham.

But the Churches of,

Blackmanstone, Eastbridge, Herst, West Hith, Midley and Orgarswick are
demolished.

And (as to the acting of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick) these Churches
following (being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted, viz.

Hith, Lid, New Romney and Old Romney.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

Aloesbridge, Bircholt Franchise. Ham, Langport, St. Martins Pountney,
Newchurch, Oxney, Street and Worth.

And the Towns of

Hith, Lid and New Romney, which have Constables of themselves.

And these three last Towns and the places within their liberties, viz.

So much of Brenzet, Ivechurch and Snargate upon the Ree Wall, as is in the
liberty of New Romney.

So much of Bromhill and Old Romney, as is either in the liberty of Lid, or New
Romney.

And so much of West Hith as is within the liberty of Hith (being all within
the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted from the acting of the Bailiffe
of this Bailiwick.

Stowting.
Has in it, Acryse, Alcham, Bewsfeild, Buckland near Dovor, Capell near
Folkstone, Charlton near Dovor, Cheriton, Cliffe near Dover, Coldred, Dovor,
Eleham, Elmsted, Ewell, Folkstone, Guston, part of upper Hardresse, Hawking,
Monks Horton, Hougham, West Langdon, Liddon, Liminge, part of Limpne, St.
Margarets near Dover, Newington besides Hith, Padlesworth near Eleham,
Postling, Rever, Saltwoood, part of Sellinge, Shebbertswold, Stanford,
Stelling, Stowting, Swingfeild and part of Waltham,

And the Churches of,

Acryse, Alcham, Bewsfeild, Buckland near Dovor, Capell near Folkstone,
Charlton near Dover, Cheriton, Cliffe near Dovor, Coldred, Dovor, Eleham,
Elmsted, Ewell, Folkestone, Guston, Hawking, Monks Horton, Hougham, Wes^
Langdon, Liddon, Liminge, St. Margarets near Dovor, Newington besides Hith,
Padlesworth near Eleham, Postling, Rever, Saltwood, Shebbertswold, Standford,
Stelling, Stowting and Swingfield.

But as to the acting of the Bailiff of the said Bailiwick, these Churches
following, being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, are exempted, viz.

Dovor, and Folkstone.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz. Beusborough, Folkston,
Heane, Lonningborough and Stowting.

And these Towns following (which are in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) and
have Constables of themselves, viz.

Dovor and Folkstone.

Both which, as also so much of Charlton near Dovor, and Hougham, as are in the
like liberty of the Cinque Ports, are likewise exempted from the acting of the
Bailiffe of this Bailiwick.

Sutton Bromley.
Has in it so much of Beckenham as is in Kent, Brasted, Bromley, Charlton near
Greenwich, Chesilherst, Chelsfield, Chevening, Chidingstone, part of Cowden,
Cudham, so much of Deptford as is in Kent, Down, Eatonbridge, Eltham,
Farnborough, East Greenwich, Halsted, Hayes, Hever, Kemsing, Keston, Lee,
Leusham, part of Lighe next Tunbridge, Nockholt, Orpington, O^ford, part of
Pensherst, Seal, Sevenoke, Shoram, part of Speldherst, Sundrish, Westram, West
Wickham and Woolwich.

And all the Churches of these Parishes.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

Blackheath, Bromley and Beckenham, Codsheath, Somerden and Westram, and
Eatonbridge.

And part of the Hundred of Ruxley.

It has also the Ville of Brasted, which has a Constable of it self.

Sutton Dartford.
Has in it Ash near Wrotham, Bexley, part of Cowden, Crayford, Foots Cray, St.
Mary Cray, North Cray, Paul's Cray, Darent, Dartford, Earith, Eynsford,
Farningham, Fawkeham, Hartley, Horton Kirby, Kingsdowne near W^^tham,
Longfield, Lullingstone, Plumsted, Ridley, Southfleet, Stone near Dartford,
Sutton at Hone, Swanscomb, East Wickham and Wilmington.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Cowden.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

Axstone, Dartford and Wilmington, Little and Lesnes. And part of the Hundred
of Ruxley.

Twyford.
Has in it Brenchley, part of Capell near Tunbridge, West Farley, part of
Goudhurst, part of Hadlow, part of Horsmanden, part of Hunton, Lamberherst,
part of Marden, Mereworth, Nettlested, East Peckham, part of West Peckham, part
of Pembury, part of Stapleherst, Teston, part of Tudeley, Watringbury and
Yalding.

And the Churches of,

Brenchley, West Farley, Goudherst, Horsmanden, Hunton, Lamberherst, Marden,
Mereworth, Nettlested, East Peckham, West Peckham, Teston, Watringbury and
Yalding.

This Bailiwick has also in it these Hundreds, viz.

West Barnfield, Brenchley and Horsmanden, Littlefield, Marden and Twyford.

This County has also in it sixty four Hundreds.

Of all which and the extents of the same, I shall also treat Alphabetically;

1. Aloesbridge.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty, Brenzet, Brookland,
Fairfield, part of Ivechurch, part of Newchurch, Snargate, part of Snave,

And the Churches of,

Brenzet, Brookland, Fairfield, Snargate and Snave,

2. Axstone.
OTherwise Claestone, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Ash near Wrotham, part of Cowden, Darent, Eynsford, Farningham, Fawkeham,
Hartley, Horton Kirby, Kingsdowne near Wrotham, Longfield, Lullingstone,
Ridley, Southfleet, Stone near Dartford, Sutton at Hone and Swanscombe.

And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Cowden.)

3. Great Barnefield.
OTherwise East Barnefield, has in it one Constable, who has in his Liberty,

Part of Cranbrooke, and part of Hawkeherst, and the Church of Haukeherst.

4. West Barnefield.
OTherwise Little Barnefield, has in it one Constable, who has in his
liberty, Part of Goudherst, But not the Church.

5. Barckley.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty, Part of Benenden, part of
Biddenden, part of Cranbr^oke, part of Frittenden, part of Halden, part of
Hedcorne, part of Smarden.

And only the Church of Biddenden.

6. Beusborough.
Has in it two Constables, Who have in their liberty,

Bewsfield, Buckland near Dovor, part of Charlton next Dovor, Cliffe near
Dovor, Coldred, Ewell, Guston, part of Hougham, West Langdon, part of Liddon,
St. Margarets near Dovor, Rever and Shebbertswold.

And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Liddon.)

7. Bircholt Barony.
OTherwise Bilisholt, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Braborne, and part of Hastingligh,

And both those Churches.

8. Bircholt Franchise.
OTherwise Bilisholt, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Aldington, Smeeth, and part of Mersham.

And only the Church of Smeeth.

9. Blackborne.
OTherwise Blacetune, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Apledore, part of Betherisden, part of Halden, part of Kenarton, part
of Shadoxherst, part of Smarden, part of Warehorne, Woodchurch.

And the Churches of,

Apledore, Halden, Kenarton, Shadoxherst, Woodchurch,

10. Blengate.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Chislet, Herne, Hoth, R^culver, Sturmouth, Sturrey, West Beer, and all the
Churches of those Parishes.

11. Blackheath.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Charlton near Greenwich,
part of Chesilherst, so much of Deptford as is in Kent, Eltham, East Greenwich,
Lee, Leusham, Woolwich.

And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Chesilherst.

12. Boughton under the Blean.
OTherwise Boctune, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Boughton under the Blean, Graveney, Hernehill, part of Selling.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

13. Bridge and Petham.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of St. Alphage, Bridge, part of Chartham, part of Hackinton, part of
upper Hardress, nether Hardress, part of Nakinton, Patricksborne, Petham, and
part of Waltham.

And the Churches of,

Bridge, upper Hardress, nether Hardress, Nakinton, Patricksborne, Petham,
Waltham.

14. Brenchlen and Horsmanden.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Brenchley, part of Horsmanden, Lamberherst,

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

15. Bromley and Beckenham.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

So much of Beckenham as is in Kent and Bromley.

And the Churches of both those Parishes.

16. Calehill.
OTherwise Calehele, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Betherisden, Charing, part of great Chart, little Chart, Egerton, part
of Hedcorn, part of Hothfield, part of ^eneham, Pluckley, part of Smarden and
part of Westwell.

And the Churches of,

Cha^ing, little Chart, Egerton, Pluckley, Smarden, Westwell.

17. Chart and Longbridge.
OTherwise Langebrige, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Ashford, part of Betherisden, part of great Chart, Hincksell, part of
Hothfield, Kennington, Kingsnoth, part of Mersham, Sevington, part of
Shadoxherst and Willesborough.

And the Churches of,

Betherisden, great Chart, Hincksell, Hothfield, Kennington, Kingsnoth, Mersham
Sevington and Willesborough.

18. Chetham and Gillingham.
OTherwise Cert^ham, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Chetham, part of Gillingham, St. James in Grean.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

19. Codsheath.
OTherwise Codesede, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Chevening, Halsted, Kemsing, part of Lighe, Otford, Seal, Sevenoke,
Shoram, part of Speldherst, Sundrish.

And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Speldherst.)

20. Cornilo.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

East Langdon, great Mongeham, little Mongeham, Northborne, Ripple, Sholden,
Sutton next Dovor.

And all the Churches of those Parishes (except little Mongeham, which is
demolished.)

21. Cranbrook.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Benenden, part of Biddenden, part of Cranbrook, part of Frittenden,
part of Goudherst, part of Haukeherst, part of Hedcorne, part of Stapleherst.

And the Churches of,

Cranbrook, Frittenden, Stapleherst.

22. Dartford and Wilmington.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Dartford and Wilmington.

And the Churches of both those Parishes.

23. Downhamford.
OTherwise Dounahamford, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Adisham, the Borough of Shourt in Hackington, Ickham, Littleborne, Staple,
Stodmarsh, Wickham Breaux.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

24. Eastry.
OTherwise Estrege, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Barefriston, Betshanger, Chillenden, Eastry, Eythorn, Ham, Knowlton, part of
Nonington, Tilnestone, Waldershare, part of Woodnesborough, Worth.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Nonington.

25. Eyhorne.
OTherwise Ha^horne, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Bersted, part of Bicknor, Boughton Malherbe, Boughton Monchelsea,
Bredherst, Bromfield, Chart next Sutton Vallance, Frinsted, Harietsham, part of
Hedcorne, Hollingborne, H^cking, Langley, Leeds, part of Leneham, part of
Marden, Otham, Otterden, part of Stapleherst, part of Stockbury, East Sutton,
Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, part of Vlcomb, Wichling and Wormsell.

And all the Chu^ches of those Parishes, except Marden and Stapleherst.

26. Felborough.
OTherwise Felebergh, o^herwise Feleberg, has in it two Constables, who have
in their liberty,

Chall^ck, part of Chartham, Chilham, Godmersham, M^lash.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

27. Feversham.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Badlesmer, Buckland near
Feversham, Devington, Easeling, part of Feversham, Goodneston near Feversham,
Hartye, Leveland, Luddenham, Newnham, Norton, Ore, part of Ospringe, Preston
near Feversham, part of Selling, Sheldwich, Stal^^^field, Stone near Feversham,
Throwley and part of Vlcomb.

And the Churches of,

Badlesmer, Buckland near Feversham, Devington, Easeling, Goodnestone near
Feversham, Hearty, Leveland, Luddenham, Newnham, Norton, Ore, Preston near
Feversham, Sheldwich, Sta^^^field and Throwley.

28. Folkestone.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Acrise, Alcham, Capell near Folkestone, Cheriton, part of Folkestone,
Hawking, part of Hougham, part of Liddon, Newington near Hi^h, Swingfield.

And the Churches of,

Alcham, Capell near Folkestone, Cheriton, Hawking, Liddon, Newington near
Hith, and Swingfield.

29. Ham.
HAmme, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Kenarton, Orlestone, part of Rucking, part of Shadoxherst, part of
Snav^, part of Warehorne.

And the Churches of,

Orlestone and Warehorne.

30. Heane.
Has in it ^wo Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part o^ ^impne, Postling and Saltwood.

And the Churches of,

Pastling and Saltwood.

31. Hoo.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Alhollowes, part of
Cobham, high Halstow, Hoo, St. Mary's, part of West Peckham, part of Stoke.

And the Churches of,

Alhollowes, high Halstow, Hoo, St. Mary's, Stoke.

32. Kinghamford.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Berham, Bishopsborne,
Denton near Eleham, Kingston, Woo^^on.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

33. Langport.
OTherwise Langeport, has in it one Constable, who has ^n h^s liberty,

Part of Hope, Lid, and part of Old Romney.

And the Churches of,

Hope and Lid.

34. Larkefield.
OTherwise Lavercefield, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Addington, Allington near Maidstone, part of Aylesford, Birling, Boreham,
Ditton, part of Horsmanden, part of Hunton, Laborne, East Malling, part of West
Malling, Ofham, Padlesworth near Snodland, Ryarsh, Snodland, Trottiscliffe and
Woldham.

And the Churches of,

Addington, Allington near Maidstone, Birling, Boreham, Ditton, Laborne, East
Malling, Ofham, Paddlesworth near Snodland, Ryarsh, Snodland, Trottiscliffe and
Woldham.

35. Littlefield.
OTherwise Litelfeld, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Hadlow, Mereworth, part of East Peckham, part of West Peckham.

And the Churches of Mereworth and West Peckham.

36. Little and Lesnes.
OTherwise Litlelet, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Craford, Earith, Plumsted and East Wickham.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

37. Loningborough.
OTherwise Noniberge, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Acrise, Eleham, part of upper Hardress, Liminge, Padlesworth near
Eleham, Stelling.

And the Churches of,

Acrise, Eleham, Liminge, Padlesworth near Eleham, Stelling.

38. Maidstone.
OTherwise Medestone, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

East Barming, West Barming, part of Bersted, Boxley, Detling, East Farley,
part of Hunton, Linton, Loose, part of Marden and part of Stapleherst.

And the Churches of,

East Barming, Boxley, Detling, East Farley, Linton and Loose.

38. Marden.
Has in it one Constable who has in his liberty,

Part of Goudherst, part of Marden and part of Stapleherst.

And the Churches of,

Goudherst and Marden,

39. Milton.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Bapchild, part of
Bicknor, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, Emley, Halstow, Hartlip, part of Iwade,
Kingsdowne near Sittingborne, Milsted, Milton near Sittingborne, Murston,
Newington besides Sittingborne, Rainham, Rodmersham, Sittingborne, part of
Stockbury, Tongue, Tunstall and Vpchurch.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except

Bicknor and Stockbury.

40. St. Martins Pountney.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty, Part of Hope, part of
Ivechurch, part of St. Mary's, Midley, part of Newchurch, part of New Romney,
part of Old Romney.

And the Churches of,

Ivechurch, St Mary's, Midley.

41. Newchurch.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Bilsington, part of St Mary's, part of Newchurch, part of Rucking and part of
Snave.

And the Churches of,

Bilsington, Newchurch, Rucking.

42. Oxney.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of E^eney, Stone, W^t^rsham.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

43. Preston.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty, Elmstone and Preston near
Fordwich. And the Churches of both those Parishes.

44. Ringslow.
Otherwise Tenet, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of St. Laurence, Minster in Thanet, Monkton, part of St. Nicholas.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

45. Ruxley.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Bexley, part of
Chesilherst, Chelsfield, part of Chidingstone, Foots Cray, St. Mary Cray, North
Cray, Paul's Cray, Cudham, Down, Farnborough, Hayes, part of Hever, Keston,
Nockhol^, Orpington and West Wickham.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except

Chidingstone and Hever,

46. Rolvenden.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Benenden and Rolvenden.

And the Churches of both those Parishes.

47. Selbrittenden.
OTherwise Selebrichtindene, has in it one Constable, w^o has in his liberty,

Part of Benenden, part of Hawkeherst, part of Newenden, Sandherst.

And only the Church of Sandherst.

48. Shamel.
OTherwise Scamele, has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Chalk, Cliffe near Gravesend, part of Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, Denton near
Gravesend, Frinsbury, Halling, Higham Merston, Shorn, part of Stoke, Stroud.

And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Stoke.

49. Isle of Sheppey.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Eastchurch, Layesdowne, Minster in Sheppey and Warden.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

50. Somerden.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Chevening, part of Chidingstone, part of Cowden, part of Eatonbridge,
part of Hever, part of Lighe, part of Pensherst, and part of Speldherst.

And the Churches of,

Chidingstone, Cowden, Hever, Pensherst, Speldherst.

51. Stowting.
Has in it two Constables, and they have in their liberty, Elmsted, Munkes
Horton, part of Sellindge, part of Stelling, Stanford, Stowting, part of
Waltham.

And the Churches of Elmsted, Monks Horton, Stanford and Stowting.

52. Street.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Aldington, Bo^^^ington, Herst, part of Limpne, part of Sellindge,

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

53. Tenham.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Doddington, part of Hed^orne, part of ^wade, Linsted, Tenham.

And the Churches of,

Doddington, Linsted, Tenham.

54. Toltingtrow.
OTherwise Toltetem, otherwise Tollentr, has in it two Constables, who have in
their liberty,

Grave^end, Ifield, E^ddesdon, Meopham, Milton near Graves^nd, North^leet and
Nutsted.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

55. Twyford.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Brenchley, part of Capell near Tunbridge, West Farley, part of Hunton,
part of Marden, Nettlested, part of East Peckham, part of Pembury, Teston, part
of Tudeley, Watringbury, part of Yalding, And the Churches of,

West Farley, Hunton, Nettlested, East Peckham, Teston, Watringbury, Yalding.

56. Tenterden.
Has no Constable, the Mayor is Mayor of the Town and Hundred, which hundred
has in it,

Part of Ebeney, Tenterden, and the Church of Tenterden.

57. Wachlingstone.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Asherst, Bidborough, part of Capell near Tunbridge, so much of Fant as is in
Kent, part of Lighe, part of Pembury, part of Pensherst, part of Speldherst,
part of Tudeley.

And the Churches of,

Asherst, Bidborough, Pembury and Tudeley.

58. Westram and Eatonbridge.
OTherwise Hostre^am, has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Part of Brasted, part of Cowden, part of Eatonbridge, Westram.

And the Churches of,

Eatonbridge and Westram.

59. Westgate.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of St. Alphage, St Dunstan, part of Hackington, Harbledowne, Milton near
Canterbury, part of St. Mary Northgate, Thanington and part of Westgate.

And the Churches of,

St Dunstan, Hackington, Harbledowne, Milton near Canterbury, Thanington.

Al^o Christchurch Canterbury is claimed to be in this Hundred.

60. Whitstaple.
Has in it two Constables, who have in theor libe^ty,

Cosmus Bleane, Swaycliffe, Whitstaple, and part of Nakington.

And the Churches of,

Cosmus Bleane, Swaycliffe, Whitstaple.

61. Wingham.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

A^h near Sandwich, Goodnestone near Sandwich, part of Nonington, Wimlingswold,
Wingham.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

62. Worth.
Has in it one Constable, who has in his liberty,

Blackmanstone, Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Eastbridge, part of West Hith, part of
Limpne, part of Newchurch, Orgarswick.

And the Churches of,

Burwarsh and Dimchurch.

63. Wrotham.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Ightham, Plaxtoole, Shipborne, Stansted, Wrotham.

And all the Churches of those Parishes.

64. Wye.
Has in it two Constables, who have in their liberty,

Part of Barborne, Boughton Aluph, Brook, Crundall, Eastwell, part of Walth^m,
Wye.

And the Churches of,

Boughton Aluph, Brook, Crundall, Eastwell and Wye.

There are also several other Towns and places in this County, which have
Constables or other Officers (of that nature) of themselves, and are not
subject to the Constable of any Hundred, some of which Towns and places, are
in the Foreign, and others in the liberty of the Cinque Ports (of all which
in order Alphabetically.
In the Foreign.
Ashford
TOwn has one Constable, who has in his liberty that Town, and the Church
therein, and so much of the Parish as is within the liberty of Ashford.

Aylesford
Town, has one Constable, it is an ancient demesne, and to the same belong
part of Brenchley, part of Horsmanden, part of Hunton and part of Yalding; and
no other Church but Aylesford is within that liberty.

Brasted
Ville, has one Constable, whose liberty is the Ville of Brasted only, and
the Church is in the same.

Hadlow
Borough, has one Constable, who has in his liberty, part of Capell near
Tunbridge, and part of Hadlow, and the Churches of both those Parishes.

Helden
Borough, has one Constable, who has in his liberty, part of Tunbridge, but
not the Church.

Longport
Borough, has one Constable, who has in his liberty, part of the Parish of
St. Paul, but not the Church.

Maidstone
Town, and Parish, has one Constable, whose liberty extends over the same.

West Malling
Town, has two Constables, whose liberty extends over all the Parish (except
the Borough of St. Leonard) and it has the Church in the same.

Newenden
Township, has no Constable, but has an Officer (in the nature of a
Constable) called the Bailiffe, whose liberty extends only over this
Township, and not over any part of the rest of the Parish, but it has the
Church in the same.

Ospringe
Town, has one Constable, whose liberty extends over the Town, but not over
the Parish.

Queenborough
Corporation, has Officers of its own, whose liberty extends over the Parish.

Rochester
City, has Officers of its own, whose liberty extends over the Parish.

Seasalter
Is no Hundred, but a Constable of it self, whose liberty extends over the
Parish.

South
Borough, has a Constable, who has in his liberty, part of the Parish of
Tunbridge, but not the Church.

Tunbridge
Town, has a Constable of it self, whose liberty exten^eth over all the
Parish, that is not in the aforesaid Helden Borough, or South Borou^h.

In the liberty of the Cinque Ports.
The Towns and places there have Constables and Officers of their own, the
names of which Towns and places, and which of them have Churches therein follow
Alphabetically.
PArt of Apledore, but not the Church.

Beakesborne, with the Church. Birchington, with the Church. Part of Brenzet,
but not the Church. So much of B^omhill as is in Kent (the Church was in
Sussex.)

Part of Charlton* but not the Church.

Deal, with the Church. Dovor, with the two Churches in the same.

Part of Feversham (viz. the Town) wi^h the Church. Part of Folkstone (viz. the
Town) with the Church. F^^dwich, with the Church.

The Grange in Gillingham, but not the Church.

Hith, with the Church. Part of West Hith, but not the Church. Part of H^ugham,
but not the Church.

St. John's, with the Church. Part of Ivechurch, but not the Church*

Ramsgate in St. Laurence, but not the Church.

St. Nicholos, but not the Church.

St. Peter's, with the Church.

Ringwold, with the Church. Part of New Romney (viz. the Town) with the Church.
Part of Old Romney, with the Church.

Sandwich, with the three Churches in the same. Part of Snargate, but not the
Church. Stonar, the Church is demolished.

^Walmer, with the Church. Wood, otherwise Wood church, the Church is
demolished. Part of Woodne^borough, but not the Church.

Seventeen several Franchises and Liberties do also claim in this County, some
whereof have Courts of Record in the same, of all which, and of direction of
Writs of Habeas Corpus, to remove Persons or Causes out of such of them as have
Courts of Record, and direction of Sheriffs Warrants to arrest in those
liberties: I shall now likewise proceed to treat Alphaletically.
1. The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury.
THis Liberty has in it a Court of Record, to hold plea of all Actions, real,
personal and mixed.

And claims the Manor of Brandred in Acrise, part of Alcham, the Borough of
Staplegate in St. Alphage and St. Mary Northgate, part of Ash near Sandwich,
part of Berham, the Denns of Biddenden and Spelherst in Biddenden, part of
Bilsington, the Manor of Bishopshorne, the Manor of Boughton under the
Bleane, part of Buckland near Dovor, part of Capell near Folkstone, the Manor
of Charing, part of Charlton near Dovor, the Borough of Chelmanton in great
Chart, part of Chevening, part of Chislet, part of Cl^ff near Dovor, part of
Cosmus Bleane, the Manor of Sissingherst in Cranbrooke, part of Footes Cray,
part of Deal, part of Denton near Eleham, part of De^ling, part of Doddington,
so much of the Manor of Westgate as is in St. Dunstans, part of Egerton, part
of Elmsted, part of Eythorne, the Manor of Gillingham, part of Goodnestone
near Sandwich, the Manor of Graveney, part of Guston, part of Hackington,
part of Halsted, part of Harbledowne, part of Hawking, part of Herne, part of
Herne^ill, part of Hith, part of Monks Horton, part of Hothfield, part of
Houghom, part of Ifield, part of Leneham, the Manor of Leveland, part of Lid,
part of Liddon, the Manor of Liminge, part of Linsted, part of Littleborne,
the Manor of Maidstone, part of St Margarets near Dovor, part of Merston,
part of Milton near Canterbury, part of little Mongeham, part of Nakinton, part
of St^ Nicholas in Thanet, part of Nonington, part of Norburne, the Manor of
Orpington, the Manor of O^ford, part of Padlesworth near Eleham, the Manno^r
of Petham, the Mannours of Pluckley and Sherland in Pluckley, the Manor of
Preston near Fordwich, the Manor of Reculver, part of Repple, the Manor of
Bedderinden in Sandherst, the Manor of Saltwood, part of Shebbertswold, part
of Shold^n, part of Shoram, the Denn of Holnherst in Smarden, p^rt of Snargate,
part of Staple, part of Stouting, part of Stur^outh the Manor of Sundrish,
part of Su^^on near Dovor, the Manor of Tenham, part of Thamington, the
Manor of Tilnestone, the Manor of T^^bridge, part of Vlcombe, part of
Waltham, part of West Beer, the Manor of Westgate, the manor of Westwell,
part of Whitfield, otherwise Beusfield, the Borough of Tanker^on in Whitstaple,
the Manor of Wingham, part of Wi^^ersham, part of Woodnesborough, part of
Wootton, the Manor of Wrotham, part of Wye.

The direction of a Habe as Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if
the Defendant be out of custody, Thus,

To the Steward of the Court of Record for the liberties of the late
Archbishopric of Canterbury.

But if the Defendant be i^ custody, then thus,

To the Steward and B^liffe of the Court of Record for the libert^es of (...)
late Archbishopric of Canterbury, and to either of them.

The She^^ffe th^s directs his Warrants upon process to that l^berty v^z.

To the Ba^liffe of the liberties of the late Archbishopric of Canterbury.

2. The Liberty of Ashford.
THis Liberty has in it a Court of Record to hold pleas for all acti^ns, the
debt or damages not ^xceeding twenty marks. Which li^erty claims over the
Town of Ashford, and all the Parish, ex^ept the Boroug^s of Henwood, otherwise
Hewet, and Rudlow.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the
Defen^ant ^e out of custo^y, thus,

To the Steward of the Court of Record of the liberty of Ashford.

But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus,

To the Steward and Bailiffe of the Court of Record of the liberty of Ash^ord,
and to either of them.

The Sh^^iffe thus directe^h his Warrants upon process to that liberty, viz.

To the Bail^ffe of the liberty of Ash^ord.

3. The Liberty of St. Augustine.
THis Liberty has a Court of Record, to hold plea of a^^ ^ctions, real,
personal and mixed.

And claims all Ad^sham, part of Apledore, all Badlesmere, part of Benenden,
part of Betherisden, part of Betshanger, part of Biddenden, part of B^rchington
part of Bobbing, part of Boughton Monchelsea, part of Bridge, the Rectory of
Bruckland, part of Buckland near Dovor, all Buckland near Feversham, the
Manor of Burmarsh, all Chellenden, the Manor, Park and Parish of C^islet,
part of Cosmus Bleane, part of Crundall, all Devington, part of Dimchurch, all
Ease^ing, part of Elmsted, the Manor of Elmstone, all Ewell, part of
Eythorne, the Re^tory and so much as is out of the Ports in Feversham, the
M^nnour of Fordwich, all Goodneston near Feversham, all Winchet Hill in
Goudherst, the Manor of Guston, part of Halden, part of upper Hardress, all
nether Hardress, all Hartye, the Denns of Ockley, Gillenden and Parocke in
Hawkeherst, near the Church and all the Parish of Herne, part of Hope, all
Hoth, all Ickham, the Vicarage of, and at Mergate in St. John's, part of
lverburch, part of Kenarton, the Manor and Rectory of Kennington, al^
Kingstone, all Knowlton, ^he Manor of East Langdon, so much as is out of the
Ports in St. ^aurence, the Manor of Leneham, all ^eveland, the Manor and
all the Parish of Littleborne, all Luddenham, part of Marden, the Manor and
Rectory o^ Milton near Canterbury, part of Minster in Sheppey, all Minster in
Th^net, all Monkton, the Manor of Nackington, the Manor of Newington
besides Sittinghorne, all Newnham, so much as is not in the Cinque Ports, in
St. Nicholas in Thanet, part of Nouington, the Manor of Norb^rne, all Norton,
all Ore, so much as is in the Hundred of Feversham in Ospring^, part of Otham,
all Patricksho^ne, the Borough of Longpar^ in St. Paul, the Manor of
Plumsted, all Preston near Feversham, part of Preston near Fordwich, ^ll
Reculver, part of Rever, the Manor of Ripple, part of Sandwich, the Manor
and so much as is in the Hundred of Feversham in Steling, part of Shebe^t^ward,
all Sheldwich, part of Sholdon, part of Smarden, the Manor ^f Snave, all
Stalisfield, all Staple, part of (...), all Stodmarsh, all Stone near
Feversham, the Rectory an^ V^car^ge of Stone in Oxney^ all Stu^m^uth, all (...)
pa^^ ^f Sutton near Dovor, the Manor o^ ^waycliffe, the Rectory of Tent^rden
all Throwley, the B^rough o^ Kin^snode i^ Vlcombe, all West Beer, part of
Whitfield, otherwise B^usfi^ld, ^ll, ex^e^t ^he B^r^ugh of Tankerton in
Whi^st^ple, all Wi^kham B^eaux, the Manor an^ Rectory of Willesborough, the
Rectory of Wing^am, part of Wo^dnesborough, part of Wormsell.

The ^irection of a Hab^a^ Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the
Defendant be out of custody thus,

To the Steward of the Court of Record of the liberties of the late dissolved
M^na^^ery of St. Augustine, near ^h^ City of Canterbury in the County of Kent.

But if the Defendant be in c^sto^y then thu^,

To the Stoward and Bailiffe of the C^u^t of Record of the liberties of the
late dissolved M^nastery of St Augustine, (...) the City of Canterbury in the
County of Kent, and to either of them.

The Sheriff thus directs his Warrants upon process to that liberty, viz^

To the Bailiffe of the liberties of the late dissolved Monestery of St.
Augustine near Canterbury.

4. The Liberty of the Cinque Ports.
THis Liberty has in it (extending over all the same) a Court of Chancery, and
a Court of Admiralty, and anciently had a Court called the Castlegate Court
(for determining pleas touching guarding that Castle.)

And within this liberty are several Ports and Towns in this County, every of
which has a chief Magistrate and Jurats, and every of them is a Justice of the
Peace within the li^erties of that Town.

Every of the laid Port^ and Towns has ^lso a Session of the Peace, and a
Court o^ Record for all pleas, real, personal and mixed.

This Liberty of the Cinque Ports extendet^ it sel^ over all the said Ports and
Towns, and the several places within their Jur^s^ictions, viz.

The Town and Port of Sandwich with the Parishes and places within the
juris^iction of the same, viz.

Deal, Stonar, Walmer, Ramsgat^ in St. Laurence, Sar in St. Nicholas, an^
Lands (sometimes parcel of the Manor of Boxley) in Woodnesborough.

The Town and Port of Dovor, with the Parishes and places within the
jurisdiction of the same, viz.

Birchington, part of Charlton near Dovor, part of Hougham, St. John's, St.
Peter's, Ringwold, Woodchurch in Thanet.

The Town and Port of New Romney, with the places within the jurisdiction of
the same, viz.

Part of Old Romney B^om^ill, part of I^echurch, part of Brenzet, part of
Snargate, part of Apledore.

The Town and P^rt of Hith, with part of West Hith, within the jurisdiction of
the same^ the Town of Feversham, and part of that Parish; the Town of Folkstone
and part of that Parish; the Town and Parish of Fordwich; the Town and Parish
of Lid; the Town and Parish of Tenterden, with the Borough of Reading in E^eney
(within the Jurisdiction of the same) the Parish of Beakesborne and the Grange
in Gillingham, within the jurisdiction of the Town and Port of Hasting.

The Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports is the immediate Officer (for the whole
liberty of the same) to the Courts at Westminster, and the direction of Writs
to him is thus

To our Constable of our Castle of Dovor, and to the Warden of our Cinque Ports
or to his Lieutenant there.

Here also I thought fit to set down the direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove
a Cause out of the liberty of the City of Canterbury (which is t^us, wheth^r
the Defendant be in custody or not) viz.

To the Mayor of the City of Canterbury.

5. The Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury.
THis Liberty has in it a C^urt of Record, for pleas in all actions, real,
personal and mixed.

And this liberty claims, the Manor of Adisham, the Manor of Apledore,
the Borough of Rudlow in Ashford, part of Benenden, part of Betherisden, so
much as is in the Manor of Godmersham in Biddenden, so much as is in the
Manor of Brokefend in Birchington, part of Boughton Monche^sea, so much as is
in the Manor of Hollinghorn, in Bredherst, part of Brenze^, the Manor of
Brook, ^art of Brookland, so much as is in the Manor of Copton, in Buckland
near Feversham, the Leeze, and part of the Churchyard, and what is not in the
liberty of Wye, in Challock, the Manor of great Chart, the Manor of little
Chart, the Manor of Chartham, the precincts of Christchurch Canterbury, all
the Town and Denn of Cranbrooke (except the George Inn with the appurtenances)
in Cranbrooke, so much as is in the Manor o^ Copton, in Devington, the
Manor of Eastry, part of Ebeney, the Mann^ur of Eynsford, the upper part of
Ey^^orne, the Manor of Fairefield, the Manor of East Farley, the Manor of
West Farley, part of Farningham, so much as is in the Manor of Hollinghorne
in Frittenden, the Manor of Godmersham, the Boroughs of Pattenden and Lilsden
in Goudherst, part of Halden, part of Ha^^ow, so much as is in the Ma^nour of
Hollingbo^ne, in Harie^sham, the Denns of Foxhole, little Hensell, Pipfden,
Co^gherst and l^ttle Riseden in Hawkcherst, the Den^ of Habenbury in Hedcorn,
part of Higham, the Manor of Hollingborne, the Lands late of S^. Anthony
Roper in Horton Kirby, part of Hucking, the M^nnours of I^kham an^ Brampling in
Ickh^m, so much as is in the Manor of Ickham in Ivechurch, part of Iwade, so
much as is in the Manor of Apledore in Kena^ton the Mannours of Laysdown and
Boyeton, in and near Laysdown so much as is in the Manor of Hollingb^rne in
Leeds, the Manor of Lo^fe, part of Marden, the M^nnor of Me^ph^m, the Manor
of M^rsham, so much as is in the Manor of (...) in M^dley, part of great
Mongeham, the M^nnour of (...), so much as ^s in the M^nnour of Eastry, in
(...) part of West Pack^um, the Man^our of Prestou near Fev^rsham, part of
Rolvenden, so much as is in the Manor of Ag^ne in Old Romney, the Manor of
(...) and so much as is in the Manor of Ickham, in Rucking, the Manor of
(...) part of Smarden, so much as is in the Manor o^ (...), in Snave, part of
Staple, (...) of Stapleherst, so much as is in any of^he (...) of Copton,
Selgrave or Hamme marsh, in (...) near (...) part of Stone in Oxney, the (...)
late of S^. Anth^ny Roper, in Sutton at Hone, so much as is in the ma^nour of
Shourt in Swaycliffe, part of (...) part of (...), the manor of Westwell, the
mannours of Palster and Wittersham in Wittersham, so much as is in the mann^ur
of Apledore in Woodchurch, part of (...), so much as is in the manor of
(...), in Word,

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a cause out of this liberty, if the
De^endant be out of custody, thus, To the Steward of the High Court of Record
of the liberties of the late D^^n and Chapter of the late Cath^drall and Me^ro
political Church of Christ Canterbury.

But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus,

To the Steward and Bailiffe of the High Court of Record of the liberties of
the late Dean and Chapter of the late Cathedral and M^tropoliticall Church of
Christ Canterbury, and to either of them.

The Sheriff thus directs his Warrants upon process to that liberty, viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberties of the late Dean and Chapter of Ch^^st^hu^ch
Canterbury.

6. The Liberty of Eleham.
THis Liberty has no Court of Record for pleas,

But claims so much as is in the upper half Hundred of Loningborough, in
Acrise, upp^r Hardress, Padlesworth near Eleham, Stelling, and al^ Ele^am.

The Sheriff thus directs his Warra^ts upon p^ocess to that liberty, viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Ele^am.

7. The Liberty of Gravesend and Milton.
THis Liberty has in it a Corporation and Court of Record, And claims a^l
Gravesend, and Milton near Graves^nd.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a C^u^e out of this Liberty
(whether the Defendant be in custody or not) is thus,

To the Mayor, Iur^^s and Inhabitants of the Towns and Parishes of Gravsend
and Milton.

The Sheriff directs his Warrants upon process to this Li^erty thus, viz.

To the Mayor of the Towns of Gravesend and Milton, and to his Ministers.

8. The Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster.
THis Liberty has no Court of Record for pleas in this County, But claims
part of Ash near Wr^ham, at Cha^o^d in Asherst, the ^an^o^rs of (...) and
Goddington, Woodlands called Charm wood, and the Rectory o^ C^elsfi^ld, in
Chelsfield, at Morants Court in Chevening. part of Chidingstone, part of St.
M^ry Cray, the ma^n^ur of Pau^^ Cray, so much as is in the manor of
Hastingligh, in Elm^ted, the Recto^y of (...) part of Farningham, the manor
o^ Hastingligh, part of Horton Kirby, the manor of Kensing, part of Keston,
the manor of Lullingstone, part of O^ford, part of Orpington, at Chaford in
Pensherst, the manor of ^eale, at B^adbo^rne in Sevenoke the manor of
Goddington in Stroud, the manor of West Wickham, and the message and lands
called Spring Parkes, Old Parkes, Frith's Wood and Chamk^^'s Grove, in West
Wickham.

The Sheriff directs his Warrants upon process to the Bailiffe of this liberty
thus, viz.

To the B^iliffe of the liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster.

9. The Liberty of Liminge.
THis Liberty has no Court of Record for pleas,

But claims so much as is in the lower half Hundred of Loningborough in
Liminge so much as is in that half Hundred, in Paddlesworth near E^^ham.

The Sheriff directs his Wa^ran^s upon process to the Bailiffe of this liberty
thus viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Liminge.

10. The Liberty of Maidstone.
THis Liberty has a Corporation in it, and a Court of Record, the^uri diction
whereof extends (as to all actions real, personal and mixed,) over all the
Town and Parish of Maidstone, and as to personal actions, only under the
value of five pounds,

It extends over East Farley, East Berming, West Barming, Loose, Boxley,
Allington, Myl^ale in Aylesford, new Hith in East Malling, Linton and Otham.

And upon the River of Medway, from East Farley bridge to a piece of land
called Hawkewood in Boreham.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty
(whether the Defendant be in Custody or not) i^ thus,

To the Mayor of the Kings Town and Parish of Maidstone.

The Sheriff directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Mayor of the Kings Town and Parish of Maidstone, and to his Ministers.

11. The Liberty of Queenborough.
THis Liberty has a Corporation, and Court of Record, and claims over the
Town and Parish of Queenborough.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus, to remove a Cause out of this Liberty
(whether the Defendant be in Custody or not) is thus:

To the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Town of Queenborough.

The Sher^ff directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Town of Queenborough, and to their
Officer.

12. The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester.
THis Liberty has a Court of Record for Pleas, in all Actions, (Real,
Personal and mixed) and claims, Part of Allhollowes, part of Aylesford, part
of Beckenham, all Bromley, part of Chetham, part of Cliffe near Gravesend, at
the stone house and Churchyard in Cobham, all Cookstone, part of Cowling, all
Darent, all the Marketplace, from the running stream to the Market-house, and
most of that side of the street where the Cook Inn is, and the Mill (but not
the Mill-land) in Dartford, part of Denton near Gravesend, in the Churchyard of
Fawkeham, all Frindsbury, all Halling, part of Higham, part of Hoo, part of
Longfield, part of West Malling, part of St. Margarets near Rochester, part of
St. Mary's near Rochester, in the Churchyard of Northfleet, part of Padlesworth
near Snodland, the precincts of the late Cathedral Church of Rochester, the
Rectory of Rolvenden, part of Shorn, all Snodland, all Southfleet, all Stoke,
all Stone near Dartford, part of Stroud, part of Sutton at Hone, all
Trottiscliffe, part of Wilmington and all Woldham.

The direction of a Hobeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the
Defendant be out of custody, is thus,

To the Steward of the Court of the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester.

But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus,

To the Steward and Bailiffe of the Court of the liberty of the late Bishop of
Rochester, and to either of them.

The Sheriff directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester.

13. The Liberty of the City of Rochester.
THis Liberty has in it a Corporation and Court of Record, for pleas in all
actions, real, personal and mixed, and claims,

All the City of Rochester, from the high street of that City to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, and from thence cross the highway, all along the
fields to the Farm called Horsted in Chetham, from Horsted Farm, cross the
Woods, to the highway leading from Rochester to Maidstone, and from thence
cross the lands to Windmill hill near Nassenden Farm, and from thence (over the
fields) cross the way between St. Margarets and Aylesford, down to a Farm
called Rings, and from thence into the River of Medway in St. Margarets near
Rochester. From the highstreet of Rochester, over the Bridge to the Mill called
Stroud Mill (including the Mill) and from thence all along the High Street at
the right hand side thereof, to the sign of the Angel, and all Littleborough,
and so beyond the Church to the way between Frindsbury and Cookstone, and up
the way leading, to Frindsbury, to the house called the Ship (including the
Church) in Stroud.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a cause out of this liberty
(whether the Defendant be in custody or not) i^ thus,

To the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Rochester.

The Sheriff directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Rochester, and their
Mini^sters.

14. The Liberty of Romney-Marsh.
THis liberty has in it a Corporation and Court of Record for pleas in all
actions, real, personal and mixed, and claims,

Part of Apledore, part of Bilsington, all (...) part of Bonnington, part of
Brenz^t a^l (...) Dim-Church all Eastbridge, all He^st all Hope, p^^t of
Ivechurch, part of Kenar^on, part of Limpne, all St. Mary's, all Ne^church, all
Orgarswick, part of Orl stone part of New Romney, part of Old Romney, part of
R^cking, part of Snargate, all Snave, part of Wareborne.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a cause out of this liberty
(whether the Defendant be in custody or not) is,

To the Bailiffe and Iurats of Romney Marsh.

The Sheriff directs Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Bailiffe and Iurats of Romney Marsh, and to their Officer.

15. The Liberty of Sevenoke.
THis liberty has no Court of Record for pleas, But claims part of Kemsing,
part of Lighe next Tunbridge, part of Seal, all Sevenoke and part of
Speldherst.

The Sheriff directs Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Sevenoke.

16. The Liberty of Wrotham.
THis Liberty has no Court of Record; but claims, All Ig^tham, all
Plaxtoole, all Shipborne, all Stansted, all Wrotham.

The Sheriff directs Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Wrotham.

17. The Liberty of Wye.
THis liberty has a Court of Record for pleas in all actions, real, personal
and mixed, and claims,

The Borough of Henwood, otherwise Hewit in Ashford, the Borough of Snode^ill
in Betherisden, the Borough of Wachinden in Biddenden, all Boughton Aluph, the
Borough of Cocklescombe in Braborne, all B^ooke, part of the Churchyard, the
Fair place, and what else is not in the liberty of the late Deane of
Canterbury in Challock, part of Chilham, the Borough of Frechisley, otherwise
Abbots Franchise in Cranbrooke, all Cr^^dall, all Eastwell, part of Godmersham,
the Denn of Romden in Halden, the Borough of Town in Hastingligh, the Borough
of Houkeherst, otherwise Southborough in Houkeherst, part of West Hith, all
Kingsnoth, the Borough of Dengemarsh in Lid, part of Mersham, part of Molash,
the Borough of West Kingsnoth in Pluckles, part of R^cking, the yoke of
Develand being all S^vington, the Denn of Chepredge in Tenterden, the Borough
of Town in Wal^ham, part of Warehorne, the Boroughs of Shottenden and Deane in
Westwell, the Borough of Henwood in Willesborough, the Denn of Plurenden in
Woodchurch, all W^^.

The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the
Defendant be out of custo^y is thus,

To the Steward of the Court of the Royal Manor of Wye in the County of Kent.

But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus,

To the Steward and Bailiffe of the Court of the Royal Manor of Wye in the
County of Kent, and to either of them.

The Sheriff drects Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz.

To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Wye.

There are seven principal Rivers in this County.
1. Thames
Runs about thirty miles in length at the Northside of the County, between
the same and Essex.

2. Ravensborne
Arises at Holliwoods hill in Keston, and runs from thence by Hayes, and
from thence (by Br^^ley, Leu^^am and Debtford) into the River of Thames, and
with it into the Sea.

3. Cray
Arises at Newell in Orpington, and from thence runs by St. Mary Cray, and
Paul's Cray, and from thence between Foots Cray and North Cray, and by Bexley
to Crayford, and from thence into the River Darent, and with it into the River
of Thames, and with that into the Sea.

4. Darent
Arises at Squi^reyes in Westram, and from thence run^eth ^o Brasted,
^undrish, Otford, Shoram, Lullingstone, Aynsford, ^a^ningham, Horton Kirby,
Sutton at Hone, and Darent, from thence to Dartford, and beyond that meets
the River Cray, and with that runs into the River of Thames, and with it
into the Sea.

5. Medway
Has four heads,

I. About Croberst in Surrey, and runs from thence to Eatonbridge, Hever,
Chidingstone, Pensherst, Lighe, Tunbridge, Hadlow and Yalding, and from thence
to Nettlested, Teston, and West Farley, and from thence between East Barming
and East Farley to Maidstone, and from thence to Al^ington, and Westward to
Aylesford, and from thence Northward, between Boreham and Snodland, and Woldham
and Halling, to Cookstone, and from thence to Rochester, and from thence
between Frindsbury and Chetham, it runs Northward about a mile and a half,
and from thence Eastward as much, and from thence Southward to Gillingham, then
about two miles and a half Eastward, then as much Northward, then Eastward
about one mile and a half, then Southward about a mile, then Northward about 2.
miles, then Eastward about three miles, and so Northward into the Sea (between
the Isles of Greane and Sheppey.)

2. Near Fant in Sussex, and runs from thence to Lamberherst, and
Horsmanden, and from thence to a place called the Twist, where it spreads it
self into two parts, one part whereof runn that ^he Westside of Marden, and
from thence to a place called Hunton Ford, and from thence Westward to Yalding
afores^id, and the other part also runs at the Westside of the Twist to
Yalding aforesaid and they both there meeting, run as before to Nettlested,
Teston, etc. as before.

3. About Goldwell in great Chart, and from thence runs to a place called
Romden, from thence to S^arden and Hedcorne, and from thence to a place called
Stilebridge, and from thence to Hunton Ford and Yalding aofresaid, and from
thence to Nettlested, Teston, etc. as before.

4. At Biggin^oth in Leneham, and runs from thence to Leeds, and from thence
between Bersted and Otha^, to Maidstone, Allington, etc. as before.

6. Stoure.
THis also has four heads, 1 At Streatwell in Leneham, and runs from thence
to little Chart and Hothfield, and from thence between Ashford and
Willesborough, and from thence Northward, to Wye, Godmersham, Chartham, Milton,
Th^nington and Canterbury, and from thence to S^urrey, from thence between
Fordwich and West Beer to (...) and from thence to Sar^, and so at the Westside
of the Isle of Thanet, into the Sea.

2. At Postling Church, and runs from thence to Stanford, from thence
Westward to Sellindge, Mersham and Sevington, and from thence between
Willesborough and Ashford, meeting with the former stream, runs with i^ to
Wye, Godmersham, etc. as before.

3. At Liminge, and runs from thence to Eleham, from thence between Berham
and Kingstone to Bishop^borne, and Bridge, from thence to Patricks^orne, and
Beakesborne, from thence between Littleborne and Ickham, to Wickham Breaux,
Preston and Sturm^uth, and from thence in at the Southwest side of the Isle of
Thanet, and b^ that Northward ^^to the Sea.

4. Near great Mingeham, and from thence runs to Norburne, Ham, Worth and
Sandwich, and from thence to Rich^orough, E^sfleet and nether Court, and so
meeting with the last stream, runs to Sarr, and from thence as before into
the Sea.

7. Rother
Arises a^o it Argo's hill in or near Rotherfield in Sussex and runn^ng by
Mayfield, E^chingham, Saleherst and Bodeh^m, in Sussex, comet^ into Ke^^, in
the Parish of Sandherst and from thence runs Eastward to Newe^den,
W^ttersh^m, E^eney, Stone and Apledore, and (...) thence turning Southward by
the East end of the Isle of Oxney, runs by Iden and Playden in Sussex, and
between that and East Guldeford (also in Sussex) into the Sea at Rye.

This County has in it 14. Corporations, viz.
In the Foreign.
1. GRavesend and Milton. 2. Maidstone. 3. Queenborough. 4. Rochester. 5.
Romney Marsh,

In the Cinque Ports.
6. Dovor. 7. Feversham. 8. Folkstone. 9. Fordwich. 10. Hith. 11. Lid. 12. New
Romney. 13. Sandwich. 14. Tenterden.

And one City, viz. Rochester (the City of Canterbury being a County of it
self.)

There are in this County 28. Market Towns, viz.
In the Foreign.
1. AShford, 2. Bromley, 3. Cranbrook, 4. St. Mary Cray, 5. Dartford, 6.
Eleham, 7. Goudherst, 8. Gravesend, 9. Leneham, 10, Maidstone, 11. West
Malling, 12. Milton near Sittingborne, 13. Rochester, 14. Sevenoke, 15.
Smarden, 16. Tunbridge, 17. Westram, 18. Woolwich, 19. Wrotham, and 20. Wye.

In the Cinque Ports.
21. Dovor, 22. Feversham, 23 Folkstone, 24. Hith, 25. Lid, 26. New Romney, 27.
Sandwich, 28. Tenterden.

And the Markets are held in these Towns as follows, viz.

Monday at Eleham. Tuesday at Le^eham and Wrotham. Wednesday at St. Mary Cray,
Feversham, Goudherst, Gravesend, Dovor, Sandwich, and Westram. Thursday at
Bromley, Folkstone, Lid, Maidstone and Wye^ Friday at Rochester, Smarden,
Tenterden, Tunbridge and Woolwich. Saturday at Ashford, Cranbrook, Dartford,
Dovor, Feversham, Gravesend, Hith, West Malling, Milton near Sitting^orne, New
Romney, Sandwich and Sevenoke.

Likewise at Sandway in Leneham there is a Market (for Bullocks) upon every
Tuesday after Al^ollo^^ day, till Christma^.

And a Market at Northfleet, upon every Tuesday after ^aster-Tuesday, till
Whitson-Tuesday.

I have omitted Canterbury out of the names of these Market-Townes, for that it
is a County of it self; but there is a Market in the same upon every Wednesday
and Saturday.

There are in this County yearly 124. Faires, most of which a^^ kept in the
several Months of the year as follows.
January 25. Paul's Conversion, at Milton near Gravesend. February 2. Candlemas
day, at St. Mary Cray, Maidstone. 3. St. Blase, at Bromley. 14. St. Valentine,
at Feversham, It holds ten days.

March 12. St Gregory, at Wye. 24. St. Buttolph, at Northfleet. 25. Our Lady
day, at great Chart, Lamberherst, St. Peter's, Sea^a^er, Stoke.

April 23. St. George, at Charing, Wrotham, 25. St. Mark at Eatonbridge,
Tenterden.

May 1. Phillip and Jacob, at Maidstone, Wingham, Wittersham. 3. Finding of the
holy Cross, at Ware^orne called Ham Fair. 6. John Port Latin, at Ashford,
Speldherst, called Groombridge Fair. 19. St. Dunstan, at Cranbrooke,
Rochester. 26. Translation of St. Augustine, at Leneham.

June 9. St. Edmund the King, at Maidstone, called Garlic Fair. 11. St.
Barnaby, at Apledore. 24. Midsummerday, at Bilsington, called Woodcock Fair,
Harietsham, St. John's in Thanet, Seasalter, Tunbridge. 29. St. Peter, at
Aylesford, Hedcorne, Hith, Me^pham, St. Peter's in Thanet, Sevenoke.

July 7. Translation of Becket, at Christchurch Canterbury, called Becket
Fair, it holds nine days. 13. Anacletus, at Lid. 15. St. Swit^in, at
Horsmanden. 19. St. Rusin, at St. Margarets near Dovor. 20. St. Margarets, at
Betherisden, 22. St. Mary Magdalen, at Cowden, Dartford, Goudherst, called
Combwell Fair, Stockbury. 23. Apolinaris, at Monk^on. 25. St. James, at
Bromley, Elmsted, East Malling, called Larkefield Fair, Staple.

August 1. Lammas day, at Bruckland, Feversham, it holds ten days, West
Malling. 10. St. Laurence, at Hawkeherst, New Romney. 15. Assumption of our
Lady, at Goudherst, Stro^d. 24. St. Bartholomew, at Bobbing, Buckland near
Do^or, St. John's in Thanet, Otford. 29. Decollation of St. John Baptist, at
Ashford.

September 1. Giles Abbot, at Cranbrooke, Farnborough, Re^ul^er* S^ip^orne. 8.
Nativity of our Lady, at Chetham, Westram. 14. Holy Rood, at Bersted,
Goodneston near Sandwich. 21. St. Matthew, at Eastry, West Malling, Ware^orne.
27. Cosmus and Dimianus, at Chaliock. 29. Michaelmas day, at Christchurch
Canterbury, it holds nine days, Earith, Higham Marden, Seasalter,
Sittingborne, it holds five days, Smarden.

October 6. St. Faith, at Maidstone. 8. Pelagi^s, at Cliffe near Gravesend. 9.
St. Dennis, at Eleham. 13. Translation of St. Edward, at Gravesend, it holds a
week. 18. St. Luke, at Charing, Charlton near Greenwich, called Horn Fair,
great Mongeham, Tunbridge. 28. Simon and Jude, at Biddenden, Chilham.

November 1. All Saints, at Stelling. 6. St. Leonard, at Badlesmer, West
Malling. 11. St. Martin, at Dovor, it holds nine days. 20. St. Edward the
King, at Hith, Sutton Vallance. 23. St. Clement, at Sandwich, hold three days.
30. St. Andrew, at Rochester.

December 6. St. Nicholas, at Pluckley, Sandherst, Sevenoke 25. Christmas day,
at Seasalter. 29. Thomas Becket, at Christchurch Canterbury, it holds nine
days.

And the residue of the said 124. Fairs are kept on no certain day of the
Month, but on the days following, viz.

Ashwednesday ( being the Wednesday) after Shrove sunday, at Tunbridge.

Palm monday, bing the Monday before Easter, at Eleham (...) in Sheppey.

Good Friday, being the Friday before Easter day, at Whitstaple.

Easter Monday, at Eleham, Kemsing.

Easter Tuesday, at Northfleet, Yalding.

Ascension day, being the Thursday sevennight before Whitsunday, at Brasted,
Earith, Stelling, Stone in Oxney.

Whitson Monday, at Eleham, Hadlow, Sittingborne, it holds three days.

Whitson Tuesday, at Chevening, called Chepsted Fair, Northfleet.

Wednesday in Whitson week, at Ightham, called Coxcomb Fair.

THe several Officers following (are by the Sheriff of this County) returned
to attend at the Assizes holden for the same, viz. All the Justices of the
Peace of the County,
Mayors
Of the City of Rochester, of the Town of Maidstone, of the Towns of Gravesend
and Milton.

All the Coronors of the County.

Stewards of Liberties
Of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, of the late Dean and Chapter of
Christchurch Canterbury, of Wye.

Bailiffs of Liberties
Ashford, Liminge, Sevenoke, Gravesend and Milton, the late Bishop of
Rochester, Wrotham, Eleham.

Bailiffs of the County
Sutton Bromley, Sutton Dartford, Hoo, Eyhorne, Seven Hundreds, Milton, Chart
and Longbridge, Scray, Bridge, Eastry, Stowting, Shipway, Twyford, Lowy of
Tunbridge.

Constables.
Hundred of Blackheath, two: Hundred of Ruxley, two: Hundred of Codsheath, two:
Hundred of Somerden, two: Hundred of Westram and Eatonbridge, one: Hundred of
Bromley and Beckenham, one: Town of Brasted, one: Hundred of Dartford and
Wilmington, two: Hundred of Little and Lesnes, one, Hundred of Axstone, two:
Hundred of Hoo, two: Hundred of Shamell, two: Hundred of Chetham and
Gillingham, two: Hundred of Larkefield, two: Town of West Malling, two: Hundred
of Toltingtrow, two: Hundred of Wrotham, two: Hundred of Twyford, two: Hundred
of West Barnfield, one: Hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, two: Hundred of
M^rd^n, one: Hundred of Wa^hlingstone, two: Hundred of Littlefi^ld, ^ne:
Hundred of Milton, two: Hundred within the Isle of Sheppey* one: Hundred of
Felb^rough, two: ^undred of Feversham, two: Hundred of Tenham, two: Hundred of
Boughton Blean, two: Town of Ospringe, one: Hundred of Downhamf^^d, two:
Hundred of Bridge and Petham, two: Borough of (...), one: Hundred of Westgate,
two: Hundred of Blengate, two: Hundred of Kinghamford, two: Hundred of (...),
one: Hundred of Whitstaple, two: Hundred of (...), one: Hundred of W^ngham,
two: Hundred of (...), two: Hundred of Eastry, two: Hundred of Stowting, two:
Hundred of Heane, one: Hundred of Lonningborough, two: Hundred of B^u^borough,
two: Hundred of Folkstone, two: Hundred of Wye, two: Hundred of Calehill, two:
Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, two: Hundred of Eyhorne, two: Hundred of
Maidstone, one* Town of Maidstone, one: Helden Borough, one: South Borough,
one: Hadlow Borough, one: Town of Tunbridge, one: Hundred of Cranbrooke, one:
Hundred of Selbrittenden, one: Hundred of great Barnefield, one: Hundred of
Blackborne, one: Hundred of Rolvenden, one: Hundred of Barckley, one: Hundred
of Bircholt Barony, one: Town of Ashford, one: Hundred of Street, two: Hundred
of Bircholt Franchise, one: Hundred of (...), one: Hundred of Newchurch, one:
Hundred of Al^esbridge, one: Hundred of St. Mar^ins Pountney, one: Hundred
within the Isle of Oxney, one.

THe West division of the County of Kent has in it yearly two general
Sessions of the Peace (usually holden at Maidstone) viz.

Tuesday after Easter-week, and Tuesday after Michaelmas day.

These Officers following are (by the Sheriff of the County) returned ^o
attend at the said Sessions, viz.

Baliffes of Liberties.
Sevenoke, Gravesend and Milton, the late Bishop of Rochester, Wrotham.

Bailiffes of the County.
Sutton Bromley, Sutton Dartford, Hoo, Twyford, Lowy of Tunbridge, Seven
Hundreds, Eyhorne.

Constables.
Hundred of Blackheath, two* Hundred of Ruxley, two: Hundred of Codsheath, two:
Hundred of Somerden, two: Hundred of Westram and Eatonbridge, one: Town of
Brasted, one: Hundred of Bromley and Beckenham, two: Hundred of Dartford and
Wilmington, two: Hundred of Little and Lesnes, one: Hundred of Axtone, two:
Hundred of Hoo, two, Hundred of Shamell, two: Hundred of Chetham and
Gillingham, two: Hundred of Larkefield, two: Town of West Malling, two: Hundred
of Toltingtrow, two: Hundred of Wrotham, two. Hundred of Twyford, two: Hundred
of West Barnfield, one: Hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, two. Hundred of
Marden, one: Hundred of Wa^h^ingstone, two: Hundred of Littlefield, one: Helden
Borough, one: Town of Tunbridge, one: South Borough, one: Hadlow Borough, one:
Hundred of Cranbrooke, one* Hundred of Selbrittenden, one: Hundred of great
Barnfield, one: Hundred of Blackborne, one: Hundred of Rolvenden, one: Hundred
of Barckley, one: Hundred of Eyhorne, two: Hundred of Maidstone, one: Town of
Maidstone, one.

THe East division of the County of Kent has in it yearly two general
Sessions of the Peace (usual^y holden at the Castle of Canterbury) viz.

Tuesday after Epiphany (commonly called Twelf^ide) and Tuesday before St.
James.

These Officers following are (by the Sheriff of the County) returned to
attend at the said Sessions, viz.

Stewards of Liberties.
Of the late Archbishop^ick of Canterbury, of the late Dean and Chapter of
Christchurch Canterbury, of Wye.

Bailiffes of Liberties
Ashford, Liminge, Eleham.

Bailiffes of the County.
Milton, Scray, Bridge and Petham, Stowting, Chart and Longbridge, Eastry,
Shipway.

Constables
Hundred of Milton, two: Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, one: Hundred of
Felborough, two: Hundred of Feversham, two: Hundred of Tenham, two: Hundred of
Boughton under the Blean, two: Town of Ospringe, one: Hundred of Downhamford,
two: Hundred of Bridge and Petham, two: Hundred of Westgate, two: Hundred of
Blengate, two: Hundred of Kinghamford, two: Hundred of Ringslow, two: Hundred
of Whitstaple, two: Hundred of Preston, one: Hundred of Wingham, two: Hundred
of Cornilo, two: Hundred of Eastry two: Hundred of Stowting, two: Hundred of
Heane, two: Hundred of Loningborough, two: Hundred of Beusborough, two: Hundred
of Folkstone, two: Hundred of Wye, two: Hundred of Calehill, two: Hundred of
Chart and Longbridge, two: Hundred of Bircholt Barony, one: Town of Ashford,
one: Hundred of Street, two: Hundred of Bircholt Franchise, one: Hundred of
Ham, one: Hundred of Newchurch, one: Hundred of Aloesbridge, one: Hundred of
St. Martins Pountney, one: Hundred of Oxney, one.

For Ecclesiastical government, this County had formerly in it two Bishoprics,
viz. Canterbury and Rochester; Each of which Diocese was divided into several
Deanries, and those Deanries had in them the several Parishes in this County as
follows, viz. The Diocese of Canterbury had in it eleven Deanries, which had
in them the Parishes in this County following, viz.
1. Bridge.
ADisham, Ash near Sandwich, Beakesborne, Berham, Bishopsbourne, Boughton
Aluph, Bridge, Brook, Challock, Chartham, Chilham, Chillenden, Crundall,
Elmstone, Godmersham, Goodneston near Sandwich, upper Hardress, (...),
Kingstone, Littleborne, Molash, Nonnington, Patricksborne, Petham, Preston near
Fordwich, Staple, Stelling, Stodmarsh, S^u^mouth, Waltham, Wickam Breaux,
Wimlingswold, Wingham and Wye.

2. Canterbury.
St. A^hage, Christchurch, Cosmus Blean, St. Dunstans, Fordwich, Hackington,
Harbl^down, nether Hardress, Milton near Canterbury, Nackington, St. Mary
Northgate, St. Paul, Sturrey, Thanington, and Westgate.

3. Charing.
Ash^ord, Benenden, Betherisden, Biddenden, Boughton M^l^erbe, Charing, great
Chart, little Chart, Cranbrooke, Eastwell, Egerton, Frittenden, Halden,
Hawkeherst, Hedcorne, Hothfield, Kennington, Newenden, Pluckley, Rolvenden,
Sand^erst, Smarden, Tenterden and Westwell.

4. Dovor.
Alcham, Beusfield, alias Whitfield, Buckland near Dovor, (...) near Folkstone,
Charlton near Dovor, Cheriton, Cliffe near Dovor, St. James and St. Mary's in
Dovor, Ewell, Folkstone, Guston, Hawking, Hougham, Liddon, St. Margarets near
Dovor, Newington besides Hith, Rever and Swingfield.

5. Eleham.
Acri^e, Braborne, Denton near Eleham, El^ham, Elmsted, Hasting^i^h, Hith,
Monks Horton, Liminge, Padlesworth near Eleham, Postling, Saltwood, Stanford,
Stowting and Woott^n.

6. Limpne.
(...), Apledore, Bilsington, Blackmanstone, ^onnington, Brenzet, Bruckland,
Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Eastbridge, Ebeney, Fairfield, Herst, Hincksel, West,
Hith, Hope, Ivechurch, Kenarton, Kingsnoth, Lid, Limpne, St. Mary's near New
Romney, Mersham, Medley, Newchurch, Orgarswick, Orlestone, New Romney, Old
Romney, Rucking, Sellindge, Sevington, Shadoxherst, Smeeth, Snargate, Snave,
Stone in Oxuey, Warehorne, Willesborough, Wittersham, Woodchurch.

7. Ospringe.
Badlesmer, Boughton Blean, Buckland near Feversham, Devington, Doddington,
Easeling, Feversham, Goodnestone* near Feversham, Graveney, Hartye, Hernehill,
Leveland, Linsted, Luddenham, Newnham, Norton, Ore, Ospringe, O^^erden, Preston
near Feversham, Selling, Sheldwich, Stalisfield, Tenham and Throwley.

8. Sandwich.
Barefriston, Betshanger, Coldred, Deal, Eastry, Ey^horne, Ham, Knowlton, East
Langdon, West Langdon, great Mongeham, little Mongeham, Norburne, Rin^wold,
Ripple, St. Clement, St. Mary, St Peter in Sandwich, Shebbertswold, Sholden,
Sutton near Dovor, Ti^neston, Waldershare, Walmer, Woodnesborough and Word.

9. Sittingborne.
Bapchild, Bicknor, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, Eastchurch, Emley, Halstow,
Hartlip, Iwade, Kingsdowne near Sittingborne, Laysdowne, Mi^sted, Milton near
Sittingborne, Minster in Sheppey, Murston, Newi^gton besi^es Sittingborne,
Queenborough, Reinham Rodmersham, Sittingborne, Stockbury, Tongue, Tustall,
Vpchurch, Warden and Wichling.

10. Sutton.
Bersted, Boughton Monchelsea, Boxley, Bred^erst, Bromfield, Chart next Sutton
Vallance, Detling, Frinsted, Goudherst, Harietsham, Hollingborne, Hucking,
Langley, Leeds, Leneham, Linton, Loose, Maidstone, Marden, Otham, Stapleherst,
East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, Vlcomb and Wormsell.

11. West-Beer.
Birchington, Chislet, Herne, Hoth, St. John's, St. Laurence, Minster in Thanet,
Monkton, St Nicholas, St. Peter's, Recul^er, Seasalter, Stonar, Swaycliffe, West
Beer, Whitstaple, Wood, all^s Woodchurch.

The Diocese of Rochester Had in it four Deanries, which had in them the
Parishes in this County following viz.
1. Dartford.
BEckenham, Bromley, Charlton near Greenwich, Chesilherst, Chelsfield, Foots
Cray, St. Mary Cray, Paul's Cray, North Cray, Cudham, Dartford, Deptford,
Earith, Eltham, Farnborough, East Greenwich, Horton Kirby, Lee, Leusham,
Lullingstone, Plumsted, Sutton at Hone, East Wickham, West Wickham, Wilmington,
and Woolwich.

2. Malling.
(...) Al^ington near Maidstone, Asherst, East Barming, West Barming,
Bidborough, Birling, Brenchley, Capell near Tunbridge, Cowden, Ditton,
Eatonbridge, West Farley, Hadlow, Horsmanden, Laborne, Lamberherst, Lyghe, West
Malling, Mereworth, Nettlested, Osham, Padlesworth near Snodland, West Peckham,
Pembury, Ryarsh, Seal, Shipborne, Speldherst, Teston, Trotiscliffe, Tuneley,
Tunbridge, Watringbury, Westram and Yalding.

3. Rochester.
All Hollowes, Ash near Wrotham, Aylesford, B^reham, Chalk, Chetham, Cobham,
Cookstone, Cowling, Denton near Gravesend, Faukeham, Frindsbury, Gravesend,
Halling, high Halstow, Har^ley, Higham, Hoo, Kingsdown near Wrotham, Longfield,
Luddesdon, St. Margarets near Rochester, St. Mary's near Rochester, Milton near
Gravesend, Nutsted, Rochester, Ridl^y, Shorn, Snodland, Southfleet, Stoke,
Stone near Dartford, Stroud, Swanscombe, and Woldham.

4. Shoram.
Bexley, Brasted, Chevening, Chidingstone, Cliffe near Gravesend, Craford,
Darent, Eynsford, East Farley, Farningham, Gillingham, Halsted, Hayes, Hever,
Hunton, St. James in Greane, Ifield, Ightham, Kensing, Keston, East Malling,
Meopham, Nockholt, Northfleet, Orpington, O^ford, East Peckham, Pensherst,
Plaxtoole, Sevenoke, Shoram, Stansted, Sundrish, and Wr^tham.

Now follow alphabetically the names of the Saints, to whom the several
Churches aforesaid were dedicated, and which of the said Churches were so
dedicated to every of them.

All Saints.
ALl Hollows, All Saints Canterbury. Biddenden, Bi^chington, Birling, Boughton
Aluph Boxley, Brenchley, Burmarsh, Chilenden, Footes Cray, East Church, West
Farley, Frindsbury, Graveney, Hartley, Holingborne, Hope, Iwade, Lid, Maidston,
Murston, Petham, S^odland, Stanford, Stapleherst, Sturmarsh, Tudeley, Ulcombe,
Waldershare, West Beer, Whitstable, Woldham, Woodchurch.

St. Alphage, St. Alphage Canterbury, East Greenwich, Seasalter.

St. Andrew. St. Andrew Canterbury, Bu^kland near Dovor, Shebberswold,
Tilnestone, Wickham Breaux,

St. Anthony. Alcham.

St. Augustine. Brookland, East Langdon, Norburne, Snave.

St Bartholomew. Bobbing, Goodnestone near Feversham, Otford, Waltham.

St. Beatrice. Bethe^isden.

St. Butolph. L^llingstone Northfleet.

St. Clement. Laisdown, Old Romney, Sandwich.

Holy Cross. Bersted, Goodnestone near Sandwich, Westgate Canterbury.

Cosmus and Damianus. Challock, Cosmus Blean.

St. Dunstan. C^anbrook, St. Dunstans, Frinsted, West Petham, Snargate.

St. Edi^h* Kemsing.

St. Eanswith. Brenzet.

St. Edmund the King. Kingsdown (near Wrotham) St. Edmund Canterbury.

St. George. Beckenham, Benenden, Ham, Ivechurch St. George Canterbury.

St. Giles. Farnborough, Kingstone, Merston, Shipborn, Tongue, Wormsell.

St. Gregory and St. Martin. Wye.

St. Helen. Cliff^ near Gravesend.

St. John Baptist.
Berham, Bredgate, Doddington, Earith, Eltham, Halling, Harietsham, St. John in
Thanet, St. John Canterbury, Meopham, Mersham, Sutton at Hone, Swaycliffe,
Tunstall, Watringbury, West Wickham, Wittersham.

St. John the Evangelist. I^kham.

St. James the Apostle. Cowling, North Cray, Dovor, Elmsted, St. James in
Greane, Seldwich, Staple.

St. Katheri^e. Kingsdown near Sittingborn, Preston, near Feversham.

St. Laurence.
Bapchild, Bidborough, Godmersham, Hawkeherst, Longham, St. Laurence in Thanet,
Leveland, Mereworth, Otterden.

St. Leonard. Badlesmer, Deal, Herst, Hith.

St. Luke Charlton near Greenwich.

St. Innocents. Adisham.

St. Margaret.
Addington, East Barning, Bromfeild Darent, Hal^tow, High Halstow, Horsmanden,
Hu^king, Lee, St. Marga^^^^ Canterbury, St. Margarets near Dovor, St. Marg^rets
near Rochester, Rainham, Wichling, Wimlingswold.

St. Martin.
Acrise, Addington, Cheriton, Detling Guston, Herne, St. Martins Canterbury,
Great Mongeha^, Ryarsh, Wotton.

St. Mary.
Ashford, Barefriston, Bishopsborn, Boreham, Braborne, Brook, Capel near
Folkstone, Great Chart, Little Chart, Char^ham, (...), Chetham, Chilham,
Chislet, St. Mary Cr^y, Crundall, Denton near Gravesend, Dovor, Easeling,
Eastry, E^stwell, Ebeney, Egerton, Eleham, Fawkeham, Feversham, Fordwich,
Frittenden, Gillingham, Go^dherst, Gravesend, Hadlow, Halden, N^ther Hardres,
Hastingligh, Higham, Hincksell, West H^th, Horton Kirby, Hothfield, Kenarton,
Kenington, Lamberherst, West Langdon, Langley, Leneham, Lensham, Siddon,
Luddenham, Lygh, East Malling, West Malling, St. Mary's in Hoo, St. Mary's near
New Romney, Minster in Thanet, Nakington, Netlested, Newington, ( besides
Sittingborn) Nonington, Norton, O^lestone, P^trick^born, Postling, Reculver,
Ripple, Rolvenden, Sandwich, Sellindge, Selling, Sevington, Smeeth, Speldherst,
Stalisfe^ld, Stelling, Stodmarsh, Stone, near Dartford, Stone in Oxney
Sto^ting, Sutton Vallance, Tenham, Tur^ham, Upchurch, Walmer, Westram,
Westwell, Willesborough, Wingham, Woodnesborough, Woolwich.

St. Mary Bredman. Canterbury.

St. Mary Breden. Canterbury.

St. Mary Castle. Canterbury.

St. Mary and St. Eadburgh. Liminge.

St. Mary and St. Eanswith Folkstone.

St. Mary Holy Cross. Hoth Mil^^ed.

St. Mary Northgate. Canterbury.

St. Mary Queeningate. Canterbury:

St. Mary and St. Sexburge. Minster in Sheppey.

St. Mary Magdalen
Cobham, Cowden, Denton near Eleham, Devington, Longfield, St. Mary Magdalen,
Canterbury, Monkton, Rucking, Stockbu^y.

St. Matthew. Warehorne,

St. Michael.
Chart next Sutton, Cookstone, Harbledown, Hartlip, Hawking, Hernchill,
Kingsnoth, Marden, St Michael Canterbury, O^ham, East Peckham, Sittingborn,
Smarden, Throwley, East Wickham, Wilmington.

St. Mildred* St. Mildred Canterbury, Nutsted, Preston near Fordwich, Tenterden.

St. Nicholas.
Ash near Sandwich, Boughton Malherb, Chi^il^erst, Deptford, Leeds, Linton,
Newington besides Hith, St. Nicholas in Thanet, Otham, Pluckley, Plumsted,
Ringwold, Rochester, Rodmarsham, New Romney, Sandherst, Sevenoke, Sholdon,
Southfleet, Stroud, Sturrey, Thanington.

St. Oswald. Padlesworth near Eleham.

St. Paul Aylesford, St. Paul, Canterbury.

St. Paulinus. Paul's Cray.

St. Pancras. Coldred.

St. Peter.
Beakesborne, Be^sfield, Boughton Monchelsea, Bredherst, Bridge, Charlton near
Dovor, Cliffe near Dovor, Ditton, Monks H^rt^n, Molash. Newenden, Ore,
Pembury, St. Peter's in Thanet, St. Peter's Canterbury, Sandwich, Seal, Stoke,
Swingfield.

St. Peter and Paul.
Apledore, Ash near Wrotham, Bilsington, Borden, Boughton Bleane, Bromley,
Charing Cudham, Dimchurch, Eatonbridge, Ewell, Eythorne, upper Hardress,
Hedcorne, Laborne, Linsted, Luddesdon, Milton near Gravesend, Newchurch,
Newington, Ospringe, Rever, Saltwood, Shadoxherst, Shrone, East Sutton,
Swanscomb, Teston, Trotiscliffe, Tunbridge, Word, Yalding.

St. Romwald. Bonington.

St. Stephen. Hackington, Limpne.

S. Thomas the Apostle. Hartye.

St. Thomas the Martyr. Capell near Tunbridge, Fairfield.

Holy Trinity. Dartford, Milton near Sittingborne, Queenborough.

St. Vincent. Littleborne.

St. Warburgh. Hoo.

Now whereas the names of many Parishes of this Coun^y end in one Termination,
I have here set down Alphabetically, both the Terminations and Parishes, but
(for brevity sake) have omitted those Terminations, in which six (at the least)
of the Parishes do not end.
Borne, 10.
BEakesborne, Bishopsborne, Braborne, Hollingborne, Laborne, Littleborne,
Norborne, Patricsborne, Shipborne, Sittingborne.

Church, 7.
Dimchurch, Eastchurch, Ivechurch, Newchurch, Woodchurch near Tenterden,
Woodchurch in Thanet.

Den, 16.
Benenden, Betherisden, Biddenden, Barden, Chillenden, Cowden, Frittenden,
Halden, Horsmanden, Marden, Newenden, Otterden, Rolvenden, Smarden, Tenterden,
Warden.

Ell, 7.
Capell, Capell, Ewell, Eastwell, Hincksell, Westwell, Wormsell.

Er, 11.
Betshanger, Badlesmer, Hever, Minster, Minster, St. Peter, Reculver, Rever,
Rochester, Seasalter, Walmer.

Field. 9.
Beusfield, Bromfield, Chelsfield, Fairefield, Hothfield, Ifield, Longfield,
Stalisfield, Swingfield.

Ford, 8.
Ashford, Aylesford, Craford, Dartford, Deptford, Eynsford, O^ford, Stanford.

Ham, 49.
Adisham, Alcham, Beckenham, Be^ham, Boreham, Chartham, Chetham, Chilham,
Cobham, Cudham, Eleham, Eltham, Farmingham, Faukeham, Feversham, Gillingham,
Godmersham, Ham, Harietsham, Higham, Hougham, Ickham, Ightham, Leneham,
Leusham, Luddenham, Meopham, Mersham, great Mongeham, little Mongeham, Newnham,
Osham, East Peckham, West Peckham, Petham, Rainham, Rodmersham, Shoreham,
Tenham, Thurnham, Waltham, Westerham, Wickham, Wickham, Wickham, Wingham,
Wittersham, Woldham Wrotham.

Herst, 12.
Asherst, Bredherst, Chiselherst, Goudherst, Hawkeherst, Herst, Lamberherst,
Pensherst, Sandherst, Shadoxherst, Speldherst, Stapleherst.

Ing, 24.
Barming, Barming, Birling, Bobbing, Charing, Chevening, Cowling, Detling,
Easeling, Halling, Hawking, Hucking, Kemsing, Liming, East Malling, West
Malling, Ospring, Postling, Rucking, Selling, Stelling, Stowting, Wichling,
Yalding.

Ley, 13.
Bexley, Boxley, Brenchley, Bromley, Emley, East Farley, West Farley, Hartley,
Langley, Midley, Pluckley Throwley, Tudely.

Ry, 8.
Eastry, Frindsbury, St. Mary, St. Mary, Pembury, Stockbury, Sturry,
Watringbury,

Sted, 11.
Bersted, Brasted, Elmsted, Frinsted, Halsted, Linsted, Milsted, Nettlested,
Nutsted, Plumsted, Stansted.

Stone, 15.
Blackmanstone, Chidingstone, Cookstone, Elmstone, Folkstone, Goodnestone,
Goodnestone, Kingstone, Lullingstone, Maidstone, Orlestone, Stone, Stone,
Stone, Tilnestone.

Ton, 53.
Addington, Aldington, All^ngton, Baref^iston, Bilsington, Birchington,
Bonington, Boughton, Boughton, Boughton, Boughton, Charlton, Ch^rlton,
Cheriton, Denton, Denton, Devington, Ditton, Doddington, Egerton, G^ston,
Hackington, Horton Horton, Hunton, Kenarton, Kennington, Keston, Knowlton,
Linton Milton, Milton, Milton, Monkton, Merston, Murston, Nakinton, Newington,
Newington, Nonnington, Norton, Orpington, Preston, Preston, Sevington, Sutton,
Sutton, Sutton, Sutton, Teston, Thannington, Wilmington, Wootton.

The names of the Sheriffs of the County of Kent, in the five last Centuries,
viz. in the times of the Kings and Queens herein after named and since.
Henry the 2. Who began his Reign 25. October 1154.
1 Rualon. 2 Raph Picot 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 The same
8 Hugh of Dovor of Chilham 9 The same 10 The same 11 The same 12 The same 13
The same 14 The same 15 Gervas of Cornehill 16 The same 17 The same 18 The same
19 The same 20 The same 21 The same and Robert Fitz-Bernard 22 Robert
Fitz-Bernard of Kingsdown. 23 The same 24 The same 25 The same 26 The same 27
The same 28 The same 29 The same 30 William son of Nigel of Munevile. 31 Allen
of Valoynes of Fremom^. 32 The same 33 The same 34.
Richard the 1. Who began his reign, 6. of June, 1189.
1 Reginald of Cornehill 2 The same 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 William
of St Mardal 7 Walter son of Derman 8 Reginald of Cornehill 9 The same 10 The
same
John. Who began his Reign 6. of April 1199.
1 Reginald of Cornehill^ 2 The same 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The
same 7 The same 8 The same 9 The same 10 The same 11 The same 12 John son of
Vnam of Selling and Reginald of Cornhill 13 The same 14 The same 15 The same 16
The same 17 The same,
Henry 3. Who began his Reign 19. October 1216.
1 Hubert of Burge, and Hugh of Windlesores of Wareborne. 2 The same 3 The same
4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 The same 8 Hubert of Burgh and Roger
Grimston. 9 The same 10 The same 11 Hubert of Boroz, and William Brito. 12 The
same 13 The same 14 The same 15 The same 16 The same 17 Bartholomew of Cryall
18 The same 19 The same 20 The same 21 The same 22 The same 23 The same 24
Humphrey of Bo^un Earl of Essex. 25 The same 26 Peter of Suba^die and Bertramr
of Cryall 27 Bertram of Cryall and John of Cobham 28 Bertram of Cryall 29 The
same 30 The same 31 The same 32 The same 33 Reginald of Cobham 34 The same 35
The same 36 The same 37 The same 38 The same 39 The same 40 The same 41 Walter
of Bersted and Reginald of Cobham 42 Fulke Playferer of Iseling. 43 The same 44
John of Cobham 45 The same 46 The same 47 Robert Walerand and Thomas Delaway.
48 Roger of Leybourne 49 The same 50 The same and Henry of Bourne 51 The same
52 The same 53 Stephen of Penchester of Alington Castle near Maidstone and
Henry of Leeds. 54 The same 55 The same 56 Henry Malemenies of Pluckley.
Edward the 1. Who began his Reign 16. November 1272.
1 Henry Malemanies of Pluckley. 2 William Haute of Petham 3 William of
Valoynes 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 Robert of Scothon 8 The same 9 The
same 10 The same 11 Peter of Huntingfeild of Iseling. 12 The same 13 The same
14 Hamo of Gatton of Throwley. 15 William of Shellessend of Chelsfeild. 16 The
same 17 The same 18 William of Brimshet 19 The same 20 John of Nortwood in
Milton near Sittingborne 21 The same and John of Bourne, 22 John of Bourne 23
The same 24 the same 25 William Trussel 26 The same 27 Henry of Apuldorefeild
28 John of Northwood in Milton near Sittingborn, 29 Henry of Cobham 30 The same
31 Warreis of Walloynes 32 The same 33 John of Northwood in Milton near
Sittingborne 34 The same 35 William of Cossenton in Alesford.
Edward the 2. Who began his reign 7. of July 1307.
1 Henry of Cobham 2 John of Blunde 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same
7 William of Basing and John the younger of Haudlo, 8 The same 9 Henry of
Cobham 10 John Malemaines of Hoo 11 The same and John Fremingham, 12 John
Fremingham and Henry Sarden 13 Henry Sarden and William Septvans 14 15 William
Septvans of Milton and Raph Savage 16 The same 17 John Shelvige of Shelvige
Barn 18 John of Fremingham 19 The same
Edward the 3. Who began his reign 25. of January 1326.
1 Raph of St. Laurence of Swaycliffe 2 William of Orlanston 3 The same, and
John of Shelvige 4 John of Shelvige and John of Bourne 5 The same 6 Thomas of
Brockhall and Laurence of St. Laurence 7 The same 8 Stephen of Cobham 9 The
same 10 The same 11 Thomas of Brockhall of Saltwood 12 William Morant of
Morants Court in Chevenning 13 The same 14 Henry of Valoynes of Repton in
Ashford 15 John Mereworth of Mereworth 16 The same and John Widleston 17 John
Widleston 18 The same 19 The same 20 The same 21 William of Langley of Knowlton
22 John of Fremingham 23 William Langley and Arnold Savage of Bobbing 24 25
William Langley of Knowlton 26 James Le Pine of East Sutton 27 William
Apuldorefeild of Linsted 28 James le Pine of East Sutton 29 Reginald of Dike of
Sussex 30 Gilbert of Hels of Egerton 31 William of Apuldorefeild of Linsted 32
Raph Fremingham of Fremingham 33 William Makenade of Preston 34 William of
Apuldorefeild of ^insted 35 The same 36 The same 37 William Pimpe of
Nettlested. 38 William of Apuldorefeild of Linsted 39 John Colepeper of Bayhall
40 The same 41 Richard at Leeds of Shelwich 42 John of Brockall of Saltwood 43
John Colepeper 44 William of Apuldorefeild of Linsted 45 William Pimpe of
Nettlested 46 John Barry of Sevington 47 Jeffery Colepeper 48 Robert Nottingham
of Mil^^ed 49 William Pimpe of Nettlested 50 Nicholas at Crouch of Great Chart
5^ Henry of Apuldorefeild of Linsted
Richard 2. Who began his reign 21 of June, 1377.
1 Thomas of Cobham 2 John of Fremingham 3 James of Peckham of Wrotham 4
William Septvans of Milton Septvans 5 Arnold Savage of Bobbing 6 Thomas
Brockhall of Saltwood 7 The same 8 Robert Corbie of Boughton 9 Arnold Savage of
Bobbing 10 Raph St Ledger of Vlcomb 11 William of Guldeford 12 James Peckham of
Wrotham 13 William Burceston of Hunton 14 Richard Berham of Berham 15 Thomas
Chich of the Dungeon near Canterbu^y 16 William Barry of Sevington 17 John
Fremingham of Fremingham 18 Thomas Colepeper 19 Nicholas Hau^e 20 Thomas St.
Ledger of Vlcomb 21 Nicholas Petine of Sheppey 22 John Boteller of Graveney
Henry 4. Who began his reign 29. of September 1399.
1 Robert Clifford of Canterbury 2 Thomas Ludlow 3 John Diggs 4 Thomas Hiache 5
Richard Clitherow of Ash 6 The same 7 Valentine Barret of Pery Court 8 Henry
Horn of Kenardington 9 Edward Haute 10 William Snach of Addington 11 Reginald
Pimpe of Nettlested. 12 John Darell of Cadehill 13 William Notebenn of Ash near
Sandwich
Henry the 5. Who began his rain 20. of March 1412.
1 William Clifford of Bobbing 2 Robert Clifford of Canterbury. 3 William
Langley of Knowlton 4 William Darell of Cadehill 5 John Darell of Cadehill 6
Richard Clitherow of Ash 7 John Burge of Eatonbridge 8 William Haute of Bourne
9 The same
Henry the 6. Who began his reign 31. of August 1422.
1 John Darell of Cadehill 2 William Cheney of Shurland in Sheppey 3 John
Rickhill of Frindsbury 4 William Clifford of Bobbing 5 William Colepeper of
Aylesford 6 Thomas Ellis of Kemington 7 William Scot of Scots- hall in Smeeth 8
John Peche of Littington 9 John St. Ledger of Vlcombe 10 Edward Guldeford of
Halden in Rolvenden 11 William Buriston of Hunton 12 Richard Woodvile of Mote
Castle in Maidstone 13 William Clifford of Bobbing 14 William Manston of
Manston in Thanet 15 James Fenis of Seal 16 Richard Walder of Groom-bridg in
Speldherst 17 Edward Guldeford of Halden in Rolvenden 18 G^rvas Clifford of
Canterbury 19 John Yeard of Denton near Eleham 20 John Warner of Sheppy 21
William Mary's of Preston 22 Thomas Brown of Wickham 23 William Crowmer of
Tunstall 24. John Thorneberry of Feversham 25 William Isley of Sundrish 26
William Kene of Ospring 27 Stephen St. Ledger of Vlcomb 28 Henry Crowmer of
Tunstal 29 Gervas Clifford of Canterbury 30 Robert Horn of Kinardington 31
Thomas Ballard of Horton 32 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford 33 John Cheney of
Shurland in Sheppey Knight 34 Phillip Belknap of the Mote Esquire 35 Alexander
Eden Esquire 36 John Guldeford of Halden in Rolvenden Esquire 37 Gervas
Clifford of Canterbury Knight 38 Thomas Bruine Knight 39 John Scot of
Scots-hall in Smeeth Esquire.
Edward the 4. Who began his reign 4. March 1460
1 John Isaac of Patricksborne Esquire 2 William Peach of Lullingston Knight 3
The same 4 John Diggs of Berham Esquire 5 Alexander Clifford of Bobbing Esquire
6 William Haute of Bourne Knight 7 John Culpeper Knight 8 Raph St. Ledger of
Vlcomb Esquire 9 Henry Ferrers of Peckham Esquire 10 John Bramstone of Preston
Esquire 11 Richard Culpeper Esquire 12 James Peckham of Yaldham in Wrotham
Esquire 13 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford Knight 14 John Isley of Sundrish
Esquire 15 Willian Haute of Bourne Knight 16 John Green of Chesilherst Esquire
17 William Cheney of Shurland in Sheppey Esquire 18 Richard Haute of Bourne
Esquire 19 Richard Lee of Delce Esquire 20 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford
Knight 21 George Brown of Wickham Esquire 22 Richard Haute of B^urne Esquire
Edward the 5. Who began his Reign the 9. April 1483.
1 Richard Haute of Bourne Esquire
Richard the 3. Who began his reign the 22. of June 1483.
1 William Haute of Bourne Knight 2 John Barrune of the Grange in Gillingham
Esquire 3 Richard Brahenberry of the Mote Knight.
Henry the 7. Who began his reign the 22 of August 1485.
1 William Cheny of Shurland in Sheppey Esquire 2 John Pimpe of Nettlested
Esquire 3 Henry Ferrers of Great Peckham Knight. 4 Walter Roberts of
Glastenbury in Cranbrook Esquire 5 William Boleyne of Seal Knight 6 William
Sco^ of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 7 John Darell Esquire 8 Thomas Kempe of
Ollantigh in Wye Esquire 9 Richard Guldeford of Halden in Rolvenden Knight 10
John Pech of Lullingstone Esquire 11 John Diggs of Barham Esquire 12 James
Wallingham of S^adberry in Chesilherst Esquire 13 Jews Clifford of Bobbing
Esquire 14 Robert Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Esquire 15 Alexander Colepeper of
Bedbury in Goudherst Esquire 16 Thomas Iden Esquire 17 William Scots of Scots
hall in Smeeth Knight 18 Raph St Ledger of Vlcomb Esquire 19 William Crowmer of
Tunstoll Esquire 20 John Langley of Knowlton Esquire 21 Thomas Kempe of
Ollantigh in Wye Knight 22 Alexander Colepeper of Bedgbury in Goudherst Esquire
23 Henry Vane of Tunbridge Esquire 24 Reginald Peckham of Yalham in Wrotham
Esquire.
Henry the 8. Who began his reign the 22 of April 1509.
1 William Crowmer of Tunstal Knight 2 James Diggs of Diggs Court in Berham
Esquire 3 Thomas Colleyn of Hever Castle Knight 4 Thomas Kempe of Ollantigh in
Wye Knight 5 John Norton of Northwood in Milton Knight 6 Alexander Colepeper of
Bedbury in Goudherst Esquire 7 Thomas Cheney of Shurland in Sh^ppey Esquire 8
William Scot of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 9 Thomas Boline Knight 10 John
Crispe of Quex in Birchington Esquire 11 John Wilshire of Stone castle in Stone
near Dartford Knight 12 John Roper of St. Dunstans Esquire 13 Robert Sonds of
Town place of Throwley Esquire 14 John Fogg of P^epton in Ashford Knight 15
George Guldeford of Hemsted in Benenden Knight 16 William Haute of Bourne
Knight 17 Henry Vane Esquire 18 William VVhetenhall of Peckham Esquire 19 John
Scot of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 20 William Kempe of Ollan^igh in Wye
Esquire 21 Edward Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Knight 22 William Waller of
Groom-bridge in Speldherst Esquire 23 Richard Clement of the Mo^e in Ightham
Knight 24 William Finch of the M^te near Canterbury Knight 25 Thomas Roberts of
Glastenbury in Cranbrook Esquire 26 Thomas Poinings of Osten Hanger, in
Stanford Knight 27 Edward Wooton of Boughton Malherbe Knight 28 Thomas Wiat of
Alington Castle Knight 29 William Hau^e of Bourne Knight 30 William Sidney of
Pensherst Knight 31 Anthony St. Ledger of Vlcombe Knight 32 Anthony Sonds of
Throwley Esquire 33 Reginald Scot of Scots Hall in Smeeth Esquire 34 Henry
Isley of Sundrish Knight 35 Humphrey Style o^Langley Park in Beckenham Knight
36 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford Knight 37 Pereivall Heart of Lullingstone
Knight 38 Henry Crispe of Quex in Birehintgon, Esquire
Edward the 6. Who began his reign the 28. of January 1546.
1 William Sedley of Southfleet Esquire 2 George Harpur of Sutton Valance
Knight 3 Thomas Colepeper of Bedgbury in G^udherst Esquire 4 Thomas Wyat of
Allington Castle Knight 5 Henry Isley of Sundrish Knight 6 John Guldeford of
Hempsted in Benenden Knight.
Mary, and Philip and Mary.
1 Robert Southwell of Mereworth Knight 1, and 2. The same 2. 3. William Roper
of Welhall Esquire 3. 4. Thomas Kempe of Ollan^igh in Wye Knight 4. 5. George
Vane of Bads^ll in Capel Esquire.
From henceforth are added the names of the Judges of the Assizes holden for
the County of Kent in the last Century, beginning first of Queen Elizabeth,
1558. and Ending at summer Assizes 1658. The Names of the several Sheriffs of
the said County when the same assizes were holden, and the several years
wherein, days upon which, and places where the same were so holden. (Wherein
note that Q. B. stands for Queens Bench, K. B. for Kings Bench, U. B. for
Upper Bench, and C. B. for Common Bench.)
In the time of Queen Elizabeth, Who began her reign the 18. of November, 1558.
Good Reader, you shall find these in this order set, viz. 1. Queens reign, 2.
Judges, 3. Shriffes, 4. Days of the Assizes, 5. Places of Assizes, 6. Years of
our Lord.

1 Serjants at Law elect, Carus, Chomley, Sheriff Thomas Wootton of Boughton
Maleherbe Esquire Monday the 20. of February at East-Greenwich. 1588. 1 Serjant,
Raph Chomley, Attorney General Gerard, The same Sheriff, Monday the 10. of
July, at Maidstone. 1559. 2 Serjant Reginald Chomley, Attorney General Gerard,
Sheriff Nicholas Cripse, of Whitstaple Esquire Friday in the third week in Lent, a^
Dartford. 1559 2 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 1. of July at
Maidstone. 1560 3 Serjant Phillip Chomley, Attorney General Gerard, Sheriff
Warham St. Ledger of Vlcombe Esquire Tuesday in the third week in Lent, at Dartford.
1560 3 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 10. of July at
Maidstone. 1561 4 Serjant Raph Chomley, Attorney General Gerard, Sheriff, John
Tu^ton of Hothfeild Esquire Monday in the third week in Lent, at East Greenwich.
1561 4 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday 27. of July, at Maidstone.
1562 5 Serjant Philip Chomley, Attorney General Gerard, Sheriff, Richard Baker
of Sissingherst in Cranbrook Esquire Wednesday in the fourth week in Lent at
East-Greenwich. 1562 5 Q B. Justice Southcote, Queens Serjant Wray, The same
Sheriff, Monday the 19. of July, at Maidstone. 1563 6 Q B. Justice Southcote,
Attorney General Gerard, Sheriff, Thomas Walsingham of Scadbury in Chesilherst
Esquire Monday in the fifth week of Lent at Dartford. 1563 6 The same Judges, The
same Sheriff, Monday the 17 of July, at Maidstone. 1564 7 The same Judges,
Sheriff Thomas Kempe of Ollantigh in Wye Knight, Monday in the fourth week in
Lent at Dartford. 1564 7 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 30 of
July, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1565
The same day and year, the Assizes for the County of the City of Canterbury,
were holden by the same Judges, at the Guilde-hall in the said City. Leonard
Cotton Sheriff.

8 The same Judges, Sheriff John Mainey of Biddenden Esquire in the third week in
Lent, at Rochester. 1565 8 The same Judge, William Isley of Sundrish Esquire Monday
the 22. of July* at Maidstone. 1566 9 The same Judges, Sheriff John Sedley of
Southfleet Esquire Monday in the fifth week in Lent, at Rochester. 1566 9 The same
Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 10. of July, at Maidstone. 1567 10 Q B.
Justice Southcote, Queens Serjant Wray, Sheriff William Crowmer of Tunstall Esquire
Monday the 8. of March, at Dartford. 1567 10 The same Judges, The same Sheriff,
Thursday the 15. of July, at Maidstone. 1568 11 The same Judges, Sheriff John
Brown, of Horton Esquire Thursday 3. of March, at Maidstone. 1568 11 The same
Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 14. of July, at Maidstone. 1569 12 The
same Judges, Sheriff Edward Isaac of Beaksborough Esquire Monday the 20. of
February, at Rochester. 1569 12 The same Judges, The same Shriffe, Tuesday 11.
of July, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1570
The same day and year the Assizes (for the County of the City of Canterbury,)
were holden by the same Judges, at the Guildhall in the said City, Reginald
Totnall Sheriff.

13 Q. B. Justice Southcote, Serjant Gaudy, Sheriff John Leonard of Chevening,
Esquire Monday in the second week in Lent, at Dartford. 1570 13 The same Judges,
The same Sheriff, Monday 16. July, at Maidstone. 1571 14 The same Judges,
Sheriff Walter Mainey the elder, of Stapleherst Esquire Thursday in the first week
in Lent at Rochester. 1571 14 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday 1. of
September, at Maidstone. 1572 15 Q. B. Justice Southcote, C. B. Justice Monson,
Sheriff Thomas Fane, the elder of Badsell in Capell Esquire Thursday in the second
week in Lent, at Rochester. 1572 15 The same Judges, The same Sheriff,
Thursday, the 25. of June, at Maidstone. 1573 16 The same Judges, Sheriff
Thomas Willoughby of Boreplace in Chidingstone Esquire Thursday in the second week
in Lent, at Dartford. 1573 16 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the
15 of July at Maidstone. 1574 17 Q. B. Justice Southcote, Q. B. Justice Gaudy,
Sheriff James Hal^s of the Dungeon near Canterbury Knight, Monday in the second
week in Lent, at Rochester. 1574 17 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday
the 4. of July, at Rochester. 1575 18 The same Judges, Sheriff John T^fton, of
Hothfield, Esquire Thursday in the first week in Lent, at Rochester. 1575* 18 The
same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 16 of July, at Maidstone. 1576 19 The
same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Scot, of Scots hall in Smeeth, Knight, Thursday the
21 of February, at Rochester. 1576 19 The same Judges, The same Sheriff,
Wednesday the 3. of July, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1577 20 The same Judges,
Sheriff, Edward Boys of Fredvile in Nonington Esquire Monday in the second week in
Lent, at Rochester. 1577 20 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 10.
of July, at Maidstone. 1578 21 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Wotton of
Boughton-Mal^erbe, Esquire Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester. 1578
21 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 23. of July, at Maidstone.
1579 22 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Coppinger, Esquire Thursday in the second
week in Lent, at Dartford. 1579 23 The same Judges, Thomas Fane Esquire Monday the
11 of July, at Maidstone. 1580 23 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Sonds of
Throwley, Esquire Monday the third week in Lent, at Rochester. 1580 23 The same
Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday, the 3. of July, at Rochester 1581 24 The same
Judges, Sheriff, George Heart of Lullingstone Knight, Thursday in the second
week in ^ent, ^t Rochester. 1581 24 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday
the 19. of July, at Maidstone. 1582 25 Q B. Justice Gaudy, Queens Serjant
Gaudy, Sheriff, Richard Baker of Siffingherst in Cranbrook, Knight, Monday in
the third week in Lent, at Rochester. 1582 25 The same Judges, The same
Sheriff, Monday the 15. of July, at Maidstone. 1583 26 The same Judges,
Sheriff, Justinian Champneyes of Bexley Esquire Thursday the 24. February, at
Rochester. 1583 26 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 13. of July,
at Rochester. 1584 27 The same Judges, Sheriff, Michael Sonds of Throwley
Esquire, Thursday the 25. of February, at Rochester. 1584 27 The same Judges,
The same Sheriff, Monday the 5^ of July at Maidstone. 1585 28 Q. B. Justice
Gaudy, Baron Gent, Sheriff William Cromer of Tunstall, Esquire 21. of February, at
Rochester. 1585 21 Q. B. Justice Gaudy, Baron ^lerk, The same Sheriff, Monday
the 27. of June, at Rochester. 1586 29 Q. B. Justice Gaudy, Queens Serjant
Puckering, Sheriff James Hales of the Dungeon near Canterbury, Knight, Thursday
the 2, of March, at Rochester. 1586 29 The same Judges, The same Sheriff,
Monday the 10. of July, at Maidstone 1587 30 Q. B. Justice Gaudy, Baron Clerk,
Sheriff, John Fineux of Herne Esquire Thursday the 22. of February at Sevenoke.
1587 30 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 1. of July, at Rochester.
1588 31 Baron Clarke, Queens Serjant Purkering, Sheriff Richard Hardres, of
Great Hardres Esquire Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester 1588 31 The
same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 23. of July, at M^idstone. 1589 32
The same Judges, Sheriff, William Sedley of Hever, Esquire Monday the 23. of
February, at ^ochester. 1589 32 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the
16. of July, at Rochester. 1590 33 The same Judges, Sheriff* Thomas Willoughby
of Boreplace in Chidingstone, Esquire Thursday the 25. of February, at Sevenoke.
1590 33 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 1. of July, at
Maidstone. 1591 34 The same Judges, Sheriff, Sampson Leonard of Chepening, Esquire
Monday the 21. of February, at Rochester. 1591 34 Baron Clerk C. B. Justice
Walmsley, The same Seriff, Monday the 26. of June, at Maidstone. 1592 35 The
same Judges, Sheriff Robert Binge of Wrotham, Esquire Thursday the 22. of February,
at Rochester. 1592 35 Baron Clarke, Queens Serjant Owen, The same Sheriff,
Thursday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1593 36 The same Judges, Sheriff,
Michael Sonds of Throwley, Esquire Monday in the third week in Lent, at Rochester.
1593 36 Baron Clark, Queens Serjant Drew, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 25. of
July, at Maidstone. 1594 37 The same Judges, Edward Wotton of Boughton Malherbe
Knight, Thursday the 20. of February, at Rochester. 1594 37 The same Judges,
the same Sheriff, Monday the 14 of July, at Maidstone. 1595. 38 Q. B. Justice
Gaudy, C. B. Justice Owen, Sheriff, Thomas Palmer of Hougham Esquire Thursday the
19. of February, at Sevenoke. 1595 38 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday
the 5. of July, at Maidstone. 1596 39 The same Judges, Sheriff, Moyle Finch of
Eastwell Knight, Thursday the 17. of February, at Rochester. 1596 39 The same
Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 27. of June, at Maidstone. 1597 40 The
same Judges, Sheriff, Thomas Kemp of Ollan^igh in Wy^, Esquire Monday the 20. of
February, at Dartford. 1597 40 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 7.
of July, at Maidstone. 1598 41 Q. B. Justice Gaudy, C. B. Justice Glanvil,
Sheriff, Martin Barnham, of Holingborne, Esquire Monday in the fifth week in Lent,
at Rochester. 1598 41 Q. B. Justice Gaudy, C. B. Justice Kingsmill. The same
Sheriff, Thursday the 5 of July, at Rochester. 1599 42 The same Judges,
Sheriff, Roger Twisenden of Great Peckham, Esquire Monday in the third week in Lent
at Rochester. 1599 42 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday 26. of June
at Maidstone. 1600 43 The same Judges, Sheriff, John Smith of Stansted, Esquire
Monday, in the first week in Lent, at Sevenoke. 1600 43 Q. B. Justice Gaudy,
Serjant Daniel, the same Sheriff, Thursday, the 9. of July, at Maidstone. 1601
44 The same Judges, Sheriff, Thomas Scot of Scots-hall in Smeeth, Esquire Monday in
the first week in Lent, at Rochester. 1601 44 The same Judges, the same
Sheriff, Wednesday the 7. of July, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1602 45 Q. B.
Justice Gaudy, Queens Serjant Heal, Sheriff, Peter Manwood of St. Stevens Esquire
Monday the 21. of February, at Dartford. 1602
In the time of King James, who began his Reign the 24. of March, 1602.
1 K. B. Justice Gaudy, Kings Serjant Heal, Sheriff, Peter Manwood of St.
Stephens Knight of the Bath, Thursday 29. of September, at Maidstone. 1603 1
The same Judges, Sheriff, James Crowmer of Tunstall Knight, Thursday the 23. of
February, at Rochester. 1603 2 K. B. Justice Gaudy, C. B. Justice Daniel, the
same Sheriff Monday the 9. of July, at Maidstone. 1604 2 The same Judges,
Sheriff Thomas Baker of Si^^ingherst in Cranbrook, Knight, Monday in the third
week in Lent, at Rochester. 1604 3 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday
the 4. of July, at Maidstone. 1605 3 C. B. Justice Daniel, C. B. Justice
Coventry, Sheriff Moyle Finch of Eastwell Knight, Wednesday in the second week
in Lent, at Maidstone. 1605 4 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 21.
of July, at Maidstone. 1606 4 Baron Altham, Kings Serjant Crook, Sheriff,
Norton Knatchbull of Mersham Knight, Monday in the third week in Lent, at
Rochester, 1606 5 Baron Snigge, K. B. Justice Crook, the same Sheriff, Thursday
16, of July, at Maidstone. 1607 5 C. B. Justice Walmsley, K. B. Justice Crook,
Sheriff, Robert Edolph of Hinxhill, Knight, Thursday in the second week in
Lent, at Rochester. 1607 6 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday ^he 30.
of June, at Maidstone. 1608 6 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Hales, of
Woodchurch Knight, Thursday the 23. of February, at Maidstone. 1608 7 The same
Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 20 of July, at Rochester. 7 The same
Judges, William Withens of Eltham, Knight, Monday in the fourth week in Lent,
at Milton near Gravesend. 1609 8 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday
the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1610 8 C. B. Justice Walmsley, Kings Serjant
Dodderige, Sheriff Nicholas Gilborne of Charing, Knight, Thursday in the second
week in Lent, at Maidstone. 1610 9 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday
the 27 of June at Maidstone. 1611 9 C. B. Justice Walmsley, Kings Serjant Crook
Sheriff Maxmilian Dalison of Halling, Knight, Thursday the 27. of February, at
Rochester. 1611 10 C. B. Justice Winch, Kings Serjant Doderidge, The same
Sheriff, Thursday 6. of July, at Maid^tone. 1612 10 C. B. Justice Winch, K. B.
Justice Doderidge, Sheriff William Stead of Harietsham, Knight, Thursday the
third week in Lent, at Maidstone 1612 11 Kings Serjants, Mountague and Davis,
The same Sheriff, Thursday the 8. of July, at Maidstone. 1613 11 K. B. Justice,
Houghton, Kings Serjant Moun^ague, Sheriff, Anthony, An^her of Bourne, Knight,
24 of February, at Rochester. 1613 12 The same Judges, the same Sheriff,
Thursday the 28 of July, at Maidstone. 1614 12 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward
Filmer of East Sutton Knight, Thursday the 23. of Feb^uary, at Maidstone. 1614
13 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 20 of July, at Rochester.
1615 13 C. B. Chief Justice Hobert, K. B. Justice Hou^^ton, Sheriff Edwin
Sandys of Norburne Knight, Thursday the 22. of February, at Mil^on near
Gravesend. 1615 14 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 10. of
July, at Maidstone. 1616 14 The same Judges, Sheriff, William Be^wick, of
Horsmanden, Esquire Wednesday the 26. of February, at Maidstone. 1616 15 K. B.
Justice Houghton, Kings Serjant Crew, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 23. of
July, at Maidston^. 1617 15 The same Judges, Sheriff Gabriel Livesey of
Hollingborne Esquire Thursday the 19 of February, at Rochester. 1617 16 The same
Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 16. of July, at Maidstone. 1618 16 the
same Judges, Sheriff, Thomas Norton of Bobbing Knight, Thursday the 25. of
February, at Rochester. 1618 17 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the
1. of July, at Maidstone. 1619 17 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Scot of
Scots-hall in Smeeth, Esquire Wednesday the 23. of February, at Maidstone. 1619 18
The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday, the 20. of July, at Maidstone.
1620 18 The same Judges, Sheriff, John Sedley of Aylesford, Baronet, Wednesday
the 28. of February, at Maidstone. 1620 19 The same Judges, the same Sheriff,
Thursday the 5. of July, at Maidstone. 1621 19 The same Judges Sheriff, Thomas,
Roberts of Glastenbury in Cranbrook Knight, and Barone^, Wednesday, the 27. of
February, at Maidstone. 1621 20 K. B. Justice Ho^ghton, Kings Serjant
Mount^gue, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 25* of July at Maidstone. 1622 20 K.
B. Justice Houghton, Kings Serjant Crew, Sheriff, George Fane of Buston in
Hunton Knight. Wednesday the 26. of February, at Maidstone. 1622 21 The same
Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 16. of July, at Maidstone. 1623 21 K.
B. Justice Chamberlain, Kings Serjant Crew, Sheriff John Hayward of
Hollingborne, Knight, Wednesday the 3. of March, at Maidstone. 1623 22 The same
Judges, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 7. of July, at Maidstone, 1624 22 C. B.
Justice Croke, Kings Serjant Davis, Sheriff. Thomas Hamond of Brasted Knight,
Wednesday 2. of March, at Maidstone. 1624
In the time of King Charles, Who began his Reign the 27. of March 1625
1 C. B. Justice Croke, Justice Yelverton, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 20.
of July, at Maidston. 1625 1 C. B. Justice Croke, Baron Trevor Sheriff, Isaac
Sedley of Great Chart Knight and Baronet, Wednesday the 8. of March, at
Maidston. 1625 2 C. B. Justice Croke, Kings Serjant Davis, the same Sheriff,
Wednesday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1626 2 C. B. Justice Croke, Baron
Trevor Sheriff, Basell Dixwell of Folkston Esquire Thursday the 1. of March at
Maidstone. 1626 3 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 4. of Ju^y,
at Maidstone. 1627 3 The same Judges, Sheriff Edward Engeham of Canterbury,
Knight, Wednesday 27. of February, at Maidstone 1627 4 The same Judges, the
same Sheriff, Wednesday the 6. of July at Maidstone. 1628 4 K. B. Justice
Crook, Baron Vernon, Sheriff William Campion of Combwell in Goudherst Knight,
Wednesday 4. of March, at Maidstone. 1628 5 The same Judges, the same Sheriff,
Thursday the 19. of June, at Maidstone. 1629 5 Baron Vernon, Kings Serjant
Hitcham, Sheriff Richard Brown, Esquire Monday the 22. of March, at Maidstone. 1629
6 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday, the 12 of July, at Maidstone. 1630
6 The same Judges, Sheriff Robert Lew^nor of El^ham Knight, Monday the 7. of
March, at Maidstone. 1630 7 C. B. Justice Vernon, The same Sheriff, Wednesday
the 20 of July, at Maidstone. 1631 7 The same Judges, Sheriff, Nicholas Miller
of Wrotham Esquire Thursday, the 22 of March, at Maidstone. 1631 8 Baron Weston,
Kings Serjant Hitcham, The same Sheriff Monday 9. of July at Milton near
Gravesend. 1632 8 Baron Weston, C. B. Justice Crawley, Sheriff Thomas Style of
Warringbury, Baronet, Wednesday the 8. of March at Milton near Gravesend. 1632
9 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 31 of July, at Maid^tone.
1633 9 K. B. Chei^e Justice Richardson, Kings Serjant Hitcham Sheriff, John
Baker of Si^^^nghurst in Cranbrook. Baro^et, Monday the 3. of March, at Milton
near Gravesend. 1633 10 K. B. Chief Justice Richardson, Baron Weston, The same
Sheriff, Monday the 14 of July, at Maidstone. 1634 10 Baron Weston, Kings
Serjant Hitcham, Sheriff Edward C^ute, of Hinxhill Esquire Wednesday 25 of Februa^^
(...) 163^ 11 C. B. Justice Crawley, Baron Westo^, The same Sheriff, Wednesday
the 8. of July, at Maidstone 1635 11 The same Judges, Sheriff William Colepepyr
of Aylesford, Baronet, Wednesday the 24. of February, at Maidstone. 1635 12 The
same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 13. of July, at Maidstone. 1636 12
The same Judges, Sheriff, George Sonds of Throwley, Knight of the Bath,
Wednesday the 22. of February, at Maidstone. 1636 13 The same Judges, the same
Sheriff, Wednesday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1637 13 The same Judges,
Thomas Hendley of ^ourshorne in Cranbrook, Knight, Wednesday 21. of February,
at Maidstone. 1637 14 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 2. of July,
at Maidstone. 1638 14 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Master of Canterbury
Knight, Wednesday the 27 of February, at Maidstone. 1638 15 Baron Weston, C* B.
Justice Reve, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 17 of July, at Maidstone. 1639 15
The same Judges, Sheriff David Polhill of O^ford Esquire Wednesday the 26. of
February, at Maidstone 1639 16 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the
15 of July, at Maidstone. 1640 16 C. B. Justice Reve, Sheriff James Hugeson of
Kinsted Esquire Wednesday the 3. of March, at Maidstone. 1640 17 K. B. Justice
Mallet, The same Sheriff, Monday the 23. of August, at Maidstone. 1641 17 The
same Judges, Sheriff John Honiwood of Elmsted, Knight, Thursday the 22. of
March at Maidstone 1641 18 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Saturday 23. of
July at Maidstone. 1642 18 No Judge, The same Sheriff, No assizes, 1642 19 No
Judges. The same Sheriff, No assizes, 1643 19 No Judges, The same Sheriff, No
assizes, 1643 20 No Judges, The same Sheriff, No Assizes, but there was a Jail
delivery held at maidstone upon Saturday the 21. of September, this year before
John Rivers, Baronet and his Associates. 1644 20 No Judges, Sheriff John Rain^y
of Wrotham, Baronet, No Assizes; 1644 21 No Judges, The same Sheriff, No
Assizes but there was a Jail delivery held at Ma^idstone upon Tuesday the 5.
of August, this year before Thomas Walsingham, Knight, and his associa^es. 1645
21 No Judges, Sheriff Edward Monins of Waldershare Baronet, No Assizes 1645 22
K. B. Justice Bacon, Serjant Turner, The same Sheriff, Friday the 24. of July
at M^idstone. 1646 22 C. B. Justice Reve, Serjant Cresheld, Sheriff, John
Henden of Biddenden Knight, Monday the 22. of March, at Maidstone. 1646 23. K.
B. Justice Bacon, Serjant Cresheld, The same Sheriff Thursday the 5. of August
at Seve^oke 1647 23 The same Judge, Sheriff, Stephen Scot of Hayes Knight,
Tuesday the 7. of March, at Maidstone. 1647 23 The same Judges, the same
Sheriff, Tuesday the 5. of September, at Sevenoke. 1648 C. B. Justice Phesant,
Sheriff, George Selby, Esquire Wednesday the 7. of March, at Maidstone. 1648 C. B.
Justice Phesant, Serjant Green, The same Sheriff Tuesday the 10. of July, at
Maidstone. 1649 Baron Gate, C. B. Justice Atkins, Sheriff, Henry Crispe of Quex
in Birchington, Esquire Tuesday the 26. of March, at Maidstone. 1649 Baron Gate,
Baron Rigby, The same Sheriff, Monday the 5. of August, at Maidstone. 1650 C.
B. Justice Warburton, Commonwealths Serjant Green, Sheriff George Curteis, of
Chart next Sutton Valence Esquire Tuesday the 11. of March, at Maidstone. 1650 C. B
Justice Pulestone, C. B. Justice Warburton, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 9.
of July, at Maidstone. 1651 V. B. Justice Ask, Common Wealths Serjant Green,
Sheriff, Thomas Fludd of Otham, Esquire Wednesday the 17. of March, at Maidstone.
1651 V. B. Justice Ask, C. B. Justice Warburton, the same Sheriff, Tuesday the
27. of July, at Maidstone. 1652 V. B. Justice Ask, Sheriff Bernard Hide Esquire
Monday the 14. of March, at Maidstone. 1652 C. B. Chief Justice St. John, C. B.
Justice Wa^burton The same Sheriff, Monday the 25. of July, at Maidstone. 1653
V. B. Justice Ask, Serjant Newdegate, Sheriff, John Earl of Thanet, of
H^thfield, Monday the 6. of March, at Maidstone. 1653 Baron Pepys, The same
Sheriff, Monday, the 24. of July, at Maidstone. 1654 V. B. Justice Ask,
Serjant Steel, Sheriff Humphery Tustone of the Mote in Maidstone Knight, and
Baronet, Monday the 19^ of March at Maidstone. 1654 Serjant Croke, Serjant
Hill, The same Sheriff, Tuesday the 7. of August, at Maidstone. 1655 V. B.
Justice Ask, V. B. Justice Warburton, Sheriff Michael Livesey, of East-Church
in the Isle of Sheppey Baronet, Monday the 17. of March at Maidstone. 1655 V.
B. Justice Warburton, Serjant Croke, The same Sheriff, Monday the 28. of July,
at Maidstone. 1656 Serjant Hill, The same Sheriff, Twesday the 17. of March, at
Maidstone. 1656 C. B. Justice Hale, The same Sheriff, Tuesday the 7. of July,
at Maidstone. 1657 C. B. Justice Hale, Serjant Crook, Sheriff Charles Bowls of
Chetham Esquire Tuesday the 30. of March, at Maidstone 1658 C. B. Chief Justice St.
John, C. B. Justice Hale, Sheriff Charles Bowls of Chetham Esquire Wednesday the
21. of July, at Maidstone. 1658
Directions for correction of my former little Book, called a brief Survey of
the County of Kent.
AT the bottom of the Parishes beginning with the letter A set down, St.
Alphage. And mark after (...) thus, for the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham,
for the Liberty, Archbishop; for the Hundred, Westgate; for the Lath, St
Augustine; for the division of the County, East; for the division of Justices,
Lath of St. Augustine; for where the Churches stands, City of Canterbur; for
the Church, St. Alphage; and for the diocese, Canterbury.

In Acrise. For the standing of the Church, put out Folkstone hundred, and put
in Lonningborough hundred.

In Aldington, For the liberty, put out Archbishop, and for where the Church
stands put out Bir^holt Franchise hundred, and put in Street hundred.

In Alington near Maidstone, for the liber^y, put in Maidstone, and for where
the Church stands put out Hoo hundred, and put in Larkefield hundred.

In Appledore. For the libe^ty, put out Archbishop and add Cinque ports, New
Romney, Romney Marsh, and in the division of Justices add, Corpo^ation of
Romney Marsh, and Corporation of New Romney.

In Ash with Ridley, put out with Ri^ley, and put in near Wr^tham.

In Aylesford, for where the Church stande^h put out Lark^field hundred, and
put in Ancient Deme^en.

In (...). ^or the liberty, put out Archbishop.

In Beaks^^rne. For the libe^ty, p^t out St. Augu^stine, and pu^^n, Town and
Port of Hasting

In (...) for the liberties, (...) Archbishop

In Betherisden, For the liberties, put out Archbishop.

In Birchingstone, For the liberty, add Dovor.

In Blackmanstone, For where the Church stands, add demolished.

In Braborne, For the liberties, put out Deane of Canterbury, and in the
hundred, add Wye.

In Bren^hley, For the hundreds, add Ancient demesne make Breuzet, B^enzet, and
in the Liberties there add Cinque Ports, New Romney and in the Divisions of
Justices add, Corporation of New Romney, Lath of Shipway.

In Bromhill, in the Liberty, add New Romney.

In Bruckland, in the liberties, put out Archbishop.

In Cha^lton next Dovor, in the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in
Dovor, and in the hundred there add Cinque Ports.

In Great Chart, in the liberty, add Archbishop.

In Chesilherst, in the hundred, add Ruxley, and for standing of the Church,
put out Blackheath hundred, and put in Ruxley hundred.

In Chetham, For the Fair, put in the 8th. of September.

In Coldred, For the liberty put out St. Augustine.

In Cosimus Bleane, make it Cosmus Bleane, and make Whitestaple, Whitstaple,
both in the hundred and place where the Church stands.

In Cowden, For the Bailiwick, add Sutton Dartford, and in the hundreds, add
Axstone.

In Craford make Lesues, Lesnes, both in the hundred and place where the Church
stands.

In St. Mary Cray, For the libe^ty put Duchy of Lancaster.

In Deal, For the Liberties, add Sandwich.

In Denton near Eleham, both for the hundred, and place where the Church
stands, put out Eastry, and put in Kinghamford, and for the Church add, in
Eastry Bailiwick.

In Dovor, For the liberty, add Dovor.

In Eastry, For the Fair, make it 21th. of September.

In Ebeney, For the liberties, add Tenterden.

In Egerton, For the Liberties, put out Dean of Canterbury

In Elmsted, For the liberty, add Duchy of Lancaster.

In Eynsford for the Liberty, put in Dean of Canterbury.

In Eythorne, Both for the hundred and place where the Church stands, put out
Wingham, and put in Eastry.

In East Farley, For the liberty, add Deane of Canterbury.

In West Farley, For the liberty put in Dean of Canterbury.

In Farmingham, For the liberty, add Dean of Canterbury.

In Fawkeham, For the liberty, put in Bishop of Rochester.

In Feversham, For the Liberty, add Feversham.

In Folkstone, For the liberty add Folkstone.

In Fordwich, For the liberty, add Fordwich.

In Frittenden, For the Liberty, put out Archbishop.

In Gillingham, For the Liberties, add Hasting.

In Goodnestone near Sandwich, For the Fair put in 14. of September.

In East Greenwich, For the liberty, put out St. Augustine.

In St. Gregory's, put out all that Parish

In Guston, For the liberty, add St. Augustine.

In Hackington, For the hundreds, add Downhamford.

In Halden, For the liberties, put out Archbishop.

In Ham, For the liberty put out St Augustine.

In Hartye, make it Hartley.

In Hartly, make it Hartye.

In Hastingligh, in the liberties, put out Deane of Canterbury, and put in
Duchy of Lanc^ster; and in the D^ocess, make Canterbuy, Canterbury.

In Hedcorne, in the liberty, put out Archbishop.

In Hever, in the division of Justices, put out upper division, and put in
lower division.

In Hincksell, For the liberties, put out St. Augustine and Wye.

In Hith, For the liberties, add Hith

In West Hith, For the liberties, add Hith, for the hundred, put in Hith and
Worth; for the division of Justices, add Lath of Shipway; and for where the
Church stands, put in Worth hundred, demolished.

In Hope All Saints, For the liberty put out Archbishop.

In Hor^on Kirby, For the liberty, add Dean of Canterbury.

In Horsemanden, For the hund^eds, add Ancient Demesne.

In Hothfield, For the liberties, put out Dean of Canterbury and Wye.

In Hougham, for the liberties, put out St. Augustine and add Cinque Ports
Dovor, and in the division of Justices put in, Town and Port of Dovor.

Next to Ightham, set down Ifeild, and mark after it thus, For the Bailiwick,
Hoo; for the Liberty, Archbishop; for the hundred, Toltingtrow; for the Lath,
Ayles^ord; for the division of the County, West; for the division of Justices,
North division; for the place where the Church stands, Toltingtrow hundred;
and for the Diocese, Rochester;

In St. Jones, make it St. John's, And in the Liberties, add Dov^r.

In Ivechurch, For the Liberties, add Cinque Ports, New Romney; and for the
Division of Justices, add the Corporation of New Romney.

In Ken^rion, for the hundreds, add Ham; for the laths, add Shipway; for
division of the County, add East; And for division of Justices, add Corporation
of Romney Marsh.

In East Langdon, for the liberty, put out Archbishop; and for the hundred, and
place where the Church stands, make Corinlo, Cornilo.

In West Langdon, for the liberty put out St. Augustine.

In St. Laurence, For the liberties, add Sandwich, and for where the Church
stands, put in Ringslow hundred.

In Len^ham, for the Market, for the Words, Tuesday at Sandwich, make them
Tuesday and at Sandway.

In Lid, for the liberties, add Lid.

In Liminge, for the liberties, add Eleham.

In Limpne, for the liberties, put out Archbishop; and for ^he division of
Justices, add Romney Marsh.

In Longfield, for the liberty, put in Bishop of Rochester.

In Maidstone, for the Liberty, add Archbishop.

In East Malling, For the name of the Church, put in St. Mary.

In West Malling, for the hundred, add Larkefield.

In Marden, for the Bailiwick, add Eyhorne; and for the hundreds, add Maidstone
and Eyhorne.

In St. Margarets near Rochester, for the division of Justices, put out North
division.

In St. Martine, put out all that Parish.

In Meopham, for the fair put in 29. of June.

In Mersham, for the liberties, put out Archbishop.

In Merston, for the liberty, put out St. Augustine, and put in Archbishop.

In Midley, for the liberty, put in Deane of Canterbury.

In Great Mongeham, for the liberty put out Archbishop.

In Little Mongeham, for where the Church stands add demolished.

In Newenden, for the Liberty, put out Archbishop.

In St. Nicholas, for the liberty, add Sandwich.

In Northfleet, For the liberty, put in Bishop of Rochester.

Next to Northfleet, set down Nutsteed, and mark after it thus, for the
Bailiwick, Hoo; for the hundred, To'tingtrow; for the lath, Aylesford; for the
division of the County, West; for the division of Justices, North division; for
where the Church stands* Toltingtrow hundred; for the name of the Church, St.
Mildred; and for the Diocese, Rochester.

In O^lestone, For the division of Justices, add Lath of Shipway.

In Orpington, for the liberty, put in Duchy of Lancaster, and Archbishop.

In Otford, for the liberty, add Duchy of Lanc^ster.

In Otham, for the liberty, add Maidstone.

In Padlesworth near Eleham, for the liberties, add Elcham.

In St. Paul, for the division of Justi^es, add City of Canterbury.

In East Peckham, for the name of the Church, put in St Michael.

In West Peckham, for the Bai^iwick, add Hoo; for the liberty put in Dean of
Canterbury, for the hundred put out Twyford, and put in Hoo.

In Pensherst, for the Bailiwick, add Lowy of Tunbridge for the hundred, add
Wachlingstone, for the Lath, add Aylesford.

In St. Peter's, For the liberties, put out St. Augustine, and put in Dovor.

Next to Preston near Fordwich, set down Preston near Feversham, and mark
after it thus; For the Bailiwick, Scray; for the Liberties, St. Augustine, and
Deane of Canterbury; for the hundred, Feversham; for the Lath, Scray; for the
division of the County, East; for the Division of Justices, upper division; for
where the Church stands, Feversham hundred; for the name of the Church St.
Katherine; and for the Diocese, Canterbury.

^ In Rever, for the liberties, put out Archbishop.

^ In Ringwold, for the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in Dovor.

^ In Rolvenden, for the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in Bishop of
Rochester.

In New Romney, for the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in New Romney,
and for the division of Justices, add lath of Shipway.

In Old Romney, put out Archbishop, and put in New Romney.

Next to Old Romney, set down Ridley, and mark after it thus, for the
Bailiwick, Sutton Dartford, for the hundred, Axstone; for the lath, Sutton at
Hone; for the division of the County, West; for division of Justices, upper
division; and for the Diocese, Rochester.

In Sandwich for the Fair, put out six days, and make it three days.

In Seasalter, for the place where the Church stands* put out hundred, and
put in Town.

In Sellinge, for the liberty, put out Archbishop.

In Sevenoke, for the name of the Church put in St. Nicholas.

In Sevington, for the liberties, put out Deane of Canterbury.

In Shadoxherst, for the liberty, put out Archbishop.

In Smarden, for the liberties, put out Wye.

In Smeeth, for the liberty, put out Archbishop.

In Snargate, for the liberties, add, Cinque Ports, and New Romney, and in the
division of Justices add Corporation of New Romney.

In Speldherst, for the liberty, put in Sevenoke.

In Stelling, for the hundred, add Stowting.

In Stonar, for the liberty, add Sandwich.

In Stone near Feversham, for where the Church stands, put demolished.

In Stroud, for where the Church stands, add in the liberty of the City o^
Rochester.

In Sturmouth, for the liberty, add St. Augustine.

In Sturrey, for the liberties, put out Archbishop.

In Sutton at Hone, for the libelty, put in Bishop of Rochester, and Deane of
Canterbury.

In Swayc^ife, for the hundred, and for where the Church stands, put out
Blengate, and put in Wh^tstaple.

In Tenterden, for the liberties, add Tenterden.

In Vl^^mbe, for the liberty, add St. Augustine, and in the hundred, add
Feversham.

In Walmer, for the liberty, add Sandwich.

In Waltham, for the Laths, add Scray.

In Westgate, for the division of Justices, add City of Canterbury,

Make Weshwell, Westwell, and in the hundred, there add Wye.

In Whi^staple, for the Market, put out Good Friday, and for the Fair, put in
Good Friday.

In Wingham, for the Liberty add S. Augustine, and for the Fair, put in the
first of May.

In Wood, put out St. Augustine, and put in Dovor.

In Woodnesborough, for the liberties add Sandwich.

In Woolwich, for the Bailiwick, make Sutton Dartford Sutton Bromley.

In Wrotham, where the Church stands, make Rotham, Wrotham:

In Y^lding, for the hundred, add Ancient Demesne.

An Alphabeticall Table of the Names of Persons and Families mentioned in this
Tract.
A
Aberfeild, Page 162 Abingdon, 97 Aburgaveny, 30 Albrance, 80 104 Albuger, 198
Alese, 190 Alisander, 252 Allard, 27 Alphegh, 54 Altham, 406 Andrew, 298
Apleton, 64 Apuldorefeild, 45, 76 166, 391, 392, often 393 Arsick, 80 160
Arundell, 108 121 178 286 Ashborneham, 79 Asheton 81 Ask, 413, often
Aslington, 11 Astall, 153 Athelstan, 145 Atholl, 16 Atkins, 412 Au^her, 231 407
twice Audley, 168 276 Auste^, 270 Axenham 228
B
Ba, 152 Bacon, 412 often Badcock, 130 Badlesmer, 55, 164, 165, 275, Bake^, 65,
133, 399, twice, 402, 403, 406, twice 410 twice. Ballard, 394 Bamme 108 396
Banknot, 260 Barnham, 405, twice Barret, 166 393 Barry, 245, 288, 392, 393,
Bartilt, 130 Barton, 10 Basing 391 twice Bassa 222 Ba^h, 75 Beamont, 70
Beausits, 108 Beauso^d P. 115 Beck 94 Becket, 233 Becklee, 239 Bederenden, 86
236 Begebure, 111 Belknap, 76 394 Berham, 65 393 Bernard 388 often Bersted, 390
Beswick, 408 twice Best, 34 Bettenham, 65 Bigg, 49 189 262 Bing, 404 twice
Birtrick 69, 72, 100, 174, 25^ Blechenden, 196 Bloor, 22^ Blunde 391 often
Boddenden 27 Bohun, 390 twice Boleyn, 141, 396, twice 397 Bonfant, 260 267
Borgeris 112 Boroz 389 often Boteler, 112 393 Bourchier, 244 twice Bourne 249,
390 thrice 391 often 392 twice Bowls 414, twice Boys, 130, 135, 402, twice
Brandon 128 Brahenbury, 396 Bramstone, 395 Bredgar, 37 Bredon, 204 Brent, P. 46
155 157 Brenton, 241 Bressy, 240 Brimshete 391 Briony, 277 Brito, 389 often
Brockhall, 392 often 393 twice Brook, 60 244 Brown, 188, 394, 395, 400 twice
410 twice. Bryene, 241 395 Backland, 248 (...), 394 (...) 278, 389 (...) (...)
297 (...) 70
C
Cade 67, 100, 149, 168, 244 Camden 25 Campeius, 169 Campion 111, 410 twice
Canterbury 87 Capell, 155 Carew 231 Carus 399 Cawne 153 Cely, 247 Chamberlain
409 twice, Champneyes 403 twice Chapman 260 Cheney 55, 191, 394, twice 395,
396, 397 Chich 393 Chichester 158 Chomley 399 often Chute 2^, 410, 411, Clare
276, 277 Clarenb^ld 102 Cleave 169 Clement 153, 397 Clerk 293, 403, often 404,
often. Cliord 31, 393, 394, often 395, twice 396. Clinton 93, 104, 151,
Clitherow 14, 393, twice 394. Cobham 60, 63, 217, 248, 390 often, 391, often
392 thrice 393. Cockshot 130 Colbridge 34 Colf 169 Colin 295 Colkins 34
Columbary 11 Colwell 101 Conghe^st 129 Constenton 209 Coppinger 402 Corbiec 393
Cornhill 388 often, 389 often. Corveile 191 Cossenton 391 Cotton 400 Coventry
406 twice Courtney 178, 185 236 Cowfeild 239 Crane 128 Cranmer 208 Crawley 410
twice, 411 often. Crequer 18, 80, 164, 165, Cresheld 412, often Crew 408 often,
409 thrice, Criell 87, 255, 390 often, Crispe 196, 397 twice, 399 twice, 412
twice. Croke 406 often, 407 thrice, 409 often, 410 twice, 413 twice 414, Crouch
392 Crowmer 249, 278, 394 twice, 396 twice, 400 twice, 403 twice, 406 twice
Culpeper 76, 111, 138, 165 213, 392 thrice, 393, 394 395 twice, 396 twice, 397,
398, 411, twice. Curtis 270, 413, twice.
D
Dalison 407 twice, Daniell 405 thrice, 406 often, Darell 393, 394 thrice, 396
Davis 407, 409 twice Davy 204 Deering 46, 170, 217, Delaway 390 Delmynden 130
Dene 75, 209, 273, Derman 389 Dew 261 Deyre 247 Digs 22, 393, 395, 396, twice,
Dike 392 Dixwell 409 twice Dodderidge 407 twice Donat 96, 221 Dorset 244 Dovor
388, often Down 86 Drainer 250 Drake 73 Drew 404, thrice
E
Eastgate 228 Eckisford 96 Eden 149, 395 Edolph 142, 406 twice Edfin 13, 207,
291 Elham 64 Ellis 239, 288, 293, twice 394 Engeham 48, 409, twice Erasmus 10
Ereby 180 Essex 236 Etchingham 129 Evering 79 Evernden 27
F
Fane 151, 186, 402, 409 twice, Fa^lconbridge 168 Ferers 395, 396 Feversham
101, 112 Filmer 407, twice Finch 90, 101, 245, 397 404, 405, 406, twice, Eynes
18, 79, 103, 394 Fineux 140, 269 Flammock 73, 168 Fleet 27 Fludd 413 twice
Fogg 16, 394, 395, twice 397 twice, Fremingham 391 often, 392. twice 339
Frogenhall 269 Fulbert 55, 80.
G
Garret 83 Gate 412 twice Gatton 391 Gaudy 401 often, 402 often, 403 often, 404
thrice, 405 often, 406 often. Gawge 297 Gent 403 Gerard 249, 399, often Gibbon
132, 434 Gilborne 407, twice Gipford 17 Glanvil 227, 263, 405 Gloucester 114
Goddard 239, 273 Godf^ey 170 Godwin 104, 129, 190, 218, 233, 270. Goldwell 48
Goshall 14 Gower 36 Gray 17 Green 395, 412, 413 twice Gregby 244 Grimston 389
Guldeford 21, 165, 231 twice 393, 394 twice, 395 396, 397, 398.
H
Hadenham 69, 228 Hale 414 thrice Hales 116 401 twice 403 twice 406, 407.
Halden 143, 236 Haleth 49 Hamo 70 Hamond 409 twice Hardres 122, 403 twice Harey
293 Harfleete 14 Harpur 398 Heart 176 397 402 twice Haselwood 165 Hatcher 101
Hatecliffe 167 Haudlo 75, 239, 391 twice Haute 153, 317, 390, 393, twice 394,
39^, often 397 twice, Hawkins 53 Haymond 244 Hayward 409, twice Head 151 Heal
405, 406 twice Hels 392 Henden 27, 412, twice Hendley 411, twice Herlackenden
293 Hernden 249 Hesilt 204 Heyman 271 Hiache 393 Hide 413 twice Hill 413, 414
Hitcham 410 often Hith 119, 143, 228 Hobart 407, 408 twice Honiwood 411 twice,
412 often. Hoo 228 Horn 156, 166, 393, 394. Hornley 70 Hougham 150 Houghton 407
often 408 often, 109 Hugeson 411, twice Fitz Hughes 11 Hunsden 133 Hunt 204
Huntingfield 390, thrice.
I.
Iddenden 134 Iden 396 Jeames 297 Isaac 395. 400 twice Isley 394, 395, 397,
398, 400 Islip 43, 90, 178, 196, 262 297 Joseline 37 Joseph 73, 168. I^re 35,
102, 303. Jude, 277
K.
Karlemane 42 Kempe 55, 298, 299, 396 twice, 397 twice, 398 400 twice, 405
twice, Keyme 125, 394, Kilwarly 222 Kin^smill 405 often. Kirby 147 Kiriell 14
Knatchbull 406 twice K^olles 229
L.
Lacy 204 Laken 260 Lamb 178, 267. Lambard, In the Epistle and 115, 119,
Langley 160, 392 thrice, 394, 396, Langton 279 Law 244 Ledian 164 Lee 395 Leeds
390 thrice, Lee^e 247, 392, Legate 239 Lennard 401 twice, 404 twice, Lewknot 410
twice, Leyborne 93, 160, Lisle 247 Liverick 14, 140, Livesey 408 twice, 413
twice, 414 twice, Long 239 Loveton 76 Low 125, 228, Lucy 53, 87, 88, Ludlow 76,
393, Lullingstone 176 Lumbard 260 Lie 204 Lyschild 188
M.
Mainey 27, 400, 401 twice. Makenade 392 Malemanies 217, 390, 391 Mallet 411
thrice, Mamigmot 73 Mamou^h 80, 280 Manwood 116, 239, 405 406, Mardall 389
Mary's 166, 269, 394, Marshall 271 Martin 45, 106, 113, 228, Master 10, 411
twice, Maimsell 28, 233, Manston 163, 394. Mepham 185 Mereworth 392 Merton 228
Mill 410 twice, Monceusies 267 Monins 412 twice, Monson 401 often, Moore 21,
231, Morant 392 Morton 10, 46, 94, 178, 244 Mountague 407 often, 408, Mountford
236 Moyle 27 Munevile 103, 389
N.
Naylor 12 Newdeg^te 41 Norbury 16 Northampton 81, 85 Norton 50, 101 twice,
190, 397, 408 twice, Norwood 190, 191, 249 391 Noteben 393 Notingham 392
O.
Ockley 130 Odiarne 291 Offord 178 Orlanstone 207, 391 twice, Owen 404 often,
405 thrice,
P.
Painter 221 Palmer 252, 404 twice, Paramore 125 Parson 134 Pashey 94 Pashley
36, 129 Payname 260 Peche 394, 395 twice, 396 Peckham 213, 290, 297, 393 twice,
395, 396, Penchester, otherwise Pensherst, 11, 215, 390 thrice Pepis 413 Peter
128 Petine 393 Petlesden 291 Petley 86 Peverell 80 Phesant 412 Philipot 86, 246
Philips 140, 270 Picot 388, often Pierle 94 Pimpe 392, thrice 393, 396. Le Pine
392 twice Playferer 390 twice Plumcooper 239 Pluckley 217 Poinings 67, 100,
255, 397 Pole 252 Polhill 411 twice Poode 249 Porch 24, 80, Potkins 244, twice
Pratellis 212 Prene 295 Puckering 403 often, 404 often. Pulestone 413
R.
Rabing 239 Rainey 412 twice. Randolph 27 Read 54, 101 Reve 412 Reynold 75,
87, 280 Richardson 410 Rigby 412 Rikh^ll 204, 394 Ringley 160 Rivers 412
Roberts 65, 111, 131, 396 397, 408 twice. Rochford 226 Ro^^ 225 Romney 232
Rookesley 67, 13^ Roper 87, 94, 397, 398 Rualon 388 Rupy 117, 172, 237, 269
Rust 101 Rutland 55
S.
Sandwey 222 Sandwich 104, 239 twice, Sandys 407, 408. Sarden 391 twice, Savage
31, 391 twice, 392 393 twice Savoy 178 Say 30, 244 S^ot 36, 129, 394, 395, 396
twice, 397 thrice, 402, twice, 405, twice, 408 twice, 412 twice. Sco^hon 390,
often Scroope 70 Segrave 104 Selby 412, twice Selling 389, often. Sencler 87
Septvans 14, 249, 391 thrice, 393 Sevenoke, 244 Seyl^ard 27 Sharp 48, 249
Shellesend 391, thrice Shelvige 391, thrice, 392 Shephard 271 Sheppey 228
Sherland 89, 191, Shorn 192 Short 270 Sidley 17, 398, 400 twice, 403, 404,
408 twice, 409 twice. Sidney 215, 397, Siesley 130 Sigeline 63, 185 Simons 128
Simonson in the epistle. Siward 186 Smith 249, 405 twice, Snach 393 Snigg 406
Som^er 58, 300 Sonds 397, twice, 402 twice, 403, twice, 404 twice, 411 twice,
Soole 191 Sorewell 260 Southwell 398 Southcote 399 twice, 400 often, 401,
often, 402, often. Staford 244, 276 Staplegate 28 Stead 407 twice, Steel 412
Style 397, 410, twice St. John 413, 414, St. Leg^r 165, 279, 393, twice, 394,
twice, 395, 396, 397, 399, twice. St. Laurence, 391, 392 twice. St. Nicholas,
14, 163, 201. Stone 87 Stratford 87, 222 Stratton 297 Straw 168 Subaudie 390
Sudbury 62 Suet 174 Surenden 23, 217, Swan 239
T.
Thomas 267 Thorn 101, 125, 192, Thorneberry 394 Thornham 112, 209, Tiler 70,
168, 179, Took 48 Tongue 101, 268 Totnall 401 Tottleherst 244 Trapes 239 Tresse
181 Trevor 409 Trussell 391 twice, Turner 412 Tuston 399 twice, 401, 402 413
often, Twisden 48, 405 twice,
V.
Valoynes 389 thrice, 390 often, 392. Vane 396, 397, 398, 401, twice, Ver 148
Vernon 410 Veseye 94 At Vies 37 Vsford 178 Vpton 101
W.
Walden 87, 228, Walerand 390 Walkesley 157 Walleis 68 Walleynes 76, 391,
Waller 397 Walmsley 404 twice. 406 thrice, 407 often. Walsingham 52, 396, 399,
400, 412 twice. Walter 394 Wangdeford 204 Warbeck 71 Warburton 413 often, Ware
191 Warham 208, 229, 244, Warner 394 Warren 11 Waterhouse 293 Wats 230 Watson
119 Watton 291 Weaver 73 Weston 410 often, 411 often, Whetenhall 397 Whittlesey
121 Whitfeild 270 Wickham 220 Widlestone 392 often, Wigmore 101 Wildegos 27,
132 Wilford 65 Fitz Williams 80, 113 Willoughby 54, 401 twice, 404 twice,
Wilshire 26^, 397, Winch 407 Winchelsea 140, 201, 222 Windlesore 389 often
Withens 407 twice Woodford 64, 279 Woodvile 394 Wootton 34, 396, 397 twice, 399
twice, 402 twice, 404 twice. Wray 399, 400 often, Wyat 11, 63, 178, 397, 398
Y.
Yardley 244 Yeard 394 Yelverton 409
Direction to correct the Errata's.
In the Folio's,
IN Page 48. read 46. p. 49. r. 47. p. 320. r. 220. p. 250. r. 258. p. 251. r.
259. p. 254. r. 262. p. 255. r. 263. p. 258. r. 266. p. 259. r. 267. p. 262. r.
270. p. 263. r. 271.

In the Book.
Page 18. line 23. read Southeast, p. 23. l. 14. r. Beatriceden, l. 17. dele
comma, p. 26. l. 16. r. Hevenden, p. 27. l. 18. r. town l. 21. r. Mainey, p.
28. l. 31. r. Arundell, p. 35. l. 23. r. vulgarly, p. 38. l. 11. r. Brenchley,
p. 54. l. 7. r. Codsheath p. 65. l. 10. r. Hartredge, p. 86 l. 10. dele comma,
p. 100. l. 3. r. In, p. 117. l. 10. r. Northeast, p. 143. l. 13. r. Mayor, p.
159. l. 2. r. southeast, p. 165. l. 15. r. For, p. 177. l. 3. dele comma, p.
183. l. 19. r. Nassenden, p. 196. l. 3. r. Blechenden. p. 198. l 25. r.
Carmelites, l. ult. r. ^oll, p. 202. l. 1. r. Nonington, p 215. l. 27. dele
long, p. 216. l. 1. r. breadth p 217. l. 9. r. Mannours, p. 247. l. 2. dele
Augustine, p. 253. l. 28. r. Lath of Sutton p. 258. l. 11. r. Stodmarsh, p.
297. l. 20. r. Burgoyne, p. 302. l. 10. r. Monosteries, l. 25. r. 1200, p. 306.
l. 9. r. Wickham, p. 307. l. 12. r. ^ath. p. 310. l. 27. r. Smeeth, p. 311. l.
24. add of the hundred, p. 313. l. 26. r. and Alkham, p. 313. l. ult. dele
Bridge p. 334. l. 1. r. Brenc^ley, 350. l. 8. r. has, p. 354. l. 19. r. at, p.
355. l. 1^. r. Selling, p. 360. l. 21. r. Bradbourne, p. 363. l. 24. add a
period after Rochester, l. 27. the same after Chetham, p. 366. l. 22. r.
Directs, p. 379. ult. r. Tunstall, p. 381. l. 6. r. ^udeley, p. 383. l. 15. r.
Hougham, p. 384. l. 3. r. Leusham, r. Lidon, l. 25. dele comma, p. 385. l. 7.
dele comma, l. 21. r. Newnham, l. 22. r. Shorn, p. 386. l. 11. r. Vpchurch, l.
14. r. Borden, p. 391. l. 9. column 1. r. Northwood. p. 392. l. 21. col. 2. r.
Leese, p. 393. l. 29. c. 2. r. reign, p. 394. l. 22. c. 1. r. Kennington, l. 5^
c. 2. r Wa^ler, p. 395. l. 15. c. 1. r. Peache, p. 396. l. 1. c. 1. r. Bamme,
l. 25. r. Peche, l. 29. r. Walsingham, l. 4. c. 2. r. Bedgbury, l. 22. r.
Yal^ham, l. 31. r. Bolleyn, p. 397. l. 20. c. 1. r. in Throwley, p. 398. c. 2.
after l. 4. add She begun her Reign 1 July, 1553, l. 26. r. 17, p. 399. l. 2.
r. Sheriffs, p. 400. l. 14. r. Judges, l. 29. r. Beakesborn, p. 401. l. 16. r.
Vane, p. 402. l. 28. r. Heart, p. 403. l. 6. r. 20, l. 19. r. 28. p. 404. l. 10.
Chevening, l. 13. r. Sheriff p. 405. l. 20. r. Stanford, p. 407. l. 2. add.
1609 l. 3. add Sheriff, l. 13. r. Maximilian, l. 17. r. 10 p. 409. l. ult. r.
16. p. 410 l. 17. dele^, p. 411. l. 28. r. Linsted, l. 33. dele^, l. 34. r.
Tuesday. l. 35. dele^, p. 412. l. 24. adds, l. 34. r. 1650, p. 413. l. 25. r.
Tufton, p. 415 l. 6 dele of l. 10 r Church, In the Table, make Alese Alefe, In
Burgh r. 5. 78. In Fremingham r. 393. twice, In Gibbon r. 134, In Haute r. 217.
In Houghton, r 409. add Harirede 65, make Jude Iud, make Loveton Lovet^t, make
Maimsell Maunsell, make Millen Miller, In Norwood after 391 add often, In Reve
after 412 add thrice, In Richardson after 410 add twice.* In Trevor after 409
add twice, In Vernon after 410 add thrice, make Vsford Vfford, In Wa^ler add
394, dele Walter, dele Wilford.

FINIS.

