CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defendor of the Faith, etc.


A SERMON PREACHED Before the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty at OXFORD,

By H. K. D. D.

OXFORD, Printed for W. Web. 1643.

To the CHRISTIAN Reader.
FOr so much as I was at this Sermon among other auditors, who judged it very
divine like for the matter and the manner of handling of it, and afterward
understood that diverse which heard it preached, and more which did only hear
of it by the report of others, were very desirous to have the view either
written, or rather printed: therefore having obtained a copy of it for mine own
use, I thought it expedient to commit it to the press, for the public good of
all such as will vouchsafe to read it with patiencee, and judge, of it by the
rule of charity.

A Sermon preached at Oxford before the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
Psalm. 101. 1. I will sing mercy and judgment, to thee, O Lord, will I sing.
IN this Psalm the Kingly Prophet David declares, how he will behave himself
in his Kingdom: first touching his own person: and afterward touching his
subjects, both in the Coutrt, and in the Country.

In this first verse of the Psalm, he undertaketh or promises to sing; the
dittie of the song is mercy and judgment. The person to whom he sings is
expressed in these words, to thee, O Lord, will I sing.

In that he assumeth to sing the matter which he has in hand, it implies that
he will do it with joy, with a loud voice, and with his full power. Jam. 5. 13
Psalm. 137. 1. 2. 3. 4
It argues joy: For is any man among you afflicted? let him pray is any merry
let him sing: And how should the children of the Captivity sing one of the
longs of Zion in a strange land, when they sit mourning and weeping by the
Rivers of Babell, where they hung up their harps upon the willows that grow
thereby? And as a pleasant song requires a merry heart so does it also a
stretched out voice with great strength put thereunto. So then by this example
of David we are taught in the meditations of our heart, the words of our tongue
and the actions of our life, tending to godliness and justice, to do all with
chearfullnes, fervency, and to the utmost of our power. For example, in the
case of our inward affection toward God, our duty is, To love the Lord our God
with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength. In the Deuteronomy.
6. 5.
matter of Gods worship, joined with the adva^cing of his glory, and the
furtherance of our salvation: behold David danceth before the Ark with all his
might: Of the Kingdom of Christ it is prophesied 2. Sam. 6. 14.
thus by the Psalmist: Thy people shall come willingly at the time of
assembling, thine army in holy beauty. The zeal of Gods house did eat up the
Princely Psalm. 110. 3. Psalm. 69. 9.
prophet. And from the time of John the Baptist hitherto, The Kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. If Paul come to
Athens, Mat. 11. 12. Act. 17. 16. Act. 14. 14
and see the City subject to Idolatry, his spirit will be stirred within him,
and if he and Barnab^ being as Lystra perceive the people to sacrifice and
there by the names of Jupiter and Mercury, then they will (...) in sign of
d^^asting (...)ring it. If Moses when he comes down from the Mount understand
that the people in his absence have Exodus 32 15. unto the ^1.
^ the Calfe he burns it in the fire, and grindeth it to powder and streweth
it upon the water, and makes the children of Israel to drink of it, to despite
them of their Idolatry. If we speak of charitable alms, then by S. Paul's
rule, The Lord loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9. 7
If execution must be done upon the enemies of God and his holy Church, then
Jeremy pronounces him cursed that does the work of the Lord negligently.
Jer. 48. 1^
We should by Paul's advice to the Romans, be servent in spirit. And by this
admonition Romans 12. 14. Tit. 2. 14.
given in the Epistle to Titus, we ought to be zealous of good works. And
surely, if any do frame themselves after the pattern of the Laodiceans who
were luke warm, neither hot nor cold, it will come to pass that God shall spew
them out of Apoc. 3. 16.
his mouth.

To prevent which inconvenience, David here affirms that he will sing this
heavenly ditie of mercy and judgment: the which words may be construed two
ways, the Analogy of faith preserved. First, in respect of the time past by
way of praise for Gods mercy toward himself, and Gods judgments against his
enemies. Secondly in regard of the time to come touching the government of the
Kingdom by way of practice of mercy toward the good, and of judgment against
the bad.

The first interpretation yields unto us this doctrine in general, that we
should show our selves thankful unto almighty God for all his benefits
bestowed upon us according to the commandment of God joined with a comfortable
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and so will I deli^^ Psalm. 50. 15.
thee, and thou shall glorify me. And after the example of the Psalmist
saying: Open thou my lips O Lord: (that is, give me occasion to praise thee
Psalm. 51. 15.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. And if God vouchsafe to deliver
David's desolate soul from the sword and the power of the dog, from the lions
Psalm. 22. 20. 21. 22.
mouth, and the horns of the Unicornes, then will David declare his name unto
his brethren and praise him in the midst of the congregation. But alas if a
view be taken of us upon whom the ends of the world be come, it is to be feared
that we shall be found no better in this case then they were in the days of
our Savior Christ, when as of ten lepers that were cleansed, only one
returned to give thanks. And verily so have worldly Luke 17. 15. 16.
minded men been usually accustomed to mistake the original and springhead of
the temporal benefits which they receive, that the Nimrods of the earth, which
lived in the days of Habbacud when as they took up all with the angle, and
Hab. 1. 15 16.
catched it in their net, land gathered it in this yearn, whereof they rejoiced
and were glad, thee they sacrificed to their net, and burnt incense to their
yearne, because (in their falso imagination) by them their portion became fat,
and their mea^ plenteous; that is they flattered themselves, and gloried in
their own wit, force, and power, as though there by they had gotten all their
victories with increase of wealth and honor, and so robbed God of his glory.

In revenge of such kind of unthankfulness, when as superstitious people, in
the time of Hosea, ascribed Hos. 2. 5. to the 11.
unto their lovers, (that is to their Idols) the gift of their bread and wine,
corn and oil, wool and flax, silver and Gold, then Almighty God returned in
his high displeasure, and took away his corn in the time thereof, and his wine
in the season thereof, and he recovered his wool and his flax which he had
lent unto them for a time to cover their shame withal.

But David to avoid the like both sin and punishment also thereof, protests
here, that he will sing the mercy of God. I say the mercy of God toward him,
and not his own merits. And here upon it was that being hardly beset, and
greatly distressed and perplexed in the days of Saul, while his hope of the
Kingdom was suspended, he makes his prayer in these terms, Show thy
mavelous mercies thou that art the Savior of them that trust in thee, from
such as resist Psalm. 17. 7
thy right hand. And he hops one day to come into the house of God, in the
multitude of his mercy, look Psalm. 5. 7.
back to former ages: and you shall find Jacob at his return from Mesopotamia,
homeward in the way to Canaan being greatly enriched after the service of
almost three apprentiships under Laban, framing his prayer of thanksgiving in
this wise. O Lord I am not Genesis 32. 10.
worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and all the truth, which thou have
showed unto thy servant: for with my staff came I over this Jordan, and now
have I gotten two hands. And I conceive assured hope, that by this example my
gracious Sovereign does often meditate upon the mercy of God toward himself,
in respect of the great increase of temporal blessings which he has found and
felt. And as for us beloved, all of us which be ranged in the number of
subjects, considering on the one side the manifold and heinous sins, which
have formerly reigned amongst us, both unpunished and unrepented of: and on the
other side the fearful dangers that we have escaped, I can say nothing, but
that which Jeremy spoke in his lamentations long ago: It is the mercies of the
Lord that we are not consumed, because Lam. 3. 22
his compassions fail not. Pray we therefore on the behalf of our King, that
it would please Almighty God to pronounce of him as he spoke in elder time, by
Nathan of Solomon: I will be his father, and he shall be 2. Sam. 7. 14. 15.
my son, and if he sin, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the
plagues of the children of men, but my mercy shall not depart away from him.
Pray we likewise for this Church of England, Scotland, and Ireland, that God
would vouchsafe to hallow it with that blessed promise which in Isay was
uttered over the whole church of Christ militant by the spirit of prophecy
thus; The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down: but my
mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peaceful
away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee. This done, then may both
King and Subjects, even every of us utter with joyful cheer that which we
read in the Psalm, I will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever. Psalm. 89. 1.


Thus David having already sung the mercy of God toward himself, he will sing
also the judgment of God toward his enemies. And to begin with his grand and
capital enemy King Saul: after that he had been wounded by the archers of the
Philistines, fearing 1. Sam. 31. 3. 4,
left the uncircumcised should have come and thrust him through, and have mocked
him, he took a sword, and fell upon it himself: and so a cruel life had a
desperate end. And as for David's chief enemies in the Court among Saul's
favorites, namely Chush and Doeg, we read the ruin of them both. For Chush
travailed with mischief, and brought forth a lie: he Psalm 7. 1. 15. 16.
made a pit and dug it, and fell into it himself, his mischief returned upon
his own head, and his cruelty fell upon his own pate. And after that Doeg had
for a space boasted himself in his wickedness, that being a Psalm. 52. 15.
man of power he could do mischief, at the length God plucked him out of his
tabernacle, and rooted him out of the land of the living. Beside these
particulars, God gave unto David, the necks of Psalm 18. 40. 42.
his enemies in general, and he did beat them as small as the dust before the
wind, and he did tread them flat as the clay in the streets. Thus let thine
enemies perish O Lord, and the King enemies likewise, but let J^d. 5. 31.
him be as the Sun when he rises in his might.

Now the good that may enfue by the consideration of the fall of Gods and the
Churches enemies, is of two sorts. First God is thereby magnified, as may
appear in the person of Pharaoh, whom God appointed Ex. 9 16.
for this cause, to show his power in him, and to declare his name throughout
all the world. And in the destruction of the Babilonians, the earth was filled
with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the Hab. 2. 14
waters cover the Sea. Secondly, men (if they have grace) may thereby be
edified, according to the confession of the faithful in Isai, saying: We O
Lord have Isa. 26. 9.
waited for thee, in the way of thy judgments: for seeing thy judgments are
in the earth, the inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness.

Hitherto David has sung mercy and judgment, in respect of the time past by
way of praise and thanksgiving. Now he proceeds to sing the same song in
regard of the time to come touching the administration of his Kingdom by way of
practice, knowing that the duty of Princes and public Magistrates, is, to be
the Romans 13. 3.

1 Pet. 2. 14


Ministers of God for the wealth of them that do well by the exercise of
godliness and honesty, and to take vengeance on them that do evil,
committing impiety and iniquity. And these two mercy, and judgment, must go
hand in hand, being in association combined together lest if they were
altogether, and utterly severed, then mercy without judgment might turn into
foolish pity, and judgment without any temper of mercy might become extreme
cruelty.

And first to speak of Mercy, happy is that Prince who has the wisdom and
the will to be merciful to whom, and when, and where it is expedient. For such
mercy and truth preserves the King; and his throne Pro. 20. 28

Psalm. 85. 10.


shall be established with mercy, Moreover happy is that country, where
mercy and truth meet together, and so righteousness and peace kiss one
another, and worldly happy are those subjects to whom the prince vouchsafes to
show mercy and loving kindness. For the Kings wrath is like the roaring of a
Lion, and as messengers of death: but in the light of his countenance is life,
Pro. 16. 14 15 and 19. 12.
and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain, and like the dew upon the
grass. And David well knowing how laudable and honorable it was to be
merciful with discretion, being established in his Kingdom, he made enquiry
if there remained yet alive any of the house of Saul, in whom he might show the
mercy of 2 Samuel 9. 1. 3.
God (that is, such mercy as is acceptable to God) for his old dear friend
Ionathans sake. And we find it to be a laudable custom of Princes, that I may
speak it the Scripture phrase in the Psalms, by hearing the mourning of the
prisoners, and delivering the children Psalm. 102 1.

Isa. 58. 7.


of death. And in Isay, by loosing the bands of wickedness, and by taking off
the heavy burdens, by letting the oppressed go free, and by breaking every
yoke, former extortions, exactions, and other grievous oppressions: O how fair
a thing is this mercy Eccles. 35. 19.
in the time of anguish and trouble? It is like a cloud of rain that comes in
the time of drought. Thus can David show Mercy, when he thinks it meet, and
Judgment also when the matter so requires it. For he Prove. 16 12.

Isa. 32. 17.


is not ignorant, that the establishment of the Kings throne is Justice, and
Judgment: and the seat thereof is peace. Yea manifold is the good effect which
follows the executing of justice upon malefactors.

First it is profitable to the offenders themselves, for affliction gives
understanding. Foolishness is bound Prove. 22. 15.
in the heart of a child: but the rod of correction shall drive it away from
him. The rod and correction give wisdom: Pro. 29. 15
the blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and Pro. 20 30
the stripes within the bowels of the belly: that is, sharp punishment which
pierces even the inward parts, is profitable for the wicked to bring them to
amendment. But on the contrary, he that spares the rod Pro. 13 14
spilleth the child: witness the example of Hely toward his sons Hophni and
Phinehas. And of David toward 1 Samuel 2. 12. 22. 23. 24.

1 Reg. 1. 6


his son Adonijah whom he would not displease from his childhood, to say, Why
have thou done so? and so in the end he proved a presumptuous traitor, and rank
rebel. Secondly, this exemplarie justice is commodious unto others that are
bystanders and beholders, who may learn to beware by their neighbors harms,
Deuteronomy. 13. 11. and 17. 13. and 21. 21.
according as Moses wills punishment to be afflicted upon the transgressors
of the law, that Israel may hear and fear.

Whereupon Solomon groundeth this exposition of policy, or judicial
proceedings: Smile a scorner and Prove. 10.
the foolish will beware: that is to say, the simple and ignorant men learn
their duty when they see the wicked punished. And for this cause did God by
Moses command that the censers of Korah and his complice being 250 in number,
who had been destroyed and Numb. 16 37. 38. etc
consumed by a fire that came out from the Lord, should be taken and beaten
forth into broad plates, for the covering of the Altar, that they might be a
sign to the children of Israel of Gods judgments against all mutinous,
i^ditious, and rebellious persons. Whereas on the other side, If the incestuous
person at Corinth be not censured by excommunication, behold, a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump. And by 1. Cor. 5. 6 Eccles. 8. 11.
the judgment of the preacher, because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully set in
them to do evil: that is, by way of abridgement, where Justice is delayed,
there sin reigns. Therefore the Princely Psalmist promises in the last
verse Psalm. 101. 8.
of this Psalm, betimes to destroy all the wicked of the land, that he might
cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord.

Thirdly, the executing of heinous and notorious offenders withholdeth the
wrath of God from the Deuteronomy. 17. 12. and. ^2 22.

Josh. 7. 1. 5


public state of the Realm, by taking evil out of Israel. But the
unpunishing of Achan, (though his crime was unknown) was so hurtful to the
host of Israel, that the hearts of the people melted away like water. Neither
could the great dearth in David's 2 Samuel 21. 1. 6. 14.
time be removed, nor God fully pacified for Saul's cruelty, long before
committed against the Gibeonites, till seven of Saul's offspring were hung up to
the Lord in Gibeah of Saul. In brief due execution done upon great and grievous
malefactors, is a sacifice acceptable unto God, and a preservative of the state
of the Church and commonwealth. Therefore, a wise King scatters the wicked,
and causes the wheel to turn Prove. 20. 26.
over them.

But here must be inserted a caveat against all cruelty in execution of
justice. For by the law of Moses even in seeking of birds nests, it was not
lawful to take Deuteronomy. 22. 6
the damme with the young. Neither might the body of the executed malefactor
remain all night upon Deuteronomy. 21. 22. 23.
the tree. Beside this, God would not turn to them of Damascus, because they
had threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron, neither would he turn
to the children of Ammon, because they had ripped up the women with child of
Gilead that they might enlarge Amos 1. 3 13.
their own border: there is like to be judgment merciless to Pilate, who
would show no mercy: but mingled Jam. 2. 13

Luke 13. 1

Pro. 12. 10


the blood of some that had offended him, with their own sacrifices. Yet no
marvel it is that he did so, for though the righteous man regards the life
of his beast, yet even the mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Howbeit, though cruelty is always to be abhorred, yet remissness in dealing
with the adversaries of the truth, the practicers and mainteiners of a false
worship, is likewise to be excluded, because it is most pe^ilous to the church
of God, as appears by the history of the Canaanites, who by the co^nivency of
the Israelites being permitted to converse with them, and to live quietly among
them, became pricks in their Numb. 33 55.
^ies, and thorns in their sides. When Ioash the King of Israel came down to
visit Elisha lying sick upon his death bed, he was willed by the Prophet to
take into his hand the arrow of the Lords deliverance against Aram, and to
smite the ground: whereupon he smote thrice and ceased: But the man of God was
angry with him and said, thou should have smitten five or six times, so thou
should have smitten Aram 2. Reg. 13. 14. to the 20.
till thou had consumed it, where now thou shall smite Aram but thrice; the
meaning is, that Ioa^^ deserved just reproof, and great blame, because he
seemed content to have victory against the enemies of God, for twice or
thrice, and had not a zeal to overcome them continually, and destroy them
utterly. 1: Sam. 15 22. 23.

1 Reg 20. 42.

2 Chio. 15. 16.


And surely Saul cannot spare Agag saving to his own hurt. Neither can Ahab
have the life of Ben-hadad, but with his own loss. Wherefore the King Asa did
not fail to depose his grandmother Maachah from her regency, because she had
made an Idol in a grove, which Idol he brake down, and stamped it, and burnt
it at the brook Kidron.

Consider here a little with me (beloved) the mishap, (that I say not misery)
of diverse Princes (keeping me within the limits or bounds of the holy
Scripture) in this case of showing mercy, and practicing of judgment

For first of all it falls out not seldom, that those notorious malefactors
deserving death, whom Princes do pardon in mercy, (if not upon foolish pity)
do afterward most unthankfully and treacherously seek to take the Scepter out
of the hand, and to pull the Crown from the head, and to withdraw life from the
body of their benefactours, who had graciously forgiven them their crimes, and
so consequently given to them their lives, lands, goods, liberty and all. This
may be fitly exemplified in Absalon, who after that he was pardoned for the
murdering of his brother Amnon, and restored to favor in Court, rose up early,
and stood hard by the entering in of the gate, and 2 Samuel 15.
reached forth his hand to every suitor of account, and by slander, flattery,
and fair promises, he stole away the hearts of the people, and at the length
he brast forth into actual rebellion against his natural father. Ioab 2 Samuel
3 27.
likewise when he had escaped without punishment for stabbing of Abner, he was
thereby emboldned to proceed forward to the murdering of Amasa, and this Ibid.
20. 9, 10.
done without controlement, he presumed to aid aspiring Adonijah to the
prejudice of Solomon, who was to 1 Reg 1. 7
succeed in the Kingdom by the appointment of his father David yet living.

Secondly, Princes have been sometimes overawed by the Peers of the Realm,
or otherwise for fear of the tumult in the State, they durst not either show
kindness, and give entertainment to good men whom they loved, or to execute
mighty malefactors, as in duty they should have done. Of the first sort we
have an example in Achish the King of Gath, who confessed that David pleased
him as an Angel of God, but therewithal 1 Samuel 29 6. 9. 10.
he told him that he must be packing out of his company, because the Princes of
the Philistines did not favor him. Of the second sort we have an example in
David who though he spoke and did much in detestation of Ioabs murdering of
Abner, yet he durst not put him to death for it, as it may be collected by
these words of his: I am this day weak and newly anointed King: and these men
the sons of Zeruiah be too hard 2 Samuel 3. 36.
for me: the Lord reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.

But this falls out well and rightly, that whom David spared in policy,
those Saloman executed in judgment, 1 Reg. 2. 5. 6. 8. 9. 31. 44 45. 46.
as railing Shim^^, and bloody Ioab.

Here let me stand a little upon David's promise to sing mercy and judgment,
and consider whether he performed the same always or not. I will put the case
in the example of lame Mephibosheth the son of his old and dear friend
Jonathan, to whom I confess he 2 Samuel 9. 1. 3. 7.
did kindly show mercy for his fathers sake, by restoring unto him all the
fields of his Grandfather Saul, and licensing him to eat bread at his own
Table continually: but when he came to the point of judgment, I find him
defective. For when David fled before the face of Absalon. Ziba the servant of
Mephibosheth meets 2 Samuel 16. 1, 2, 3, 4.
him with a large present of his Masters goods, and presenting the same unto
him, he frames sycophantly a most false accusation of treason against his
Master, as though he had said, this day shall the house of Israel restore me
the Kingdom of my father. Whereupon rashly without leaving the one ear for
the defendant, he gave sentence, condemning the innocent in favor of the
plaintiff, being a calumniator; saying to Ziba, behold thine are all that
pertained unto Mephibosheth, and when as Mephibosheth afterward met David
returning after the overthrow of Absolon, and fully cleared himself of the
heinous crime of treason wherewith he had been falsely charged, then David
gives sentence in 2 Samuel 19. 29.
this wise, Thou and Ziba divide the lands. Herein David did evil in taking
his land from him before he knew the cause, but much worse that knowing the
truth, he did not restore them. And here we may observe that in the case of
justice our (...) is more upright then our (...), our contemplation is sounder
then our practice. Or to speak to the capacity of the meanest hearer, a man
may more easily pen the cause of Justice in his private study, then rightly
practice it in public upon the Bench. For in solitary meditation a man may
without difficulty abandon all rashness, and partial affection, but in
judicial place abroad, respect of persons, and other corruptions do easily
enter into our minds and hearts, by the Ministry of our eyes and ears.

Now the way to prevent this mischief, is to do that sincerely, which David
promises here to do; namely, to sing unto the Lord, that is to show mercy,
and practice Judgment to the glory of God, whereunto all things ought to be
referred, according to Saint Paul's direction, whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever 1 Cor. 10. 31.
ye do, do all to the glory of God. Insomuch as alms must be given in charity
without the sound of a trumpet, and prayer must be made of devotion without
Mat. 6. 1. to the 7.
public ostentation. And to descend from the general doctrine to the
particular instruction which I have in hand, miserable was the case of that
wretched Judge who did right to the poor widow, nor for fear of God, or
reverence to man; but only to avoid her clamor Luke. 18. 4. 5.
and importunity. And no better was the case of the Philistines in the book of
the Judges, who when as the Timnite gave his daughter being Sampsons wife,
Judge. 15. 1 to the 7.
to another man, they regarded not to punish this unjust and adulterous act:
But when as Sampson in revenge of this wrong, had with three hundred Foxes
turned tail to tail having firebrands fastened thereto, set on fire, and
burned up the rickes and the standing corn with the Vineyards and Olives of
the Philistines: then they came up in troops and burnt the Timnite and his
daughter with fire. Thus the wicked punish not vice for love of Justice, but to
be revenged in respect of former loss, and for fear of future danger which
else might come unto them.

Again, to thee O Lord will I sing; that is, howsoever by the chaunting of this
ditty of mercy and judgment, I shall seem to howl in the ears of the
ungodly, yet my song to thee, O Lord, shall be thought very melodious. Whereby
we are taught this general doctrine, that in doing of our duty in our several
vocations, this ought to be our comfort, that our words and works are pleasing
unto God, howsoever they be displeasing to the world of wicked men. So though
Noe was scorned by the men of his time for preparing the Arc and urging
repentance to prevent the peril of the Deluge to come: yet is he by the
providence of God ad perpetuam rei memoriam, Chronicled for a Preacher of
righteousness. And though David for dancing before the Arc, being girded with
a linen Ephod, was by his wife Michal despised in her heart, yet was he had is
2 Pet. 2. 5. 2 Samuel 6. 14. 16. 20. 21. 22.
most high reputation by the maids of honor attending upon Michal. Yea David
will yet be more vile then thus, and he will be low in his own sight, knowing
that all shall be acceptable in heaven, which is here on earth done before the
Lord, that is for no worldly affection, but only for the zeal which we bear
to Gods glory.

Isai and the children which God gave unto him, Isa 8. 18. VV^s. 5. 15.

Mat. 51. 18. 19.


were as signs and wonders in Israel: yet their reward was with the Lord. If
John come neither eating nor drinking, they say he has a devil. And if the
Son of man come eating and drinking, they say behold a glutton, and a drinker
of wine, a friend of publicans Act. 26. 24. 25.
and Sinners: But yet wisdom is justified of her children. If Festus be judge
of Paul's speeches, then Paul 1 Cor. 5. 9. 13.
is beside himself, much learning does make him mad. Howbeit, Paul is not mad,
O noble Festus, but he speaks Ibid. v. 3.
the words of truth and soberness. The Apostles were made a gazing-stock unto
the world, and to the Angels, and to men, they were counted as the filth of he
world, and the off-scowring of all things: howbeit ^hey passed very little to
be judged of man's judgment: 2 Cor. 4. 15. 16.
knowing that they were unto God the sweet savor of Christ in them that are
saved, and in them which perish: to the one, the savor of death unto 2 Samuel 23.
^eath, and to the other the favor of life unto life.

Thus the sweet singer of Israel promises to sing he divine ditty of Mercy and
Judgment, to the Lord of Lords, even God the Father, the Son and the Holy
Ghost; to whom three Persons, and one everliving God, be all honor and glory
both now, and for evermore,

Amen.
FINIS.

