OF Christian Communion, To be kept on In the Unity of Christ's Church, and
among the Professors of Truth and Holiness.

AND Of the Obligations, both of Faithful Pastors, to Administer Orthodox and
Holy Offices; and of Faithful People, to Communicate in the same.

Fitted for Persecuted, or Divided, or corrupt States of Churches; when they
are either born down by Secular Persecutions, or broken with Schisms, or
Defiled with Sinful Offices and Ministrations.

In three Parts.

Printed Anno Dom. 1693.

THE PREFACE
Reader,
IT IS a sad thing, when any Kingdoms are divided about the Payment of their
Allegiance and Civil Duties, which must needs bereave vast Numbers of the
Innocence, and more of the Comforts and Quietness of Humane Life. But it is
still worse, when this grows into a Division of Churches, and Breach of
Religious Communions. For, besides that Religion is the chief of all things
which can concern us, (...)
and whereon we must Build all our Hopes of Good in another Life: Religious
Exercises and Assemblies, should be the properest, Cordial to Revive our
Spirits, and the best and surest Refuge for us to flee unto in the greatest
civil Distractions. But such Division of Churches and Communions, unsettles and
distracts the Hearts of Good and Pions People about this; and makes them at a
Loss, where to serve God, and say their Prayers. And this must put all, who
pretend to seriousness, or a Religious Spirit, on showing Compassion; and some,
on endeavoring Relief, and on reaching out such things, as may direct and be
of use to them, in a Safe and Conscionable Guidance of their Steps, at such
times.

And this is the Design of this Treatise. Wherein my Business is not at all to
Dispute the particular Titles to any Crowns, or to examine the Claims of the
several Pretenders to them. In that, I leave every Honest Mind to other ways of
Informing and Satisfying themselves, and of Forming such Judgments thereof, as
Truth and Justice shall happen to require in their particular Case. But when by
those Ways, they are come to be resolved therein, I endeavor to show them what
things lie most upon Conscience, either their Pastors, or their own, as to
Church Ministrations; and what way they are to take about Religious Offices and
Communion, on such unhappy Divisions.

These Matters I Treat of, not as they are State Points, like one who seeks
only to be a Stickler in Civil Differences; or to help those, who, on such
Breaches, Study only to make a Bustle in State Parties. But as they are Matters
of Religion, and concern all, who would keep in the Favor of God, and in the
right Way to Heaven. For my Design and Study all along, is to show how they,
who desire nothing more than to save their immortal Souls, may keep free from
Guilt and Eternal Danger in these particulars: My great Care for them, and for
my self in these Matters, being how we may truly and acceptably Serve God, more
than any Temporal Interest, or the Cause of any Persons, or Parties in this
World And this I offer to the Conscientious, who prefer Religion before Worldly
Ends, and Eternity before this Life; And who in these Differences, are Willing
and Desirous to take the sure Way to Future Peace, and Everlasting Bliss,
however the same may expose them here, to Worldly Difficulties,
Uncomfortableness, and Persecutions.

As for the Ways and Practices here spoken off, I have given warning of their
Gullt and Danger with planeness. And this is necessary in all good Christians,
especially in Ministers, who are If. 5. 20.
not to call Evil Good, or to give soft Names to ill things, and to palliate
Unrighteousness instead of exposing and exploding it: which were to take part
with Wickedness, and to Ezekiel. 13. 28, 20.
sew Pillows for the Bolstring up of Sinners.

I am sensible what need there is of Charity and Candor at all times,
especially on the Bursting out of Differences. And how indispensable Christian
Duties these are, not only in Men at Ease, but in Confessors and Sufferers for
Righteousness toward their Persecutors. If I keep not Charity, though I give
my Body to be Burned, and Suffer Martyrdom, it Profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13.
13. And when we see Men inapparently Wicked and Ungodly Ways, or Unrighteous
Things done; it is the part of this Charity and Candor, to show Favor and
Easiness in Judging of the Dispositions of Mind wherewith they do them.
Ascribing them, so far as it can find any reasonable Color or Pretense
thereof, to the most excusable Principles. As to their being Mislead by the
plausible Arguings of Deceivers, or to an Error of their Judgments; rather than
to their acting all the while against their own Belief and Convictions: And to
their being overawed by Fear of Princes, or of Popular Violence; or being
Forced by Worldly Wants; and Necessities; rather than to their doing the same
willingly and of themselves, or out of Malice. As our Blessed Lord, whilst he
hung upon the Cross, most Heartily imputes the Wickedness of his Crucifiers, to
their Ignorance: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23.
34. It is also the Part thereof, freely to encourage, and Friendly to desire,
and endeavor their Return; rejoicing to have them see their Folly, rather than
to see them suffer for it: And, without Upbraiding them with the Remembrance of
former Errors, Amicably to Welcome, and carry on the Change, when, through the
Blessing and Grace of God, they are wrought upon by whatever Methods of
Providence, and begin to come to themselves.

But whist it is so Favorable, in judging of the inward Dispositions of the
Persons; it is no Part of this Charity and Candor, either to think or to speak
Favorably, of the Ungodly or Unrighteous things themselves, whch are set up,
or driven on at such Times. The unlawful Practices themselves, it censures with
Justice, being a Charity, that is Pure and Pious, and that is careful for God,
and for the Duties of an Holy Religion, in the First Place. Out of Love to God
and Religion, it cannot Favor Vices, or softer and take part with any Sin.
Yea, and out of Love to Men, it cannot speak softly of destructive Courses, or
represent any ungodly Ways or Things, as less Dishonorable and Offensive to
God, or as less Dangerous to Souls, than in the End they will find them. So
that, they are mightily Mistaken, who think it any Part of true Christian
Charity and Candor, to befriend ungodly Practices, or to minee and soften
unlawful and unrighteous Things; which were to conspire with Sin and Wickedness
against God and Religion, and to betray the Souls of Men, instead of
befriending them.

I am also sincerely and conscientiously srudious of Peace: and to keep Men
unreproveable in that, is one intent, though not the only one, of these Papers.
And before open Breaches are made, the Love of Peace will spend it self in
endeavors to prevent them. But if they are made already, as they are to a
great Hight, when the Espousers of ill things have proceeded to set up
Anti-Bishops, which divide Church Societies; till by pouring in Oil they can be
Cured and Closed again, one chief Business left then for the Love of Peace and
Union, is to see that Peace and Unity be kept with the Right Side. And this I
have here endeavored to assist the Children of Peace in, the best I can. For
it would be a fatal Mistake indeed, to have the very Love and Desire of Peace
abused to the Maintenance of Dividers, and to see well-meaning Men, whilst at
such Times they are designedly Laboring to avoid Schisms, to run Headlong into
them. As they must do, if they mistake their Side, wherewith this Peace and
Unity is to be kept; and, instead of the true Body, take part with the
Seditious, and join themselves to those Members who are broken off, on such
Divisions.

Besides, the Peace and Union, which we are to seek in this World, must be such
as may give us Peace at the last. It is not being at Peace in such Ways, as
will fill our Souls in the End with Eternal Horrors. And therefore it is not to
be sought by our Violation of any Parts of Righteousness, nor by our consenting
or giving way to the Suppression thereof, or letting fall our Zeal for the
same. So that we must not seek to compass it, by Neutrality and Luke-warmness
for Gods Holy Commandments. And much less by Treachery, in giving up them, and
the Souls of Men, whose Eternal Weal depends upon the Observance thereof, as
the Purchase of external Unity with any Society. When Worldly Peace can no
longer be kept together with Righteousness, it is no Peace for Christians; or
for Men, who would prefer the Peace of God, and of their own Conscience, before
any false and forced Shows of Peace and Unity with any other Persons.

And these Endeavors, to direct Men, whose Care is to keep Peace and Unity
with any Societies, how they may keep them with the Right Side, when they are
broken into Parties; and in such things, and by such Compliances, as will not
intercept their Future Comforts: Methinks, should be acceptable to all sincere
Lovers thereof, who would be directed how they may wisely pursue what they
love, and ^ot miss of their own Desires, and would fix at last on such a Peace
and Union, as will not Deceive them, or End in Ruin.

In treating of these Matters, I endeavor to clear and confirm what I offer
thereupon by the Authority of the Sacred Scriptures, and from the Reason and
Nature of the things Discoursed of. And moreover, from the Doctrine, and
Practice of the Primitive Church: Showing what the Holy Apostles; and their
Successors of the first and best Ages, would have said to Men, in the Cases and
Breaches here proposed; and how, as I conceive, they would have determined
their own Practice, had they been tried therewith, and placed in such
Circumstances. This I show from their own Rules, which they gave out to others,
and acted by themselves, in their own Circumstances. And it would be a strange,
and very Criminal Innovation, for any now in our Days to slight their Ways.
For we all know, that our Holy Religion does not begin with us, and that we are
not the First Christians, but only their Successors, and that too at a great
Distance. We all profess to be their Followers, and should think we have best
provided for our own Safety. when we have taken the Way to be found in their
Company.

In confirming any Points from their Doctrine, or Practice, I have given their
own Words in the Margin, that the Learned Reader, having the very Words and
Passages I Build upon before him, may be the better Enabled, and with more Ease
to himself, to judge of the use which I make of them, and of the Inferences
which I draw from them. But in the Body of the Book, I have only given the
Translation, or put the Sense or Purport of the same, that the unlearned Reader
may not be discouraged or hindered by the Intermixtures of an unknown Tongue,
but peruse the whole without Interruption.

Through the whole, I am sincerely Careful, so far as I am able, to satisfy
Conscientious and truly Religious Minds, what Way they are to take for Sacred
Offices and Church Communion, on such unhappy Divisions. And seeking their
Satisfaction in these Matters, I have offered the best I can to Resolve those
Points, which I thought they were most like to be unsatisfied in; and to clear
up those things, which seemed to me most liable to mislead them; and either to
Answer or Obviate those Objections, which are already made, or, so far as I can
at present Foresee, may probably hereafter start up in their Way to unsettle
them about the same. All which, as I have labored in, with an Humble
Dependence on God's Grace and Assistance; so I now humbly recommend to his
Blessing. Desiring nothing more, than that he may Graciously Accept the same,
and Pardon all the oversights and well-meant Failures and Mistakes which shall
happen to be found therein, and direct and turn this Work, Poor and Defective
as it is to the Uses and Interest of Truth and Godliness, and to the
Edification and Service of his Holy Church. April 8 h. 1692.


THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the Duty of Pastors, to exercise their Spiritual Powers, and afford
the People Orthodox and holy Ministrations.
CHAP. I. Of the Differences here Treated of, and of the Schism consequent
thereon.
SOme Grand Allegations of both Parties, under the Differences here Treated of.
Of a State of Schism thereby. When the Sufferers may, and when they may not
Remedy this, by Receeding, and Letting fall their Pastoral Claims and
Ministrations.

CHAP. II. Of the Immoral Ways, introduced by a wrong Payment of Allegiance.
UNder State Deprivations, Bishops and Clergy still retain their Spiritual
Powers. To be inquired then, whether they are still bound to exercise, and make
use thereof. A Representation of the immoral ways, which are brought in by a
wrong Payment of Allegiance. The same are incurred by Paying it to any, as a
mere King in Fact. Of these Immoralities, as appearing not only in Practice,
but in Worship and Devotions. Of the Care to Nurse People up therein, at such
times.

CHAP. III. Of the Cases wherein Faithful Bishops and Ministers, are bound to
stick to their Pastoral Powers and Ministrations.
THis they are bound to, when there is need thereof in the Cause of Religion,
and for the Safety of Souls. It lies on them to see the Faithful supplied, and
the Churches provided. 1. With a Sinless and Unpolluted Worship. This in
Respect of Immoralities as well as of Idolatry and Superstition in Worship.
Though they cannot afford it free from the Company of immoral Practicers, yet
they ought to afford it free of immoral Prayers. 2. With the Ministration of
all necessary Truth, not only in Faith, but also in Practice. More
particularly, 1. When dangerous and immoral Practices are setting up;
especially if like to become general. 2. When they are not only set up, but
justified. 1. In some particular Cases, especially of general Concern.

CHAP. IV. More of the Cases, wherein Faithful Bishops and Ministers are bound
to stick to their Pastoral Powers and Ministrations.
THey are still more bound to this Ministration, when 2. This Justification of
immoral Practices, is, by eluding and vacating of moral Precepts opposite
thereto, by Doctrinal Salvo's. Instances of these Salvo's. How they vacate the
respective moral Precepts. Such Salvo's make a Change in moral Doctrine, though
Men still own the Duties under their general Names. The Duty of Pastors to
defend and bear up moral Duties against such Salvo's, by their Ministrations,
shown at large. And this, when such corrupt Salvo's, are only the Doctrines of
the Pastors, not the Determinations of the Church. They are more strictly
obliged thereto, if the immoral Practices justified by such Salvo's, are, 1.
extremely Scandaelous to Religion. 2. Generally Preached up by Seducers. Or, 3.
Come strongly recommended to carnal Passions and Interests; chiefly if driven
on by general Persecutions.

CHAP. V. Of the Obligations to actual Ministration, which lie upon them in the
foresaid Cases.
THese deduced from their Office and Characters, as they relate. 1. To God, and
stand in Place, 1. Of his Messengers. 2. Of his Ministers and Ambassadors. The
various Obligations laid on them thereto by this. 3. Of his Co-workers. 2. As
they relate to Religion, as they are Ministers and Stewards of its Word and
Mysteries. The Obligations arising hence.

CHAP. VI. More of the Obligations to actual Ministration, which lie upon them
in the foresaid Cases.
3. AS they relate to the Souls of Men, and are set over the Church. 1. As
Watchmen. 2. As Overseers. 3. As Guides or Leaders. 4. As Pastors or
Shepherds. 5. As Doctors, or standing Teachers of the Church. As Lights of the
World, and the Salt of the Earth. Their Obligations to such exercise in the
foresaid Cases, from all the foresaid Characters. Different Degrees in this
Obligation. A Spirit of Love and Zeal to Christ and his Church, which stand not
upon strict Terms, the Spring and Principle of this Exercise. How this clears
the Duty of deprived Bishops and Clergy, as to this Exercise on such
Revolutions. Answerable to this Obligation of the Pastors, to afford such
Ministrations at such Times, is the Peoples Obligation to adhere to them, and
attend on them for Participation thereof.

PART II. Of Deprivations by Civil States, or Ecclesiastical Synods.
CHAP. I. Of the Force of State Deprivations in the foresaid Cases.
THE Plea of a Deprivation of State, represented in Bar of their Ministrations
in the foresaid Cases. Concerning which, 1. This is to be pressed only under a
supposed Legal, and Rightful State. 2. Its Deprivation, is no conscionable
Discharge from their Spiritual Ministrations in the foresaid Cases. This is
meant only of pure Spiritual Ministrations. Not 3. of any Temporal Accessions
and Inforcements of those Ministrations; over which, the State has Power,
because it conferred them. As also, over some other Powers belonging to the
Church, whilst it kept separate, which it gives up to the State, during its
Incorporation with it. These it gives up 1. with a Salvo to the Interests, of
Religion, and of Souls. 2. Only whilst it continues protected, not when the
State puts True Religion under Persecution.

CHAP. II. Of the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy Received and Asserted by our
Church.
It lies not in his being invested with, or having a Sovereign Disposal of the
Powers of Orders. But 1. in retaining his civil Power over all Persons, whether
Laymen or Ecclesiastics. In Virtue of this civil Power over the Persons of
Ecclesiastics, he can command them faithfully to discharge their Spiritual
Functions. 2. In the Subordination of Ecclesiastical Courts and Causes, wherein
Ecclesiastics are content to act subordinately, on the Score of their secular
Mixtures and Jurisdictions. And in holding all this 3. in Opposition and Bar of
all other Earthly Dependence, especially of all Foreign Jurisdiction and
Appeals. This Supremacy excludes not Spiritual Ministrations of deprived Clergy
in the foresaid Cases. This may be collected from their Adversaries Concessions.

CHAP. III. Remarques on the Preceding Account of the Force of State
Deprivations, and Instances of Deprivations alleged to the contrary,
considered and cleared up.
THE preceding Account of the Force of State Deprivations, is not 1. To deny
the civil Power, the Cognizance of Bishops and Ministers in civil Matters. Nor
any Just Power over Ecclesiastics. 2. Nor to set the Church above the State,
as the Papal Usurpations pretend to do. Nor to mistake, or overlook the
Condition of an incorporate Church. The Deprivation of Abiathar by Solomon,
considered and cleared. As also, the frequent Depositions of the Jewish High
Priests, by the Roman Governors. And of the Greek Patriarchs by the Turks. And
of the Popish Bishops, by a Commission of State, pursuant to an Act of
Parliament in Queen Mary's Days.

CHAP. IV. Of Deprivations by Synods in the foresaid Cases.
DEprivation of Bishops, most fit and pr per for Synods. Their Deprivation no
Discharge from Ministrations in the foresaid Cases, as shown by reasons. And by
the Practice of the Church. This is meant, when Synods deprive for the cause of
the Truth; not of other mere Personal ^rimes, where the Injured must acquiesce,
till relieved by regular Sentence. that regard is to be had to the Decisions of
Synods in these Cases.

PART III. Of SCHISM.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Shism. And of the Schism of particular Members from
their own Church, in throwing off Subjection and Dependence on their own
Bishops.
OF the Union of a Society, which Schism breaks. One way of Uniting Societies,
is by Uniting them under the same Heads. These, in Church Societies, are the
Bishops. Union of particular Members to their own Church, is in Keeping Subject
and Dependant on their own Lawful Bishops. And their Schism lies in breaking
off from them; especially in seting up Opposite or Anti-Bishops against them.
So 1. in such Oppositions, the Anti-Bishop and his Adherents make the Schism,
if the former Bishop was Orthodox, and is still Rightful Bishop of the Church.
Of George the Cappadocian and Athanasius. 2. The Unity of the Church does not
go with the greatest Numbers. What distinguishes Meetings in the Unity of the
Church, from Schismatical Conventicles. Schismatics too often the more Numerous
Party. Much less does it go with Places of Assemblies. 3. Therefore in pressing
Ecclesiastical Unity, Men must be pressed to keep United to their own Orthodox
Rightful Bishop, not to any Opposite Bishop. The Gospel Precepts of Love, and
Peace, etc. all on this Side, and not to be urged the other way. Such a Schism
not to be cared by the Recessions of the Suffering Bishops in the foresaid
Cases.

CHAP. II. Of the Schism of particular Churches, from other Sister Churches* by
rejecting Fraternal Communion therewith.
UNity of one Body, to be kept up among all particular Churches. This is
chiefly by the Union and Accord of the respective Bishops and Pastors thereof.
All Orthodox Bishops and Churches keep this up, 1. By Receiving each others
Members, as if they were their own Members. 2. And in like sort, by refusing
each others Schismatics. And Excommunicates: And admitting each others
Reconciliation and Reunion of Members: Of Communicatory Letters fox those
Purposes.

CHAP. III. Of just Grounds to break off Communion: Particularly, of making
impious and unlawful Things, or unrighteous Usurpations and Encroachments, the
Terms of their Communion.
JUst Ground to break off Communion from any Churches, 1. When they put impious
or unlawful Things into their Sacred Offices. Reasons hereof. Faith and Worship
spoke of as the great Ligaments, which Bind us to any Church. 2. More still, if
they admit none to Communion in the good Parts, unless they particularly concur
in the corrupt ones too. 2. A Second Ground, is, if they make unrighteous
Usurpations the Condition of their Communion.

CHAP. IV. Heresy a just Ground to break off Communion.
Christ's first end, was to Publish a Religion. Next, to Incorporate ^^ into a
Church or Society, for the Profession of it, Christian Doctrine, the Foundation
of Church Society and Unity. So we are not Bound to Associate or Unite with
any, longer than they keep to this Doctrine, but are discharged by their
Heresy. And on the Evidence of the Fact it self, before Synodical Sentence.
This Liberty 1. For the People, and Clergy, toward their own local Guides, and
Bishops. 2. For Clergy, and People of one Church, toward those of another. And
on Defections from grand and necessary Doctrines of Practice, as well as of
Faith. Chiefly, when the Ministerial Defense of either, is no longer allowed in
their Communion. Being thus set loose from their own Erring Bishops and Clergy,
they are free to Unite with others who are Orthodox. And those others, are free
to receive them. Canonical Rules against intermedling in others Diocese, etc.
no hindrance thereto. Rules of Unity, not pleadable by such Defectors, for
uniting with them. The Guilt of making the Schism, lies on the Defectors.
Should their Brethren come over, that would not Cure, but make the Breach from
the Catholic Church wider.

CHAP. V. Of the Communion of good Christians, or with whom they are to join in
Divine Offices under a Schism.
THeir Obligations to stick to their Orthodox Rightful Bishops, and to stand
off from the Anti-Bishops and their Adherents, in the forementioned Cases. As
reta ^^^ing their Baptism, they may own the Schismatics as Brethren: but as
being in a Schism, they must stand off from their Communion. A great Sense of
the Obligations, to shu^ the Communion of Schismeticks, and corrupt Teachers,
in the first Times. This was most, when Charity was at the hight. This will bar
Communion 1. with the Electors, and Ordainers of such Anti-Bishops. 2. With
their Clergy and People, or the Assemblies of their Diocese. 3. With other
Bishops and Churches, who take their part, and communicate with them. 4. With
the Bishops of a Province, who turn over to an Anti-Primate or opposite
Metropolitan. Of Provincial Union, and the Rules for Maintenance thereof. 5.
When Curch Divisions are made for opposite Ways of Worship and Tenets, Men will
Unite with such as are of their own Mind, and hold Communion with those, who
are for the same way of necessary Worship and Tenets with themselves.

CHAP. VI. Of Ordinations of Anti-Bishops, which, though always Schismatical, are
not always Nullities.
OF St. Cyprians saying the Anti-Bishop is not Secundus, but Nullus. That
Anti-Bishops are real Bishops, and their Ordinations are not Null in
themselves; but were admitted, in the Novatians, by the Council of Nice. In the
Donatists, by the Roman and African Councils. The same shown in several other
Cases. Though Men have Orders, yet they cannot exercise the same in Assemblies of
the Faithful, without the Communion of the Church. Such Offenders Received,
sometimes to Clerical, sometimes only to Lay-Communion, as the Church saw
Cause. The Case of the Anti-Bishops ordained by the Schismatic Meletius.
Ecclesiastical Laws and Discipline asserted, or abated in such Receptions, as
was judged most expedent for the Church. The Donatists made Schism, to take
away the Powers of Orders, and are opposed therein by St. Austin. How St.
Cyprian and the Africanes of his Age, seem to have done the same, which St.
Basil disliked in them. Although their Nulling the Ministerial Acts of
Schismatics, seems to be only in the Way of Asserting Discipline and Canons,
by denying Communion to them in their Churches; not that they thought them Null
in themselves. How the Admission of Ordination of Anti-Bishops, Consists with
the Bishops being the Principle of Unity, and is not against the Nature of the
Spiritual Monarchy. A Difference as to this, between Secular and Spiritual
Monarchies: And of Local Limitations in conserring Orders.

CHAP. VII. Of the Excusableness of the Peoples receiving Ministerial Offices
from Men in Schism, rather than live without any at all.
THis wants the Malignity of Schism. The Excusableness thereof shown, 1. From
the Nature and Importance of the things themselves. Where of the great
Importance of Public Worship, or of Communion in Ministerial Offices. 2. From
the Abatements God himself has been willing to make on such Necessity, in other
like Duties. 2. From the Practice of Gods People under the greatest Schisms:
This Necessity being thought to Legitimate it. 1. Among the Ten Tribes, whose
Ministrations were all in a Shism. 2. With the Schismatical Novatians in the
height of the Arian Persecution. 3. In the Schismatical Extirpation of
Episcopacy among us, in the great Rebellion. 4. Under the Schism of Foreign
Churches, where the Protestants have no Bishops. Of the Abatements the Church
has made, where it had great Reason, in the Point of Shunning the Communion of
Schismatics, and Excommunicate Persons, especially before they were Sentenced
by the Church. The same Equitably Applicable to this Case. How both a due Sense
of the Criminallness of Schism, and Exercise of public Worship, is provided
for by this Means.

CHAP. VIII. Of Communicating in like Necessity, where there are some Prayers
Sinful in the Matter of them.
To concur or go along in any unrighteous Petition or Thanksgiving, is most
Unrighteous and Profane. Of mixed Prayers, where the Mixtures are Idolatrous,
etc. Or where some Immoral Petitions are added to a Service not exceptionable
on any other Accounts. Of Bearing such Immoral Mixtures, whilst they do not
particularly concur therein, but express Dissent from the same, and resorting
still to the Assemblyes where they are used, in Care of ^^eping Peace and
Union. Of Bearing the same, for the Necessity of having some Ministerial
Offices in want of other Opportunityes. Mere Presence at such Immoral
Add^tions, no interpretative Profession of Concurrence there^n. Chiefly if
Dissent be shown by some external Sign. Of these Concessions of favor and
ease. All highly concerned to take the Right way in the Points here Debated.
Unsofe, should they take the wrong, to trust to the Plea of mistake and
Ignorance. Of Zeal against Popery alleged therein. The Con(...).

PART I. Of the Duty of Pastors to Exercise their Spiritual Powers, and to
afford the People Orthodox and Holy Ministrations.
CHAP. I. Of the Differences here Treated of, and of the Schism consequent
thereon.
REvolutions of States and Kingdoms, when they have put them into the
Possession of New Masters, are wont to bring on New Oaths of Allegiance, for
Security of the New Possessors; and also, to bring on Alterations of Public
Prayers and Liturgies, so far, at least, as concerns the Cause and Interest of
the Governing Persons; that Religious, as well as Civil Offices and
Ministrations, may espouse and serve their Cause, who have got the Power into
their Hands.

These Impositions of such New Oaths, and of such Alterations and Ordering of
the Public Worship, pursuant to the Design thereof, are usually followed with
Acts of State, for Deprivation of those Bishops and Clergy, who Refuse and
Stand off from the same; and for Substituting opposite or Anti-Bishops, and
other Clergy, that will conform thereto, into their Places. And when these are
executed accordingly, especially in much disputed Cases, it may be an
afflictive Sight to many good and Christian Minds, in just acknowledgement to
the extraordinary, and perhaps generally celebrated Merits of Some, and in due
Compassion to the hard Measure of all the Sufferers. But it will be much more
impressive and lamentable, on the Score of that terrible Rent and Schism,
thereby like to ensue in such Churches, which is so generally and deservedly
dreaded and bewailed, by all Sincere Promoters of Unity, and unfeigned Lovers
of Peace, and of the Prosperity of the Church.

This Breach being thus made, on One Side, The Sufferers will be pressed to
Submit, in Regard to the Deprivation of the State. And moreover, supposing
themselves injured, they will be put in Mind of the justly magnified excellency
of the Desirableness, and Necessity of Unity; and will be called upon as Good
Pastors, who prefer the Flock, before themselves, to give up Private Claims to
Public Peace, and Personal Quarrels and Pretenses to the Advantage and
Edification of the Church. And this Preference of Peace to private Interests,
they must own to be the Duty of all good Pasters, and as, becomes such, profess
to set these things above all Worldly Profits and Considerations being ready,
when called thereto, Job 10. 11,
To lay down even their Lines for the Sheep, after the Example of the Great
Shepherd. And it is not improbable, but that at such times; they may wish
withal, that their Admonishes had been as ready to follow this Advice, as they
are to give it; and had, like good and conscionable Christians, reflected
seasonably and seriously themselves, upon these Duties of Peace and Unity,
before they had acted so much against them, in rushing Head long, as they may
allege, into that Breach, which in the End, the generality see so great cause
to lament, but which the Sufferers have no Power to Remedy. Or, that in Just
and Necessary Remorse, for what they have done, they would penitently return
whence they are fallen; and seeing their Error, so unhappily over-looked
before, by coming into the old Paths, reunite themselves to then Brethren
again.

But on the Other hand, they will be ready to put their Brethren and Accusers
in Mind, that neither a State Deprivation, nor a Synodical Deprivation, had
there been one, can discharge a Bishop from standing up, to keep off Damage and
Danger to Religion, and to the Souls of Men, or from preventing their being
nursed up in immoral Practices and Devotions. And that True and Faithful
Pastors, are not so straightly bound to keep up external Unity and Peace, as to
keep up necessary Truth and Righteousness, and holy and unpolluted Worship, in
the Church. Their Charge is, first, To provide against all things that endager
or destroy the Souls of Men, and damnifie Religion; and when that is done, then
to look how they may provide against all Schism, or breach of external Unity,
with their Compastors or Brethren; but never seek to salve and secure this, by
letting those alone.

Besides, as to Peace and Union, instead of carrying themselves off from Truth
and Righteousness at such times, or any good People off from them, they will
allege, that they oblige all, who will make Conscience thereof, and observe
them as they ought, to stick to them. For the Unity, which Christ requires, is,
to keep united upon the Profession of true Doctrine and holy Worship, not of
any damnable Errors and Corruptions thereof. And under our own Lawful and
Canonical Bishops and Pastors, not under any opposite or Anti-Bishops and
Pastors, Schismatically set up against them, and violently intruding into their
Places.

The determination of this Debate at all such times, and on all such
Emergencies, is both of highest account, and of most general Concernment. And
the design of these Papers, is to set down those things, whereon, in my
Judgment, the clearing of it must depend; and by the help whereof, Sincere
Christians, in such Divisions, may be enabled to resolve, both what is the Duty
of the Sulfering Bishops and Clergy, in those Cases; and also, what is the
Peoples Duty, and with which of the concerned Parties, Men, who desire nothing
so much, as to please God, and to keep a good Conscience, ought to unite and
join themselves.

As to the deprived Bishops and Clergy, at such times, the question is,
Whether, not withstanding their Deprivation, they are Bound still to go on in
the Exercise of their Ministry? Or, sitting down under it, and letting fall
their Spiritual Ministrations, they Should content themselves to keep United
the Anti-Bishops, and to their Adberents, as Lay Communicants.

If it be their Duty still to insist on their Spiritual Powers, and, as they
can, and at their Perils to exercise their respective Ministrations; those
Churches are unavoidably left in a State of Flagr an^ Schism. For the opposite
or Anti-Bishops are set up against them, in their respective Churches, as New
Heads, And if the Old Ones are not only still in place, and Bishops of their
Flocks, (...) and still bound to stick thereto, and to act as Heads of those
Churches; each Church will stand divided between Two Heads: which drawing
opposite Parties and Members after them, must unavoidably make two Bodies, and
ro^d one into two Churches. And besides, one having the Protection and
Countenance of the State, and the other wanting it, they must not by divided
and separate Ministrations. One, in the way of an Incorporate Church,
encouraged by Legal Places and Preferments, and fo^^^fied by secular Laws and
Privileges. But the Other, in the way of a Destitute or Persecured Church,
stripped of the Public Churches, and of secular Benefices, and of all Temporal
Aids and Methods, directing and fortifying the Spiritual Jurisdiction in the
Ecolesiastical Courts, and left merely to its Spiritual Powers. When the State
deprives them; they must take up with what is independantly and original their
own, and not expect from it the Benefits and Assistances of any secular
mixtures, which were derived to them by Incorporation.

As to this point of Schism, several good Minds may think, that though, by
setting up opposite or Anti-Bishops against them, in their respective Sees,
others have already made it; yet may it be in the Power of the seinjured
Sufferers, by their Receding and Submission thereto* to remedy and put an end
to it. And it is like many Serious and hearty Lovers of Peace, and of those
Churches, may at such times be apt to wish, that, for the sake of Unity, they
would do so.

Indeed, where they may be free to do as they please, that is when no part of
Faith or good Practice is like to suffer by it nor the safety and welfare of
those Souls committed to them, is ha^^rded thereby, much may be said to good
Pastors, not to insist too much on their Personal Rights and Privileges, but to
forego, and give them up, for the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church. Their
Spiritual Powers are committed to them, not as to 1. Pet. 5. 2, 3.
Lords of Gods Heretage, therewith to seek, and serve themselves; but as to
Tit. 1. 7. 1. Pet. 4. 10.
Stewards, that look after it for another or as Ephesians. 4. 11. Jer. 3. 15.
Sheepheards, thereby to serve and Benefit their Flocks. Their Powers are all a
Mat. 20. 26, 27, 28.
Ministry, to promote Religion, and serve the Church by parting with any thing
of their own for its good, as their Great Master did; not to please or
aggrandize their own Persons being 2. Cor. 10. 8.
given them for Edification, or wherewith to build up the Church not for
Destruction, or the pulling of it down. Accordingly, the Pastoral Spirit is a
generous Public Spirit. Nothing is more opposite thereto, than narrow private
Aims, and seeking of themselves; nor more required thereby, than neglect, or
denial of themselves, for the Safety and Profit of their Flocks, and Care or
Solicitude for others. It lies as the Blessed Apostle says, in Phil. 2, 20.
Naturally caring for the Churches: In v. 2.
Seeking not their own things, but the things which are Jesus Christ's. In 1.
Cor. 10. 33.
not seeking their own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may be saved.
In 1. Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
making themselves Servants to all, when thereby they could Profit, the State
of Religion, and their Flocks, though it were by Incumbring and Prejudicing
themselves; becoming all things to all Men, that by all means they may save
some.

And therefore, when it has only been a cause of their own Persons, or
Personal, Claims, but not of Religion, or of the Interest of the Church; Good
and Holy Bishops have thought it became the Pastoral Spirit, rather to receed,
and sit down under the Injuries, than, that for their Sakes, a Fatal Schism
should be kept on in the Church. Cle^a. To. Ep. 1. ad Cor. c. 53, 54, 55. ed.
Ox. p. 113, 114.
If this Schism be for my Sake, send me away, or I will depart whither you
please, and do what the People would have me, that the Flock of Christ, with
the Presbyters over it, may be kept in Peace: Was what St. Clemens Romanus, St.
Paul's Phil. 4. 3.
Fellow Labourer; recommended to the Heads of Parties in the Church of Corinth;
and pressed by the Example of Moses, who was* content to Exodus 32. 33.
be blotted out of the Book of Life, to save the Israelites; and of those
Kings, who, even among Heathens, devoted themselves to Death, for the
Preservation of their own Countries. We ought to endure any thing, rather than
hat the Church of Christ should be divided. Yea, it is not only as Glorious, but
more Glorious in my Judgment, to suffer Mantyrdom, for keeping out Schism in
the Church, than for not Sacrificing to Idols: Ap. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c.
45.
says Dionysius of Alexandria to Novatus, on the division made at Rome. (...);
etc. Gregor. Presbyt. vita Gregor. Nazianz p. 31. praefix. op. Nazianz. and
Nazianz. d^vita suaCarm. p. 29.
If I am any way the cause of your Division, I am not better than the Prophet
Jonah; Throw me into the Sea, so that thereby the Tempest of those Troubles may
cease from you. Whatever you see needful to that end, I choose to suffer. Though I
am blameless, (...), etc. Greg. Naz. Carm. p. 29.
and have been no cause of these Troubles; yet, for your Unanimity and
Peace-sake, I am content to be thrust out of the Throne, and to be expelled the
City: says Gregory Nazianzen, in his Speech to the Synod, on the contest of
Maximus Cynicus, for his See of Constantinople. And we are ready to leave this
Prelacy to whom you will; provided that way the Church may continue one, Homil.
11 in Ep. ad Ephesians. Sub fin.
said St. Chrysostom, when at Constantinople, others, as he complains, had
unlawfully ascended the Episcopal Throne, and thereupon a Separation was made
from him.

But in Cases, where the injured Sufferers are still bound to insist on their
Powers, and to stand up for Religions Sake, and the Churches; this way of
curing a Schism by their receeding, has no place. And therefore this Obligation
to exercise their Ministries, I have fixed the Debate upon, in the case of such
deprived Bishops and Ministers. For if they stand bound in Duty at such times,
to exercise their Ministrations; though never so desirous of Peace and Unity,
they cannot our that Schism, which others have made, by letting their
Ministrations fall. And, besides it is directly meeting that Pretense, and fully
answering it: I think it plainest to be apprehended, and more powerful to
operate on the Minds of those, who are to be directed, and resolved in this
Dispute.

CHAP. II. Of the Immoral ways introduced by a wrong payment of Allegiance.
THE Bishops and Clergy, who are deprived by the State, when they cannot comply
with the foresaid Changes and Impositions on such Revolutions, notwithstanding
the deprivation of State, still retain their Episcopal and Sac^rd^tal Powers.
That is, they are as true Bishops and Priests, as they were before. They are
still endowed with the Powers of Orders, and their use thereof would be as
valid, though not as to secular Claims and Privileges, which are the Gift of
Princes, yet as to the real Effects of the Covenant of Grace, or to purely
Spiritual purposes, as they would have been, had they not been so deprived.

For these Powers are not derived from the State, nor from any secular
Authority. They are called the Powers and Keys, not of any Kingdom of this
World, but of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16. 19. Jesus Christ was a Spiritual
King, disclaiming all secular Authority or Power of the Sword, and Jo. 18. 36.
declaring his Kingdom was not of this World, nor to be upheld by his Servants
Fighting with the Sword. And he instituted all Church Powers; yea, these he
instituted before the Church came to be Incorporated with the State, and made
no new Institution or alteration therein afterward. And when secular Powers
turned Christians, they became the Members of an empowered Church, and were let
in by Ministers, and privileged to claim Ministrations from Powers antecedently
received from Christ; and not at all needing to be received from them, nor
capable of being conferred by them, as having never been conferred on them.

Nor are these Powers to be held, only during the Will and Pleasure of the
State. For then they could not be retained against its Mind: And so, not in a
state of Persecution, when the secular Power sets it self to root out the
Church, and all Church-Powers and Ministrations. Whereas, these Powers were
given to the Church, bearing Christ's Cross, and laboring under Persecutions;
and to continue in it always, even to the end of the World, under whatever
circumstances, as well when secularly Oppressed, as when Protected.
Accordingly, these spiritual Powers were held on by the Apostles, when the
secular Rulers declared against their Apostolical Authority, and Act. 4. 18, 22.
forbid them to Preach any more i^ the Name of Jesus. And by the Bishops and
Clergy, in all the succeeding Persecutions. For all Persecutions of the Church,
were Persecutions of all Church Administrations, and of Bishops and Priests in
a more especial manner, who were chief Actors, and at the Head thereof. Yea,
especial Edicts and Prosecutions were made against them, for being vested with
these Authorities; as the Title of St. Cyprian 's Proscription, was for being
Cyp. Ep. 66. p. 156. Ed. Ox.
Episcopus Christianorum, or a Christian Bishop: which Authorities therefore,
would no longer have belonged to them, could a Persecuting Power have deprived,
or bereaved them thereof.

And this retaining their spiritual Powers, will be allowed by their
Adversaries, who Vindicat. of the unrcaso nab. of the new Separation, p. 9, 11.
And a Vindication of their Majesty's Authority to still the Sees of the
deprived Bishops, p. 18, 19, 20.
acknowledge, that the deprivation of State is no Degradation, to divest them
of their Character, or spiritual Powers conferred in Orders: but only a
debaring them of exercise thereof in their Dominions, and in way of an
incorporate Church, under State Encouragements. So that, if they do exercise
their Ministry, there will be no want of Spiritual Powers, to render their Acts
Nullities, or of no effect and validity before Christ. But only want of secular
Benefices, and enforcements to them; and of submission, as they allege, to the
secular Power, or of secular Obedience.

And having still their Episcopal and Ministerial Powers, it is next to be
considered, whether they stand bound to exercise and make use thereof?

It Is not to be brought into this Question, what is to be done herein, on
Worldly Arguments, as they stand deprived of their Livelihoods, and way of
Maintenance, how hard soever this may fall, either upon themselves, or their
Families. Which, however it may abate or excuse, especially to compassionate
Natures; yet is no justification of things, that are otherwise unjustifiable on
principles of Religion and Conscience. But what is to be done on conscionable
Arguments, that are to rule their Determinations as Christians, especially as
Divines; or that they may faithfully discharge their duty? What is to be done
by spiritually minded and mortified Men, who are raised above this World, and
prefer God and Religion before themselves?

Nor is the Dispute, Whether the Ministerial Powers be such a burden, that Men
must be always pressing and obtruding the exercise thereof, without any regard
to the wants of the Place, or the needs of the Church. 1 C^r. 9. 1^,
Necessity is laid upon me, and woe be to me, if I preach not the Gospel, was
spoke in the want of true Preachers, when Luke 10. 2.
the Harvest was Great, but the Laborers were Few. It spoke a necessity
introduced, not merely by the Power of Orders, but also by the circumstances of
Times and Persons, when the exercise thereof was necessary in want of
Preachers, for the use of the Church. But in plenty of true Preachers, there
would not have been the same necessity; nor would they have been bound to this
exercise, in place where there was no need of their Gifts, but the same were
exercised by others. In this surplusage of Supplies, for Church-uses and
necessities, 1 Cor. 14. 32. 33.
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, and their Powers must
either be exercised, or forborne and suspended, as makes most for Order, and
Edification, and the Peace of the Church.

But this exercise, the deprived Bishops and Clergy are bound to, in Duty and
Conscience at such times, If there is a need of their Ministrations then, to
provide for Religion and the Souls of Men; or to prevent Men from being nursed
up in destructive Ways, as Immoral Practices, and Immoral Worship and
Devotions, must be confessed to be.

To clear this, it may not be amiss to consider;

First, What Immoralities come in, by a wrong, payment of Allegiance, to
corrupt Religion, and to endanger Souls.

Secondly, What Provision good and faithful Pastors ought to make against such
Dangers and Corruptions, by the exercise of their Ministry.

First, I shall briefly consider, what Immoralities come in by a wrong Payment
of Allegiance, to corrupt Religion, and to endanger Souls.

Whether this is actually the case of any Kingdom, and the Allegiance required
of them by their New Governors, be directed and paid wrong, I do not here
discuss. That makes another dispute, viz. about the Right to the Crown
contested betwixt the two Competitors in those Countries, and the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of the New Oaths of Allegiance, consequent thereupon, which is
exacted on such changes. And this, it is no part of the design of these Papers,
to argue or meddle with.

But when this really is the case in any Revolution, as in this World, God
knows, it is too often; or among those Subjects, who believe this is their
case, and that their Allegiance is called for to the Wrong, against the Right
Person: Such as these are the Immoralities, that will everywhere corrupt
Religion, and endanger Souls, whilst such wrong Payment lasts, and which should
be thought to do so among them, viz.

Then all that time, whilst they are violently transferring their Allegiance
from him, to whom it still Remains rightfully due, would Men in the general
Practice of those Nations, be wickedly disobeying, and forceably resisting Gods
Authority, or the Father of the Fifth Commandment, which extends to civil, as
well as natural Parents. Then would they all that while be most openly, and
horribly breaking through all former Oaths of Allegiance. Then would all, who
have promised, and pay their Allegiance, to drive out their ejected Prince out
of any part of his Right, or to keep him out thereof, be actors of bare faced
Iniquity, and heinously unrighteous, coveting and invading their Neighbors
Goods. And all force used against him, or any other Persons, for their adhering
to his Cause, would, in Gods Account, be oppression, and unjust Violence; all
Spoils and Seisures of their Goods, would be Thefts and Robberies; and all
shedding of their Blood, all Cries and Clamours for it, or rejoicing in it,
would be horrible Murders; which, not only they who acted, but they who Wished,
or Prayed for, or gave Thanks for, when accomplished, would be Guilty of. All
which, are most dangerous and destructive ways, and amount to a general Breach
of Gods Commandments, and to an open wast of Moral Honesty and Justice. And all
these, would be the Dangers to Men's Souls in any Kingdom, were the Translation
of Allegiance, such an unrighteous Perversion, really, and in it self. Or, they
would be met, with like Pastoral Provisions, as if they were so Dangerous,
should the deprived Pastors believe, and apprehend it to be such. For it would
have the same effect, to awaken their Care and Ministration, if it appeared so
to them, and brought all these Dangers on the People, in their Apprehension.

Besides, it may happen, that in the Opinion of the much greater part of the
Swearers themselves, this Allegiance shall be transferred and paid to the King
Regnant, and professed by them to be so, only as to the King in Fact, leaving
the other still to be King de jure, or to retain the Legal Right. Now, if any
ejected Prince, is any where admitted to have the Legal Right, by turning their
Allegiance to his Competitor against him, the Subjects of those Countries,
would fall into all the same forementioned Practices. If he remains their
Rightful King, it is Disobedience and Rebellion, or Resisting of Gods Ordinance,
to take up Arms against him: or to abet, aid, and pray for the Prosperity and
Success of those, who take up Arms against him. It Is a Literal down right
Breach, of all Oaths formerly made to such Rightful King, to bear Allegiance to
him, and to defend him therewith, against all Attempts made against his Person,
or Crown. It Is to be Self-Condemned of the Highest Injustice, by Forcing, or
Keeping him out of that, which they own to be his Right. It Is to be Guilty, of
Murders, and Robberies, in all the Bloodshed, and Spoils, which, in the course
of their New Allegiance, they have abetted, or prayed for, or attempted to make
on him, or on his Adherents, for his Cause. For all Allegiance is due, and
required by God, to be paid to Rightful Kings. And to those, who have, and
stand upon their Right, whether they be in, or out of the actual Administration
of their respective Realms. And this, to those who have the Legal Right, which
is not set aside by Providential Possession. All which, they who please, may
see proved, in a Treatise Entitled, The Duty of Allegiance settled upon its
true Grounds, according to Scripture, Reason etc. So that there would be a like
wast of Moral Honesty, and Just Practice at such times, and like Danger to the
Souls of Subjects, to call for the Preventive or Medicinal Help of their
Ministrations, by their Swearing Brethrens own Principles, or should it prove,
that the ejected Prince has the Legal Right, according to their Apprehensions,
and Authorized Writings in this Case.

And this Immorality and Dishonesty, would endanger Men's Souls at such times,
not only as appearing in Practice, but also, as appearing in Worship and
Devotions. For all these Unrighteous, Dishonest, and Immoral things, should
they be found such, are not only daily acted by Subjects of such Realms, in the
course of Practice; but use also to be daily offered and recommended to God, in
their Solemn Worship and Devotions.

For the daily Prayers for such Governments, use to be the same, as for any
other preceding, and confessedly most rightful Governments: viz. For the
Prosperity, and continuance of their Administrations, for their overcoming all
their Enemies and Opposers, and for Gods confounding all their Devices against
them, etc. When there is a State of Declared War and Opposition, between them
and their Competitor himself, called by the Swearing Brethren, the King de
jure. There use moreover, to be particular Acknowledgements and Thansgivings
inserted, for the Subjects being delivered of their former King, and for having
their present Governors to Reign over them, in his Place. And particular
Prayers, for the Prosperity of their Arms, both by Sea and Land; when those
Arms are employed particularly against him, and against those, who, as the
Public Acts at such times use to say, Rebelliously adhere to him; and when
they are to drive him out of such parts of the Dominions, as he still holds
from them; or to keep him out of other parts thereof, if he shall make any
attempt to recover the same out of their Hands. And, besides that these things
use to be daily recommended to God, as part of the public Offices: They are
further, an Occasion, made the professed Aim of other Solemnities of Religion,
and Solemn and appropriate Times, are appointed on purpose for them, and
devoted to them. As set Days of Fasting and Humiliation, for engaging God to
give Success to these Arms and Expeditions. And set Days of Thanksgiving, for
Returning Solemn Thanks to God, for any Victory or Success he has afforded in
that Cause, after they have received the same.

Now these, in behalf of a Legal Rightful King, and where they are not made in
any other Pretenders wrong, are Just and Pious Prayers. But if in any Time or
Kingdom, they should be made by Subjects, for an unjust Possessor of another
Crown, against their Lawful King; they would be Prayers put up, for all the
sore-said Iniquities and Immoralities of Perjury and Rebellion, of Oppression,
Injustice, and all sorts of unrighteous Violence. Or, if made against one,
owned to be King de jure, or the Lawful King; they would still be so
unavoidably, according to those Persons Principles; and would be so held and
accounted by them, if they, who profess to go, and act upon such Principles,
would be true to them.

And the bringing such heinous Immoralities and Iniquities, into Gods own House
and Worship, I think would plainly be most highly affronting, and offensive to
the Great and Dreadful God, and as dangerous to the Souls of Men, as can well
be imagined. For these Iniquities and Immoralities, give high Provocation to
God, when he meets them in any place, or sees them committed by those, who
still retain that Reverence for him, as to believe that he forbids them, and is
Angry at them. But to bring them as an Offering into his own House, and to
recommend them in Prayers and Religious Solemnities, is to make him a Party
therein, or pleased therewith; and to the Heinousness of those Ways, as they
are Acts of high Disobedience, adds, moreover, an horrid, and more immediate
Blasphemy of God himself. Such an Immoral Worship, is a charge of his being an
Immoral God: Which Plutarch, a Wise, and Piously disposed Heathen, thought a
more intolerable Reproach, than to deny his Being, and say, There is no God.
Thus, as he observes, any Good and Virtuous Person would resent it, in his own
Case. For, (...), etc. Plut. de Superstitione Op. Tom. 2. p. 170.
I says he, had rather have it said, and should think he wronged me less, who
should say, there never was, nor is, such a Man as Plutarch: Than have another
affirm, yes, there is such a Person: But he is a Man of no Steadiness, Mutable,
Angry, Greedy of Revenge for every light Cause, that will fall out with you for
Trifles, and if you are wanting in any Ceremony, would be ready to grew your
Flesh, or stay your Son, or turn in Cattle to trample down and devour your
Corn. And Answerably, the fixing these, or any such like Immoral and
Blasphemous Characters on God, he thinks, is not less Impious, than Atheism it
self is.

And should these foresaid ways prove Immoralities, both in Practice, and in
public Prayers and Devotions; those few deprived Bishops and Clergy in any
Kingdom, who suffer for standing out against the same, when the most run into
them, cannot but see Men generally Nursed up therein.

For, as to the Practice of those Immoralities, carnal Reasons, and the course
of the Times, and the Terror of the present Powers, will make them go down with
most Men. And their Spiritual Guides, will nurse and train them up therein, if
once they themselves are generally got in to go along therewith, and to do the
same. Nay, when a general Persecution is raised, to drive on the unwilling, and
to force them to comply for external Interests; they will then stand ready to
carry on the same, with regard to Conscience. If any start, or stand off, when
consulted, they direct, and persuade them to come in, as they see they
themselves have done, and tell them, it will be no matter of Guilt, or of
Spiritual Danger to them. And when once they are got in, they speak, and Preach
Peace to them, that they may feel no Remorse for so doing, nor Harbor any
Thoughts of Returning. And to take off all apparent Inconsistence; from the
Commands of God, and the Duties of Religion, about Oaths, and Obedience to
Governors, and Common Justice, and not coveting or invading other Men's Goods
or Rights, and the like, that are ready to fly in their Faces, and bear hardest
on what they have done: They start doctrinal Salvo's for all these Precepts, to
cover their own Ways, from falling under the same, and to prove there is no Sin
therein, notwithstanding all the seemingly plain, and Literal Opposition, which
those Precepts and Duties bear to them.

And then, as to these same Immoralities, in public Worship and Devotions; if
these ways should really prove Immoralities, at such Times they are plainly
Nursed up in them, because they are part of the Daily Prayers, and, on
Occasion, are the fet Fasts and Thanksgivings, in all the public Churches and
Assemblies. The authorized and established Guides and Pastors, every where then
observe and use them, (such States not Authorizing and Establishing, but
Depriving the Refusers thereof;) and put them into the Peoples Mouths, if they
will follow and say after their Leaders. And this is to be trained and nursed
up in such Devotions, in such sort as People are trained up in any Devotions by
their Guides: that is, by being convened and called to them, and, in the
public Ministration, lead on therein; the Pastors part, as to this, lying in
Leading, as the Peoples does in Following them.

So that the People in such cases, are generally trained, and nursed up, in
these Practices and Devotions. Which, if, for want of Legal Right or Just Title
in their New Governor, and for the Continuance of the same in his Competitor,
they prove Unrighteous and Immoral Ones; they would be nursed up, in Immoral
Practices and Devotions. And what Obligation that would lay, on the Suffering
and Deprived Bishops and Clergy of those Countries, for Pastoral Ministrations,
will appear, by Considering,

2. Secondly, what Provision, good and Faithful Pastors ought to make against
such Dangers and Corruptions, by the Exercise of their Ministry, which shall be
treated of in the Ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. III. Of the Cases, wherein faithful Bishops and Ministers, are bound to
stick to their Pastoral Powers and Ministrations.
NOw, if under such Revolutions, for want of such Right and Title in the New
Governor, and for continuance of the same in his Competitor, all the foresaid
Practices and Devotions are unrighteous and immoral in themselves; this
Exercise of their Ministrations, for provision and spiritual supply of all
conscionable Adherers to Truth, and to Morality in Practice and Devotions, is
to be expected of them, from the reality and obligation of things. If they
think them to be so, and they are such in their Judgments; it is to be expected
from Men of their apprehensions, and for them to act so, is but to be true to
their own Convictions. If their Brethren own the ejected Prince, to have Legal
Right still, or to be King de jure; they ought to expect no other from them,
since that alone makes all the foresaid immoralities, and they can do no less,
if they will act according to that Principle, which is owned and professed by
themselves. The only Ground, whereon in Truth they could be exempted from this
Exercise, and therefore on which alone it can with Reason be desired, or
expected from them, is the Translation of the Legal Right; which would remove
these immoralities. So, that they can only blame them for this Exercise, who
believe the Translation of this Legal Right; nor can they make it appear, that
they blame them with Justice, but by clearing this Point, and making Proof
thereof.

Their Obligations, to exercise their Powers and Ministrations at such times,
are to provide against the wants and dangers of the Souls of Men, and against
the corruptions of Religion. And that, which will be ready at the same time, to
be alleged against it, will be the Inhibition and Deprivation of the New
State, and the appearance of rending the Church thereby, which is then become
united under other Pastors put into their place, or of making of a Schism. And
therefore, to give a clear Prospect, and for making a truer Judgment of the
Obligations, which they stand under to this exercise on such Revolutions, I
think it may be of use to consider,

1. In what Cases, the good and faithful Bishops and Ministers of Christ, are
Bound to stick to their Spiritual Powers and Pastoral Ministrations, and what
Obligations they have to do so.

2. Of what force a Deprivation of Estate, or the Preservation of external
Communion and Peace in the Church, ought to be, in debarring them thereof.

1. First, I shall consider, in what Cases, the good and faithful Bishops and
Ministers of Christ, are Bound to stick to their Spiritual Powers and Pastoral
Ministrations, and what Obligations they have to do so.

1. I shall First speak to the Cases, wherein they are Bound to stick to their
Spiritual Powers and Pastoral Ministrations, and are to go on acting as Bishops
and Pastors.

Now, this they are Bound to, when there is need of it in the Cause of
Religion, and for the safety of the Souls of Men. For these Ministerial Powers,
are Sacred Trusts. And the very end, why they are entrusted with the Bishops
and Pastors, is, that thereby they may take care of Religion and the Peoples
Souls, and provide for the needs thereof. So that they are always to be
trustily Exercised, when these stand in Need of them: or, whenever the Souls of
Men will be Endangered, and Religion Damnified, by the Pastors omitting such
Exercise and Ministration, in the places where they are concerned.

I say, they are bound then to provide such Ministrations. For the Part of
Bishops and Pastors, is not, like that of mere Lay Christians, to communicate
as they can, in what is provided for them by others. But as Pastors, they are
to make Provisions. The Work of Ministers and Pastors, lies in Feeding of the
Churches. This Feeding of Ministers, is Feeding them with Religious Offices and
Ministrations. These, the People are to partake in; but the Pastors are to
Provide, and Administer them. And this, as Religion, and the Souls of Men stand
in need thereof. And they always need a Provision of such Ministrations, both
of the Word, of Prayers, and Sacraments, as may Edify but not Pervert, and
Purge but not Pollute those, that seek to communicate therein. Therefore it
lies upon them, I conceive, to provide and supply the Churches,

First, With an Holy, or Sinless, and Unpolluted Worship, and such as may
recommend the Worshippers to God, and is fit to be accepted,

There is nothing, that the Souls of Men may seem to need more, than such an
Holy Worship. For the Worship of God, is that, whereby in an Especial manner,
they are to serve and please him: whereby, they must seek to expiate, and
atone him after any Offenses, which they have committed against him: whereby,
they can gain his Favor, and Aid; it not only being the great means of their
procuring, but also an established Way of his Conveying and Deriving down to
the Souls of his Servants, those Spiritual Graces and Blessings, which they
need and long for. The Ministrations of Worship, are the Ministrations of the
Spirit, to Minister and afford Grace to those who duly seek it; and so will be
owned of (...) Necessity, to all who see what need they have of the Divine
Grace and Bounty. And since the Worship of God is to stand them in so much
Stead, they have need enough to have it Pure and Pleasing, that the Medicine be
not turned into Poison; that it do not affront and provoke God, instead of
gaining and appeasing him; and stop Blessings, instead of bringing them down.

There is nothing also, that Religion lies more in. The Worship of God, is the
most Direct and Immediate Act, and the most express and open Profession of
Religion. It is a Service both Solemnly and Professedly Performed in the
Presence, and immediately to the Person of God. And being so directly and
immediately concerned with it in Person, he is more nicely Tender of any
Profanation, or Wrong to him therein. It Is particularly in matters of his
Worship, that he declares himself a Jealous God, in the Second Commandment.
When Sin and Wickedness is sent up to him there, his own Person is immediately
struck at. Instead of being Served and Honored, he is Aspersed and Blasphemed
by it. For such an Unholy Worship, Asperses and Slanders him, as if he were an
Unholy God. It Is a Profession, to serve, and gain him, by wicked Ways; which
represents him, as taking Pleasure in ill Things, and being ready to Patronize
them; fixing upon him, our own Violences, and making him appear as bad, as we
our selves are. And this is a most horrible Profanation, and Blasphemously
foul Aspersion, thrown upon the purest of all Beings. It is a turning Piety
into Profaneness; and our very Prayers into Libels, and Reproaches. So that if
Men would have their Worship, truly Religious; or such as may truly Represent
and Honor God, not Disgrace and Bolye him: they must take care above all
things, to preserve it free from all Profane Matter, and Sinful Mixtures. As
the Worship, is of an Holy God; so must what is Offered to him, be an Holy
Worship. Psalm. 93. 4. and Ps. 26. 6.
Holiness becomes his House, and more especially his Service. His Servants,
must put up Holy Prayers, and not have their Prayers turned into Sin, or their
Sins presented to God therein, which would turn Prayers into an Abomination.

And this is True, of all sorts of Sins, either Idolatry and Superstition, or
Immeralities. The needs of Religion, and of the Church require, that Worship
and Devotions be kept free from both, and that neither of them mix and
incorporate therewith. Immoral Prayers, as well as Idolatrous Ones, are a
Blasphemous Libel upon God, and an utter Profanation and Prostitution of
Worship and Devotion; they turn Prayer into an Abomination, and call down a
Curse instead of a Blessing. And thus it was in the Heathen Devotions, which
were not only Idolatrous, as being paid to False Gods: but too often Immoral
and Impure, as being paid to Vicious and Dishonest Deities. Mercury, by their
account was addicted to Theft; Venus, to Whoredom; Bacchus, to Revelling and
Drunkenness; as others were to other Immoralities. And setting up such Immoral
Deities, no wonder they should be See Dr. Hammond. Annot. in 1. Cor. 5. 10.
Not. 1.
found paying them Immoral Services; and together with their Idolatrous
Sacrifices, offering up also Immoral Services, as Uncleanness, Drunkenness, and
Revellings, in their Temples. And these Immoralities, in Lasciviousness and
Excess of Wine, as well as the Mis-applications of Worship therein, were the
most Odious Profanation and Blasphemous Reproach of God, and made them
Abominable Idolatries, as St. Peter says, 1. Pet. 4. 3.

These Immoralities, whilst they find a place only in Practice, if persisted
in, stop the Acceptance of Devotions. And so God told the Jews by his Prophet
Amos, that till he saw a Course of Judgment and Righteousness, he should hate
and despise their Feast Days, and not Smell in their Solomn Assemblies, nor
accept their Burnt. Offerings or Peace Offerings, nor hear their Hymns and
Songs of Praise, Amos 5. 21, 22, 23, 24. And the same he declares to them, by
Isaiah, Is. 1. 11, to v. 18. and by Jeremiah, Jer. 6. 6, 20. And if they have
such Fatal Effects, when presented to him only in Practice; what will they have
when presented to him in Solomn Worship and Prayers, which makes the
Profanation thereof so much more Staring and Audacious, and the Provocation
abundantly more Heinous.

Now these Sinless Prayers, free from Immorality, as well as from Idolatry,
which Religion and the Souls of Men stand in such need of, it must be the Care
of Pastors, to provide and Supply them with. As Ministers of Prayers, they must
see that such be administered to them. Yea, as God himself is Jealous of his
Honor, in these Services: So must they, as his Substitutes and
Representatives, be Jealous for him, to mantain and preserve Purity therein.
And that, to invite Honest and Sincere Tempers, to resort to Prayers and Divine
Service: as well as to prevent their contracting Guilt, and Profaning God
instead of Pleasing him, when they are met there. For wicked and unrighteous
Prayers, extremely disturb Righteous Petitioners, and drive away truly Plous
and Devout Minds, making them (...), as it is in the Septuagint, on the
Pollutions of the Sacrifices by Ely's Sons, that is, To forhear the Service of
God, and to abhor the Offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17, 24.

I do not say, there is the same need of affording the People of God this pure
Worship, free from the Company of Immoral Practisers. The Congregation of
Worshippers, or Church of God in this World, is like to be a Mixture of
Persons; or as a Field, wherein Tares will grow mixed with the Wheat, till at
the general Harvest, they come to be separated and Weeded out by the Angels, as
our Lord ^
says. Immorality whilst only in Practice, though it Dishonor God, and hinder
the Effect of Prayers as to the Practisers themselves; yet does not affect
Communion, or stain the Devotion of others, and intercept the Blessing from
those good Practicers, who join with them in public Offices. And this is the
Error of those, among our Dissenters, who have insisted on the Plea of mixed
Communions, meaning thereby, a Mixture of Persons, or of good and bad
Practisers in Gods Worship and Service, which they pretend should be made up of
Saints, or of Pure and Regenerate Souls. Church Governors, I grant, in such
Sort, as may be most Medicinal to the Offenders themselves, and to preserve
Religion from the stain, and the sound Members from the Infection of such
Companions, are to remove such, (especially when the Immoralities are Gross and
Notorious,) from Communion by Church-Censurers, so far as may be profitably and
prudently done in Course of Discipline, and as Times and Circumstances, and the
State of a Church in this corrupt and mixed World, will bear. But this will be
no absolute Provision against them; and after all, the Church here will have a
Mixture of Persons, or good and bad to meet together in Divine Offices, and
it is not for any, to break Communion with it thereupon.

But, though they are not universally to keep out Immoral Practisers; yet they
are to keep out Immoral Prayers from public Ministrations. For these are
offered to all that come, though only fit to Poison, not to Nourish them: And
are put up to God, in the Name of the Congregation; and so are a public,
visible, and professed Dishonor to him. So that they, who have the Care of
public Worship, must take care to Purge them out of it.

It will be incumbent on them, to supply the Church,

2. Secondly, With the Ministration of all that Truth, which is necessary to be
believed, or Practiced. The Word, or Preaching of these Truths, is to bear up
Religion, and to save the Souls of Men. And the Ministry of this Word, is
committed unto them.

This Ministration must be of all Necessary Truth. What our Lord entrusted with
the Apostles, and, in them, with the Bishops and Pastors of the Church to the
end of the world, is, to Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded: Where all things, must needs take in all that are necessary. Mat.
28. 20. And St. Paul, in Discharge of his Cure of Souls, pleads himself pure of
the Blood of all Men, as having deolared to them the whole Counsel of God,
which their Blood might any way depend upon, and having kept back nothing that
was Profitable to them, Acts 20. 26, 27. For in these Points, if the People
perish through the Watch-Mans being Dumb, or for want of his giving warning;
the People Die, indeed, and are taken away in their Iniquity, but their Blood
will God require at the Watch-Mans Hand, Ezekiel. 33. 6, 8. As for inferior
Truths, which are not commonly necessary for Christians to know and to be
instructed in; but in their Nature, are more indifferent: They may be forborne
for Peace, as need requires, and to prevent great Stirs and Divisions in the
Church. But Truths of Necessity and Importance, must not be neglected, or given
up on such Pretenses.

And it must be a Ministration of all that is necessary, whether in Faith, or
Practice. That which makes either, to be a necessary part of their
Ministration, is, because they are necessary parts of Religion, and necessary
to the Souls of Men. And this makes an equal Necessity, of Ministering both. For
Obedience, is as Necessary, and indispensable a Branch of the Gospel, as Faith:
And Practical Opinions, are as much set by, as Propositions about Faith; and as
much Dishonor may accrue to God, and as much Danger to the Souls of Men, by
Practical, as by Speculative Heresies. Nay, many times more, since matters of
Morality and Practice, are more naturally imprinted on all Men's Hearts, and are
more easy and obvious to all Understandings. They lie open, to the Unlearned,
as well as to Learned Men. Yea, the Ignorant and Unlearned, oft-times continue
to see them, when the Learned overlook them: a little Skill, with a sufficient
Degree of Honesty, qualifying Men to discern these Matters; and there not being
so much need of Learning, in those, who would descry, as there is in those, who
would pervert and mistake them. And this makes the Mistakes of Men, in these
Points, both more Dangerous to themselves, and more Dishonorable to Religion.
For being so generally known, or easy of Knowledge: There is not like Room in
them, for Extenuation and Excuse, of Error or Ignorance; as there is in
Speculations of Faith, that are of harder Examination, and lie further off;
which renders Practical Heresies oft-times more Dangerous. And on the same
Account, the Dishonor to God and Religion thereby, is more universally noted,
being more manifestly Apparent, and more sensibly Disgusting, to the Generality
of Beholders: Which makes them also, more Disgraceful and Standalous. And
therefore they stand particularly bound, to Minister the Word, and give
warning, in these Points: Both as what would oft-times more surely, and
irremediably shed the Blood of Souls; and as what would prove more Scandalous
in the Sight of all considerate Persons, and make Religion more generally
Despised, Blasphemed, and evil Spoken of.

Particularly, it will be incumbent on them to supply the Church with the
Ministration of Necessary Practical Truths,

1. When Dangerous and Immoral Practices are setting up. Especially, if they
are setting up generally, and most People are in danger of being drawn into
them: As when they come dressed up, with Appearances and Recommendations of
Wordly Ease, or Interests; or are driven on by the Arm of Secular Power, or by
the Cry of a Time. And undisturbedly, as when they, who are in the place of
Reproving, Dissemble and Connive at them; and are Dumb, not lifting up their
Voices against them.

These Immoral Practices, though the Immoral Things are only Practiced, but not
Justified, are most Dangerous and Destructive to those Souls, who are involved
therein. And when they see Men in the Ways of Death, the Watchmen are required
at their Pe^il to give Warning, and to tell them what will be the End thereof.
If thou give him not Warning, nor speak to warn the Wicked from his wicked
Way, to save his Life; his Blood will I require at thine Hand, Ezekiel. 3. 18, 20.
and cap. 33. 8. They are the Spiritual Weaknesses, and Diseases of Souls, their
Strayings, and Loosing of themselves, in Wrong and Pernicious Ways. And the
Duty of Shepherds, is not to stand off, or to keep Silent when these Maladies
have seized the Flocks; but to show their Pastoral Care, and make Provision for
them. They are, as God tells the Shepherds by Ezekiel, to Heal that which they
find to be Sick, by applying proper Remedies; and to Strengthen that which is
Diseased, Feeding it with wholesome Doctrine, or Bonit Alimentis. Grot, ad loc.
Proper Aliment, as Grotious says upon it; to bring again that which was Driven
away, and to Seek that which was lost, if happily, by seasonable and needful
Warning and Admonition, they may recover it. Ezekiel. 34. 4. And if they take up
with Feeding of themselves, and Neglect by these ways to Feed the Flocks at
such times; he denounces Woes to them, ver. 2. and declares he will require his
Flock at their Hand, ver. 10.

I do not say Immoral Practices, are a Cause for Pastors to Separate
Communions. For Immorality, whilst confined to Practice and Conversation, and
not crept into Worship and Prayers, does not hinder all Communion in Divine
Service. Nor are we to separate from any Church in Divine Offices. because of a
Mixture of Persons, or of their having Moral and Immoral Livers among them, as
I observed before.

But they are an obliging Call to them, to Minister the Word, to put a stop to
them. And if they cannot be allowed to do this in Communion with others; they
must do it however, by breaking off from them, and Officiating by themselves.
And such Breach, to say nothing of other Grounds, is consequential upon the
Ministrations of the deprived Pastors, on such Revolutions. They are by their
Deprivation Secluded from Ministering in the Authorized and Established
Churches; and so must act seperately, and Minister by themselves, if they are
bound to Minister the Word at all.

2. When ill, or immoral Practides, are not only set up, but Justified. And
then ill Practices, are turned into ill Principles, and become Doctrines. There
may (...) Defection from Duties in Practice, whilst Men retain their
Principles: Their Love of this World, and the Strength of Corrupt Passions,
carrying them too often, to act and do all against their Judgments. But if their
Opinion is brought over, and in Judgment they are reconciled to ill Ways; since
all Judgment i^^pon Principle, that is, by change of Principles. Their Judgment
then is perverted, by ill and Corrupt Doctrines. Which, having imbibed to
corrupt, and alleging to clear and justify themselves; they will teach and
propagate among others. And when, by venting corrupt Principles and
Propositions, False Guides set up for Teachers of ill Things: It Is high time,
for True and Faithful Guides, to open their Mouths, and to strive for Truth and
Righteonsness against them. They are ill Watchmen, if they are a sleep, or
silent, at such a Time. And ill Shepherds, if they take no care to lay
wholesome things before the Flocks, and to drive away unwholesome, when the
Speakers of Perverse Things, are endeavoring to Poison them. And Unfaithful
Stewards, and Dispensers of the Word, if, instead of dispensing it out, they
smother and suppress it, when the Church is in the greatest need to be informed
thereof.

Particularly, they are obliged to this Ministration, when the ill and Immoral
Practices are Justified.

1. First, In some particular Cases, especially, if those Cases are of general
Concern, that draw in great Numbers of Persons: And may prove of long
Continuance, to hold them on for a considerable Time, in the Repetition of the
same Immoral Practices. Both which happen, in Case of Injustice, to
dispossessed Princes, and of turning Allegiance against them; which concern all
the Subjects of such Princes, and will continue so to do, till the Competition
cease.

Now these Immoralities in particular Cases, are the Immoralities, that will
destroy Souls, when those Cases happen. It is in particular Cases, that
particular Persons are Guilty of them, and liable to be condemned for them. So,
it is in particular Cases, that they need to be warned against them, and showed
the Danger of them.

And the giving them this Warning, in such particular Cases, as they come, is
the Business of the Watchman. For he is set to Watch particular Cases, and
against particular Occurrences; and is to call out and give warning, as often as
he espies any Harm, or Danger approaching therein. And if any perish in those
Cases, for want of his giving them Notice, God tells him, Ezekiel. 33. 6.
He will require their Blood at his Hands. The Watchman, must have both his
Eyes abroad, to epsy these Dangers; and his Tongue free, to proclaim, and give
warning of them: Being set to drive any approaching Evils away, by giving the
Alarm for People to Arm against them, and to keep out of their Way. And if,
like Men asleep, they take no Notice of Vices, when catching and over-runing
their Flocks, nor open their Mouths against them; the Scripture brands and
upraids them, as it did the Prophets, and Watchmen of Israel, with the Name of
Dumb Dogs that cannot Bark: It being the Office of Priests and Prophets, to
reprehend and open their Mouths, against approaching Vices, as it is of Dogs
set to watch the House, to open theirs, and Bark against approaching Thieves,
as ad loc.
Grotius comments upon it, Isa. 56. 10.

It is the part of Luke 12, 42.
Stewards and Rulers of the House; who are set to attend all particular Cases,
that may arise, and concern the Family; and still to Dispense and Deliver out,
what Portion of Food, each Case, or Occasion, may make Needful, or proper for
the Household.

It is the Office of Pastors and Shepherds, to have an Eye to circumstances of
Time and Place, and to Watch over their Flocks in particular Cases. The Needs
of their Flocks, their Sicknesses and Strayings, lie all in particular Cases.
And, as the Work and Duty of Shepherds, lies in Ezekiel. 34. 2, 8.
Feeding of their Flocks, it will be their Duty to administer this Food, when
they need it, and their Care and Provision must be for those particular Cases,
which are in want thereof. Their Feeding of their Flocks, must be by
Strengthening them in any Case, where they see them Diseased; or Healing them,
where they find them Sick; or Seeking after them, when they are Lost; and
bringing them back at any Time, when they are gone Astray, or are Driven away,
as God tells the Shepherds of Israel, Ezekiel. 34. 3, 4. And if they Neglect, by
due Ministrations to feed them in these Cases, where they are in so great want
to be Fed; he tells them they are no Shepherds, but that his v. 8.
Flock is without a Shepherd, v. 5. Or, that they are such Shepherd, as Feed
not his Flock, but Feed themselves, ver. 2, 8.

It is the Duty of Ministers of the Word, who are to watch and mark Seasons,
and not to let the People want it in any Case, when they need to be Warned, and
Instructed by it. They are to Preach the Word, and to be instant in it, in
Season, yea, and even out of Season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. To see, that none of the
Family Starve, or go astray for want thereof, in a trying Time; but that all
have what Portion of it they need, in due Season, Luke 12. 42. They are
constituted Pastors and Teachers, to Minister the Word, for perfecting the
Saints, and for Edifying the Body of Christ: And so are bound to administer it
in any Case, where the Saints need to be perfected; or where that Body needs to
be repaired thereby; as sure they do, when ill Practices have broken in, and
are allowed among them, Ephesians. 4 11, 12.

It is the Work and Profession of Guides of Souls, to direct them in all
particular Occurrences, and to set them Right in all Cases: And if at any time,
they see them about to mistake their Way, to show them which Path they ought to
keep; or, if they see they are gone wrong, to call out to them to come back
again. They are such (...).
Guides or Leaders, as are entrusted with, and must give an Account of Souls:
And so are strictly bound to see, that they do not may, nor perish in any Case,
for Want of true and careful Guidance and Direction, Heb. 13. 17.

So that particular Cases, which are the Times of the Peoples Needs, must be
Times of the Pastors Ministrations. Especially such particular Cases, wherein
the Generality are like to run into Deadly Sin, and are like to be daily
Repeating the same, and, for ought appears, to continue long therein.

And therefore in such Cases, if Immoral Things are not only practiced, but
justified; the True Pastors are more highly bound to Warn the Church, and to
show the Guilt and Danger thereof. The mere Justification of them in such
particular Case, without any further Propositions or False Doctrines about
them, is enough to require this Ministration at their Hands. For, when such
Immoral Things, are justified; Sin is not only Practiced, but it, and Death,
are generally recommended. Men are taught then, to Is. 5. 20.
call Evil, Good; and to embrace Sin, without Remorse or Shame; and to meet
Death, without Fear, or Sense of Danger. And what is there left then to
restrain them, from Corrupting themselves therewith, according as they are lead
thereto, by their own Interests, Ease, or Inclinations; or by the Power, or
Persuasions of others? So that Sin, and Death, here Ride Triumphant, and go on
without Opposition. And that sure, is a loud Call for the Ministers of
Righteousness, to stir up their Ministerial Powers, to put a stop thereto, and
to save the Souls they are set to Minister to, from being polluted and
destroyed by them. They would be ill Ministers of the Word, should they
administer no Word, but keep silent; and ill Watchmen for their several
Charges, should they give no Warning; ill Stewards of the Household, should
they make no Provision; ill Shepherds of the Flocks should they neglect to
Feed and Minister to them; and ill Guides of Souls, should they fail to show
the Way, and to give Directions, how they may avoid both Sin and Death, so
fairly and invitingly recommended to them, and so hastily coming upon them, in
these Cases.

CHAP. IV More of the Cases, wherein faithful Bishops and Ministers, are bound
to stick to their Pastoral Powers and Ministrations.
BUT when Immoral and Unrighteous Practices, are Justified in any particular
Case: Since those Practices are literally and directly Condemned by Moral
Precepts, they who pretend to Justify them, must find some way to reconcile
and take off those Precepts. So that this Justification of Immoral Practices in
a particular Case, will be sure to bring on another Step, which will make this
Ministration of all true Pastors still more Necessary, and that is,

2. Secondly, The eluding, or vacating of Moral Duties, and Precepts opposite
thereto, by Doctrinal Salvo's.

When Men both act, and justify immoral things, they do not ordinarily
renounce the Duties transgressed thereby, under their general and received
Names; but start such Doctrines and Principles about them, for Salvo's, as
elude, or vacate them in Practice.

Thus, the Jesuits allow the sinfulnes of Lying. But they say, what is Spoken
is no Lie, if they can make it a Truth by a Mental Reservation; or by the
Aequivocalness and Ambiguity, of any Words or Sentences, whereby it is
Expressed.

Thus also others admit the Damnableness, of Resisting the Higher Power,
according to St. To. 23. 3.
Paul, or of Raising Rebellion. But they say, this is only resisting them,
whilst they keep to Laws, and within the Bounds of Legal Powers, and the Frame
of the Government; not when they go beyond them. They own, that by the Fifth
Commandment, and other Scriptural Precepts, Allegiance is due to their
Sovereign Prince. But they teach withal, sometimes, as the Papists, that it is
in the Power of the Pope; or, as others, that it is in the power of the People;
to depose their Princes, and then they are no longer Sovereigns. And thereby,
to Absolve and Discharge themselves, from owing and bearing them any more
Allegiance. Which Positions, for Deposing Princes, and for Absolving Subjects
from their Allegiance to them, have passed in the Account of our Laws and
Church, for Damnable Doctrines. Or else they say, that this Allegiance, is due
for the Sake of Public Good; and that whether the Sovereign himself, whose
Right it is, Discharge it or no, Public Good, when it interferes, will give a
Discharge thereof. Or again, that it is due, only on Account of Actual
Administration, and is still to follow the King in Fact: And so is no longer
Due to their Lawful King, if once another has Forcibly Dispossessed him.

Further yet, some allow the Sacredness and Obligations of Oaths; particularly
of the Oath of Allegiance to Princes. But they teach moreover, sometimes, that
all this Sacred Obligation, is only to some Feigned Softning and lower Senses
of their own, neither suiting with the Nature of things, nor with the Ordinary
and Honest Use of Words, and with the Simplicity and plain Dealing of Promises
and Solemn Declarations. Nay, nor with their own ensuing Practice and
Performance thereof, they, who in Swearing, declared for a lower, afterward
paying and practicing an higher Sense; as all will be called to do in course of
their Obedience, who profess Allegiance to any as their Civil Governors. Or
else, that all this Sacred Obligation of the Oath of Allegiance, is in
Subordination to the Antecedent and Superior Obligation of Public Good, and
that it will Absolve and Discharge them from it.

Again, they admit the unlawfulness of Stealing, or of taking another Man's
Goods, or Crown, against the Eighth; or of Coveting them, against the Tenth
Commandment. But they teach also, which roots up the Foundations of common
Honesty and Justice, that if Providence has at any time assisted an Invader to
get them from him, the Invader has thereby got a Providential Right thereto,
which is the best Right; and that after that, they may lawfully maintain him,
in his Violent Possession; and may Innocently keep the other, whom themselves
own still to have the Legal Right, out of the Possession of his Right, yea; and
may with a safe Conscience force any Remaining Parts out of his Hands, which he
shall Happen to continue still Possessed of.

Lastly, Admitting the ordinary Wickedness and Destructiveness, of such Breach
of Oaths, and of open Injustice, etc. yet many think all may be salved, by the
Maintenance and Preservation of some other Duties thereby, which are of more
worth, as of Orthodox Faith, or of Purity of Gospel Worship and Divine Service.
Thus the Jews, who Swear by the Name of the Lord, but not in Truth, viz.
Swearing Falsely what they never meant nor intended; nor in Righteousness, viz.
promising to do what was very Unrighteous and Unjust. And yet, as God taxes
them by Isaiah, they thought to salve all, and would stay themselves upon the
God of Israel, by calling themselves of the Holy City, or by retaining Gods
Temple and true Worship still among them, Is. 48. 1, 2.

Such as these, are the Doctrinal Salvo's, whereby Men, who in the General
would continue to own, and to profess Moral Duties and Precepts, do
notwithstanding study to reconcile them with some beloved and Justified
Practices, which are a literal and downright Breach thereof.

Now, though for Silencing of their own Consciences, or in Fear of Worldly
Shame, in these, and the like Cases, Men still own the Duty in general Words:
yet, by these opposite Principles and Doctrinal Salvo's, do they Elude and
Vacate them in Practice. That is, under Shelter of these opposite Doctrines,
they practice against those Duties, and Justify themselves therein, as if
there were no such Duties to restrain, nor general Words to forbid them.

Under the Doctrinal Solvo's, of Aequivocations and Mental Reservations, for
instance, they think themselves true Men, all the time they are telling horrid
Lies. And under the aforesaid Doctrinal Limitation, of the Damnableness of
Resistance, to Legal Actings and Administrations of Princes; they believe
themselves good Subjects, whilst they are most wickedly Levying War, and
Rebelling against God's Ordinance. Thus likewise, under the Doctrinal Salvo's,
of the Popes, or Peoples Power to Depose Kings, and to Discharge their Subjects
of their Obedience; of Allegiance being Due, only to a King in Fact; or whilst
the Payment of it makes as they conceive, for the Public Good: may they think
themselves Unreprovable in Duty and Loyalty to their Lawful King, though all
the while they appear both to God and Man, as if they ought him nothing; yea,
though both by Prayers and Practice, they openly resist him, and oppose and set
themselves against him. And by confining the Obligation of Oaths of Allegiance,
to their own Arbitrary Senses; or, by Cancelling them, by Antecedent
Obligations of Public Good: They may Fancy themselves keeping Faith, all the
time they are woefully breaking it; and that they are observing Oaths, tho, all
the while at their extreme Peril, they are Literally Forswearing themselves.
And under Shelter of the aforesaid Providential Right, to what an Invader has
unjustly got into his Possession: They may take themselves for Just and
Righteous Persons, whilst all the time they are wickedly and horribly backing
Violence and Wrong; and helping one to hold, what they believe and know he has
unjustly got; and keeping the injured and oppressed Person, out of his own. And
this is making God's Laws of no Effect in Practice, however they may still be
owned, in general Names and Acknowledgments; since, in their Actions, Men may
do Contrary, as Securely and Warrantably, as if there were no such Laws at all.
Thus it was, with the Salvo of the Vow Corban among the Jews, to get clear of
the Duty, of Honoring and supporting Parents. And with other Salvo's about
Oaths, and other-Commandments. And these our Savior called, a making void the
Commandments of God through their Doctrinal Traditions, Mat. 15. 5, 6. and Cap.
22.

And where this is the Case, it must not be said, on the Account of their still
Owning and Preaching up the Moral Duties, under their general Names, that Men
have made no Change of Moral Doctrines. They may have made none, but say the
same, as to general Doctrines, viz. that in the General, there lies an
Obligation upon Men, to keep Faith and Oaths, and to be Obedient and Passive
under Governors, and to do Justice to Proprietors, and the like. And so the
Pharise^^s, would in the General own, the Duty of Supporting Parents, and those
other Duties, which they made void in Practice. But these general and
abstracted Doctrines, lie further off; and some other Doctrines more
circumstantiate give them their proper Limitations, and teach the Obligation
thereof, and how far they are Duties in particular Cases, must come between
them and the Practice of Men, which lies all in such particular Cases. And in
these nearer, and more limited and circumstantiate Doctrines about the foresaid
moral Duties, there is a Change, when Men fall to start the foresaid Salvo's.
Yea, such a Change, as intercepts all the Force of the General Doctrines, and
teaches and authorizes Men, notwithstanding those general Doctrines, to
Practice otherwise. And such as the Pharisees made, for which they are charged
by our Savior, for making void God's Laws; which certainly is to make a woeful
Change thereof. These salving Doctrines, are all changes of Doctrine; and the
Preachers thereof at such times, make as great a change of Moral Doctrines, as
is necessary to make a change of Moral Practices. And though they may not all
Agree, in any one of these Salvo's, or changes of Moral Doctrine; as Men are
not so like to do when they are going wrong, the ways of Error being Infinite,
though the way of Truth is but One. Yet if once they all Agree, not only in
following; but in justifying and teaching the Immoral Practices; they must all
do it, upon one or other of these new salving Doctrines, which Men, not hardy
enough to decry moral Duties under their general Names, must each of them choose
for themselves as they see Cause.

Now, when such changes of Practical Doctrine are introduced, and Moral Duties
and Precepts are thus eluded and vacated, by Doctrinal Salvo's and Limitations:
It Is more highly incumbent still, on the Ministers of Christ, to stand up in
his Cause, and to administer his Word, in Defense thereof. They are Ministers
of Religion, and must not see it suffer in any of its Articles, or Duties; but,
as its appointed Officers and Advocates, must guard and maintain them. These
Articles and Duties, are a Trust divinely committed to them. 1 Timothy 2. ^1.
The glorious Gospel, was committed to my Trust: 1 And 1 These. 2. 4.
we are allowed of God, to be put in Trust with the Gospel, faith St. Paul.
They are entrusted in their Hands, as things, which they are to keep and hold
fast. O! Timothy, keep that which was committed to thy Trust, says he again, 1 Timothy 6. 20. Hold it fast, and in the Form of found Words, wherein it was
delivered, 2 Timothy 1. 13. He trusts to them; not only to keep and retain them,
but to defend and plead for them. I am set for the Defense of the Gospel, Phil.
1. 17. To take care, that they be transmitted down to others, who shall come
next in Succession. The things, that thou have heard of me, the same commit
thou to Faithful Men, who shall be able to Teach others therein, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
And having received such Sacred Trusts, they must show a strict Fidelity, in
Discharge thereof. St. Paul directs Timothy, to commit them to Faithful Men, 2 Timothy 2. 2. And says, Christ committed the Gospel to his Trust, and put him
into the Ministry of it counting him Faithful, 1 Timothy 1. 11, 12. And all this
Fidelity, is to be the Fidelity of Ministers, who are entrusted, not only with
the private Keeping and Profession; but with the public Ministration of these
Articles, and Gospel Duties. So that their Keeping, and holding fast to them;
is their Keeping and Holding, to the Preaching, and Ministration of them; and
by that same Preaching and Ministration, are they to defend them in the present
Age, and to deliver them over to Posterity.

And therefore, when any Moral Duties or Precepts, deposited and entrusted with
them, are endangered, and Attempts are made to elude or vacate them: They are
tried, how true they will prove to their Trusts, of Ministerial Keeping, and
Defending, and transmitting of them down. And then, they must not desert them,
but stand up and act for them, by a Faithful Administration. If others
treacherously reject them, or bend their Wits to vacate them, and render them
of no effect; they must not run in, to give their Voice with them; nor by their
uncontesting Silence, and base yielding, betray, and give up that Sacred
Depositum, which was entrusted to their Custody and Maintenance.

This ministerial Maintenance and Administration of Moral Precepts, when thus
changed and vacated by corrupt Salvo's, God expected from all True Prophets,
and Faithful Shepherds among the Jews.

In the Prophet chap. 23.
Jeremiah, we are told of ver. 1, 9.
False Prophets and Pastors, who, by such Salvo's, had Poisoned Peoples Morals.
They had corrupted them in point of Oaths, drawing them generally into
Swearing, (or Perjury, as ad loc.
Caestalio, and Arias Montanus, and others,) because of which, as it is there
said, The Land Mourns: And also, in point of Justice, abetting a Course of
Evil, (or Violence, as the Margin,) and of Unrighteous Force, Jer. 23. 10. This
Corruption of Practice, was by Corruption of Principles. For they had made them
first to believe, that there is no Sin in these their Doings; which they had
studied to shelter by Salvo's of their own Invention, from the censure of those
Laws, which seemed plainly to forbid them. They commit Adultery, and walk in
Lies, i. e. in Lying Salvo's and Adulteration of moral Duties, making the
Preservation of Gods Worship and Temple, a Shelter for these Vices and
Immoralities, as in ver. 10. and ver. 14.
Grotius Notes: And by such Adulterations, they strengthen the Hands of Evil
Doers in these Ways, that none of them does return from his Wickedness, ver.
14. And these Salvo's, invented from Time to Time, as need was, were not more a
Defection from the Truth, than from their own professed Principles: The
Prophets being taxed therein, for causing the People to err, as by their Lies,
so by their See Zeph. 3. 4.
Lightness, ver. 32. But now, when the False Prophets, and unfaithful
Shepherds, set themselves by such corrupt Salvo's, to clude and vacate moral
Precepts God expected of all the True and Faithful Shepherds, that they should
stand up against them, for Ministration, and Maintenance thereof. They should
have stood in his Council, and have caused his People to hear his Word, to turn
them from those evil ways, which the False Teachers labored to strengthen and
encourage them in, by their Lying Salvo's, ver. 22. If any Prophets had his
Word, he expected they should speak it Faithfully, ver. 28. That his Word
should be in them like a Fire, bursting out with Violence, and not sparing any
that stood in its way, as the False Prophets, those false and flattering
Accomodators, were wont to do; and like an Hammer, that breaks the Rock in
Pieces, striking on the most obdurate, when the other, in their soothing ways,
were wont to stroke them, ver. 29.

In Ezekiel, God complains of the False Prophets, for Daubing over Immoral
Practices with untemper'd Mortar, i. e, with corrupt Salvo's, to cover them
from the Censure and Condemnation of moral Precepts, Ezekiel. 13. 10, 11. etc.
Their Daubing, was by such Covers, or Plasters, as were Visions of Peace; or to
show the Evildoers, how they did not break with God, and moral Duties, by
these their immoral Practices, ver. 15, 16. This he also calls, making
Kerchiefs or Vales, their end being to hide all Appearance of Sin and Deformity
in these Actings; and says, they fitted them to every Stature, ver. 18, 21.
And by these Lies, or Lying Salvo's, they made Men believe, that there was no
Breach of moral Precepts in these immoral Practices, nor any Danger of Death
thereby; and so strengthened the Hands of the Wicked, that he should not return
from his wicked Way, by promising him Life though he went on therein, ver. 22.
But if any true Prophets, who saw this, should keep silence; or, out of selfish
Subtlety, should Skulk, and keep out of those Dangers, which attend the
ministerial Reproof thereof at such Times: God brands them, as being like Foxes
in the Desert, for not having gone up into the Gaps or Breaches to repair them,
and for not having made up the Hedge for the House of Israel, by fencing it
again with sound Doctrine, and with the Conscience of moral Duties, to keep out
all further Eruption of such immoral Practices, ver. 4, 5. And elsewhere by the
same Prophet, he denounces woes to them, and declares he will require his Flock
at their Hands, if, instead of Feeding only themselves, they do not, as becomes
good Shepherds, Feed their Flocks; and that, by the due exercise of their
Ministrations, for Strengthening the Diseased, or for Healing the Sick, or for
Reducing the Scattered, or Recovering the Lost, as the needs of the Flock shall
require, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3. 4. 10.

The Priests, says Zephaniah, have done Violence to the Law, forecing it with
corrupt Glosses and Expositions, to bear with immoral and unlawful Practices.
Zeph. 3. 4. They have violated my Law, or, as the Margin from the Hebrew,
offered Violence to it, i. e. stopped its Mouth by Wicked Salvo's, not
suffering it to condemn those evil Deeds, against which it is designed, says
God by Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 22. 26. These corrupt Salvo's, and doctrinal Perversions
of Gods Laws, are grievously complained of by the Holy Prophets, and still grew
up among the Jews, to perfect the Wickedness, and to hasten on the Ruin of that
Church. But whenever these Attempts were made by False Prophets and Seducers,
to pervert the Laws of God; it was incumbent on his true Ministers, to oppose
them therein, and to Minister those Laws and Duties to the People in their true
meaning. And they still incur the Censure, of Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3.
Shepherds that Feed not the Flock, but themselves; of Blind VVatch-Men, and
Dumb Dogs; if they are silent, and sit still on such Occasions. * Is. 56. 10.


The like, our Savior Christ also expected from his Disciples, when they found
such Salvo's advanced, for Practices against any of his Commandments.

The Pharisees, had invented many doctrinal Salvo's, to justify Men in the
Breach of moral Duties, and to vacate several of Gods Holy Commandments. Thus
they dealt, by the Breach of Oaths; which they cleared by several arbitrary
Limitations, and nice Distinctions of their own, about the Obligation of them,
or Men's becoming Debtors, i. e. bound by them, Mat. 23. 16, 18. And by the
Denial of Relief, or Help to Parents; which they See Dr. Lightfoot's Hor. Heb.
in loc.
said was discharged of the Obligation laid by the Fifth Commandment, and free
from Sin, if it was salved by the Vow Corban, i. e. if they had made a Vow
before, that they would never Relieve them, Mat. 15. 4. 5. 6. Thus Frustrating
the Commandments of God, as he tells them, and making them of none effect,
through their undermining Salvo's and Traditions, Mat. 15. 6. and Mark 7. 9,
13. Not to mention, their Limiting the Obligation of all Righteousness; to
external Acts; or other ways, of their exempting many Offenses, forbid by their
own Law, as well as by that of the Blessed Jesus.

But when the Ministers of Christ met with these Salvo's, it was their, Part,
not to suffer them, but to rescue moral Precepts from being corrupted, and Men's
Consciences and Practices from being ensnared by them. They were to Mat. 16. 6,
11.
beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, in these, and other Points: not only,
as private Christians, to beware of imbibing it themselves; but. as Pastors, of
suffering others to be tainted, or corrupted therewith. When by these, and such
like Glosses, Luke 11. 52.
the Lawyers had taken away the Key of Knowledge, and Mat. 23. 13. vid.
Chrysostom. in loc. and Comment. incerti Authori^ ap Chrysostom. in loc.
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, as our Lord says; they, as
Ministers of that Kingdom, were to unlock and open it to them, and to make
these Duties, which were the Paths thereof, plane for all, who were sincerely.
desirous to walk in them. They that are made Pastors, and put in Station to be
Great in the Kingdom of Heaven, must both do the some themselves; and teach
others to observe, even the least of Christ's Commandments, when others not only
transgress them in their own Practice, but teach Men to transgress them, Mat.
15. 19.

St. Paul afterward speaks of False Apostles, who corrupted the Word of God.
(...), that adulterated it, as Vintners do their VVines, by corrupt Mixtures,
blending their own Arbitrary Salvo's and Conceits therewith, or Mixing their
own Doctrines with Gods, as St. in loc.
Chrysostom comments. 2 Cor. 2. 17. Who handled the Word of God deceitfully.
2. Cor. 4. 2. And spoke Lies in Hypocrisy, pretending them consistent with, or
sometimes promotive of Duty and Piety. 1 Timothy 4. 2. And perverted the Gospel of
Christ, Gal. 1. 17. But when the true Ministers met with any of these corrupt
Infusions, and Adulterations of Christian Doctrines; instead of Treacherously
conniving at these Adulterations, they were, by a purer and more sincere
Ministration, to cure and teach Men better. They were to make full Proof of
their Ministry in Preaching the Word; and to reprove, and rebuke all that was
contrary to it, among those that would heap to themselves Teachers of Errors
and Adulterations of the Truth, according to their own Lusts, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3,
5. When others fell to speak Lies in Hypocrisy, they were not to neglect the
Gift that was in them, that is, their Pastoral Power and Function; but to 2 Timothy 1. 6.
stir it up, and put the Brethren in Remembrance of the pure and saving
Christian Truths and Duties, that they may discharge the part of Good Ministers
of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4. 2. 6. 14. When Vain T^lkers and Deceivers started
up, Teaching Things they ought not, for Filt by Lucres sake; they were called
upon, not only to hold fast the Faithful Word, as they had been taught, and to
keep to it themselves; but also, by Sound Doctrine, to exhort and Act 20. 28,
30, 31.
teach others, and to convince, and stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9,
10. 11.

Thus are the Faithful Ministers of Christ obliged, to Feed the Church with the
pure Administration of Moral, or other Gospel Duties; when the False Guides, by
doctrinal Salvo's, and undermining Propositions, are showing Men, how they may
securely Vacate and Transgress them. They are not to connive at such
Corruptions, and Adulterations of moral Precepts; but to cry out, and warn
against them: Nor to smother, and keep up the real and injured Duties; but to
Preach and Minister them out to those Souls, who are like to perish through
their Ignorance, and Breach thereof. And this, as they will answer Gods
repeated Calls and Injunctions, or approve themselves True and Faithful to
their Ministerial Trusts. To neglect it, or fail therein, would be Treachery
and Falseness to that Sacred Doctrine, which had been deposited with them; and
to those Souls, which had been committed to them.

And this Ministration they are bound to, though these corrupt Salvo's are only
the Doctrines of the Pastors and Teachers, (as those forementioned Salvo's of
the False Prophets, and of the Pharisees too, I suppose, were among the Jews;)
and are not yet made the Determinations of the Church. It Is not enough, on such
Justification of Immoral Practices, or advancement of Immoral Salvo's by the
Guides of Souls, to say, the Church has not altered its Articles, nor
justified nor salved the ill things so, by any Synodical Confession. For it is a
call to them for their Ministration, if these things are done by the Churchmen.
Their Ministration, is to provide against the dangers of Souls. And they are
allways endangered by damnable Practices, whosoever teach them, whether their
particular Guides, or whole Synods. But particular Guides, are the Directors,
which the generality of Men have for their Consciences and Practices. So that
the Consciences and Practices of the generality are endangered, when they fall
generally to teach them the Breach of Moral Duties by corrupt Salvo's. And
then, true Guides are to warn them of these Dangers. When Speakers of perverse
things shall arise from among themselves, the Pastors are bid to take heed to
their Flocks, and to feed them with the Word of Truth and Righteousness, Act.
20. 28, 30.

And instead of abating this Obligation, it will add to it, if, amidst all this
Prevarication of the Church Men by such corrupt Salvo's, the Church it self
continues right in these Points, and says the same it did in its public Acts
and Articles. For then, in these Ministrations, those Faithful Pastors have, as
the Authority of Truth, so also the Authority of their own Church on their
Side. Therein, they only minister out among the Members, what their own Church
teaches: and show themselves, as Faithful Ministers of Christ, in standing up
for his Truths; So Faithful Ministers of their own Church, in standing up for
its Doctrines. As to the Point of separation from the Church; I Grant that true
Ministers must not separate from a Church for any Doctrines, if the Church it
self holds and maintains them, though the Churchmen should generally and
shamefully defect from them. But this Ministration of those deserted Doctrines,
is not to separate from it, but to stick Firm and Constant to it; yea, and to
keep it up still as a Visible Body, for all its true Members to Adhere to. And
I hope true and faithful Ministers of a Church, may stand by it, in maintenance
and ministration of the Truths and Laws of God; though that continue on a Breach,
and keep them at a distance from those Revolting Pastors, who have defected and
separated themselves from both

The foresaid Justification of Immoral Practices in such particular Cases, and
maintenance thereof by Doctrinal Salvo's, will make the Consciences of
Transgressors, Easy and in Rest at Sin. They will by this Means, see no Breach
of Duty in what they do, nor danger of Punishment for doing it. They are taught
in these Cases, to call Evil Good, and to put Darkness for Light, whereto such
Heavy Woes are Is. 5. 20.
denounced by the Prophet: and so, under the greatest Load and Danger, of Sin
and Guilt, think themselves Safe and Innocent. This God calls, Ier. 6. 14. and
C. 8. 11. andC. 23. 17. Ezekiel. 13. 10.
Speaking Peace to the wicked, or to those, who should have no Peace, but
Terror and Indignation in their present Evil Ways. And Ezekiel. 13. 18. 20.
Sewing Pillows, to bolster up Evil Doers, to make them Easy and at Rest in
their Unrighteousness. And Ier. 23. 14. Ezekiel. 13. 23.
Strengthening the Hands of the Wicked, making them bold and forward in their
Ungodly Courses; and barring their Repentance and Return from their Wickedness,
by leaving in them no Conscience of Guilt, no Relentings or Remorse, for their
going on therein.

Now all this, is a direct Ministration to destroy Souls. And whilst False
Prophets, and Devouring Wolves, are ministering Lies for their Destruction; it
is evidently and highly Incumbent on true and faithful Pastors, who are set to
Save Souls, to minister the word of Truth for their Salvation. Accordingly,
amidst all these Preachers of Peace and Strengthners of Evil Doers, God Ezekiel.
13. ^, 5.
tells the Prophets of Israel, that they should not, like Subtle Foxes, have
studied only how to slip aside, and shun danger by silently Conniving at these
Doings: But ought to have gone up into the Gaps, and have made up the Hedges.
Seeing they were public Ministers, deputed by God to act for him, and for the
good of Souls; their part had been Ier. 23. 22.
to stand in his Counsel, and to have caused his People to hear his Words, and
thereby to have turned them from the Evil of their Doings. When the People run
thus, to do Evil in such Cases, without any Sense of Guilt, or by calling Evil
Good; they heap up Sin, and Death to themselves, and know it not, and so Perish
for want of Knowledge. But the Priests Lips must keep up Knowledge among the
People, and they must have the Knowledge of the Law at his Mouth, Mal. 2. 7.
And if my People are destrayed, for lack of Knowledge; because thou have
rejected Knowledge, and the Communication thereof to my People, I will also
reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me, says God, Hos. 4. 6.

Such is the Obligation incumbent on true Pastors, to Minister moral Truths,
when immoral Practices are justified in particular Cases, and all the moral
Duties opposite thereto, are vacated and taken off, by undermining
Propositions, and Doctrinal Salvo's.

And they are still more strictly obliged to this Ministration, if the
Practices justified by such Salvo's, are

1. In immoralities of Great, and general ill Fame, and in things extremely
Scandalous to Religion.

All gross Violations, of common Honesty and Justice; and Breach of Faith,
especially when confirmed by Solemn Oaths; and renouncing of Duty and
Subjection to Superiors, more particularly to Patents and Princes; and such
others; are immoralities, that all Sober Men think they ought to account
Scandalous, and of highest Reproach. For the Duties transgressed thereby, are
generally known to be of greatest Importance, for keeping up Society, and for
securing the Comforts of humane Life: Which therefore all Mankind, that feel
such need of Society, and would find Comfort in Life, cry up, and utterly decry
the Breaches of them. So that these Immoralities, are sure to bring the most
general Infamy upon any thing that is Guilty of them; yea, and upon Religion it
self, should it ever be found, or represented, as allowing, or giving
Countenance thereto.

Now the Ministers of Religion, are to be especially careful, to preserve its
good Name, and to keep up an honorable Opinion and Reverence for it among Men.
He has nothing of the Ministerial Care, or of a Ministerial Spirit, who is
careless and unconcerned, how ill, and irreverently Men think of Religion.
Indeed, if they would keep Religion if self up in the World, they must keep up
this Reverence, and good Opinion of it. For if once Mankind come to think ill,
or despicably of it, they are never like to trouble themselves much therewith,
nor to Labor after much thereof. And if they would preserve Religion
reputable, and secure of Men's Reverence, and honorable Opinion; they must
watchfully keep all those things out of it, which deservedly loose and lessen
Men's good Opinion. They must have a jealous Care to preserve it pure, not
admitting, or justifying any thing, that, in the common Sense of Mankind, is
Infamous, or of bad Name. And therefore, if any such things, (as all the
forementioned immoralities are in an High-Degree,) offer to creep in, or if
Satan's Ministers are Busy to introduce them; they must Oppose, and Minister
against them with all their Might, and presently disclaim and purge them out,
that Religion may be clear of them. They must Watch, as far as they are able,
to keep them out of the Practice of Men; least from such Practice of its
Professors, the Lookers on should Harbor a Presumption or Suspicion, as if
Religion had some Toleration or Allowance for them. 1 Timothy 6. 1.
Let Servants count their own Masters worthy of all Honor; and Tit. 2. 4, 5. ^
Tim. 5. 14.
Let Wives be keepers at Home, and obedient to their own Husbands, etc. that
the Word of God, and his Doctrine, be not Blasphemed, faith St. Paul, directing
Timothy and Titus, in that Pastoral and Ministerial Care, which they should
have of the Church. But when these ill and infamous things appear, not only in
Practice, but in Doctrines; and come, not as the blamed and prevaricating Acts
of Professors, but as Justified and Preached up by their Guides and Leaders:
Then Religion is more directly and planely brought in, and the true Ministers
thereof are more highly obliged to oppose them in its behalf, to prevent its
incurring any Scandal or Reproach thereby.

Or,

2, If they are generally Preached up by Seducers, and Men are every where
Taught, and persuaded to them. Instead of giving any Discharge, to those few
Faithful Ministers that remain; at such times, the general falling away and
Corruption of others, adds to their Obligation. For God, and these moral Truths
then, have more need of their Ministration. And they can have no Pretense left,
of putting off this Service to other Ministers, since they in effect Preach them
down, and there is no Appearance of their being faithfully administered at all,
if not by them. So that, what ministerial Trusts they undertook, or Form of
Ordination.
Promises they made, of being ready with all Faithful Diligence, to drive away
all such erroneous Doctrine, are more pressing upon them, since then they rest
on their Fidelity alone. And this will be to answer the Apostles Rules, of
taking beed to all their Flocks, when the Speakers of Perverse things arise, to
draw away Disciples after them, Act. 20. 28, 30. Of standing up against
Deceivers, that Teach things which they ought not, and of Exhorting, and
Covincing, and Stopping the Mouths of Gainsayers, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. Of making
full Proof of their Ministry, when People have Teachers after their own Lusts;
yea, will not bear sound Doctrine, but heap up such to themselves, having
Itching Ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 5.

Or,

3. If they come recommended by Suitableness, to Wordly and Carnal Passions and
Interests, which, when once these Salvo's have reconciled them to Men's
Consciences, will be sure to gain innumerable Followers. But especially, if the
Serupulous and Unwilling are driven into them, by a sore and general
Persecution.

This Case of Persecution, I grant, is an outward Discouragement to the true
Pastors, from Performing this Ministration, because it will be sure to be
hottest against them. And it will be an Hindrance too, from their Discharging
it so fully, and generally, as they might do in a free and quiet Time. If
Meetings then, are Fixed, and of free Recourse, and open^, and Numerous, they
will miss of their End, and the Effect will only be, to be disturbed, and
carried before Magistrates, not to go on in Prayers and Devotions. Assemblies
to partake in these Ministrations, cannot be so regular, and constant to Times
and Places; so free, and full of Communicants; and so easy and accessable to
all those Members, who desire, and stand in need thereof; when the Church is
daily disturbed, and persecuted, and driven into the Wilderness, as they may in
Times of Peace and external Allowance. And thus, in the First Persecutions, the
Disciples assembled in the Evening, and were careful to keep the Doors shut,
for Fear of the Jews, Io. 20. 19, 26. And St. Paul's Meeting on the First Day of
the Week at Troas, was held in an upper Chamber, and in the Act. 12. 12.
Nightime, his Speech being continued until Midnight, Act. 20. 7, 8, 9, 11.
And Pliny's Account to the Emperor Trajan, of the Christians Meetings in that
Persecution, is, that Quod essent soliti stato die onte Lucem convenire,
carmenque Christo, quasi Deo dicere secum invicem. Plin. Epist. l. 10. Ep. 97,
p. 306.
on their set times, their manner was to Meet together before Day, for their
Solemn Worship and Sacraments.

But so far as they can Minister the Word of moral Truths against them, in a
persecuted and dispersed State, and in such sort as that will admit of; they
have more Obligation to this Ministration, by reason of the Persecution. It
makes the difficulty of this Ministration, to be the more; but the Duty of it
to be never the less, but the straighter likewise. For, the more others
Persecute moral Duties, and good Practice; the more need there is for the
Ministers thereof, to stand up for them. And the more any Faithful Souls, are
persecuted for them; the more need there is for the Guides of Souls, and the
more Obligation lies on them, by the best Ministrations they can, to instruct
and strengthen them therein. They are then to Minister the Word, not only to
confirm them in their good Practices; but also, to support and comfort them
under their hard Sufferings, and to assist and arm them at all Points against
their Persecutors and Spiritual Enemies, that by Faith and Fortitude, Patience
and Charity, they may bravely repel all their Assaults, and gloriously Triumph
over them.

Thus God blames the Shepherds of Israel, because, when the Flocks were
Scattered, none did search or seek after them; when any were driven away, none
sought to bring them back again, nor to Strengthen what was Diseased, nor to
bind up what was broken among them, Ezekiel. 34. 4, 5, 6. And when the Woolf is
coming, to break in among the Sheep, and to rear and scatter them, i. e. When
some cruel and imminent Persecution is before them: If a Pastor does not stick
by them then, and Minister and show his Pastoral Care the best he can; but
leaves them to themselves, and looks only how he may secure his own Person; our
Blessed Lord tells us, he is no true Shepherd, as being destitute of the
Pastoral Care and Spirit, but an Hireling, Jo. 10. 12. And St. Paul bids
Timothy, to stir up the Gift that was in him, by the Laying on of his Hands,
and not to be hindered, or discouraged from it, by the Persecutions of that
Time: for that the Holy Ghost, conferred by God upon his Ministers by such
Imposition of Hands, is not the Spirit of Fear, or Cowardice, whose
Ministrations are to be stopped by Approach of Dangers; but the Spirit of Power
or Courage, and of Love to Him and his Church, when thereby we expose our own
Persons, 2 Timothy 1. 6, 7. Seeing we have, or stand charged with this Ministry,
though Troubled, Perplexed, and Persecuted on every side, in the due Discharge
thereof, we faint not, says he, 2 Cor. 4, 1, 8, 9. But approve our selves the
Ministers of God, by the Word of Truth, and by the Armor of Righteousness on
the Right Hand, and on the Left, in all Patience, and Afflictions, and in the
midst of Tumults, of Stripes, and Imprisonments, 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5, 7.

CHAP. V Of the Obligations to Actual Ministration, which lie upon them in the
foresaid Cases.
HItherto, I have insisted on those Cases, wherein true and faithful Pastors
and Ministers of Jesus Christ, are plainly bound, as I conceive, to stir up
those Spiritual Powers, which he has conferred on them; and to act
Ministerally as Bishops and Pastors, for supplying the needs of Religion and of
Souls, or of the Churches which are entrusted to their Charge.

And the Sum of what I have said thereupon, is this* They are bound to supply
the Church, with the Ministration of Prayers, or of pure and unpolluted
Offices, when the public Service is corrupted, and Prayers are poisoned, not
only with Idolatrous, but also with Unrighteous and Immoral Mixtures. And with
the Ministry of the Word, when they see Dangerous and Immoral Practices are
begun to be set up. And more still, when they are offered to be Justified.
Being obliged to this, when Immoral Practices are justified in some great and
particular Cases, which are like to involve the generality of Persons. And
higher obliged yet, when, for Justification of the same in such particular
Cases, False Teachers set themselves to vacate all the opposite Moral Duties,
by Undermining Propositions and Doctrinal Salvo's. All which still call louder
for this Ministration, if the immoral Practices so justified, and Doctrinally
Salved, are in themselves Infamous, and a Scandal to Religion; or, if they have
numbers of Seducers and False Guides, to recommend or persuade them; or, if
they are pressed and forced upon all Refusers, by a secular Arm, and driven on
by a violent and general Persecution. When the Breach is so great upon
Religion, and the Danger is so terrible to the Souls of Men, and is like to
make a general Wast, and to seize and destroy such Numbers of them: True
Ministers of Religion, and Guides of Souls, ought not to be Silent, and to Sit
still, under such Wrongs done to both. But are bound, Not to Neglect the Gift
that is in them, by the laying on of Hanas, 1. Tim. 4. 14. but to stir it up,
and that out of a Spirit of Love to Religion and the Church, and of Power or
Courage without fear of Dangers, as I observed from St. Paul, 2 Timothy 1, 6, 7.
To give Attendance to it, waiting on their Ministry, Romans 12. 7. Not to be
content merely to accept Seasons, as put upon them; but to seek them, Preaching
the Word, and being instant, in Season, and out of Season. 2 Timothy 4. 2. To give
themselves wholly to these things, and to persevere and continue in performing
them, that in so doing, they may both save themselves, and those that hear
them, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16.

But further to set off this Obligation, having said thus much to the Cases
wherein they stand bound, I shall now proceed.

2. Secondly, To Note, what Obligations of Actual Ministration, do lie upon
them in such Cases. And these Obligations will appear, both from the Nature of
the Pastoral Function, from the several Characters which they sustain, and from
the Post or Station which they are placed in.

These Characters I shall consider, under this Threefold Respect, either as
they relate to God, to Religion, or to the Souls of Men.

1. First, I shall consider them, as they relate to God. And here this
Obligation to the foresaid Ministrations, in the preceding and such like Cases,
will appear plain upon them, as they bear the Character, and stand in Place,

1. Of his Messengers. The Priest is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal.
2. 7. And St. Paul says, The Galatians received him, as an (...).
Angel or Messenger of God, Gal. 4. 14. And the Bishops of the Churches, are
styled Angels, Rev. 1. 20. Now, when a polluted and immoral Worship is offered
up to God, or when Immoral Practices are set up, and the plain Sense of Moral
Precepts is perverted or vacated to maintain them; God has enough to say to
Men, both for Caution and Prevention, and also for their Recovery from the
same. And who shall tell them this, but his own Messengers? And how should they
tell it, but in the discharge of their Ministrations? So that by their
Ministry, they must show them the horrible Profanation of an Immoral Devotion,
and teach and afford them a pure Worship, which is according to his Mind. And
declare to them the true force and Meaning of those Moral Laws and Duties,
which others have Doctrinally Gloss'd away and vacated, to the end they may
warrantably and securely Trangress them. As the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts,
his Lips ought to keep up Knowledge among the People, and they are to seek the
Law, i. e. the true Sense of it, as (...).
Grotius and others note, at his Mouth, Mal. 2. 7. So that he is Ministerially
to open his Mouth, not to shut it; to minister Knowledge, not to pen it up and
suppress it within himself: It being the Part of an ill and unfaithful
Messenger, to Seal up his Lips, and conceal the Me^inge which he is charged
with.

2. Of his Ministers and Ambassadors. They are not, as inferior Messengers,
employed only to bear and tell a Message; but as Ministers of his Kingdom, they
are Messengers empowered, and authorized, to Negotiate and Transact for God.
And this, not only in some particular thing; but at large, in all the outward
Administration of the Covenant of Grace, or of Reconciliation between God and
Man. Let a Man so account of us, says St. Paul, as of (...) the Officers of
Christ, 1. Cor. 4. 1. as of (...), Ministers by whom ye believed, 1 Cor. 3. 5.
as of (...), the Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20. as of (...), the Public Agents of
Jesus Christ, Romans 15. 16. as of such Ambassadors, who have the Ministy, (...),
the Administration of Reconciliation between God and sinful Men, 2 Cor. 5. 18,
19. and as of such Public Agents, who are empowered and entrusted to Minister
the Gospel of God, Romans 15. 16. Nay, being thus empowered as God's Ministers,
Public Agents, and Ambassadors: They are not only as his Servants, who are to
do his Business; but as his visible Representatives and Vicegerents here on
Earth, who in all these concerns, are to sustain his Person, and to stand in
his Place. This is the Part of public Agents and Ambassadors, who Sustain the
Person, and supply the presence of their Masters. Speaking to you as God's
Ambassadors, God bespeaks you, and beseeches you by us; and praying you, as
Ambassadors of Christ, we pray you in Christ's Stead, says St. Paul to the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5. 20. And accordingly the Galatians, he says, received him
as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4. 14. and in his Ministerial Actings, he declares he
Acted in the Person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 10. And they are sent thus to transact
for him in all these Administrations, and to Sustain and Supply his Place, not
only at some one Time, or on some particular and occasional Turn; but with
standing Powers, as his Ambassadors in Ordinary, or Residentiaries here on
Earth, who are to do the same still from time to time, as there is Occasion.

Now, Standing thus, as his Ordinary Ministers, and Public Representatives,
who are to act Gods Part, and to supply his Place in these Matters; they must
be bound to their actual Administrations, in the foresaid Cases.

For being to act in those Cases, and in all others which providentially come
before them, as Gods Ministers and Officers; they ought to do all therein, that
is needful for Gods Business. They are unfaithful Ministers, if they do not
appear, and concern themselves in their Master's Affairs, and so far as their
Powers will go, prosecute his Business who imploys and intrusts them. And when
sinful Prayers are presented to him, in his Solemn and public Worship; his
Business is to have them purged out, and to have more pure and unpolluted
Prayers put up to him in their Room. When Immoral Practices are justified, his
Business is to have them generally Disclaimed and Condemned. When moral
Precepts are Gloss'd away, and vacated; his Concern, is to have them faithfully
expounded and maintained. So that, if they must officiate, and act in
Prosecution of his Business; they must Officiate, and Minister in Prosecution
of these things. And they throw off the Part, and work of his Ministers, if
they will have no care of his Matters, nor afford him their Ministrations at
such Times.

As Gods public Agents, and Ordinary Ambassadors, their Instructions are, to
preserve the things of God safe. Then, they must see to guard his Worship from
Sinful and Polluted Mixtures; and his Laws from elusive Glosses, and
undermining Salvo's; and the Practices of his People, from damnable
Unrighteousness and Immoralities. And what sort of Agents would they show
themselves, should they refuse to Minister, and Act for him; what trusty
Ambassadors, should they fail to pursue their Instructions, when all these
Wrongs and Violences are offered to his Affairs, and are attempted to be
obtruded upon his Worship, his Precepts, and his People, at such times?

As his Ambassadors, they are Ambassadors for Peace, and carry 2 Cor. 5. 18,
19, 20.
the Word of Reconciliation, to a People that has offended him. And when God,
and any People are at Enmity, by reason of the foresaid Worship and Practices;
would they approve themselves fit to be entrusted with this Embassage of Peace,
or to be Faithful in the Discharge thereof, who should not so much as tell the
Offenders, that God and they are at Difference; nor minister and propose from
him, the true Terms of making up the Breach. By failing to Minister this Word,
when they are sent on purpose with it, and have undertaken the (...), v. 18.
Administration of it; would they not prove themselves downright Enemies, and
basely Treacherous and False to both? And is any Failure or Falsehood, more
Fatal, as well as more inexcusable, than theirs would be in this Case?

As Christ's Representatives, and as Sustaining his Person and Place, they are
to say what he would say to any Offenders, and to act as he would act in these
Cases, were he visibly to appear, and immediately to manage and administer his
own Affairs. They must come into Christ's Care and Administration, when they
come to sustain his Person. For his Part on Earth, as he declares, was to Mat.
^^.
Minister to his Church. Representing him, they must endeavor, as they can, to
supply the want of his Presence; and that must be, by affording Religion, and
his People, what Ministrations he would afford to them, were he among ^^^m. And
this must imply the foresaid Exercise of their Spiritual Ministries, in the
abovementioned Cases. For, were he on Earth at such Times, he would surely see
no want of these Ministrations, to preserve, or rescue, his Worship from being
polluted, his Laws from being vacated, and the Practice of his People from such
Ways of Sin and Death, as are then offered to be obtruded on them. To Minister
against all these, was his Business when he was upon the Earth; and would be
so, were he to appear again: And ought to be the Business of all, that
represent and appear for him. If they neglect the Ministry, and Care of these
things, and let them alone; what other Ministries are there left then, for them
to represent this great Mat. 20. 28. To. 15. 8.
Minister of God, and 1 Pet. 2. 25.
Bishops of our Souls in? If then they do not Minister his Word to the Church,
in his Name, what becomes of the Communication, which they are to keep up
between his Church and Him? For he is to speak to them by his Representatives,
and says, he that hears them, hears him, Luke 10. 16. And if his
Representatives are silent at such Times, and say nothing from Him; that,
instead of faithfully Maintaining, is to drop, and make an end of this way of
Communication.

Thus does their very Office and Station, of being Gods Ordinary and Standing
Ministers, and Public Agents, and Ambassadors, and Representatives: oblige
them to actual Administrations in the foresaid Cases. Their Office, lies in
supplying such Administrations, which are the Trust they have received from
Christ, and the Business which they are set for. He has committed to us the
Administration of this Reconciliation, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 18. This
faithful supply of such Administrations, is called, fulfilling their Ministry,
as in St. Paul's Caution to Archippus. Col. 4. 17. For to entrust his things
with them, as Ministers, or Agents; is to trust that they will act therein, and
Administer the same unto his People. Accordingly they, who have received a
Ministry, are required to wait on their Administration, To. 12. 6, 7. Or, every
Man, as he has received the Gift of Preaching, or Ministry, etc. even so to
Minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the Manifold Grace of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. Thus also they are called to Preach the Word, and
Discharge these Ministrations, against Teachers Preaching to please Men's Lusts,
and against People heaping up such Teachers to themselves, that they may
thereby fulfill, or make full Proof of their Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 5. And
are bid, not to neglect the Gift that is in them, by Imposition of Hands, but
to be the Peoples Monitors, against the Speakers of Lies in Hypocrisy, that
they may be good Ministers of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 4. 2, 6, 14. And to approve
themselves, as the Ministers of God, by the Word of Truth, and by the Armor of
Righteousness, in the midst of Afflictions and Persecutions, 2 Cor 6. 4, 5, 7.
Their Administration, must from Time to Time keep up, what God would have kept
up, both in his Peoples Practice, and in Doctrine, in Worship, and Devotion.
They shall Teach my People the Difference, between the Holy and Profane; and
shall cause them to discern, between the Unclean and the Clean. And they shall
keep my Laws, and my Statutes, in all mine Assemblies; or, see that all things
be done in those Assemblies, according to them, as in loc.
Theodoret expounds it, Ezekiel. 44. 23, 24.

3. Of his Fellow-workers, or Co-adjutors. We, as Workers together with God,
beseech you, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 1. We are (...)
Laborers together with God, the chief Worker. And ye are Gods Husbandry,
whom, as Co-labourers, we Cultivate, Planting what is Profitable, and Rooting
out every hurtful Weed. Ye are Gods Building, which we, as Workmen together
with him, are Spiritually to Rear and Build up, or to Repair the same when any
part thereof is Broken down, 1 Cor. 3. 9.

Now, when any such Breaches are made, upon the Worship, or the Laws of God,
and upon the Practice of his People in all the foresaid Cases, God is sure to
be at Work with Men. His Providence, outwardly throws i Hindrances, and
awakening Alarms; and his Holy Spirit, is inwardly Busy in their Hearts, by
raising Holy Thoughts and Suggestions, to prevent the fall of some, and to
recover and raise up others who are already fallen, and to set, both the
Celebration of his own Worship, and the Sense of his Precepts, and the Practice
of his People, at Rights again. And whilst he is thus Working and plying them,
both with inward Motions, and with outward Accidents or Occurrences; his
Ministers, as Fellow-workers, should join their Ministration to carry on the
same Work in them. And how are they Fellow Laborers, if at such times, whilst
he holds on Laboring, they give it off? How are they true to the part of
Co-workers, if they withdraw their Ministrations, and leave and let him alone
to do all the Work himself?

They are also said to be Co-workers with him of the Peoples Joy or
Consolation, 2 Cor. 1. 24. This Joy can be had only in the Way of Holy, not of
polluted Prayers; and of Maintaining, not of vacating Gods Precepts; and of
humbly and industriously Seeking, to approve themselves to God by Good; not of
justifying themselves, in Unrighteous and Wicked Practices. For in those Ways,
they have nothing to do with Joy; but remorse, and Shame, and Sorrow are their
Portion. So that if the true Pastors, are to be Ministers and Co-workers of
their Joy and Consolation, they must Minister and Co-work at such Times, to
keep up pure Worship, and pure Precepts and Practices among them; because else,
they would not have what they may justly Rejoice and take Comfort in.

Again, the Ministerial Characters, may be considered.

2. Secondly, as they relate to Religion. And here also they carry with them a
plane Obligation to the foresaid Ministrations in the Forecited Cases.

With Respect to Religion, they are styled Ministers of the Word. We will give
our Selves, say the Apostle, to the Ministry of the Word, Act. 6. 4. Or,
Ministers of the Gospel, or of the Now Covenant. The Gospel, whereof I am made
a Minister, Ephesians. 3. 7. Col. 1. 23. And God has made us able Ministers of the
New Testament, says St. Paul, 2. Cor. 3. 6. Or sometimes, lastly, Stewards of
the Mysteries. Let a Man so account of us, as of Stewards of the Mysteries of
God, says the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 1.

Now, as Ministers and Stewards of the Word of God, of Religion, and of its
Mysteries, they stand entrusted with the Charge thereof. The Part of Stewards
and Ministers, is to keep such Pearls of Price safe, to supply what is wanting
to them, or improve them to advantage; of their Fidelity and Care wherein, they
must give a strict Account to their Masters.

So that, as Ministers and Stewards, of Religion, and of its Mysteries, they
stand obliged,

1. To keep, and preserve them. They must see, that they be not lost, nor
injured in any Part; that the Word of God be not maimed, or perverted; nor his
Worship adulterated, and polluted; nor his Doctrines, and Precepts, either
denied in Terms, or vacated by corrupt Glosses or undermining Propositions.
This is the First Thing, which they owe to those good things, wherewith they
are entrusted. That good Thing, which was committed to thee, keep, 2 Timothy 1.
14. O! Timothy, keep that, which was committed to thy Trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. Hold
it fast, and in the Form of Sound Words, wherein thou have received it, 2 Timothy
1. 13. And Remember how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, Rev. 3.
3. These things, are a (...)
Depositum, 1 Timothy 6. 20. a (...).
good Depositum, 2 Timothy 1. 14. or most Sacred and Precious Things, Lodged in
their Hands, and left to their Keeping. So that their first Fidelity to these
Depositums, must be the Fidelity of good Keepers. They must see, that they be
no worse, for being in their Hands; that nothing be Spoiled, or perish from
them, but that they have themto produce, safe, entire, and uncorrupted, when
they are called for back again.

And this Keeping of these Ministers and Stewards, must not lie merely in
Keeping these things thus Pure and Perfect, to themselves; But

2. In Keeping them up, so pure, and perfect, among others. This Worship, is to
be a public Worship; and Christ's Followers, are to join in Common, and concur
therein. And this Word, is to be generally and publicly communicated, and a
true Sense thereof is to be born up, and held fast in the Church of Christ. So
that these Keepers, of the pure and perfect Word, and Mysteries of Religion;
must be Ministers, to exhibibit and deal them out, and Stewards to dispense
them. The Part of Stewards, lies in dealing of them out: as good Stewards of
the Manifold Grace of God, Minister the same one to another, says St. Peter, 1
Pet. 4, 10, 11. And the Part of Ministers, lies in Administrations, or in
Ministering the Gospel, as St. Paul says, To. 15. 16. To be Ministers of the
New Covenant, is to have the Ministration of the Spirit, and the Ministration
of Righteousness which is therein offered, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8, 9. That is, to stand
charged with the Administration thereof, by Affording People the appointed
Ways, of Entering and Confirming it, in Administration of the Sacraments; and of
being built up in the Duties, and of Supplying and Fetching down the Grace and
Blessings thereof, in Administration of the Word, and of Prayers. And thus the
Scripture sets off being Ministers of the Word, by having the Charge of
Preaching and Testifying it. To make thee a Minister, and a VVitness, says our
Lord to Paul, when he committed the Gospel to him, Act. 26, 16. And the
Ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to Testific the Gospel of
the Grace of God, says the Apostle, Act. 20. 24. And they were then said, to
have fulfilled this Ministry of the Word, when they had Preached it all about,
Act. 12. 25.

As therefore they are obliged, to purge out all Profanation and polluted
Matter, from Worship and Prayers; and all corrupt Glosses and vacating Salvo's,
from the Doctrines and Duties of Religion, as their Faithful Keepers: So are
they obliged, to exhibit the same thus purged and cleansed in their own
Ministrations, that they may keep them up among others, as their Faithful
Stewards and Ministers. And they are very much wanting to Religion and its
Mysteries, if they do not acquit themselves, both as their Faithful Keepers,
and Dispensers, in the foresaid Cases.

And this Keeping and Dispensation, of the foresaid unpolluted Worship and
moral Doctrine, where that can be had, is to be in a regular and standing
Church. If there is a want of Pastors and People in any Defection, to
incorporate in the Administration, and Profession of them; it is a Fatal Blow,
indeed, to pure Worship and Doctrine, in any Kingdom. But if a Remnant is left,
both of Pastors, and People, who still Faithfully and Firmly adhere thereto;
their Way is, M^t. 5. 14, 15
as a Light set on a Candle-Stick, or as a City set on an Hill, by a visible
Communion, to profess them, and to bear them out before Men. It Is a Debt they
owe to Religion, and to Gods Holy Truth and Worship, to appear to the World, as
a visible Church, for the Maintenance and Ministration thereof.

For Religion, ought not to stand on scattered Individuals, but to be born up
by vid. Part 3. chap. 4.
Communions of Pastors and People, or by regular Societies. Our Lord has
instituted a Christian Church, for the Profession a^^ Support, of Christian
Worship and Doctrine. And the Church, is to be the Pillar and Bas^s, or Stay of
Truth: Or that, which should support and bear it up, and make it both more
conspicuous, and more creditable to the World, 1 Timothy 3. 15. As a Church, they
must preserve the Depositum, and Minister and bear it out in their own Times:
And commit the same to Faithful Men, who, at the Head of their Respective
Churches, may hold it on, and Teach others; that is, transmit it down, by like
Way of Church Ministrations, and visible Societies, to succeeding Ages, 2 Timothy
2. 2. By the Professions and Ministrations of such Societies, it comes down to
us: and by the same, ought we to convey it down to our Posterities, that there
may be no want of that Sacred Depositum, or of a Church, to Minister the same
and bear it out before Men, to preserve the Knowledge and Memory thereof, and
to show that True Religion has not failed, to the Worlds End.

CHAP. VI. More of the Obligations to Actual Ministration, which lie upon them
in the foresaid Cases.
THE last Respect, wherein the Ministerial Characters may be considered, is,

3. Thirdly, as they relate to the Souls of Men, or to the Church. And these
also most evidently oblige to the same Ministrations, in the foresaid Cases.

For in this Respect, they are placed in the Church of Christ, and set-over it,

1. As Watchmen. I have set thee as a Watchman to the House of Israel, says
God to the Prophet, Ezekiel, 3. 17. and cap. 33. 7. and they watch for your Souls,
as they that must give an Account thereof, says St. Paul, Heb. 13. 17. Now the
Watchman, is set to epsy any Emergent Harm or Dangers, before they come; and
to descry the Enemy, whilst yet he is only approaching. And this, to give
Notice of them, that the People may not be Surprised, or Siezed thereby, but
timely shun them, or prepare against them. So that his Office lies, in
Ministering the Word of Warning. Being set as their Watchman, thou shall warn
them from me, Ezekiel. 3. 17. and cap. 33. 7. Warning every Man, who is in the Way
of doing ill, and teaching every Man the Sin and Danger thereof, that we may
present every Man perfect in the Knowledge and Obedience of Christ Jesus, Col.
1. 28. And if he fails to minister this Word of Warning, as any Spiritual Need
of theirs, or as any Approach of Sin and Danger requires the same, their Blood
God will require at the VVatchman's Hands, Ezekiel. 33. 8. and cap. 3. 18.

Now, Immoral Worship and Practices, are most Detrimental, and Dangerous to
Souls. Immoral Prayers, Profane God, instead of Honoring him; and provoke a
Curse, instead of bringing down a Blessing. And Immoral Practices, are Ways of
Death, which Men must not trust to any Prayers to put by, or Atone for, till,
instead of going on therein, they truly Repent of the same, and turn away from
them. And when any Guides come, to recommend and justify these to Men, and to
vacate all those moral Precepts, which should make them uneasy and afraid to be
found therein; then is the Enemy approaching, and Guilt and Death stand Gaping
to devour them. And then they who watch for Souls, ought certainly to
administer the Word of Warning, and to see that the People do not securely Sin
and Perish, for want of their Blowing the Trumpet, and giving Notice. And the
Blood of those Souls would be required at their Hands, should they
treacherously keep Silent, and fail to Preach and warn their Charge, on such
Occasions.

2. As Overseers or Inspectors. Take heed to the Flock, over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Overseers, Act. 20. 28. Taking the Oversight thereof,
willingly and of a ready Mind, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Now the Overseer of Souls, is to be
an Overseer of their Worship, or of what they do in God's House; of their Lives
and Practices, how they demean themselves in those Duties, which God will
require an Account of; of their Faith, how they retain the Belief and
Profession of his Truths; and of any Spiritual Wants or Dangers, or other
things, whereon the Salvation of Souls Depends. And the Part of these Overseers
is, from time to time to observe, what their Wants, or Dangers are, either in
Worship, Faith, and Practice, etc. and to minister Provisions and Supplies
against them. Their Eyes are to be over them for these Purposes; the Oversight
which they have undertaken, being an Oversight of Care and Kindness, for the
right Conduct and Salvation of their Charge. Accordingly, as Overseers, they
are called upon to take Heed to their Flocks, or to Espy and Provide against
any Harm, that is coming upon them. And when they are in any Spiritual Want,
either of Worship, or Doctrine, or of other Ghostly Provision, which is in
their Power to supply them withal; to Feed them therewith, or to minister it to
them. Feed the Flock of Christ, whereof you have taken the Oversight, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 2. And take heed to all the Flocks, to Feed the Church, over
which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. Yea, such Heed, as befits the
Oversight of the most invaluable Things, this Church being the Churh of God,
and a Church which he has purchased with his own Blood, Act. 20. 28. And this
Feeding of their Spiritual Wants, is Feeding them with their Spiritual
Ministrations, those being the proper Food of Souls. So that, to show
themselves Faithful Overseers, when the foresaid Immoralities are introduced
into the Worship, the Doctrine, and Practice of the Church; they must take
heed, both to espy the Guilt and Danger thereof, and to supply the Church with
better and more wholesome Ministrations.

3, As Guides or Leaders. Remember (...).
your Guides, or those that have the Guidance or Rule over you, Heb. 13. 7. 17.
And our Savior calls the Scribes and Pharisees, those Ignorant, and Mistaken
Pastors, Blind (...)
Guides or Leaders, Mat. 23. 16, 24. and Mat. 15. 14.

Now, the Business of Guides of Souls, is to show them Gods Ways, and to carry
them on in the same; and to keep them out of such, as are Evil and Destructive
to them. In all things, where they are set to Direct, they must show them the
Right, and lead them on in it, as their Leaders in what is Good: and call out
to them when they are going Wrong, and show them the Danger of holding on
therein. They must not be Ignorant or mistake the way themselves, which is to
be Blind Guides, as our Savior taxed the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 16. And when they
see the Right, they must not Conceal or Dissemble it; but are to be Guides,
which speak to their People the Word of the Lord, or tell them what he calls
Right, Heb. 13. 17. And this they must do, with all carefulness; Seeing that
none miscarry, or perish for want of Guidance; but only for being Deaf thereto,
and Contumacious against all their Calls: wherein they must demean themselves,
as they that VVatch for Souls, and must give an Account thereof, as the Apostle
there says.

Now, as Guides of Souls, they are to direct and lead them, in acceptable and
saving Worship, Doctrines, and Practices. And if, with Respect to any of these,
they see them going wrong; or, see Seducers busy to mislead them: as their
true and faithful Guides, they must set them Right, and call out to them to
have a Care of Wandering; or, if they are got out of the Way, to come back
again. When others guide them into an Immoral Worship, or Immoral Practices, or
into the Belief and Maintenance of such corrupt Salvo's as vacate Moral
Duties; they must Guide them out of the same. And they would be very unfaithful
Guides, should they suffer Men, either on their own Heads, or at the Call of
Seducers and False Guides, to run into wrong Ways; and should not diligently
Discharge their Ministry, and do their Part, to lead them better, and set them
Right in such Cases.

4. As Pastors or Shepherds. The Evangelical Ministers, St. Paul calls
Pastors, Ephesians. 4. 11. They are set to Feed Christ's Sheep, and under him the
Chief Shepherd, as St. Peter Speaks, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 4. Of these, God foretells,
that they should be Pastors after his own Heart, Jer. 3. 15. And the Priests of
Israel, God calls the Pastors and Shepherds of Israel, when he sends to
denounce VVoes against them, Jer. 23. 1, 2. Ezekiel. 34 2.

Now, the Part and Office of Shepherds and Pastors is, to Feed their Sheep.
Should not the Shepherds Feed their Flocks? Ezekiel. 34. 2. And Feed the Flock of
God, which is among you, 1 Pet. 5. 2. The Food of Souls, are Divine Offices,
and the Word of Knowledge. These are represented, as the Milk, which they are
to Suck, 1 Pet. 2. 2. as the Bread of Life, wherewith they are to be Sustained,
Jo. 6. 35. and as the Meat, which perishes not, but endures to Eternal Life,
ver. 27. and ver. 47, 48, 51. And therefore the Feeding of the Shepherds of
Souls, must be their Administration of this Spriitual Food, or Feeding the
People with the Ministry of the Word, or of Divine Offices: Feeding them with
Knowledge and Understanding, as God promises the True Prophets should do, Jer.
3. 15.

His part is also to keep them together the best he can, for joint
Participation of these Ministrations, that, as one Flock, they may be Fed
therewith. This Gathering, and Keeping them together, God takes notice of in
Shepherds. He that Scattered Israel, will gather him, as a Shepherd does his
Flock, Jer. 31. 10. When he carries them out to Feed, or to Minister this
Spiritual Food to them; he calls to all his Sheep, that will know, and hear his
Voice, and not Run after strange Voices, and leads them out, and goes before
them, (the Sheep among the Jews, being used to Psalm. 23. 2, 3. and Psalm. 77.
20. and Ps. 80. 1.
Follow, not, as with us, to be driven before their Keepers,) that as one
Flock, they may Feed together thereon, he himself Administering it at the Head
of them, Jo. 10. 3, 4. 5. And if any Woolf comes to break in, to Destroy or
Scatter any of his Fold; he does not Flee away as the Hireling, but stands to
them at his Peril, to keep them together the best he can, and to Guard them
against the Wolf by a diligent Ministration, ver. 11, 12, 13. He takes heed, as
St. Paul directs, to Feed and Arm all the Flock, that they may not become a
Prey to grevious Wolves, Act. 20. 28, 29. And if any of them are lost in the
onset, he seeks after that which was Lost, to recover it again; if any, by the
Fright, were driven away, or Scattered, he endeavors to bring it back. He
Strengthens, what was Diseased; and Heals, what was Sick; and Binds up, what
was Broken in the Conflict. And without such Care, in Getting, and Keeping
their Flocks together, by such Ministrations; God declares, they are not
Shepherds that Feed his Flock, but that Feed themselves; and that he is
against them, and will require his Flock at their Hands, Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3. 4. 8.
10.

As Pastors and Shepherds of the Flock therefore, they must see what Spiritual
Food is Administered to it. If there is a want, of Necessary, and Saving
Doctrine, and Worship; they must not see the Children starve for want of Bread,
or the Fold pine away for want of Food, but lead out all that will know their
Voice, where they may have it, and there Administer the same themselves, and
supply it to them. Or, if others would Feed them with poisoned Food, as immoral
Doctrines, and immoral Worship are; they are to warn them of the Harm designed,
and to Minister purer and more wholesome to them in its stead. And their Care
must be, as much as the Case allows, to keep their Flock together with these
Administrations. So that as Shepherds, who would show Care of the Flocks, or
approve themselves Faithful Pastors; they are bound to Feed and keep their
Flocks together, by due and diligent Exercise of their Pastoral Ministrations,
in the foresaid Cases.

5. As Doctors, or standing Teachers of the Church. He has given them to the
Church, as Pastors and Teachers, says St. Paul Ephesians. 4. 11. And requires, that
they shall be (...)
able to Teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. and (...)
apt to Teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2. and 2 Timothy 2. 24. This Teaching, must be of the
Things that thou have heard of me, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 2. of the
Depositum, or of that good Thing, which was committed to ^^ee, 2 Timothy 1. 14. Of
all that is Needful, in the Work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
Church, and for the Perfecting of the Saints, in the Unity of the Faith, and in
the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
13. It must be a Teaching these, Faithfully, and Incorruptly, as they have been
Taught them: Holding fast the Faithful Word, as they have been Taught it, that
their Exhortation may be by Sound Doctrine, Tit. 1. 9.

And in this Work of Teaching all these Things, with Fidelity and
Incorruptness, from Time to Time, as need requires, they must lay themselves
out, and give Attendance. Let him that Teaches, wait on Teaching; and him that
Exhorts, on Exhortation, To. 12. 7, 8. Give Attendance to Exhortation, to
Doctrine, i. e. (...)
Teaching or Instructing others, 1 Timothy 4. 13. They are to Labor, in
Administering this Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17. To give themselves wholly to
these Things, and to continue in them, that by so doing, they may both save
themselves, and those that hear them, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. They are to slip no
Seasons, when People need to be Taught any of these Matters. But to Preach the
Word, and to be instant in it, in Season, and out of Season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. And,
as Good and Faithful Rulers and Stewards of the Household, to give them their
proper Portion of Meat in due Season, Luke 12. 42. Particularly in those
Seasons, when False Teachers lead them to do ill Things, and seek to Poison
them with corrupt Doctrines. For then, by Sound Doctrine, they are to stop the
Mouths of vain Talkers and Deceivers, who for filthy Lucres Sake, Teach things
which they ought not; and to convince Gain Sayers, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11. And to be
ready with all faithful Diligence, to banish and drive away all erroneous and
strange Doctrine, contrary to Gods Word, and to call upon others to do the
same: As all Bishops, according to our Form of Consecration, Solemnly Promise
in their Ordination.

Now, sustaining the Office, and standieg in Place of such Teachers to the
Church; the Ministers of Christ must necessarily be bound, to a diligent
Discharge of their Ministrations, or to Administer the Word in the
forementioned Cases. For then, both the Prayers and Religious Service, and the
Lives and common Practice of the People, is corrupted by heinous Immoralities.
And they want to be Taught and Showed, that there is any Harm in either; False
Teachers having justified to them the Immoralities in both, and, by vacating
moral Precepts, and by Broaching corrupt and immoral Doctrines, having labored
to leave in them no Conscience thereof. And when People are thus Untaught, or
Mistaught, in great and concerning Parts of the Depositum; they, who would
faithfully Discharge the Part of true Teachers, must take Care to Teach them
better. If they are to attend on it, to Labor, and give themselves wholly to
it; how can they let it fall at such a Time, not appearing at all, or appearing
very negligent therein. If they are to continue in Teaching these Things, they
must not flinch from it, and give it off; if they are to do it, in, and out of
Season, they must not sure be wanting, when the Season is so pressing; if
against Deceivers, and Gainsayers, they ought in no wise to fail, when those
Gainsayers are so busy at Work, for Perversion thereof. So that, as Faithful
Teachers of Christ's Church, they are not to suffer the People to perish for
want of saving Knowledge, but are duly to Administer the Word in the foresaid
Cases.

I might also further Note the Necessity and Obligation they lie under to the
forementioned Ministrations, from their being set up by our Savior, as the
Light of the World, Mat. 5. 14. and as the Salt of the Earth, ver. 13. For, as
the Light of the World, they must shine out, and give Light abroad; Men not
Lighting a Candle, to put it under a Bushel, that it may shine only to it self;
but put it on a Candle-Stick, that it may shine out and give Light to others,
ver. 15. And such Light they give to the World by their Ministrations, when
they Minister the Gospel, and all the Doctrines and Duties of it, with the
Knowledge whereof, the World is to be enlightened. And as the Salt of the Earth,
they must keep the Religious Service, and Morals of Men, from being corrupted;
since the use of Salt, is to keep out Putrefaction and Rottenness. And this
also, is by their Ministrations. For, by their Constancy in Administering Sound
and Wholesome Things, they Season the Church, keeping it up in Purity and
Soundness, and keeping out all Adulterations and Corruptions, when Endeavors
are used to introduce them by Seducers.

And thus, by all the Characters of the Ministerial Function, and the Parts of
their Office, do the Bishops and Pastors of Christ's Church stand bound, to an
actual Discharge of their Ministrations, in the forementioned Cases. And cannot
Drop, or let them fall, without those Characters and Offices flying in their
Faces.

For how will they answer it to God, as having acted the Part of his Faithful
Messengers, to a People so endangered and depraved, by polluted Worship,
Doctrines, and Practices, if they have stood Dumb and Speechless, and, instead
of Ministerial Uttering and Delivering, have suppressed and kept back the Word
and Message they were charged with? How, as having well discharged the Place,
of Ministers, Ambassadors, of Public Agents and Representatives, of God and
Christ: If they have been such Representatives, as would not act, or order any
thing in their Names; Such Ambassadors, as would pursue no Instructions; Such
Public Agents, as refused to acts; and such Ministers and Officers, as would
not Minister or Officiate in their Masters Business and Affairs, yea, even in
those of most Importance, and in their greatest Exigencies? How, as having been
Co-workers, and Fellow-Helpers, if, whilst he was so busy at Work, with an
endangered and depraved People, by his Spirit and Providence; they gave over
working, and left him to do it by himself, making him no Help or Furtherance by
their Ministrations?

How will they hope to approve themselves before him, to have been Good and
Faithful Ministers and Stewards, of Religion and its Mysteries, if they have
not been, both Faithful Keepers, and Faithful Dispensers thereof? will Religion
and its Mysteries, be judged to have been well kept, when it was suffered to be
spoiled and rifled, and when the brightest Gems of this inestimable Depositum,
have been broken, embezel'd, or made away; and its choicest Flowers picked out,
and not only base, but poisonous and corrupt Weeds put in their Places? Or,
will they be deemed, to have been their Faithful Ministers and Dispensers, who
have not Minister'd or Dispensed them on^ to others, but concealed and kept
them up to themselves? Or Dispensers of them, by Church Ministrations, at the
Head of visible Societies; who have not Pastorally Administered them to any
Churches, or headed any Societies of Faithful Upright Christians, in the free
and steadfast Profession and observance thereof.

How can they expect, at the Great Day of Accounts, to pass for Men that have
acquitted themselves, as Good Watchmen, if all the Time, whilst Sin and Death
were advancing to make the People their Prey, they could spy no Enemy; or, if
they did, would speak of none, nor warn against them? Or, for Trusty
Overseers, if they over-looked the most pressing Wants of their Charge, or
gave no Caution, nor made any Supply or Provision for them? They are ill
Overseers, that overlook, when they should epsy their Peoples Necessities,
or Dangers. And over-see, not as Keepers and Guardians, but Conspirators and
Betrayers, if, when they see them, they will not discover them, but let them
silently and securely run into Destruction.

Can they imagine he will call them Faithful Guides, who left a People that
were Ignorant of the true Way, to guide themselves, or to be misguided by
Seducers; who would not show the right Way, when all Endeavors were used to
make them go wrong; nor, when they saw them Straying, would call out to them to
come back again? Or, that he will repute them Good Shepherds, who have taken
no Care to Feed their Flocks with Spiritual Ministrations, nor to Guard and Arm
them against Wolves and Seducers, nor to keep them together, when they are in
Danger to be Scattered; nor to bring them back, when they are straying from the
Fold? Or, that he will receive and welcome them, as constant and faithful
Teachers of his Church, who have let Men Sin and Perish, for want of Teaching;
and could silently sit by, and hear them Mistaught by Seducers; and, instead of
stopping their Mouths, give way to Gainsayers; whose Lips did not preserve,
and keep up Knowledge among the People, but suppress and conceal it from them;
and who, instead of Seeking, shunned the Seasons of Ministering the Word, and of
giving Gods People the Necessary Instructions?

How will they hope to approve themselves at that Day, as having been the
Lights of the World, if they held this Light as Dark-Lanthorns, ministering none
to the World, but letting it sit still in Darkness? Or, as the Salt of the
Earth, if, by pure and wholesome Ministrations, they did not season the
Inhabitants thereof, but suffered them, for want of Seasoning, to run into
Spiritual Corruption and Putrefaction? If they appear then, to have been such
Salt, as did nothing to keep out Corruption, they will be in Place of Salt
without Savor, as our Blessed Lord says, or of Insipid Salt. And such, instead
of being set by, and carefully laid up, he declares to be Good for nothing, but
to be cast out, and trodden under Foot, Mat. 5. 13.

So that all the Parts and Offices, the Titles and Characters of their own
Sacred Powers, do most fully and lowdly proclaim to them the Duty of exercising
their Spiritual Functions, and discharging their Holy Ministrations, in the
foresaid Cases. And let them but look, to any of those Marks of Power and Care,
which God has put upon them; or to any of those Stations, wherein he has
placed them; and they will effectually Remind them, how much they are obliged
to stir up the Gift that is in them, when they see Religion wronged, and the
Souls of Men endangered, by Immoral Worship and Doctrines, or by other great
Invasions on Christian Worship, Faith, or Practice.

Indeed, the Necessity of supplying the Church, with this Pure Worship, Faith,
and Practice, is thought by some to go a great Way in conferring the
Ministerial Powers, on those who otherwise would not have them. And this is the
Plea, for the Collation of the Ministerial Powers by Ordination of Presbyrers:
without Episcopal Imposition of Hands, in some Foreign Churches. But not to
examine that here, whatever force and Effect it have in that Case, of
Conferring the Ministerial Powers on those who have them not; it must needs be
a sure Call to the Exercise thereof, to those who have them, and are Endowed
therewith.

I do not say all Men are equally bound by the foresaid Characters, to exercise
these Gifts; nor that the same Men are equally bound to it in all Places. The
Blessed Apostles, had General Commissions, and were sent out expressly to all
Nations, Mat. 28. 19. Other Bishops, have a more limited Inspection, and ought
to be more especially Watchful over their own Diocesses, having more
particularly undertaken the Charge thereof. But yet so, as to be the Bishops of
the Sea Part 3. Chap. 4.
Catholic Church, and for the Preservation of the Catholic Worship and Faith;
who are therefore under Obligation of keeping these up, as far as they can,
when they are Sinking and Overborn in other Places.

Indeed, in this Ministration, they are not to stand on Punctilio's of
Obligation, doing no more than it can be proved they are bound to do in Rigor
of Justice. But they are to show Zeal and Affection, which does not weigh
Grains, but thinks that a Call, where it can do Religion and its Master any
considerable Service; and that the more of this it can do, the better it is.
The Spirit of Love, and Zeal, is the Spirit, which God requires in Pastors, to
direct and Influence their Spiritual Exercises and Administrations. Love thou
me? says Christ to Peter, repeating this to him Three Times, when he charged
him with the Pastoral Office, of Feeding his Sheep, and his Lambs, Jo. 21. 15,
16, 17. By the putting on of Hands in Orders, the Spirit, which God has given
us, is the Spirit of Love to Christ and his Church, and of Power or Firmness
and Fearlesness of what Evil may befall our selves in prosecution thereof, says
St. Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 7. The Charge of Feeding the Flock, or the Oversight which
they take, is not an unwilling Charge, such as will go no further than it is
compelled; but requires a VVilling and a Ready Mind, that, on any Call, is free
and prompt of it self to Discharge it, 1 Pet. 5. 2.

And this Spirit of Love, and Zeal, and Power, which is the Principle of their
Ministrations, stands not upon strict Terms: But, being full of Care for
Christ, and for the Good of Souls, and Fearless of what may thereby befall our
selves, does more or less, according as it is Measure and Degree is. St. Paul,
had a great Measure thereof, and according to the Degree of it is working in him
mightily, he labored and strove Earnestly in the work of the Ministry, that he
might present every Man perfect in Christ, Col. 1. 28, 29. He disputed not
nicely, how far he was bound; but would readily go beyond the strict Terms:
counting, whatever were the Overplus, that it was to be expected from this
Principle of Love and Zeal in his Master's Cause, and would abundantly be made
up by a surpassing Recompense. If I do this thing willingly, or beyond strict
Command or Necessity, says he, speaking of some things in the course of his
Ministration which he was not strictly bound to, I have a Special Reward for so
doing, 1 Cor. 9. 15, 17. And proportionable to the Degree, of this Love and
Zeal in others, will the Measure of their Service and Ministrations be
likewise. They will still in any Places, be more Active to keep up the
Catholic Faith and Worship; according as they are more perfect, in this
Ministerial or Pastoral Spirit.

And thus, at length, I think it may fully appear, that Christ's Faithful
Ministers are on many Accounts Obliged not to suppress their Ministrations, but
to supply the Church therewith, when that is Necessary to prevent a Peoples
being nursed up in Irreligious and destructive Ways, like as are, not only
Idolatry and Speculative Heresies, but also, Immoral Doctrines and Practices,
and Immoral Worship and Devotions. And therefore should those things prove
Immoralities, which, on any Revolution, happen to be justified in any Kingdom,
and are every where Pressed and Recommended to the Peoples Practice, and are
salved by the foresaid or such like new Doctrines, and are brought into
Prayers, and public Offices and Devotions in those Countries: The deprived
Bishops and Clergy in that State, would be under all these Obigations to
exercise their Functions, and to Minister to the Church in those Cases.

And this would absolutely set aside the Argument, from the forecited Sayings
of Clemens, and Dionysius, and Chrysestom, and Nazianzen, for the cessation of
Rightful Bishops to the intruding Anti-Bishops. For these Cessations, are in a
Cause that concerns only Personal Rights, not that touches the Interests of
Religion, or the Salvation of Souls. And without examining the Truth of the
particular Histories, wherein are Errors enough as others have made appear; it
will also effectually put by all the Force of the Greek Manuscript in the
Public Library at Oxford; or of the Collection of Instances of Injured Bishops
resting under unjust Deprivations, and keeping in the Communion of the new
Intruders into their Places, lately Translated by Mr. Hody. For those Instances
of Acquiescence and Communion, are brought, as the Author of the Manuscript p
1. 18. 22, of the English Translation.
several Times professes, for Instances thereof, only whilst the hitruders were
Orthodox. And so, are no Instances for Acquiescence, in the Cause and
Oppression of pure Worship and Doctrine, or of the Interest of Souls: But only
in Competition of Persons, where the public Offices to be administered, the
Doctrines to be taught and upheld, and the Practices to be Pressed and
Justified under them, were the same under both.

And therefore there can be no pressing Silence, or Cessation, on the Deprived
Bishops and Clergy at such times, with any Appearance of Truth and Reason, but
by clearing those things which they stick at, and which they see everywhere
imposed on Worship and Practice, of all Immorality and Unrighteousness. Which,
on such Revolutions and Change of Masters, they can never do, who profess to
transfer Allegiance, and to do all on the Plea of a King de facto, leaving the
Dispossessed Prince to be still King de Iure. By which, in their own Account,
they are acting all the while against Right, and against him that has it; which
is to be, as St. Paul says of Stubborn Heretics (...)
convict of their own Consciences, or Self-Condemned, Tit. 3. 10, 11. So that
all those Brethren, who on such Occasions, have professed this, must condemn
their own Principle, and all the compliance they have paid thereupon, before
they can accuse the Deprived Pastors for holding on still in their Spiritual
Administrations, or can persuade them to forbear, But that which alone can be
effective to purge the things in Debate, of this Immorality and
Unrighteousness, is the Clearing of the Legal Right, (which the public Acts of
such times, I think are not wanting to Assert,) as the Ground of all that is
then called for, either in Practice, or in Worship. And the Discussion of this,
is no Part of my Design or Purpose in these Papers.

To conclude this Point, of their Obligations to these Ministrations, I only
add in the last Place, that if, for keeping up pure Worship, Doctrine, and
Practice, Christ's Faithful Pastors are bound to afford these Ministrations in
the forementioned Cases, his Faithful People will in the same Cases stand bound
to adhere to them, and to attend on them for Participation thereof.

This Obligation will appear,

1. From that Adherence they owe to the things themselves. They are bound to
Purity of Worship, Belief, and Practice, that they may Propitiate and please
God, and Benefit their own Souls thereby. As Christians, or as Men Professing
Christian Religion, they are obliged to Unite themselves to these, and to stick
by them. And that, in Church Society and under Pastoral Administrations, to
keep up a Communion of Saints in such pure Worship and Professions. And this
must be under such Bishops and Ministers, as retain and stand true to them,
when others fall off from them.

As Members of a Church, it is true, good Christians stand obliged to adhere to
their own Bishops. For the Bishops, are the Heads of Church-Societies; and it is
the Duty of Members, to stick and keep United to the Heads of their respective
Bodies. But this, as I shall show hereafter, is only whilst they keep to those
things, wherein they are bound to head them, that is, to pure Christian Worship
and Doctrines. It is for the having these Administered, that they are obliged to
be under any Pastors, or to adhere to them. And so they must still adhere to
such, as do Administer the same. Which, if their own Bishops fail to do, they
are to stand off from them, to hold on with such pure Worship and Doctrine, and
to have the Administration thereof from such other Bishops and Pastors, as keep
True and Firm thereto, whereof I shall speak more at large, in its Part 3.
chap. 3. and 4.
proper Place.

2. From the Duty on their Part, in all the foresaid Relations. For those
Relations, carry Duties on both sides, and call, as the true Pastors to Feed
and Minister to the Church; so all True Members of the Church, to seek their
Food from the Ministrations of such true Pastors. As it is the Part and Office
of the One, to Administer them: So is it of the Other, to attend on their
Administration, for Participation thereof. If they are Christ's True Shepherds,
to whom should his Sheep adhere, but to his Shepherds, and know and hear their
Voice, and not give Ear to the Call and Voice of Strangers? Jo. 10. 3, 4, 5. If
they are the Faithful Guides of Souls, to whose Ministerial Conduct and
Direction, should the People of God commit their Souls, but to theirs, who will
lead them out, and carry them on, only in Safe and Right Ways? If they are the
Trusty Watchmen, under whose Watch and Guard, should Men, who seek nothing but
to save their Souls, place themselves, but under those, whose Eyes are always
open to see, and their Voice lift up faithfully to admonish and warn them of
their Dangers? If they are the true Teachers, to whom should the Scholars and
Disciples of Christ Resort for Instruction, but to them, and attend, as
Obedient Learners, on their Preaching and Exhortation? If they are Christ's
Faithful Ministers, his People must keep close to their Ministrations, and
adhere to them, as to his trusty Officers and Representatives here on Earth.
And if they are to be Fed with the Ministration of Holy Worship and Doctrines,
and to be instructed and bore up, only in Righteous and Good Practices; if they
must take Care, to be Warned and Guided, Taught and Helped on, only in these
Things, which are the things alone, that are fit to please God, and to save
their Precious Souls: To whom must they Cleave, and keep United for them all,
but to those Shepherds, who daily provide them with this Food; and to those
Guides, who conduct them in these Ways; and to those Watchmen, who fail not to
give them (...)tain them with these (...) Supply them (...) in each, they will
see (...) to show them their own Duty, as (...) their Ministers: And how (...)
so they themselves do to follow; as the Priests are to Administer, so are the
(...)ly to Attend on them and to (...) to their Ministrations, (...) foresaid
Cases.

3. From the (...) which they toward ^^, who call them (...) the People from
(...) and from Good and Righteous to (...) and (...) the Scripture calls or
comprehends under the Title (...) and R^. 16. 17. ^ 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Se^^cers, and To. 16. 18. Tit. 1. 10.
W^lves, and 1 Timothy 4. 1. and 2 Timothy 3. 13
makers of Divisions, and Act. 10. 2^.
(...) Prephets and False-Teachers, and the like. Now ^s the (...) good
Christians* not to associate themselves with (...) off from them; not to follow
Seducers, but to beware of them; not to run after the Wolves, (which were to
show themselves Silly S^e^p indeed, and prepared for Destruction,) but to run
away from them; not to give Ear to False-Teachers, and False-Prop^^^s, but to
keepout of their Hearing, and shut their Ea^^ against the^ and lastly, not to
strike in with those that cause Divisions, but to (...) them, as St. Paul
teaches, and as the Rules of the Church have still required Faithful Christians
to do, by the Makers of Schism. Bid him not God speed, nor receive the Bri^g^^
of False Doctrine into your Houses, 2 Jo. 10, 11. Beware of False-Prophets, as
of Ravening Wolves, Mat. 7. 15. Keep not Company with Disorderly VValkers, who
^dhere not to the Tradition they received of us, 2 These. 3. 6, 14. Mark ^^^m,
which Cause Divisions and Offenses* in breaking off, and going Contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, To. 16. 17. These, and such
like, are the Scripture Ri^^es in these Cases: Which call the Servants of
Christ, to withdraw themselves from those, who have first separated and
withdrawn themselves from his Worship and Doctrines; and, instead of them, to
Adhere to others, who, as his true Ministers and faithful Pastors, stick true
to the same, and Administer them Pure and Incorrupt to his Church; whereof I
shall give a further Account Part 3. chap. 5.
afterward.

PART. II. Of Deprivations by Civil States, or Ecclesiastical Synods.
Chap. 1. Of the Force of State Deprivations in the foresaid Cases.
HItherto I have endeavored to mark out the cases, wherein the Bishops, and
Pastors of Christ's Church are bound to exercise their Ministerial Powers, and
to proceed on duly in their Administrations. And to set forth the great and
manifold Obligations, which are incumbent on them in those Cases,

And having thus laid out their Obligations, I shall next consider the
Restraints, which at such times are most pleadable in these cases, by showing,

2. Secondly, of what force a deprivation of state, or the Preservation of
External Communion and Peace in the Church, ought to be in D^barring them
thereof.

1. First, One great thing, that may be alleged, to silence Faithful Bishops
and Ministers of Gods pure worship and Righteousness, and to stop the course of
their Ministrations in the foresaid Cases, is a Deprivation of state, when the
secular Power, by its Laws and interdicts, forbids those Ministrations, and
removes them from their Sees, putting others into their places.

For Bishops and Pastors, as they are Ministers of Christ, so are they also
Subjects of the state: And therefore, as some think, ought not to exercise
their Ministry, at least not among their Subjects, nor in any Diocese of their
Dominions, in opposition to it. And in Christian Kingdoms, the Church is
incorporated into the state. And by the Benefit of this incorporation, Bishops
and Pastors have their spiritual Ministrations backed with secular Effects and
Censures, as Excommunication among us, makes liable to Temporal imprisonment,
and incapacitates from carrying on any civil suit, or Action in the civil
courts. They have also their jurisdiction extended thereby, to some secular
matters; as the Bishops courts are to matters of Wills, Marriages, Benefices,
etc. And are encouraged therein, by Secular Benefices, Honors, and Freeholds.
Now all these secular Fortifications, jurisdictions, and encouragements in
their Ministrations, conferred on the Bishops and Pastors of an incorporate
Church, are the gifts of the state, and are secular additions, to what
Spiritual Powers they received from Jesus Christ. And what the state gives, the
state, when it sees cause, may deprive them of. So that incorporate
Ministrations, or Administering these Spiritual Powers in the mixed and fortifyed
way of an incorporate Church, may seem, as some will argue, more subject to the
state, to take out of some, and to put into other hands.

Especially considering, that in grateful return and commutation for the
benefit of incorporation, or for being made free of the state, and having the
secular accessions; the Church, by Compromise, has parted with some of its
privileges to the Civil Power. Thus, since the incorporation, has it, in
compliance, given up to the state, the Nomination of Bishops and
Metropolitanes, belonging anciently to the other Bishops of the Province, or to
the Clergy and People of the Church. And that Rules agreed on in Synods, shall
be no Canons, till they be approved and ratified by the Prince: And that there
shall be no Admission, or Refusal of Clerks to Cures, or use of Discipline, but
in consistence with, and under Regulation of the Kings P^erogative, and the
Laws of the Land; and the like. And by these Cessions, they may seem, as some
think, to have Cut off all Power of Contesting the States Nomination or
Advancement to Churches, or its Deprivation and Removal from them; as having,
by their account given up these Privileges, in way of bargain and exchange, to
keep on the benefits and State enjoyments of an incorporate Church.

But as to this Regard, which they ought to have to State deprivations in bar
of the foresaid Ministrations, I observe.

1. First, that this Regard is to be pressed, only under a supposed Legal and
Rightful State. For it is to their Rightful Prince, that, as good and faithful
subjects, they owe all their Obedience, which is called for in these cases.
What Regard they are to pay as subjects, must be to his Deprivation. But not if
they are deprived by an Usurper set up against him, who really has no Regal
Authority over them, but only pretends to it, and assumes a Power which is none
of his own. Especially, if he should deprive them, for their Adherence to their
Lawful King: As if Athaliah had deprived Jehojadah, for adhereing to Joash his
true Sovereign; or as the Re^ellious Parliament did depose, not only the
Bishops and Episcopal Clergy, those Faithful Adherers to the Crown, but
Episcopacy it self in King Charles the First's time. For then, as there is no
real Authority, to bind on; so neither would there be any Equity, or Color of
Law, to back such a deprivation, or to oblige the sufferers to acquiesce
therein. The Law, which still supports the Right of the Lawful King against his
Usurpation, must needs support the Rights of all his Adherents against the
same: And as still he would be the Legal King; so would they, not only be the
real, but, in Eye of Law, the Legal pastors, not withstanding his Forcible
Removal of them. And therefore there is no room for this regard to a
deprivation of State, on the Plea of a King de Facto, or on supposal of
unrighteous usurpation. The Legal Right, asserted still by the Public Acts on
such Revolutions, will give it place to go as far as it can. But as for all
those, who give up the Legal Right, it is not for any of them, (and it is well
known how considerable a part they make among the writers, as well as among the
practicers in this point,) to urge the Authority of a deprivation of State in
this question.

2. Secondly, a Deprivation of a Lawful state, if supposed to pass on Bishops
and Ministers, would be no conscionable discharge from keepeng on their
spiritual Ministrations, against such immoralities as are set down in the
aforesaid cases. For Jesus Christ, who gave them their Ministerial Powers,
requires them, as his Ministers and as Pastors of his Church, to exercise them
for him, and for the Souls of Men, as I have shown, when those Cases happen.
And if the State forbids what he commands, they are to hear or obey no state,
or Power on earth, against him. But must answer, as the Apostles did to the
Jewish Rulers in this Case; whether it be lawful in the sight of God, to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. Act. 4. 18. 19. 20. And thus it
must needs be, in men who are called to be his Ministers, under persecuting
States; and to be Ministers of a Religion, which is a Doctrine of the Cross,
and bids them expect and prepare to bear Crosses under oppressive powers; as is
plainly the Case of Gospel Ministers. For if they must be his Ministers, and
administer this Religion in persecutions, they must hold on Ministering, when
the state where they live breaks with them, and both most strictly forbids, and
most cruelly persecutes them for so doing. And thus the First Ministers did,
who were to plant Christianity, against all the Edicts and Oppositions, of the
Heathen, or Jewish Magistrates. And so did all the Faithful Bishops and pastors
thereof, who, in all the succeeding persecutions of the Church, stuck firm to
their Ministrations, against all the inhibitions and oppressive force of
secular Rulers; or else, our holy Religion had perished long since, and had
never descended pure and perfect as it is, to our days. And so must all others
do, in any present, or succeeding Trials, (which, as they always have done, so
always will seek to suppress Christ's worship and Truth, by suppressing the
pastoral administrations thereof,) that, by their Ministry, it may not fail in
the Church, but be held on the same, and continued down to the worlds end.

But this I say, as to their pure spirtual Powers, and Ministrations, which
they neither did, nor could receive from the Civil State, on which he never
conferred it, but which they hold independantly of Christ Jesus. That is, what
spiritual powers they have received from Christ, by imposition of Hands
continued down from the Apostles: for the feeding and governing of his Church,
by Administration of the Word, of Prayers, and Sacraments, by leting into the
Church, and excluding out of it; and for providing a constant succession of the
same Ministrations, by Empowering or Ordaining others: These mere spiritual
powers, they must exercise as his Ministers, without regard to any deprivation,
or inhibition of Worldly Princes. For Earthly Kings, cannot deprive them of
these mere spiritual powers, because they have them not from them, but Minister
therein, not by theirs, but by Christ's Commission. If Secular Princes gave them
their Commissions to exercise their spiritual Authorities, they might recall
them: If they were the fountain of these powers, and could make or ordain
Bishops, they might have more plea to unmake and deprive them. But not
originally proceeding from them, but from Christ himself, by a way of his own
prescribing, in a succession of Apostolical imposition of Hands, through all
Ages of the Church: They cannot be reversed, by their deprivation. Nor are the
Bishops and Pastors, to be debarred the exercise thereof in any Case where
Christ requires it, at their inhibition; because they are Christ's Servants more
than theirs, and must obey God rather than man. But

3. Thirdly, as for any Temporal accessions and enforcements of these mere
spiritual Ministrations, which the Church receives when once it is shone upon
by earthly powers, and made incorporate or free of the State: These Accessions
are borrowed Powers, and the Gift of Princes; and under the deposition of a
Lawful state, the Bishops and Ministers of Christ must not challenge or pretend
to them.

As to these I observe,

1. That the civil state has Power over these Temporal Accessions and secular
endowments, because it conferred them. When Kings and Queens turn Christians,
they come not in only as members, to partake in these mere spiritual
Ministrations; but as Patrons, by their secular power, to back and Promote
them. They must show themselves Nursing-Fathers, and Nursing-Mothers, as was
foretold Isa. 49. 23.
by the Prophet: and serve the Lord as Kings, that is In hoc Reges, sicut iis
divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in suo Regno bona
jubeant, mala Probibeant, non solum quae p^rtinent ad humanam Societatem, verum
etiam ad divinam Religionem. Aug. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 5.
by employing their Kingly Power to encourage and advance his service, In hoc
ergo serviunt Domino Reges in quantum sunt Reges, cum ea faciunt ad serviendum
illi, quae non possunt facere nisi Reges. Id. Ep. 50. Ad Benifacium virum
militarem.
doing him those services, which none can do but themselves, as St. Austin
tells them.

Thus, to give encouragement and leisure for the Ministers to attend on these
Ministrations without distraction, the civil State endows them with benefices,
or worldly freeholds, Honors, and privileges. It also allots them public and
Authorized places, for these Ministrations; and makes Civil Laws, requiring
people duly to resort to them, and punishing all disturbers of them, and such
as carry themselves indecently thereat. It likewise adds a secular
jurisdiction, to the spiritual, extending the spiritual jurisdiction, to the
Cognizance of Wills, Marriages, Benefices, etc. which are Civil matters; and
backing it by Temporal Accessions in the spiritual parts thereof, making a
mixture and Concurrence of Religious and civil powers, in the spiritual Courts.
For thus, the Ru^ricks, it passes into Laws; and the Canons also, which are the
Rules of exercising that jurisdiction, it binds on the Subjects with the Kings
Approbation, and Ratification, or with a Civil strengthing. And the Spiritual
censures or judgments according to these Rules, it backs with civil penalties,
as imprisonment; or with putting men under civil incapacities, as to plead in
an Action at Law, or the like.

Now all these Temporal Helps and Accessions, come not to the Bishops and
Ministers immediately from Christ, or as they are Ministers of Religion. For
Joh. 18. 36.
His Kingdom, is not of this world: Nor was he, whilst on earth, any judge in
civil matters; Nor does he confer any such worldly powers, or grant any such
commissions. But all these secular benefices and fortifications, in all the
parts of the spiritual Ministry, are the gifts of Princes. They flow from their
favor to the Church, or from their taking upon them to be its Temporal
Patrons, or it is Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers. And as the Bishops and
Ministers of Christ, hold them only by their commission: So may they lose them
by their recalling it. So that although the state has no power, either to give,
or to deprive the Ministers of Christ, of their mere spiritual powers: Yet has
it a direct Authority, to grant or deprive them, of these Temporal Additionals,

And therefore the Bishops and Ministers of Christ in an incorporate Church,
when they are deprived by their Rightful Prince, or by a Legal State, must
exercise their mere spiritual powers in the foresaid Cases, without any of
these civil effects or mixtures. That is, they can only Administer the Word,
and prayers, and Sacraments, and let in members by baptism, and on just cause
cast them out by excommunication, and ordain others that shall hold on from
time to time to do the same. But in discharge of these mere spiritual powers,
they cannot claim the established places, wherein to assemble for these
Ministrations; nor any enforcement of Civil Laws, to make men duly frequent
them, and to hinder all from disturbing them, or from demeaning themselves
disorderly or irreverently at them. Nor can they claim any secular benefices,
for maintenance of those who Minister therein; nor to have any Cognizance, of
Wills, Tyths, or other Temporal matters; nor to have their Canons, made Regal
injunctions; or their Rubricks, made Parliamentary Laws; and the breakers
thereof punishable by Civil Magistrates, in their estates, or Persons; nor
their spiritual censures, to bring men under civil incapacities, or make them
liable to civil punishments, or the like. The state, that gave these Civil
Accessions to the Bishops and Pastors, in their incorporation; has called them
back and taken them away, in their deprivation. So that now, to stick to
Christ, they must quit the benefits of incorporation, and the Favor of Princes.
And, as men left to their naked spiritual powers, which no rightful state can
deprive them of; be content to exercise their spiritual Ministrations in the
foresaid cases, not as in an endowed and secularly protected, but as in a
persecuted, or secularly destitute Church.

And as the state has power, over all these secular endowments of the spiritual
ministration, because it conferred them: So has it,

2. Over some other Powers, which belonged to the Church, whilst it kept
separate, but which it gives up to the Civil State during the benefit of
incorporation with it. For some powers the Church may have no necessity to
insist on, either for the sake of Religion, or of the Souls of Men. And such
powers, for the greater benefit of incorporation, it may be free to part with.

Thus, provided the substance of Religion were secured, and kept up among men,
in all necessary points of Worship and Doctrine; and the main of discipline
were taken care for by Canons already allowed, as it Provided, That such
Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synods Provincial, being already made,
which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of
this Realm, nor to the Damage or Hurt of the Kings Prerogative Royal, shall
now still be used and executed, as they were before the making of this Act, till
such time as they be viewed, searched, or otherwise ordered or determined, etc
according to the Tener and effect of this present Act. Statute of submission of
the Clergy, 25. H. S. c. 19. 7.
was on the submission of our Church and Clergy made under King Henry the
eighth: the Church might be free, by Compromise, to agree, that it would
exercise no Canons already made, but such as were consistent with the Kings
Prerogative, and the Laws of the Land: And that, in Case of any others, a stop
should be put to the proceedings of the spiritual courts, by secular
Prohibitions. And that the Bishops and Clergy, should not meet to make more, or
Assemble in Synod or Convocation, but when summoned thither by the Kings writ:
Nor any of their agreements should be given out for Canons, or Orders, but what
he allowed to pass under his Ratification: And that after they were passed, in
things Dispensable, on just cause in any particular case, he should have the
chief power to Grant a Dispensation. That all Bishops coming in to Govern this
Church, according to the foresaid Rules and Prescriptions, should be of his
Nomination. And that the Advancement of all Ministers, to beneficed and civilly
fortifyed Cures and Administrations, should be according to the Rights of
Patronage established by the Laws; and such like.

These, and such like powers, are naturally resident in the Church it self in a
separate state, or when it stands-upon its own bottom, and is not incorporated.
For, as a society, it must have power in it self, to make needful and wholesome
Rules of Government, from time to time; and to have its Bishops and Ministers
meet together, as they can, that they may make them; and to appoint persons,
who shall be entrusted with the Administration thereof. And accordingly, whilst
the Church was kept separate from the State, and persecuted by it, these powers
were exercised by the Church, and by its Bishops and Pastors, under all the
Heathen Persecutions. During which, the Clergy under their Bishops, and the
Bishops under their Metropolitanes, were convened and met in Synods, and made
Canons, and decided Controversies, and sentenced Criminals, and filled up
vacancies in Presbyteries, or Bishoprics, having a New Bishop elected by the
Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province, or sometimes by the Clergy and
People of the Diocese; and the like.

Indeed, as good subjects of the state, they are bound to keep all innocent
state Laws; and cannot, by any devised Canons of their own, cast off their
Obligation, or forbid themselves, or the Church, to pay a due civil obedience
by observance thereof. So that they have no power in any condition, of making
any Church Canons, which require subjects to act against innocent state
constitutions. Nor may they Lawfully refuse, when the state calls them, to meet
together in Synods, or otherwise: but, as Good Subjects, are obliged to pay a
ready obedience, and to appear upon its summons. These, are only proper
expressions of civil subjection, from which the Church can in no state or
condition plead exemption. But, though they may not disobey the state summons;
yet, when it meddles not therewith, in a separate condition, they have power to
assemble themselves, as they can, and as need requires, taking care to do it in
such ways, as will make it least jealous of them. And when Assembled, though they
can make, or enforce no Canons, to defeat any innocent civil constitutions;
they have power in such separate state, to make others which are consistent
with them, and to exercise the other now mentioned powers, as I say the Church
did in the primitive persecutions.

But when it became incorporate, and was obliged by the favors and privileges
of the state, the Church, by agreements, partly express, and partly by Tacit
and practical, carried in prescription, and the practice of times, gave up
these and such like powers, residing otherwise in it self, to the Civil
Magistrates, who were thus obligingly become its Patrons and Nursing Fathers.
(...). Soc. Hist. Eccl. Proaem. ad lib. 5. page 259.
Since the Emperors became Christians, the Affairs of the Church have Depended
upon them, and the greatest Councils have been held, and still are held at
their pleasure, was the observation of Socrates in the Preface to his Fifth
Book of the History of the Church.

These, it parted with to the civil power, for its Greater Honor. And also to
secure it, of its Good Behavior; being tied thereby to a compliance in things,
which it was not bound to insist on, for the sake of Religion and of a Good
Conscience; and to prevent all jarring and interfereing with that power, in
whose Favor and Society it found so great benefit; seeking herein, to keep up
that Beneficial kindness and Correspondence, which is between them. And these
it gave up to it, by Degrees; and more in some places, and less in others:
Being put upon parting with less at first, and with more afterward; especially
after the Papal Usurpations in the Western Church, grew so very troublesome and
prejudicial to Princes and their Kingdoms, in point of investitures, Appeals,
etc. Which made them more sensible of the advantage, of having these powers
quietly and uncontestedly lodged in their own Hands.

These it might safely part withal, during the incorporation, as retaining
still, what it could not part with, viz: a Power of standing by all Necessary
Points of worship and Doctrine, and of doing what is necessary for the Souls of
Men; and as being also fitted all the time in the main, with what is needful in
Point of Discipline. And its parting with them, was in way of Compromise and
Bargain, as a grateful Return, for the benefits and privileges of its
Enfranchisement and Incorporation; or on consideration of its enjoying a
Freedom, not only of exercising spiritual ministrations; but of exercising them
in the way of an incorporate Church, viz. in holding Benefices, and in being
backed therein by secular Jurisdiction, Laws, and Privileges.

And whilst these benefits of Incorporation are held on in favor of the Truth,
the cession of the Church in these Points is to be held on too, and not to be
resumed back again. Protected and incorporate Bishops and Pastors, must be
content to claim Episcopal and Pastoral powers, under the recessions and
limitations of an incorporate Church. Thus our Art. 37.
Articles, and Can. 1 and Q. Elizab. injunctions, and Oath of Supremacy.
Canons, receive and assert the Ecclesiastical Supremacy of our Kings, which
contains the foresaid Church-Recessions. And denounce Excommunication ipso
Facto to those, that Can. 2.
Deny any part of our King's Legal Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Causes, or his
having the same Authority therein, as the Godly Kings had among the Jews, or
Christian Emperors had in the Primitive Church. And accordingly, in our Form of
Ordaining Bishops, they profess to think themselves called to this
Ministration, according to the Will of Jesus Christ, and the Order of this
Realm: and promise to censure and punish the unquiet and disobedient within
their Diocesses, according to such Authority, as they have by God's Word, and
as to them shall be committed by the Ordinance of this Realm.

But now all this giving up these, or the like powers, to the State, for the
sake of this Incorporation, and in way of bargain and compromise; or other
abridgement of its own ministrations; is,

1. With a Salvo to the Interests of Religion, and of the Souls of Men. They
cannot give away any thing, to make themselves wanting in any necessary service
unto them; nor part with their powers of ministering to Souls, to build and
nurse them up in pure Worship, Doctrine, and Practice. These Powers, are a
Sacred Depositum; which if they imbezzle, or yield up in compliance, they are
false to God, and to men's Souls, and thereby betray both them, and their own
Holy F^^ction. And their Acts also are nullities, wherein they offer or promise
to do the same. For they are Acts against an antecedent Obligation, which are
wicked in the making, as Herod's Oath Mar. 6. 22, 23, 26.
was to gratify Herodias in the Baptists Death; and the Act. 23. 12, 13. 14.
Jews Conspiracy and Oath to kill St. Paul. But they are null as to the
Obligation of performance, as is agreed in the case of all contracts and
promises to do unlawful things, or things evil or forbidden in themselves.

They can neither discharge themselves, I say, nor receive any discharge from
Princes, of exercising these Powers, where Christ requires they should exercise
them for the Service of Religion and of Souls, as I have shown he does in the
fore mentioned cases. In Stewards, it is required that they be found faithful,
in dispensing out these Ministrations as he orders, not in suppressing them
contrary to Order, 1 Cor. 4 2. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe be to me, is
here the Scripture denunciation, if they preach not the Gospel, or fail
trustily to discharge that Ministry they have undertaken, 1 Cor. 9. 16. No
earthly Powers, by confering on them the benefits of Incorporation, get any
Authority over Christ's Ministers, to discharge them of Ministering to their
Master in these matters. For this would be, to give the civil power, which
ought to keep under Christ, a power over him. It would turn them, from Nursing
Fathers, who, by giving it a civil enfranchisement, undertake to protect the
true Religion; into devouring Wolves, who seek to make a prey of it. It is
expressly declared against by the Apostles, who appeal to the common sense of
mankind, Whether they are not bound to obey God, rather than men, Act. 4. 19.
20. And would leave no ministrations of true Gospel Worship and Doctrine, under
any Christian state, which should fall from any necessary parts thereof, and
begin to persecute them: as the Arian Emperors did, in the Persecutions they
raised against the Orthodox; and as Popish Princes did, in like violences used
by them at any time, against our Protestant Brethren or Ancestors. Than which,
nothing can be worse calculated for any Church of God, but especially for the
Christian Church, which is to continue a Church in persecution, and to bear up
Christian Worship and Doctrine, by due ministrations of both, when any powers of
this World fall, from protecting, most violently to bear them down.

And this in all times has been the Opinion and Practice of God's faithful
Ministers, when the State, which, by Incorporation, should have backed and
strengthened them therein, fell to discharge and bar them of their ministrations
in these cases.

Thus God's Faithful Prophets and Ministers did in the Jewish Church, who
approved themselves glorious Confessors and Martyrs, in administering God's Word
and true Worship, when the State fell to break in upon them, and, instead of
backing and protecting them in those ministrations, according to the purport of
incorporation, fell violently to discharge and drive them from officiating any
longer therein.

Thus likewise Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Paulus of Constantinople, and
other Bishops did, in the Arian Persecution. The civil State had then received
the Church into it self, and endowed it with civil Edicts and enfranchisements.
And the deprivation and ejection of these Bishops out of their Churches,
particularly of the Great Athanasius, was with State-Concurrence, and for
State-Causes or Pretenses. Among other Articles, Athanasius was charged with
Theod. l. 1. c. 28. and Soz. l. 3 c. 25.
Contumacy against the Emperor, in refusing to appear upon his Edict at the
Synod of Caesarea. And with a Soc. l. 1. c. 35.
Treasonable Design, to stop the yearly Transport of Corn from Alexandria to
Constantinople, on which suggestion, he was banished to Tryers by Constantine.
Not to mention the Soz. l. 2. c. 22.
Accusation of his having imposed on the Egyptians, a Tribute of Linen
Cloth; and Ibid.
having conspired with one Philumenus against the Emperor; and Athan. Apol. ad
Constan. p. 677. and 681. Ed. Col. 686
having Treasonably corresponded with the Traitor Magnentius, and Athan. ib. p.
682. ^ Athan. ad Solit. p. 811. 815. 843. and Apol. ad Constable. p. 695. Ed. Col.
usurped the Imperial Prerogative, by holding the Festival Dedication of the
great Church of Alexandria without the Emperors Warrant, and the like. And his
Deposition, and Gregory's and Georges Advancement to his See by Synods, were
seconded by Acts of State: having the Approbation and Justification of the
Emperors, and the Assistance of Prefects, as well as the Imperial Letters,
violently forcing one out of the Episcopal Throne, and giving the other
Possession thereof, and barbarously enforcing submission and adherence to them
from the Clergy and People, as was done by Athan. ad Solit. p. 815, 816, 817.
Philagrius, Apol. de Fuga, p. 716, 717. ad Constant. p. 689. 690. and Protest.
Pop. Alex. ad Calcem Ep. ad Solit. p. 867.
Syrianus, and Ep. ad Solit. p. 843, etc.
Heraclius, to omit others. But these Stateinhibitions and deprivations, coming
on him and his Adherents, not for any other Crimes alleged, which were
shameless Falsehoods, and assumed merely as pretenses, but in reality only for
his being a stout Asserter of the Orthodox Faith; he still went on preaching
and ministering the same, and for all these State-ejections, was stuck to
therein by the faithful Egyptians, and by the Orthodox in all other places.

And thus also our own Ancestors continued to do, on the States turning upon
them, and, under Forfeiture of Incorporation, and all the Penalties of a Bloody
Persecution, forbidding them to go on administering the Word and Worship of God,
according to the Reformation thereof made by King Edward, in Queen Mary's time.
For being to administer this Word and Worship, in duty to God, and in care of
Souls, they set light by the Benefits of Incorporation and civil Advantages,
and paid no regard to State-deprivations or inhibitions; but went on faithfully
to administer the same, though at the ^eril of their Lives.

I Grant, the desire of keeping on the public benefits of incorporation, may
many times be a Reason for Bishops and Ministers, voluntarily to rest under
State-deprivations and inhibitions, when it is a Case only of personal rights
and privileges. Such deprivations and inhibitions, often affect persons only
and not things, when, on the deprivation of one, the same Ministrations would
be kept up by others: As was done in the depositions of Highpriests, so common
in later times among the Jews; and of Patriarks, so ordinary at present among
the Greeks; and may happen in other places. In all which, there is only a
change of persons, but no change in ministrations; the Church being lead on in
the same necessary Worship, Doctrine, and Practice, under both. And here, to
prevent a breach with the state, and to keep on the way of spiritual
ministrations with the benefit of Secular Accessions, the Bishops and Pastors
of an incorporate Church, (where it is not like to do the Church more hurt by
an utter loss of its liberty in these points, than the incorporation desired
will compensate,) may think there is more cause for the Churches sake, to rest
under state-deprivations. They may esteem it their parts, to quit their own
particular interests, to advance the Churches; and believe that the keeping on
the public benefits of incorporation, will abundantly compensate, for the
wrongful encroachment made by such deprivation on a private person. But in
Cases, which concern, not only the personal rights and privileges of Pastors,
but the substance of Religion, or the safety of Souls, and where Christ
requires they should exercise their ministrations, as I have shown he does in
the foresaid Cases: They must not let them fall, in regard to any inhibitions,
or deprivations, even of their Lawful Princes. They must here slight all
worldly benefit of protection, and be willing, if need require, to undergo a
persecution. And go on faithfully in their ministrations, as their bounden duty
requires, and as in these Cases, Gods Faithful Ministers have done in all times.

2. Secondly, what is so given up by the Church, for abridgement of its own
power in spiritual ministrations, is only whilst it keeps united to the state,
and receives protection, not when it is separated from it again, or falls under
persecution. Its recessions, as I noted, were on consideration of State
benefits, and as a grateful return for them whilst it was suffered to enjoy
them. They are all upon the score of its union; and so cease when the State
breaks off, and turns it up to it self again. For being made separate, it is no
longer under any former ties of incorporation, but acts again with the powers
of a separate condition. And thus it is, when, instead of protecting, the State
puts any necessary points of Doctrine or Worship, or part of their
ministration, under persecution. When it separates its protection, it separates
it self. It drives out the Church, when it drives out any of those things,
which the Church must stick to at all perils; and when, instead of
incorporating, or civilly protecting the ministrations thereof, it falls to
incorporate, and to protect the ministration of error and wickedness, in their
place. It disfranchises pure Worship and Doctrine, when it enfranchises errors
and corruptions contrary to them: And by turning to persecute the necessary
ministrations of pure Religion, it breaks it self from them, and thence forward
they are no longer one, but become two again.

So that, whatever regard and compliance the Bishops and Ministers of Christ
may show, to such deprivations and inhibitions of the State whereinto they are
incorporated, whilst it inhibits no necessary Ministrations to Religion, or to
the Souls of Men, but, in discharging all those, they enjoy the privileges and
protection thereof: Yet are they not to be discharged thereby, from ministering
to the same in all the foresaid, or other like Cases; nor to be debarred of any
of their spiritual powers, after once the state breaks with them, and, instead
of yielding them the benefits of incorporation, puts them under persecution.
But then, they must exercise these ministrations, only according to what they
have Received from Christ, and from the Canons of the Church, so far as they do
not interfere with any innocent State Laws, which restrain them as Good
Subjects: Not with any Civil fortifications, and State Accessions.

CHAP. II. Of the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy Received and Asserted by our
Church.
ANd all this agrees well with the Ecclesiastical Supremacy owned by our
Church, and claimed by our Princes, Can. 2. Eccl. Anglic.
conformable to what was ascribed to, and claimed by the Godly Kings among the
Jews, and the Godly Emperors in the Primitive Church. Whose Ecclesiastical
Sovereignty, lies not in their being invested with, or in their having a
Sovereign Disposal of the Powers of Orders. But in retaining their Civil
Sovereignty over all persons, whether Laymen, or Ecclesiastics. And in the
subordination of Ecclesiastical courts and causes, which are content to act in
subordination, on the score of their secular mixtures, as in beneficiary
matters, censures, etc. And, for Cognizance of either, of these, either of
persons, or causes, in barring all Foreign Appeals.

1. First, It lies not, I say, in their being invested with, or having a
Sovereign Disposal of the powers of orders. For these, our Kings do not pretend
to have in their power, or to be powers subjected and inherent in themselves:
But to be proper, and Peculiar, to spiritual persons. Thus, King Henry the
eighth, when he asserts his own Regal Supremacy over the Church, leaves all
proper spiritual powers and Functions to spiritual persons; and, in the Sta.
24. H. 8. c. 12. 1.
statute for restraint of Appeals, declares the spiritualty sufficient and
meet, to declare and determine all such doubts, and to administer all such
offices and dutys, as to their Rooms Spiritual does appertain. And Queen Vid.
Bp. Sparrows Collect. p. 83.
Elizabeth's injunctions disclaim all challenging of any Authority and Power, of
Ministry of Divine Service in the Church, by Virtue of the Supremacy. And the
37th. Article of Religion declares, That thereby we give not our Princes the
ministering, either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments. And the Stat. 5. El. c.
1. 14.
Statute of Queen Elizabeth says, The Oath of Supremacy shall be taken, and
expounded, in such form, as is set forth in the Queens. Admonition annexed to
her Injunctions. They are the Ministers of God in their Dominions, as To. 13. 4.
St. Paul says: But that is, as Kings, not as Priests. So that, the Kings
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters, does not imply the Power of the Keys,
which the King has not, De minist. Ang. l. 3. c. 3. p. 271.
says Mr. Mason. And Non vel conciones habendi, vel rei sacrae praeeundi, vel
Sacramenta Celebrandi; non vel personas sacras, vel res; non clavium jus, vel
censurae. Verbo dicam, nihil ille sibi; nihil nos illi fas putamus attingere,
quae ad Sacerdotale Munus spectant, seu Potestatem Ordinis consequuntur.
Tortura Torti, p. 380.
by the Supremacy, we do not attribute to the King the power of the Keys, or
Ecclesiastical Censures, as Bishop Andrews observes. We never gave our Kings
the power of the Keys, or any part of either the Key of Order, or the Key of
Jurisdiction, purely spiritual, Schism guarded, Sect. 1. c. 4. p. op. 311.
says Bishop Bramhall.

And this bounding of their Claims and Pretenses of Power, is suitable to what
we find among those Godly Jewish Kings, and Christian Emperors, to whom our
Churches Art. 37.
Articles and Can. 2.
Canons, about Supremacy, refer.

As to the Jews, it appertains not unto thee, O Uzziah! to burn incense unto
the Lord, but to the Priests that are consecrated thereto, say the Priests to
King Uzziah, when he would assume to himself the Priests Office, for which God
miraculously smote him with a Leprosy upon the place, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16, 18, 19,
20. And the Lord has chosen you to stand before him, to serve, and minister
unto him, and to burn incense, says King Hezekiah to the Levites, 2 Chronicles. 29.
11.

And the like appears, of the godly Christian Emperors, who were told by their
Holy Bishops, and professed of themselves, That they were no Priests, and that
their power of Empire did not swallow up the Sacerdotal powers. (...), Hosii Ep
ad Constan. ap. Athanas. Ep. ad Solit. p 840.
God has entrusted the Affairs of the Kingdom, in your hands; but those of the
Church, in ours. And, as we may not lawfully take upon us, to act as Kings; so
neither have you Authority, O Emperor! to burn incense, or usurp the Priests
Office, said the Great Hosius, in his Epistle to the Emperor Constantius.
(...), Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 2, c. 27.
To you it appertains externally to punish; but to us to judge and determine
what is Heretical and impious, say Elusius, and Sylvanus, and the other
Bishops, to the same Constantius. (...), Ap. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5 c. 18.
The Royal Purple makes men Emperors, but it does not make them Priests, says
St. Ambrose to the Emperor Theodosius.

As Christians, and Godly Emperors, they used their Imperial Power and
Sovereignty about Church Matters. But that was not privative, to deny the
Pastors of the Church, or to bereave them of their Power; but Cumulative, to
add the Imperial Power, which was of another kind, to the Spiritual, thereby to
back their Acts, and to make them bind the faster. Thus, when they sent Count
Candidianus to the Great Council of Ephesus, the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinian declare in their (...), Council. Ephesin. Part 1. p. 229. Ed. Bin.
Tom. 2. Council.
Letter to the Council, That it was to keep good Order, and to see fair
Debates; but with Orders not to intermeddle in determining Questions of Faith,
and Ecclesiastical Matters, which, say they, is lawful only for the Bishops.
And when the Emperor Marcian came in person, at the passing the Definitions of
the Great Council of Chalcedon, (...), etc. Conc. Chalced. Part. 2. Act. 4 p.
345. Tom. 3. Council. Ed. Bin.
it was not, as he tells them in his Speech to the Council, to make
Demonstration of his own Power therein, but to give greater firmness to what
they had done in the Exercise of theirs. Which he does, by Ibid. p. 361.
Ratifying the same, by secular Penalties, as by Banishment of Citizens,
Disbanding of Soldiers, and Deposition of Clery, and by other Punishments;
after the Determinations of the Council had been read, and the Bishops had
owned, and subscribed the same, before him. When the Imperial Purple came to
confirm a Pastoral Act, it gave a new Authority to that, which had Authority in
it self before; or, as Justinian (...), etc Justin. Novel. 42. c. 3.
speaks in his Confirmation of the Episcopal Sentence, or Anathemaon Zoaras,
which, says he, having a validity from it self, or Authenticalness of its own,
the Crown makes yet more valid, or of more Authority, by adding to it a secular
Penalty. The Episcopal or Spiritual Authority, is by too many unjustly
slighted; and therefore the Secular Authority is both humbly called in, and
piously comes in to its help, since those irreligious Contemners of the
Spiritual Power, will stand more in awe of the Secular. (...), Council. Carthag.
Can. 70.
Coming in, by their Secular Authority, to help and back the Church in those
things, wherein men would otherwise contemn the Authority of the Bishops, as
the Fathers express it in the Council of Carthage. So that the Imperial Power,
even whilst employed about Church-Ministrations, all the time supposes, but
does not swallow up the Pastoral Powers: nor does its Ecclesiastical Supremacy
lie, nor was ever thought so to do, either by our Church, or by those Times
whereto it refers, in their being vested with, or having a sovereign Disposal
of the Powers of Orders. But,

2. Secondly, it lies,

1. First, In retaining their civil Power over all Persons, whether Laymen or
Ecclesiastics. The Civil State, was first in Being; and men were Subjects of
the State, when Christianity came to be proposed to them, and planted among
them. Non enim Respublica est. in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in Republica, id est,
in Imperio Romano, Optat. l. 3. p. 64. Ed. Par.
The Church is in the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the Church, as
Optatus says. And when men became Members, or Ministers of the Church, they did
not thereby cease to be Subjects of the State, or owe ever the less Duty unto
it. Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Power, is meant of
Ecclesiastics, as well as others: It takes in all, (...), etc. Chrysostom. in
loc.
though an Apostle, though an Evangelist, though a Prophet, or whosoever else, as St.
Chrysostom notes. And therefore Princes may lay their civil Commands, and
inflict their civil Punishments, upon Ecclesiastics, as well as upon their
other Subjects. They may put them under Fines, or Imprisonments, or banish them
out of their Dominions, or any parts thereof, as Act. 18. 2.
Claudius did the Jews from Rome, or as Rev. 1. 9.
Domitian did St. John into Patmos, where he wrote his Revelations; and as
Constantius and Valence did the Orthodox Bishops in the Arian Persecutions. And
true Pastors are bound to submit to this, like as other Subjects are, either
from Heathen, or Heretical Emperors, and even in hard and unjust Cases, as in
the foresaid Instances. And Alius in eam Patriam, unde extorris factus est,
regreditur, ut deprehensus non jam quasi Christianus, sed quasi nocens pereat.
Cyp. Ep. ^3 p. 29. 30. Ed. Ox.
if any under sentence of Banishment, inflicted on certain Persons, not on the
whole Cause, return into his own Country without Leave of the civil Power, if
being caught, he suffer for it, he dies not as a Christian, but as a
Malefactor, says St. Cyprian. So that Bishops and Ministers, are no exempt
Persons, but are to own their Kings as their civil Sovereigns, and are as much
bound to pay Obedience to their civil Laws, and are under the Cognizance of
their civil Courts, as others are.

And this civil Subjection of Ecclesiastical Persons, against the Papal
Exemptions thereof, is the main thing in the Ecclesiastical Supremacy claimed
by our Kings. In the Injun. ^.
Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, and in the Ca^. 1.
Canons of King James, this Supremacy is called the highest Power under God,
whereto all Men within the same Realms, by God's Law, owe most Loyalty and
Obedience, before and above all other Powers and Potentates in Earth. Her
Majesty, say the In the Admonition.
Injunctions again, thereby neither does, nor ever will challenge any other
Authority, than was lately used, and was of ancient time due to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have the sovereignty and rule over
all manner of Persons born within her Dominions, of what Estate, either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, soever they be, so as no other Foreign Power,
shall, or ought to have any superiority over them. By Supremacy, or chief
Government, says the 37th. Article of Religion, we give only that prerogative,
which we see to have been always given to all godly Princes in Holy Scriptures
by God himself; that is, that they should rule all States and Degrees committed
to their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and
restrain with the civil Sword, the Stubborn and Evildoers. And the Oath of
Supremacy, as King King James's Apology for the Oath of Alleg. p. 263.
James the First declared, only extended to the Kings Power of Judicature over
all Persons, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical; excluding all foreign Powers and
Potentates, to be Judges within his Dominions. All which, plainly make the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, to lie mainly in having Bishops and Ministers, or the
Ecclesiastical State, who were broke off from it by the Papal Exemption, under
the same common Obligation to the civil Sovereign with other Subjects, or under
the Tie of civil Subjection.

In virtue of this civil power over their Persons, as his Subjects, he can
command them faithfully to discharge their Duties, and Functions. And that, not
only as Subjects, in civil Matters; but as Ministers, in divine Offices. For,
as he is the civil Sovereign, the Temporal Magistrate is the Keeper of both
Tables, being to keep his Subjects in Godliness, as well as in Honesty, as 1 Timothy 2. 2.
St. Paul says. And is to use the civil Sword, for sins against Religion, as
well as for sins against the State; and, in his way, to punish Ministers, for
Neglect or Abuse of their spiritual Functions, as well as for Breach of the
civil Peace. Thus good Kings, as 2 King. 18. 4.
Hezekiah, and 2 Kin. 23. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11.
Josiah, employed their temporal power, to cut off corrupt administrations, and
to reform Abuses of Worship and Religious Offices, in the Jewish Church: As
Constantine, and other good Christian Kings and Emperors did afterward, in
other Nations. And the 37th. Article of our Church declares, That by his
Supremacy, the King with the civil Sword may restrain the stubborn and
evildoers, whether Laics or Ecclesiastics. And on this Account, Constantine
(...), Ap. The. od. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 20.
calls himself the Minister of God, for the Coercion and Punishment of wicked
Bishops. And, at his Entertainment of the Bishops, tells them, (...), Eusebius. de
vita Constant. l. 4. c. 24.
That God has appointed them the Bishops of things within the Church, and him
the Bishop of things without it: and that it belongs to him, as Bishop of
Bishops, to see they discharge their duties, and be pious. Thus, the Emperors,
Theodosius and Valentinian, say, That (...), etc. Council. Ephesians. Part 1. c. 32.
p. 225. Tom. 2. Con. Ed. Bin.
God, by setting them to reign; had made them the Bond, both of the piety, and
of the external welfare and security of those, who are subject to them, the
connection betwixt which two, their study was to preserve inviolable. And In hoc
enim Reges, sicut eis divinitus praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges
sunt, si in suo Regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent
ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad divinam Religionem, Aug. contra
Crescon. Grammat. l. 3. c. 5. Tom. 7. Ed. Col.
in this, Kings, says St. Austin, according as God commands them, do serve the
Lord as they are Kings, when they enjoin good things, and prohibit evil things
in their Kingdoms: And that, not only in Matters pertaining to humane society,
but also in Matters pertaining to our Holy Religion.

And thus, by means of his civil Power over Spiritual Persons, has the King the
like Power over Spiritual Acts and Functions, viz. as he can require, and, by
the civil Sword, compel them, whom Christ has empowered thereto in his
Dominions, to exercise the same. I mean, to exercise them, according to the
Rules of God's Word, and of their own Spiritual Function; his Power lying in
calling them to do their duties, not to any Neglect or Breach thereof. As we
see was observed, not only by the Godly Jewish Kings, but also by the Primitive
Emperors, whose civil Laws and Edicts in these Matters, still followed the
spiritual Rules and Duties, and were a secular Enforcement, to drive all
Ecclesiastics to keep them, not to Transgress them. (...). Justin. Novel. 83.
Our Laws, do not disdain to follow the Sacred and Divine Canons; the civil
power in these Matters, enforcing that which the Church had first prescribed,
says the Emperor Justinian. And accordingly, in the Civil Law for Restraint of
Excommunications, we (...), Cod. Justin. l. 1. Tit. 3. L. 30.
forbid our Bishops, says he, to Excommunicate any, without a just Cause be
shown for it. We forbid all Bishops and Presbyters, says another Law, to
exclude any from the Communion, before Proof of such a Cause, (...), Justin.
Novel. 123. c. 11.
for which this is commanded to be done by the Ecclesiastical Canons. So, by
his Imperial Power over their Persons, commanding their Ministrations, and
limitting them therein to their own Rules.

And thus the King, like as the Jewish Kings, and Primitive Emperors were, is
supreme in these spiritual Acts and Administrations, as in his Dominions, they
are all to be sped and administered, not by independent Foreigners, but by his
own Subjects; or, as having the supreme earthly Command of Bishops and Priests,
who are bound in civil Obedience to him, as their Temporal Sovereign, to
exercise them when he requires it. And this way, he can give Final Justice to
all his Subjects, in all spiritual, as well as temporal Matters; having
Authority to command his Bishops and Clergy, to do it in the one; as well as
his Judges and temporal Ministers, to do it in the other. And by this power, of
doing it by their Means or Ministrations, is his Supremacy set off. Thus, in
the 24. H. 8. c. 12. 1.
Statute for the Restraint of Appeals, the King is declared to be the one
supreme Head, endowed with plenary Power and Authority, to render Final Justice
in all Causes; because the spirituality, or his Bishops and Clergy, can
administer and determine all that belongs to their spiritual Offices; and the
Judges and other his temporal Ministers, can do the like for Trial of Property,
and Conservation of civil Peace. The Kings Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters,
Rex ^as claves non habet, habentibus tam^n, ut eis recte utantur, pro suo jure
imperare p^test, Mas. de Minist. Angl. l. 3. 3. 3. p. 271.
does not imply the power of the Keys, which he has not; but he may command
those who have them, to use them rightly, says Mr. Mason. This Supremacy is
preserved, if he take care, that those, who have the power of Ecclesiastical
Censures, do exercise them, Of the Kings Supremacy in his Answer to Becanus. p.
22. and p. 244.
says Dr. Burhil. He has plenary power to render final Justice; that is, to
receive the last Appeal of his own Subjects, without any fear of any Review
from Rome, or at Rome, for all Matters Ecclesiastical and Temporal;
Ecclesiastical, by his Bishops; Temporal, by his Judges, Bishop Bramhall's Just
Vindication, etc. p. Op. 63. vid. and p. 230.
says Bishop Bramhall. So that the Legal Supremacy of our Kings in spiritual
Matters, lies in their power of doing them all, (without any Interposition of
Foreign Bishops who are none of their Subjects,) by their own Bishops and
Clergy, whom they can command and compel to do their duties therein, as their
civil Sovereigns. And this way, the civil Sovereignty does not drown, or
swallow up the spiritual powers of Ecclesiastics; but supposes them all the
while, peculiarly and immediately vested therewith. But only retains its own
secular power over their Persons, as well as others; whereby it can oblige them
to a due discharge of their sacred powers, according to the Rules of their
spiritual Functions, as occasion requires.

It lies moreover;

2. Secondly, In the Subordination of Ecclesiastical Courts and Causes, wherein
Ecclesiastics are content to act subordinately, on the score of their secular
mixtures and jurisdictions, as in Beneficiary Matters, Censures, and other
things of that Cognizance. To give more leisure and encouragement to the
Ministers of Religion, in attending their spiritual Administrations, the civil
State has endowed their spiritual Cures, with temporal Benefices or
Preferments. And to beget a greater Regard, and a more general and aweful
Observance of Ecclesiastical Determinations, the civil power, as I before
observed, is annexed and mingled with the spiritual, in these Causes, and a
Concurrence is therein made of Temporal and Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions.

The Matters cognizable there, are not only mere spiritual, but some of them of
a temporal Nature. Such are all Causes Testamentary, or about Wills; the Causes
of Matrimony and Divorces; and those about Right of Tithes, Oblations, and
Obventions; Stat. 24. H. 8. c. 12. 2.
the Knowledge whereof, by the goodness of Princes of this Realm, says the
Statute for Restraint of Appeals, and by the Laws and Customs of the same,
appertains to the spiritual Jurisdiction of this Realm.

And the Canons and Rubricks, which are to rule all Proceedings, are not only
the Prescriptions of Bishops and Priests; but Royal and civil Injunctions. Like
as also the Ancient Canons were, by the piety of the Primitive Emperors. (...),
etc. Justin. Novel. 131. c. 1.
We decree, that the holy Ecclesiastical Canons, either those passed in the
four General Councils, or those confirmed by them, be in place of Laws, says
the Emperor Justinian. (...), Cod. Justin. l. 1. tit. 3. L. 45.
Our own Laws, will have the Divine Canons, not to be of less force or effect,
than Laws, -- and what the sacred Canons forbid; that also do our Laws coerce
and abolish, says the Code. And as it was in the case of those Ancient Canons,
under those Emperors; so, in case of ours too under our Kings, the Judgments
and Sentences upon them, rest not in mere spiritual, but draw on temporal
Effects and Incapacites, which effect the Sufferers in their Persons and
Estates, as well as in their spiritual Concerns: As subjecting them to a Writ
of Imprisonment, rendering them incapable to commence or carry on a Suit at Law,
or the like.

Now for the favor of this State-Concurrence in all these Causes, that under
the Union of two such different Powers there may be no clashing, the Church
submits to act in subordination, and the King, in all these Causes and mixed
Jurisdictions, is supreme. That is, no Synod of Ecclesiastics is to meet for
making Canons or Constitutions, but when, by his Writ; he convenes them. Nor
are any Agreements of theirs, when assembled, to be published as Canons or
Ordinances, till he approves or ratifies them. Nor any of those introduced
formerly, to be executed and put in use, further than they consist with the
Kings prerogative Royal, and with the Laws, Customs, and Statutes of the Realm:
All which are provided for in the Stat. 25. H. 8. ^. 19.
Statute of Submission. And when Canons are thus made by his Ratification, it
submits also, that in certain Cases, which are declared by other Acts, they may
be relaxed by his Royal Dispensation; and that, as in making Canons, so also in
granting Dispensations from them, he shall be supreme. That no Persons shall be
elected Bishops, of beneficed and temporally endowed Churches, but who have the
Kings Letters missive, as is provided in Stat. 25 Eliz. e. 29.
another Statute, or who are of his Nomination. That when Ecclesiastics sit to
judge in their Courts by those Laws, all their Proceedings in that Judicature
shall be subject to the Kings Prohibition, to stop their further hearing of a
Cause, which, by Allowance, or Custom, is of another Cognizance; or to his
Commission of Review, upon Appeals made to him, after they have given sentence.
So that in these Courts, there is a subjection and subordination to the King,
both as to the Laws they proceed by, which are the Kings Laws, as not passing,
or being introduced, without his Approbation or Sufferance; and as to the
Judgments there passed according to them.

And because of this subordination of the Bishops and Clergy, in their pure
spiritual Jurisdictions, for the Civil Sovereigns addition of such Temporal or
State Concurrence; the King is declared supreme in all these Causes. Thus much
is declared, in the Passages already mentioned from the Statutes settling the
Kings supremacy. And thus it is said in another Stat. 32. H. 8. c. 26.
Statute, of the Review of the Institution of a Christian Man, that King Henry
8th. set it forth as supreme Head of the Church of England, because he called
the Convocation together, to frame and publish ^^ by his Consent. And thus in
his That We are supreme Governor of the Chapter of Engl. and that if any
difference arise, about the External Policy, concerning the Injunctions,
Canons, or other Constitutions whatsoever thereto belonging, the Clergy in
their Convocation is to order and settle them, having first obtained Leave
under our Broad Seal so to do; and we approving their said Ordinances and
Constitutions, providing that none be made contrary to the Laws and Customs of
the Land. His Majesty's Declaration before the 39 Articles of Religion.
Declaration prefixed to the 39 Articles of Religion, King Charles the First
sets forth his supremacy over the Church, by this subordination of the
Churchmen, and because, in making any Canons or Constitutions, they must have
his License for their Assembling, and their Orders and Agreements confirmed by
his Approbation, and executed all with subordination, to the Laws and Customs
of the Land, for preservation whereof they are subject to the Temporal
Prohibition.

And in respect of both these parts of civil power, viz: Both in having this
civil command of spiritual persons, and this civil power over spiritual causes
by reason of such secular mixtures, it lies moreover in having the same,

3. Thirdly, in opposition and bar of all other earthly dependence, especially
of all Foreign jurisdiction and appeals. He is the one Supreme Head of all,
both Spiritual and Temporal, next under God, says the 24. H. 8. c. 12.
Statute for Restraint of Appeals. And the claim of Supremacy in the Queens
injunctions, is so as no other Foreign Power, shall, or ought to have any
Superiority over them. And the Thirty Seventh Article of Religion, the first of
King James the Firsts Canons, and especially the Oath of Supremacy, does most
fully disclaim, and exclude all Foreign jurisdiction herein. And the extending
of the Kings Power of Judicature over all Persons, Ecclesiastics, as well as
others, thereby, is for excluding all Foreign Powers from being Judges in our
Kings Dominions, as we heard from King James's Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance.

The Foreign jurisdiction and Appeals particularly aimed at, is that, which was
claimed here by the Popes of Rome. They had wrested from the Crown the foresaid
Sovereignty, both over Ecclesiastical Persons, and Causes. For as to
Ecclesiastical Persons, they claimed an exemption for them, as not answerable
in Civil Courts, but Cognizable only by themselves. And as to Ecclesiastical
Ministrations, as backed by secular benefices; and Ecclesiastical Causes, as
mixed in the Ecclesiastical Courts with Civil Privileges and Jurisdiction; they
disclaimed subordination to the Crown, and asserted a supremacy to themselves
therein. For they made themselves supreme here, in investitures into benefices
and preferments; and to have the chief power; by their Legates, of calling our
convecations; of passing, and ratifying, all our Decrees, Canons, and
Constitutions; of granting dispensations from them; of having their decrees
take place, of the Prerogatives of the Crown or of the Customs of the Realm; of
holding courts; and of receiving Appeals from any of our spiritual courts, and
judicatures, and the like. All which civil powers over Ecclesiastical Persons,
and subordination of Ecclesiastical causes proceeding by the foresaid mixture
of secular fortifications, benefices, and jurisdictions; the statutes,
Articles, injunctions, and Canons of this Church and Realm about Supremacy,
abolish in the Popes, and assert to the Crown, to which they Anciently did, and
of right should belong.

So that this Sovereign Civil Power, over all Ecclesiastical Persons, as their
subjects; and this Subordination of all Ecclesiastical Causes to it, because of
the Concurrence and intermixture, of the foresaid civil privileges and
juridictions therewith; and that in opposition to the papal pretenses in these
points; is the Ecclesiastical supremacy vested in the King, by our Church, and
Laws. The Popes spiritual Usurpation upon this Church, was shaken off, by
asserting to the Archbishop of Canterbury the British Churches Ancient, and
independent Primacy. Which did Right to the King too; it being against his
Prerogative, that any Foreigner, who does not own himself to be one of his
Subjects, should have any Power in his Dominions. And his Civil Usurpation on
the Crown, in respect to Ecclesiastical Persons, and Causes, among its
Subjects, was thrown out by asserting of the Kings Supremacy.

But when the Supremacy speaks such a civil power over the persons of
Ecclesiastics, as they are its subjects, and such subordination of
Ecclesiastical causes thereto, as they are united to secular benefices and
jurisdictions: Yet at the same time, as I have shown, does it disclaim all
pretense to mere spiritual powers, or to the Sovereign Disposal of the Powers
of Orders. Of it self, it can neither give, nor recall them. Nor stop the
Ministrations thereof, in any of those Cases where Christ requires them. All it
can do there, is to withdraw its Civil incorporation, from those who have these
mere spiritual powers, and are bound, for the sake of Religion and of the Souls
of Men, to proceed in the exercise thereof. But still, that exercise and
administration, which hangs on another Commission, will go on upon its own
bottom, and must be discharged as it can, under the opposition, instead of the
former incorporation of state, or under a civil Persecution.

And this continuance of such Ministrations in such Cases, notwithstanding the
deposition of state, I think may fairly be concluded, from the Concessions of
those, who have undertaken to plead for the Authority of state deprivations,
and to press them on the suffering Clergy, at such times.

We are told by Vindication of a Discourse against the New separation p. 11.
one from Mr. Mason, that a state deposition of a Bishop, is not by way of
Degradation, from his orders, as if he had them not; but of exclusion, from the
exercise thereof. And that not absolutely, as if he could exercise his office
no where; but after a sort, that he should not do it, as to their subjects, nor
in their dominions. And by A Vindication of their Majesty's Authority to fill
the Sees of the Deprived Bishops, p. 18, 19, 20. (or as they should be marked,
p. 22, 23, 24.)
another, that a state deprivation does not concern the Character, or
Ecclesiastical Communion, as an Ecclesiastical Deprivation does; but only
concerns the exercise of his Episcopal Authority, in any Diocese within the
Dominions of that State, or enjoying any Ecclesiastical Benefice in it.

Now, since such state deprivation neither concerns the Character, nor the
Communion of the Church; it is plain he is a Bishop still notwithstanding their
deprivation; and such a Bishop, as, without any fault in Church Communion, all
good Christians may Communicate with. And since his exercise of Episcopal
Powers is thereby excluded, only from the Dioceses and subjects of their
dominions; it is still the same it was, as to all other places. And what is the
hinderance, of exercising the same still in those dioceses, and among that
Kings Subjects? One reason already cited is, because he cannot exercise them in
the incorporate way, or in enjoyment of any Ecclesiastical Benefice. But
besides, another I conceive is suggested, viz. Regard to state Authority, or
civil obedience. Though neither the Faith, nor the Communion of the Church is
here concerned; yet, P. 20.
says the Learned Author last mentioned, the Authority of the State is, which
obliges both the Clergy, and Laity, in these Cases. So that although neither
his powers are thereby vacated, nor their dependence and communion with him is
broken off on other accounts; yet in Civil Obedience, it seems, by his account
both Bishops and People, on such state deprivation, are bound to acquiesce.

But now, if they are left in full Possession of their spiritual powers, and of
the communion of the Church; it is plain they cannot be debarred of their
Ministrations in the foresaid Cases, nor the people of their attendance on
them, in any regard to secular inhibitions, or to show Civil Obedience. For we
must never hear Kings against Christ, or obey them, when they bar us of doing
what he bids us do. And these Ministrations, he requires and calls for in the
aforesaid Cases, as I have shown; and also for the peoples communion with, and
attendance on them. And it matters not, that they cannot Minister any longer in
the incorporate way, or under shelter of Civil Laws, and enjoyment of
benefices. For true Ministers of Christ, and of Souls, must depise benefices
and secular incorporations, when they come in competition with his service, and
Minister his word and worship, at their hazard, and under persecutions.

Besides, if, as he owns, such deprivation does not affect the Communion of the
Church, it leaves the subjects of those dioceses still under the same Religious
and Church Principles, of dependence and communion with their Bishops, as they
were before it. For, though the state should not meddle therein, the Church has
Principles of this dependence and communion, of its own. Christ requires his
Church should be one; and that is by ahhereing to their Bishops, whom he has
made the Heads of Union. And these, it seems, the deprivation of state does not
at all Cancel, only the Authority of state, as is P. 20.
said, but not Church Communion being concerned therein. So that such Bishops
deprived by the state, continue still to be Christ's Bishops and Heads of Union
in those dioceses, according to his Rules and Principles of Union. And then,
how shall a mere command of state, dissolve the tie made by him, or break
communion betwixt their Bishop and them? Whilst Christ, by conscionable
obligations of Church Unity, bids them adhere to their Bishop, and keep one
with him; must they give ear to the state, that bids them, divide from him? I
think on second thoughts, he will not make Church Union, or the dependence of
people on their Bishops, so unsettled or precarious a thing, as either to have
no fixed and conscionable principles, engaging and holding all good Members
thereto, of its own; or to have it in the power of a secular state, when it
pleases to set them aside, and overruled them.

CHAP. III. Remarques on the Preceding Account of the Force of
State-Deprivations, and instances of Deprivations alleged to the contrary,
considered, and cleared up.
FRom what I have said in the foregoing Chapters, about the power of the Civil
State, and the effect of its Deprivations, I think it may appear, that the
Bishops and Ministers of Christ continue still invested with their Ministerial
Powers, and can receive no discharge from the exercise thereof, in the
formention'd Cases, by any State Deprivations.

And of this I observe, from what has been hitherto discoursed,

1. First, That this is not to deny the Civil Power, the Cognizance of Bishops
and Ministers, in Civil matters. Allegiance, it is true, is a civil matter, and
most nearly concerns the civil peace. Indeed, it is not only Civil, but also
Religious. For when men are required to Swear it, and in all Churches to pray
conformably to it, Solemn Oaths and Prayers, are most sacred and Religious
Acts. And Allegiance in it self is a moral duty, for due payment whereof, all
stand answerable to God in the last judgment; as well as a civil, or
state-duty, for which they are answerable to the state in judicatures of this
world. But it is such a matter of Religion, I say, as is also a civil matter,
subject to civil Cognizance, or a point of State too.

And if this is refused to a Rightful state, it is not only an offense against
Morality and Religion, which spiritual Judicatures and Synods may punish with
Canonical Depositions: But also an offense against the state, which such
Rightful state may punish by state punishments, as it may all other state
offenses; and in Ecclesiastics, when they are guilty thereof, as in all other
persons. And among these punishments, by Deprivation, though not of mere
spiritual powers, (the state having no Authority to take away those mere
spiritual powers, which it never gave,) yet of all that is Temporal in
Church-Ministrations, so as that such refusers shall no longer hold benefices
and preferments, or state endowments. Yea, and even as to those mere spiritual
powers, it may make them of themselves to forbear any further exercise thereof,
to keep state-favors and endowments to the Church, when their deprivation is in
a case, that concerns only their own personal rights and privileges, but not
the Truths or cause of Christ, as was before observed.

But if at any time, or in any Kingdom, this should be refused to an Usurping
State, which has no Legal Right; but which calls for this Allegiance, Oaths,
and solemn Prayers and Religious services conformable thereto against him who
has the Right: Then such refusal, is neither a Religious, nor a Civil offense;
neither against God, nor Gods Vicegerent, Divine or Humane Laws; but a due
obedience to both. And this brings on the Case of all the foresaid
immoralities, Damnifying Religion, and endangering Souls; wherein faithful
Bishops and Clergy, whatever they incur by standing to their Spiritual
Ministrations, must not let them fall ^n regard to any Deprivation of Usurping
Powers. Nay, nor in regard to the most rightful States, should they issue out
against them state-deprivations, to stop their Ministrations against any such
like immoralities, or other irreligious and endangering ways.

And this Limitation, of the regard they ought to have to his deprivation, is
not to deny the Rightful Civil Sovereign, any part of his just power over
Ecclesiastics. But only to deny him such a power, as would leave our Savior
Christ himself, who is his Master as well as theirs, ^o have no power over
them. Or such a power, as should enable him to discharge them, of what Christ
has given in charge to them; to take away what powers he confers, or to loose
what he has tied on. But under all this discharge of their foresaid
Ministrations, notwithstanding his inhibitions and deprivations, it allows the
Civil Magistrate as much Power over their persons, to mulct, banish, or put
them to death, on just cause, as they are his Subjects, as over any others. And
to have power also over the mixed way of administrations, so as to be able to
deprive them, though not of all exercise of their spiritual powers, yet from
holding or exercising them with Temporal jurisdictions, effects, and
privileges, after the way of an incorporate Church. And to have those other
forementioned Prerogatives, of conveneing Synods, passing Canons, sending
prohibitions to stop any process in prejudice of the Prerogative, or of the
Laws, etc. Which, for the favor and continuance of those secular mixtures, have
accrued by incorporation, and belong to Christian Kings. And these things,
which are allowed, are as much, as any of them can claim of Ecclesiastics, as
they are Kings. And, on the other side, those things, which are denied, are
such, as they would abhor to challenge or desire, who would own any subjection
to Christ, or bound their pretensions as Christian Kings.

2. Secondly, nor is it to set the Church above the State, as the Papal
Usurpation pretended to do. But only to set Almighty God, and his blessed Son
Jesus Christ, above it. Not leaving subjects, whether Laics or Ecclesiastics,
in compliance with any the most rightful state, to disobey God. Nor Ministers,
to let fall any Services and Ministrations of Religion, or cure of Souls, which
Christ calls them to exercise; yea, not only when the state is consenting, but
when it gain-says it, and does all it can, either to disable or discourage them
from it; he not having thought fit to stand to the courtesy of any civil state,
whether or no the Ministry, of saving Souls should be prosecuted, and whether
he should be served, and have a Church on Earth.

But at the same time, it sets God and Religion, above their Power; it subjects
all, both Laics and Ecclesiastics, to the same in other things. Allowing
every rightful civil state, the chief civil power over all Ecclesiastical
Persons. And the chief civil power over all Ecclesiastical Causes, so far
forth, and so long, as they are mixed and compounded with civil benefices and
jurisdictions. And a civil power to compel Church Men by civil penalties, to do
the duty of their Spiritual Ministrations; and to hold them under a necessity,
of not resisting by Arms, but of suffering with patience under them, when they
punish and persecute them, not for breaking, but for faithfully performing of
the same. And this is to leave the civil power, to be chief in all civil
matters, and to have several Prerogatives of Sovereignty in spiritual, so long
as they proceed with civil mixtures: That is, to be supreme in all, which it
can call its own. Though at the same time it is not to be held superior to
Christ, nor must be thought entrusted with the Supreme Disposal of the matters
of Religion, wherein men are empowered of Christ by another sort of Commission.

And from all these, it is plain, that it is no Revival of the abolished Papal
Usurpations. For these, lay not in the Bishops asserting, as is aforesaid, of
their own pure spiritual powers; or of their own indefeasible obligations,
notwithstanding any state inhibitions and deprivations, to exercise them for
the service of Religion and the Church, as Christ requires they should, in the
forementioned, and other like Cases. For this is no more, than has been done by
the Holy Apostles, and by all faithful Bishops and Ministers, in all Ages. But
in their claiming an independancy on the state, in the exercise of spiritual
powers and Ministrations, mixed and endowed with the borrowed adjuncts of
secular benefices and jurisdictions. And in their professing a dependence
therein upon the Pope, seeking to him for investitures and confirmations, and
making him the last judge by Appeals: As also depending on him, for conveneing
Synods, for passing and confirming Canons, and granting dispensations from
them, and for other Matters, which, for their civil endowments of Churches,
were granted to Christian Princes, and by incorporation accrued to the Crown.
And Lastly, in their Challenging an Exemption of their persons from Civil
Cognizance, so as not to be answerable in Civil Courts, and Coercible there by
civil penalties, even for state-matters and offenses. And the Retrenching of
these Usurpations, was the business of our Reformers. But as for the
independance of the Ecclesiastics mere spiritual powers, and their obligations
to exercise them in any Case, as may answer the Command of Jesus Christ, and
not the contrary inclination or inhibition of the Civil Magistrate, they were
as far from intending, as from needing, to Reform it. Yea, soon after, they
were most glorious Asserters thereof, in all their Ministrations for the
service of Souls, and for the support of Truth; which they discharged against
the deprivations and inhibitions of the state, as Confessors and Martyrs,
during all the persecutions of Queen Marys Reign.

3. Thirdly, Nor is this to mistake, or to overlook the condition of an
incorporate Church: But only not to overvalue the Civil Benefits of
Incorporation; and at the same time to under-value their Obligations, to
Christ, to the Ministeries of Religion, and to the Souls of Men. It is
necessary that Pastors and People, should keep obedient, and true to Christ:
But it is not necessary, that they should keep in the favor of Princes, and
continue a Church incorporate. Nay, it is necessary they should cheerfully take
up the Cross, and be content to be a Church persecuted, when they can no longer
enjoy the secular benefits of Incorporation, without yielding to an irreligious
and ill Ministration; nor hold on Ministering to the necessary service of Souls,
and of pure Religion, without incurring Persecution. For then, all Churchmen
of any Fidelity or Conscience, must show themselves Ministers of Christ, not of
Princes; and Guides, that watch for Souls, not for Benefices, and secular
accessions: And, like their Great Master, and all good and holy Bishops, who
were called by him, as we all are, to spiritual Ministeries, under whatever
Persecutions of Princes, despise all state-favors and preferments in this
world, in comparison of fulfilling that Spiritual Ministry and most sacred
Trust, which they have received from the Lord, and whereof one day they must
give a most strict account.

And therefore it is a very ill-grounded reasoning, which the aforesaid Author
of the Vindication of their Majesties-Authority etc. uses, to Authorize the
deprivation of suffering Bishops at such times, for state-matters, by a mere
Act of State, P. 17.
thinking it well proved, if it is as certain and evident, as that the Church
is, and must be incorporated into the State. For in the aforesaid Cases, for
the service of Christ, and the sake of Religion, and of Souls, the Church is
bound to break with the State, and to lay aside all thoughts of continuing
incorporated, and submit to be persecuted. It is then called to bear Christ's
Cross, for its stedfastness in his Service and Ministrations; not to seek or
court state-favors, by ceasing to Minister what is good, or consenting to
Minister what is ill, in compliance with Princes. And if, instead of being
certain, and evident it must, it is certain and evident the Church must not be
any longer incorporate, when it cannot purchase it, but on these Terms: Then in
all the foresaid Cases, there is an end of all Arguments to persuade
acquiescence, for the preservation of the incorporation of Churches in
Christian Kingdoms.

But though this Principle, of Faithfully exercising their pure spiritual
Minstrations in the foresaid Cases, without accepting any discharge thereof
from mere state-deprivations, excludes all over-rateing of civil incorporation,
or placing the Favor of Princes above the Favor of God, and benefices and
preferments above the interest of Religion and of Souls. Yet does it, at the
same time, allow to an incorporate state, all that really does belong to it.
And therefore in these Ministrations, after deprivation by a rightful state, it
claims nothing, that came to Churchmen by incorporation. But its Spiritual
Ministrations, Christ's Church then discharges, without the encouragement of
state-benefices and preferments; without claiming the convenience of the
established places, for a free holding of its Religious Assemblies; or the
guard and assistance of any of the forementioned Civil Laws, jurisdictions, or
other secular mixtures and state accessions, for the strengthening and
furtherance of its exercise of any spiritual Functions. And what more should
they look at in this state of incorporation, than to see, that as they do not
let fall any spiritual service, which was not given up, nor can be stopped
thereby: So, when divested thereof, that they do not challenge any worldly
benefices, powers, or other endowments, which are dependant thereupon.

And this is not to make the claims and exercise of Ecclesiastical Powers by
Bishops and Pastors, the same in all points at this day in an incorporate
Church, as they were by the Ancient Canons, whilst the Church was separate from
the state, under the Gentile Persecutions. It asserts them the same, as to
Ministering all that is necessary in Religion, and in Care of Souls; which the
Pastors are as much empowerd, and as much obliged to look to, under
incorporation, as before it. And to be the same also in other points, given up
and accruing to the State at the incorporation of the Church, as Naming of
Bishops, Conveneing them in Synods, Ratifying of Can^ns, Dispensing with them,
and the like; after once a rightful state breaks the incorporation, and puts
the true Church from state-protection and endowments, into a state of
persecution. For then, the Church and State are divided again, as they were in
the days of the Ancient Canons; and so they may be free, as Bishops then were,
to exercise those powers by the Rule of those Canons, as they can, and as in
prudence they shall see cause. But whilst the protection and incorporation
holds, for the sake whereof it laid down its claim to those powers, and
suffered them to become the States-Prerogatives; the Bishops and Ministers are
not to pretend to them. And so, whilst the Church enjoys such incorporation,
our own Church, by its Articles and Canons, disclaims the exercise of these
powers by it self, and confirms them to the Crown, as I formerly observed.

Thus are the Recognitions, which Ecclesiastics ought to make of the Supremacy
of Princes, and all the Regard they ought to bear to the incorporation of the
Church, fairly consistent with their Faithful discharge of their Spiritual
Ministrations, after the State has deprived them, in the foresaid Cases. They
stand bound to Christ there, to exercise the same, by manifold obligations, as
I have shown: And no deprivations of Princes, though they be Sovereign
Governors of all their Subjects, and have endowed and incorporated the Chuch,
can disable, or discharge them from it.

And from this state of these matters, it may be easy to clear and take off the
Force of those instances, which are brought of state-deprivations without the
concurrence of Ecclesiastical Synods, and to show they are of no force in the
foresaid Cases.

The instances chiefly insisted on, are the Deposition of Abiathar by Solomon;
Vindication of their Majesty's Authority to fill, etc. p. 23. 24. 25, 26.
and the frequent, sometimes Annual depositions of their Highpriests by the
Romans, when Judea fell into their Hands; the depositions of the Patriarks of
the Greek Church, by the Turks; and the deprivation of Queen Mary's Popish
Bishops, by a commission of State, pursuant to an Act of Parliament, without a
Synod, at the beginning of the Reformation under Queen Elizabeth.

1. First, as for Abiathar, whom, for conspiring with Adonijah, Solomon is said
to have thrust out from being Priest unto the Lord, 1 King. 2. 27. it does not
appear, that Solomon did remove him from the dignity and office of High Priest,
but only from the exercise thereof. For after this sentence was passed upon
Abiathar, and after Joab the General also, his complice and conspirator, had
been sentenced and suffered death, and Benajah was made General in his place, 1
King. 1. 28. 34, 35: Abiathar is still reckoned as Partner with Zadock, in the
High-Priest-hood, 1 King. 4. For so, in the reckoning up of Solomon's Officers,
when Benajah the Son of Jehojadah, was over the Host, it is added, and Zadock
and Abiathar were the Priests, v. 4.

And as for the debarring him the Exercise of his Highpriests Office, that was
the natural, and inseparable consequent, of 1 Kin. 2. 26, 27. and Joseph.
Antiqui. l. 8. c. 1.
his Banishment from Jerusalem to Anathoth for his Life. For the exercise of
that Office, was local, and fixed to Jerusalem and the Temple. In the Temple,
were all the Priests tied to officiate, whose Ministrations he was to direct;
and in that was the Holy of Holies, Heb. 9. 7.
whereinto once a year he himself in Person, and he alone, was to enter, and
offer the Blood of Expiation: and there was the Mercy Seat; before which he was
to stand with the Urim and Thummim, to consult God upon occasion. The Exercise
of which Ministrations, with others, required his Personal Residence, and could
not be discharged by him living in another place. So that the banishing him
from Jerusalem, by mere natural consequent, without need of spiritual
Jurisdiction, excluded him from the Exercise of the High-Priests-Office. And
this Banishment, Solomon inflicted on him as his civil Sovereign, for his
Traiterous Conspiracy with Adonijah; and on like Cause, any other lawful
Sovereign may do the same. And without doubt, he not only consented to this
Amotion, but was thankful for it, and that, instead of being sent to Anathoth,
he was not sent out of the World, as by Law 1 Kin. 2. 26.
his Fact deserved. So that Abiathar had nothing to contest in his Case, nor
any mind to do it; being justly liable to suffer so much more at the hand of
the civil Power, than it was pleased to inflict on him.

And then, as for Zadock, who held the High Priesthood in his Room, and whilst
he was living; that does not appear to have been by a New Creation. For before
this extrusion of Abiathar, he had been created Partner, Vicar, or Suffragan
with him in the Highpriests. Office, in David's time. Thus, in the reckoning up
of David's Officers, they are put together as filling this place. Sheva was
Scribe, and Zadock and Abiathar were the Priests, 2 Samuel 20. 25. And have thou
not there with thee, Zadock and Abiathar the Priests, says David to Hushai,
when, in his flight from Absalom, he sent him back into the City, to defeat the
Council of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15. 35. and chap. 17. 15. And in carrying back
the Ark into the City, David gives command to Zadock the Priest about it, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 27. and the Text adds, Zadock therefore and Abiathar carried the
Ark of God again to Jerusalem, joining them as Partners in this great Act of
the Pontifical Charge, v. 29. He also commits to Zadock the Priest, the
anointing and proclamation of Solomon, which was another Act thereof, 1 King.
1. 32, 34, 38, 39. And this is plainly asserted by Josephus, who Antiq. l. 8.
c. 1.
says, That Zadock was first created High Priest, in the Reign of David: And
therefore, on Abiathars exclusion by Solomon, that Zadock only came in to have
the High Priesthood, and to act therein alone. He was then Sagan, or Suffragan,
and Vicar to Abiathar, as In 2 Samuel 15 27. and 1 King. 1. 34.
Grotius, and In 1 King. 4. 4.
Vatablus conceive.

When Abiathar therefore, by his Banishment for Life, in just Punishment of his
Treason, was incapacitated for any further Exercise of his High-priests-office,
on such debarring of his Pontifical Exercise, there was no new Ordination of
another into his Place. But Zadock, who had been created his Partner in the
Priesthood before, on his Partners Loss of this Exercise, was to exercise the
whole himself. So that the Authority of a Deprivation of State, to unmake one,
and to make another, to be a Bishop in their dominions during his Life, is
ill-fetch'd from this Instance. For neither does Abiathar plainly appear, to
have been despoyled of the Honor of the High Priesthood, (though by Banishment
for Life, he was of the Exercise thereof,) by Solomon: Nor Zadock, to have been
first advanced and created High Priest by him; but to have been Ordained
thereto by the spiritual Powers of the Sanhedrim, to Vid. Dr. Light. Temple.
Serve. c. 3. p. 905. Tom. 1. Op.
whom that Ordination and Investiture did belong, in David's Time.

Besides,

2. Secondly, in these alleged State-deprivations of the Jewish Highpriests,
either of Abiathar by Solomon, or, after they came under Roman Subjection, of
the Chief-priests by the Roman Procurators, who made such frequent Changes
among them, sometimes Annual, as Antiq. l. 18. c. 3.
Josephus notes: In all these State-deprivations of Jewish Highpriests, I say,
there was only a change of Persons; but Matters of Religion, went on in every
thing the same, and Men were taught the same doctrines, and trained up in the
same Practices, and held on in the same Prayers, Sacrifices, and Temple, and
Synagogue-Service, under both. And where it does not affect the state of
Religion, or the interest of Souls, but only their own personal Claims and
Privileges; God's faithful Ministers may be free, as has been observed, to
secure Protection and civil benefits to the Church, by not breaking with the
State, but acquiescing under its deprivations. But what voluntary deference
were thus payable to a deprivation of State, in a case which does not touch
Religion, or the Souls of Men; must not be expected in other cases, which do
touch, and damnisie and endanger both. And thus it is in the forementioned
cases, wherein I have been asserting the necessity of holding on their
spiritual Ministrations, and not yielding to be stopped thereof by any
State-deprivations.

3. And this also clears the Instance of the submission of the Greeks, on the
frequent deprivations of their Patriarks, by the Turkish Governors. The
Benefits of Incorporation, which they propose to secure thereby, are not the
most tempting; lying not so much in being privileged and beneficed by the
State, as in not being persecuted, but tolerated under it. And their
submission, for keeping on this State benefit, such as it is, is not without
detriment to the Church, (though their breaking with the State, they fear would
be more detrimental,) the Turks, as learned Travelers inform us, Dr. Smith de
Ecclesiae Graecae statu hodierno. p. 52, 53. And Sir George Wheelers Travels.
l. 2 p. 195.
making the new Advancements for Money, to be levied on the Church by the New
Patriark, to the countenance and growth of Great Corruption, and to the
bringing of the Church in debt. But as to the course of Religious
Ministrations, they are the same under both Patriarks. Religion, or the Word,
and Prayers, and Sacraments, are administered alike without Alteration; and the
Souls under their Charge, are fed with the same Doctrines both of Faith and
good Life, and are nursed up in the same Practices, and serve God in the same
Prayers and public Offices, in both cases. And therefore, those deposed
Patriarks, are not driven, by insisting on their spiritual Powers and
Ministrations, to break this partial Incorporation, such as it is, for the
support of pure Faith, Worship and Practice, or for the Interest of Religion
and of Souls; as I have shown true and faithful Pastors are in the
forementioned cases.

4. The Fourth and Last Instance, is of Queen Mary's Popish Bishops, deposed by
a Commission of the Queens Council, without a competent and lawful Synod, and
principally for a State-crime, viz. refusing the Oath of Supremacy, which was
made a cause of deprivation by a preceding Act of her Parliament, under Queen
Elizabeth: And of our Reformed Bishops coming into their Sees, upon such
deprivation, during the others Lives.

As to this Case of the Marian Bishops, or of other Popish Bishops under Edward
the sixth, Two Things are to be Noted in their Removal and Ejection out of
their Dioceses. One is, from the Temporalities, the Benefices and Preferments
thereof. And these temporal endowments, as I have observed, are directly
subject to the temporal Power. So that the Act of Parliament, and the
Proceedings of the Council, and the Commission of the lawful State, took away
all Claim to the Temporalities, and deprived them of their Bishoprics, as they
were Temporal Free-holds.

The Other is, from the spiritual adherence and dependence of the People upon
them, as on Heads of Church-Unity and Communion, for Religious Ministrations.
And this, there was no need for the State to deprive the Popish Bishops of; for
they had already deprived themselves of it, by their own Corruptions, both in
Doctrines, and Devotions. Adulterations of Religion, and corrupt Ministrations,
of the Word, of Prayers, and Sacraments, break the Ligaments, which tie on
People to this adherence to any Bishops or Pastors; yea, though they were
Apostles themselves. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that which we have Preached unto you, let him be (...)
Anathema or accursed, says St. Paul, Gal. 1. 8. Or, instead of sticking to
his Communion, break off from it, and have no more Religious Commerce with
such, than was to be held with those, whom the Synagogue or Church had
Anathematized or cut off: (...), as he Romans 9. 3. vid. Theod. in loc. and
Chrysostom
elsewhere uses it, and in the Ecclesiastical Style, speaking one
excommunicate, for so we Christians are wont to call a Sentence against the
speakers of impious things, (...) etc. Soc. Hist Eccl l. 7. c. 34. p. 377.
says S^crates. When therefore any Bishops and Pastors, instead of Heading
Christian Truths, appear at the Head of Unchristian Errors; the People are
discharged from their obligation and dependence upon them, and are to unite
themselves, as they can, to others, who still keep firm to that necessary
Gospel Truth and Worship, which they have forsaken, as shall be shown more
fully Chap. 3. and 4, Part 3.
afterward. And this was done by the Popish Bishops, who fed the People with
false Doctrines, and polluted Prayers and Ministrations; which left no need of
any thing more to deprive them of the Peoples Communion and Dependence, these
Papal Corruptions of Religious Ministrations, being enough to discharge and
drive them away of themselves.

So that the Reformed Bishops, when they were set at the Heads of those
Diocesses, called none away, nor made them break off, from any just and due
spiritual dependence on their former Bishops, whose own Heretical Doctrines and
Corrupt Ministrations, had made the People cease from depending any longer in
Conscience upon them. They wanted only to be lawfully empowered, and regularly
ordained themselves, by Episcopal Imposition of Hands; as all those reformed
Bishops plainly were: and the People were free from any Obligations to the Old
Ones, because of their Errors, and corrupt and dangerous Ministrations; and
both lawfully might unite themselves to them, and were in duty bound so to do.
And thus, coming to Head a People, whose dependence was broke off from others,
by their spiritual corruptions and depravations of Religion; they were no
spiritual Intruders. And coming into Benefices and Temporalities, made vacant
by the deprivation of a Lawful State; they were guilty of no civil Usurpation
and Injustice. And this is enough, to justify the Advancement of those first
Reformers: Though, where Bishops are Orthodox, and deprived for their adherence
to Truth and Righteousness, both in their private Practice, and public
Ministrations, the People are still left spiritually to depend on them, and are
not to be taken off by any deprivation, though of the most rightful state, as
in the abovementioned Cases.

It Is true, as to the Popish Bishops themselves, they thought otherwise of
their own Worship and Doctrines, and took them for Christian and Gospel-ways
and Truths, not for Antichristian Corruptions. And had they really been, what
they thought, as they were not but quite contrary, it had been their duty to go
on in their Pastoral Cures and Ministrations, with Persecutions, for all their
deprivations. And so we our selves should have thought, at least we all seem as
if we should, if, by Gods Providence, the civil State had gone on to deprive
our reformed Bishops, for sticking to the worship and doctrines of the
Reformation, and had set up Popish Bishops in their Places. Notwithstanding
which, I suppose both our faithful Prelates and People, instead of silently
acquiescing, would have gone on ministering and communicating, in the reformed
worship and doctrine of this Church.

But whatever they thought of these things, or how consonant or disagreeing
soever their Actings were to their own Apprehensions in this case; it suffices
for justification of our Reformed Bishops advancement to their Sees, without
their being deprived by competent and lawful Synods, which is objected as a
thing most exceptionable therein, and as seeming most to deviate from
Ecclesiastical Rule, that in reality they were not Orthodox. And that, for this
want of Orthodoxy, without any need of recourse to the Authority of mere State
Deprivations, to take off people from a spiritual Adherence and Communion with
their Bishops, the People, before they could have a Synodical Deprivation, were
loose from them, and at liberty to unite themselves to the Orthodox Reformers
in their Room.

CHAP. IV. Of Deprivations by Synods in the foresaid Cases.
ANd thus, I think it may sufficiently appear, how the manifold obligations,
which are shown above to lie on Faithful Bishops and Ministers, not to
suppress, but to exercise their spiritual ministrations in the foresaid Cases,
are not set aside, or barred, by any inhibition or deprivation, though of the
most Lawful Civil State. They will do it with more ease and worldly
encouragement, when the State tolerates, and much more when it fortifies and
furthers them therein. But they are not at liberty to give it off, but must go
on exercising the same, when it is more troublesome, and when the State
gain-says, and puts them under persecution for so doing.

And thus it is, where the State will Act apart, and proceed without a Synod in
depriving Bishops, and in discharging the Ecclesiastical Communion, and
dependence of the people, Spiritually related, and united to them.

But Deprivation of Bishops, who are Spiritual Powers; is more ordinarily by a
Synod of Bishops, who are a Spiritual Judicature. Great Reason there is, for
the Deprivation of Bishops, to proceed in this course. The Civil-State, indeed,
comes in, by Reason of Civil Accessions and Endowments, which strengthen and
encourage the spiritual ministrations. But these Civil Accessions, are but
Accessaries and Appendages; and their spiritual powers, are the Principal in
their Ministrations, and in Church Communion and dependence on them. And
therefore the removing of their ministrations, and of the Communion and
dependence of the Church thereupon, is never so fitly, and fully attempted, as
by spiritual judicatures, who, being spiritual persons, have more directly to
do with Church Communion, and spiritual powers. And accordingly, this has still
been the course of the most Pious Princes, who have reserved the deliberations
about Religion and Church matters, and the Depositions of Bishops, (which so
closely affects Church Communion,) to Convocations and Synods of Bishops and
^lergy. And when these proceed to sentence, it more directly affects the
concerned parties: Church Communion, and Church Governors, being more directly
under the Church-mens Cognizance; and not only indirectly and by the by, as it
may engage the deprived persons, when not bound to it otherwise, to yield and
acquiesce in voluntary compliance for civil interests.

But suppose a Concurrence of both these powers, and that the deprivation of
the Rightful State is confirmed by Synodical Concurrence: Yet I observe in the
last place, that this Deprivation by Synods, is not sufficient to bar or
discharge Bishops or Ministers, from the foresaid Exercise of their Spiritual
Ministrations, in the above mentioned Cases.

Bishops and Metropolitanes, are not more subject and dependant on Synods; than
Presbyters and people are on their Bishops: Our Lord himself, and his Holy
Apostles, having appointed Bishops in his Church, and called for our subjection
and obedience to them. But this submission of Priests and people to their
Bishops, is with a Salvo to their Holy Religion, and its Articles and
Interests. And if any Bishops go against the Truths, or Laws of Christ, or
against the interests of Souls, and of True Religion, we are not to follow
them, or to depend on them therein. To stick to any necessary Christian
Doctrines, Worship, or Practices, Christ's Faithful people and Ministers must
break even with their own Bishops; holding even them Anathema, as St. Gal. 1. 8.
Paul directs, when they would lead them contrary to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, as I noted before, and shall show more fully Part 3. c. 3. and 4.
afterward. And so must they with any other Bishops, or Number and Synods of
Bishops, in like Case.

All Exercise and Administration, of Church Authority and Jurisdiction, is tied
to Rules. Not only to Rules, of the Churches own making, or Ecclesiastical
Canons; but above all, and in the first place, to the Rules laid down by Christ
himself. And all the validity of Church Acts in way of external judicature, in
Synods, or otherwise; is so far, as they go by them, or do nothing against them.

Thus it is, in Decreeing Rites and Ceremonies, or Determining Controversies of
Faith; wherein, though the Church has Authority, yet is it thus limited, and
has no Authority, as our Church Article, 20.
Declares, to ordain any thing contrary to Gods word. Even general Councils,
are bounded by this Limitation, and things ordained by them, Article, 21.
say the Thirty Nine Articles again, as necessary to Salvation, have neither
strength, nor Authority, unless it may be declared that are taken out of Holy
Scriptures.

And thus it is also in Matter of Censures, or Ecclesiastical Sentences
judicially past therein upon persons, whether Laics, or Ecclesiastics. We, in
the Ver. 2.
Exercise of our Apostolical Power, can do nothing against the Truth, or in
punishing and Censuring any for Faithful observance thereof; but all our Power
is for the Truth, and to be exercised in its behalf, by punishing and not
sparing, not those who stand to, but those who defect from it, 2 Cor. 13. 8.
When the Church speaks to us in External Judicatures, we must hear it, as our
Lord Mat. ^0. ^7.
orders. But we must hear it speaking under Christ, never against him. So that
if it Excommunicates any, for sticking firm to any part of his Holy Religion,
with whom, for that very adherence sake, he requires his Faithful Followers, to
hold Communion; Or, if it deprives, or discharge any Ministers, from
Administering the same, in any case where he has charged them to keep on that
ministration: Its power here, is set up against him, and its Acts, have no
Power to bind those, who are concerned in them.

Thus it is, when it sha Excommunicate any, for adhereing to any necessary
Christian Doctrines, Worship, or Practices. For all, who would hold to Christ,
must Neglect such Censures; and, though any Church or Synod throws such persons
out of its Communion, they are joyfully to well come and receive them into
theirs. For, when our Mat. 18. 17, 11.
Lord Arthorizes, and gives validity to Church Censures, saying they shall be
bound in Heaven, and bidding us look on all who will not hear the Church, as
Heath^ns and Publicans: He limits this validity to those censures, which pass
upon men, not for any parts of righteousness, but for real offenses. If thy
Brother Trespass against thee, and will not hear thee, tell it unto the Church:
So that some real offense or Trespass, must still be the ground of the process.
Mat. 18. 15. 17. It must be, for not hearing the Church, when it calls us to
his Truths and Precepts, not when it sets up to carry us from them. For there,
if it use censures, it acts of it self, and not by his Commission: It opens, or
shuts, by an Erring Key, and must not expect, that what is so bound or loosed
on earth, shall be Ratifyed in Heaven. By such perverse Censures, the Church
only deprives it self of the Communion of Faithful Christians; but does not
deprive them, of Communion with Christ, or with one another. (...) etc.
The unjust Excommunications of the Jewish Sinhedrim, when they cast Christ's
Disciples out of their Synagogues, only estranged or cut off themselves, says
Photius, but (...), etc.
brought those Disciples so much nearer to their Lord and Master. And so now,
says he, when the imitators of the Jews Excommunicate the Followers of the
Apostles, they thereby only (...), etc. Photius Pats. Constant. Epist. Michaeli
Metropol. Mitylenes, Epist. Photii 116 p. 157.
Conjoyn and Unite them the more to those Divine Apostles, to whom they are
more closely and exactly knit, both in Faith and Life, by the Communion of
sufferings. But they miserably cut off themselves, both from their Doctrine,
and from our Orthodox Faith.

And therefore, instead of bemoaning themselves, under such Excommunications,
and seeking to have them take off, by Complying with the Church; our Blessed
Savior fortifies his ^r^^ followers against them, and bids them, not only
patiently to rest under t^em, but triumpha^^ly to re oyce therein. They shall
put you out ^ the (...) ues, says he to ^^em, and Cautions them not be offended
thereat, when it should happen, or not to fall off from him or his ways, to
recover the Liberty of the S^nagogues again, Joh. 16. 1. 2. When they shall
separate you from their company, by Excommunications and Anathema's, and shall
reproach you, and cast out your name as evil for the Son of Man's sake; rejoice
ye in that day, and leap for joy; for, behold! Great is your Reward in Heaven;
for in the like manner did their Fathers unto the Prophets. Luke 6. 22, 23. And
thus, the Holy Apostles, and Faithful Adherers to Gods Truth, and Worship, and
good Christian Practices, did in all times, when, for such Adherence, they fell
under the Anathema's of Synods, or the Excommunication of Churches, during the
Papal, or any other former, or later Persecutions. They joyfully received such
sentences, and always owned one another, and held Communion in Adherence to
Gods word and ways, among themselves; when they were cast out of the communion,
of such corrupt and Apostatizing Synods, or Churches.

And it is the same, when it shall deprive or discharge any Faithful Bishops and
Ministers, from supporting such necessary Doctrines, worship, and practices, by
their Ministrations, as Christ requires. For then, notwithstanding such
deprivations and discharge, by Churches and Synods, CHRIST'S Faithful Ministers
must hold on Ministering, and his faithful People must hold on Communicating,
and Adhereing to them therein. Thus, as our LORD Luke 6. 22, 23.
Notes, their Fathers had Separated and cast out the Old Prophets, from
Prophesying in their Company, or Assemblies: Who still went on Preaching and
Ministering the Word, which they were sent out to publish. And thus the
Sanhedrim, that great Synod of the Jewish Church, discharged the Apostles from
Ministering Christianity, or Preaching any more in Christ's Name; who told them,
they could by no means desist thereupon, but must hold on their Ministration,
being to Ovey God rather than men. Act. 4. 18, 19, 20.

Thus also several Synods Deprived Athanasius, and the other Orthodox Bishops,
who were the stout Asserters and Maintainers of the Divinity of our Lord,
against the Arians. Such was the Synod of Tire. And such also was the Synod of
Antioch, whose Deprivations of Athanasius and the other Orthodox Bishops, were
a Blow made at the Nicene Faith: though their Canons, being good, and according
to Primitive Usage, were by Orthodox Councils afterward taken into the Book of
Ecclesiastical Canons, out of which, As Can. Antioch. 4, 5, 16. vid. Con.
Chalced. Part 2. Act. 4. p. 324. and p. 319. and Part 2. Act. 11. p. 406. Tom.
3. Conc. Ed. Bin.
several of them are repeated verbatim in the great Council of Chalcedon, and
are there, among the Canons of others Synods, Council. Chalced. Can. 1.
taken in to be Canons of the Universal Church. And such likewise were the
deprivations of other Synods, assembled in that Cause afterward.

Now under these Synodical deprivations, the great Business of those suffering
Bishops, was to show, that whatever other Immoralities or Personal Crimes were
pretended against them, (as several were most impudently pretended, against all
Ground and Reason,) yet in reality and truth, their deprivations were for the
Cause of the Faith, or for their firmness in maintaining the Divinity and
Consubstantiality of Christ with the Father. This, Athanasius, and Paulus,
plead for themselves, teaching, (...).
That their Depositions were not for any other Cause, but for the subversion of
the Orthodox Faith, as is related by L. 2. c. 20.
Socrates and L. 3. c. 11.
Sozomen. And what they made appear to the Emperor Constans, was, That they
suffered, (...), Soz. l. 3. c. 10. p. 511.
not for the Crimes or ill Lives they were accused of, as the sentence of
Deposition did contain, but for their thinking, and teaching differently from
the Synods their D^posers, about the Faith.

And when it was once clear, to any Persons, or Churches, that they were
deprived for the cause of the Faith: they were not hindered by any Authority of
external Judicature, in the Synods their deposers; but readily received, and
communicated with them, as Christ's true Bishops still in those places. For,
notwithstanding these Synodical Deprivations, Athanasius was all the while
owned and adhered to by the Faithful Egyptians; as Paulus also was by the
Faithful Constantinopolitanes. And when they came to Rome, on their giving full
satisfaction in this Point, Julius the Bishop of Rome received them to
Communion. Hearing the Cause of each, Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 8. p. 507.
says Sozomen, and finding them all to agree in the Nicene Faith, which he saw
undermined and struck at by their Deprivers, he received them to Communion, as
being of the same Belief with himself.

This Reception of Athanasius and others, who stood deprived by the Synods of
Tire and Antioch, etc. to his Communion, was before the Synod of Rome, wherein
the Orientals should have justified their Proceedings, had acquitted and
received them. For before the Synod was held at Rome, in the Cause of
Athanasius; Pope Julius, gave Notice of the time appointed for it, to the
Eastern Bishops, who had been Deposing Athanasius at Antioch, and substituting
Gregory in his place; writing to them, to send some of their number, to clear
the justice of their sentence and proceedings in that cause. This is plain from
Athanasius, who Apol. 2. adv. Arian. sub. ^it.
says it was held after the Letters sent by Eusebius, and after both the
Eusebians, and he himself had been cited to appear at it. And also from Pope
Julius 's ^^. p. 739.
Letters to them, on the Request, and at the Conclusion, of the Roman Synod,
wherein he mentions the return of his Presbyters, Elpidius and Philoxenus, who
were (...) ad Solit. p. 816,
sent with the former Letter, and the answer they had brought him from
Eusebius, and the Orential Bishops. But before this first Letter, to notify
the time appointed for the Roman Synod to the Orentials; Julius, on plain
appearance, that their sufferings were not for any other pretended Crimes, but
only on account of the Orthodox Faith, had embraced the Communion of
Athanasius, and the other Deposed Bishops. For Sozomen l. 3. c. 8. p. 597.
relates, that on his receiving them to Communion, he writ that Letter to the
Orientals, taxing their unjust sentences and attempts upon the Nicene Faith,
and calling them to the Synod to be held at Rome, there to justify their
proceedings against them. And in the Letter, which the Orientals sent back to
him, which he received, as I have now shown, before the sitting of the Roman
Synod, and which was read to the Bishops therein Assembled; they Soz. ib. p. 508
complain of his having Communicated with Athanasius, and his Adherents, which
they said was a Reproach cast on their Synods, and an Abrogation of their
sentence. So that his disregard of the Synodical Deprivations of Athanasius,
and the other Orthodox Bishops, Deposed in the Synods of Tire or Antioch, was
not on account, of their having been regularly reversed, by any Superior
External Judicature. But it was, as having been of no force and effect in
themselves, because passing on Christ's Faithful Pastors, for their Fidelity and
Firmness to the True Christian Faith.

Besides, when the Synod at Rome sat in the cause of Athanasius, and the other
Orthodox Bishops, and Synodically admitted them to Communion: I do not see,
how, in the Regular way of External Judicature, this could take off the
Deprivations by the forementioned Synods. For the Synod at Rome, was inferior
in Number of Bishops, Consisting, as Athanasius Ep. ad Solit. p. 818.
says, only of about Fifty Bishops. Whereas the Synod of Tire, besides the
Egyptians, who came along with Athanasius, Consisted of sixty Bishops met there
from diverse places L. 1. c. 28
says Socrates; and the Synod of Antioch, which again Deposed him, and the
other Orthodox Bishops, consisted of Ninty seven, as Sozomen L. 3. c. 5. p. 501.
reports. And moreover, the Synod of Rome, consisted of Bishops, who lived more
remote and further off, and were Subjects of another Prince, viz. Constans.
Whereas the Synods which deprived them, Consisted of the Neighboring Bishops,
some of them Comprovincials to the accused parties; and were Subjects of their
own Emperor, viz. Constantius, whose censure may seem more concluding on the
Fellow-Bishops of their own Empire. So that Julius, and his Fifty Bishops in
the Roman Synod, could not reverse the Depositions of those former Synods, in
Regular way of outward Judicatures.

But yet finding, whatever other things were pretended, that in reality they
had been deposed in those Synods, for their Firmness to the Nicene aith, in
prejudice whereof there lies no power of depriving in any Synods; before any
Superior, or more general Council had reversed their depositions in Regular way
of External Judicature, they took part, and Communicated with Athanasius, and
the other Deprived Bishops. And this, the Faithful Egyptians, both Clergy and
People, had done, without any regard to the Deprivation of those Synods, all
the time of Athanasius's forced absence from them; and are applauded by Pope
Julius for the same. For, in his Ap. Soc. Hist. Ecc. l. 2. c. 23. p. 109. 110,
111.
Letter to the Church of Alexandria, after the Synod of Sardica, on the
Restitution of Athanasius to his See; he extols them, for their firm and
constant adherence to the right Faith, and to him their Bishop, who had been so
glorious a Confessor and Maintainer thereof, all the while he was violently
torn from them, and another obtruded on their Church in his room.

And like to this, has been the Practice, I think, of all times. For still, as
Errors and Corruptions, in Doctrine, Worship, and Practice, prevailed and
became general in any places; on any considerable opposition made to them by
Christ's faithful Ministers, to silence Gainsayers, they have had the
establishment of Synods. And these Synods, have anathematized the Truth,
condemned and deposed the Preachers, and excommunicated and cast out the
Adherents and Practicers thereof. But yet the Preachers and Ministers of God's
Worship and Truth, have still held on their Ministrations, and God's faithful
People have stuck to them therein: And under all the depositions and
excommunications, of Councils or Churches, they have kept Communion with one
another, in these necessary Truths and Ways of God, which Corrupt and Apostate
Councils have anathematized. Or else, under that power of Error, which has so
often tyrannized over the Truth, more especially in the Arian Persecutions, and
in the several steps and advancements of the Papal Corruptions, the pure
Worship and Doctrine of Christ, had perished, and all Face of a true and
unadulterated Church had long since failed from off the Earth.

This I say, in case of Depositions, or other Censures, for the Cause of the
necessary Truths, or Worship of Jesus Christ. In deprivations for other things,
or on pretense of mere personal Crimes, the Case, I grant, may be otherwise.
For in them, though the Sentence be unjust, it is a personal Wrong, and affects
the sufferers themselves. And in private sufferings, it is reasonable to bear
much for Orders sake, and to be tied up to ways of Order for Redress: So that
such sufferers, shall be bound to rest under the judicial Injustice, till they
can have it reversed in like sort as it was laid on, viz. in way of Judi^ature,
or by Regular Appeals. And accordingly in all depositions, for such private or
personal Crimes, this is required by the Ancient Canons. If a Bishop,
Presbyter, or Deacon, say the Councils of Held An. 419.
Carthage and Held An. 347.
Sardica, (and the same Determinations, (...), Bals. ad Can. 12. Council. Sardic.
says Balsamon, are to be taken as meant of Laymen too,) be deposed, on
pretense of his Idleness and Neglects; let him not dare, say they, to go on, or
to assert his former Right of Communion, during the time of his
Excommunication, (...), Council. Sardic. Can. 14. (...), Conc. Carth. Can. 32.
till his Cause has had a new Cognizance and Examination, or been heard over
again. And if, before such re-hearing, he presume to do otherwise; he shall be
judged, say the Fathers at Cartharge, thereby to have given sentence of
Condemnation against himself.

But in Depositions or Excommunications, for doctrinal Truths, and spiritual
Ministrations; there is not only a Wrong to themselves, but a Wrong to
Religion. And there they must go on, for the sake of Gospel Worship and
doctrines, which are Christ's Cause; though they would be content to suffer and
sit still, so far as it is their own. And accordingly, the Council of
Constantinople, entitled, Prima and Secunda, excepts the Case of (...), Conc.
Constable. 1 and 2 Dict. Can. 15.
Heretical Prelates promoting or pushing on any Heresies, when it requires
Inferiors to stay for a synodical Cognizance, before they break off dependence
from their Prelates, in all other Cases.

Though Synods therefore, are the most Venerable Ecclesiastical Judicature here
on Earth; yet is all the Obligation and Authority, of their decisions or
sentences, within this Compass. They have no Effect, or Force, against the
Truth, as St. Paul 2 Cor. 13. 8.
says, or against any for adhering to it. So that they are to affect none, who
have Christ and his Truth plainly on their side. Nor do their judgments and
definitions, bar those, who are concerned to take Notice of them, from
examining and judging for themselves, whether they strike at any part of
Christian Truth and Religion, before they pay Obedience to them. I grant, there
ought to be great deference to their determination; and all private Persons are
to use great modesty, and care, in judging after them; and need to look, that
the blow and destruction thereby made, to any necessary Truth or Practice of
our holy Religion, be very plain, before they overlook and disregard what they
order. But still, judge they must, because in all their belief and practice in
these things, it is not any implicit dependence on men, or a blind obedience to
any humane sentence or decision; but observance of the Truth it self, or of
what Christ has appointed in his Word, that must justify them. And therefore,
if on an humble and diligent examination, and by plain evidence, it appear,
that in their definitions of Articles, or censure of Persons, they strike at
the Truth, and seek the overthrow of any part of Religion; their Acts are to be
esteemed as of no effect, and all concerned Parties, both Clergy and People,
are to go on doing the same, in Religious Ministration and Communion, as if
there were no such thing. More just, and authoritative Synods, they will be
like to seek; and appeal from these, in a regular way, to others more general,
which, in external way of humane judicature, shall reverse their unjust
sentences. But suffering all in the Cause of Truth and Religion, they will not
desist in the mean time; but go on, notwithstanding any such synodical
Anathema, or Deprivation, in true spiritual Ministrations and Communion.

PART III. Of Schism.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Schism. And of the Schism of Particular Members from
their own Church, in throwing off Subjection and Dependence on their own
Bishops.
BY what I have offered, about the Authority and effect of State-deprivations,
yea, or even of the depositions of Synods too, I think it may appear, how the
faithful Ministers of Christ are not disabled, or discharged, by any such
deprivations, from the exercise of their spiritual Ministrations, whereto they
stand bound, by so many Obligations, in the forementioned Cases.

But besides the deprivation of State, some think the maintenance of Unity in
the Church, when that is like to be broken thereby, ought to stop them of that
Exercise. And therefore, for a further clearing of their duty in those Cases, I
shall proceed,

2. Secondly, to show, That the preservation of external Communion and Peace in
the Church, ought not to debar, or put by their due discharge thereof.

Admit, say some, that it were their duty to go on in their Ministrations for
the service of Religion and of Souls, in those cases where this can be done in
maintenance of Unity, and whilst the Church continues one. Yet what will you
say, if such Ministration must unavoidably make, or keep up a Schism? Do not we
all own that, to be one of the greatest Banes to Religion, and a most sinful
and mischievous thing? And if otherwise they ought to be held on, ought not
such Ministrations to be let fall, rather than a Schism shall be made, or kept
up in the Church thereby?

That there will be a Schism in the Church, in such cases, is most apparent.
And that Schism is most dreadful to the Church, full of Guilt, as it is both
the Breach of Unity and the Bane of Charity, and an Inlet of continual
miseries, and disturbances, is no less apparent. But in pressing the
consideration thereof upon particular persons, or parties, for prevention, or
redress, it is to be enquired, first, who makes it? That will show who ought to
mend it; but if they will not, it may be enquired next, who else can cure it?
Or what the sufferers, in love of peace, and preferring the Public before
themselves, should give up for the Cure thereof, that they may duly prize
external Unity, but not overvalue it? Or if, through the Error or
inflexibleness, (which God avert,) of those who are the Authors thereof, it be
already made, and cannot be remedyed, all are to consider, lastly, how they are
to carry themselves toward the Makers of it, and with whom they are to hold
Communion.

To Clear these Points I shall say something.

I. To the Nature of Schism, to show when a Schism is made, and by whom.

II. To those things, which may be a just ground to disunite and break off,
either from any Persons, or Churches, without blame of Schism; some things not
being to be born, nor others to be parted with, for the love of external Pea^e
and Union.

III. To the Communion of good Christians under a Schism, and how they are to
carry it toward Schismatics.

1. First, I shall say something to the Nature of Schism, to show when a Schism
is made, and by whom.

Schism, lies in Breach of Union, or in Making two, or many, out of one.
Schismata, quibus scinderet unitatem, Cyp. de unit. Eccl. p. 105. and 119. --
In Schismatis Parts Christi Membra distrahere, and Catholicae Ecclesiae Corpus
unum scindere ac laniare nituntur, id. Ep. 44. p. 86.
Schisms, says St. Cyprian, which cut or break the Unity, or tear and divide
that, which should be kept together as one Body. By Schism, as St. Chrysostom
Homil. 3. in 1 ad Cor. c. 1. v. 10. on (...).
notes, One Church is broken into many Churches, and the Unity thereof is
abolished, Accordingly the Members are called upon, to be joined together in
the same mind, and in speaking the same things, that there be no (...).
Schisms, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Not to set up an Independance among themselves, and act
separately; but with mutual dependence and conjunction, that there be no schism
in the body. 1 Cor. 12. 25. And (...) schisms, are usually rendered divisions,
as 1 Cor. 10. and c. 11. 18.

This Union, which Schism breaks, is the union of a society. For the Church is
a society of men, Associated and incorporated together, for the work and
purposes of Religion. It Is called a Ephesians. 3. 15.
Family, or Household, or City, which are all words Expressive of Society. St
Paul Styles it, the City of the living God, Heb. 12. 22. And tells the
Christians Ephesians. 2. 19.
at Ephesus, that they are (...).
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2. 19.

This Church, or spiritual city, wherein Christians are incorporated into one
Body, is not only the Church of one place or Country, wherein all the Members
may Embody and Associate under the same Governors; as the Church of Rome,
Alexandria, or Antioch. But the collection of all particular Christian
Societys, or the whole number of independent Churches, Existing in all times,
and diffused through all places. For all these, our Savior has ordained to be
one Society, or Spiritual Body. Of them he speaks, or of all that do or shall
believe on him, when he prays to his Father, that they all may be one, Joh. 17.
11. 20. 21. And of them St Paul speaks, when he says both of Jews and Gentiles,
distributed into so many distinct Churches, that by the Cross of Christ, they
are all reconciled to God in one Body. Ephesians. 2. 16. And when he says of Baptism,
which, being duly received in any Church, makes a man free of all other
Christian Churches, that by one spirit, we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And of the Unity of this Church,
or Collection of all Believers, do those Scriptures speak, which represent all
that are in Heaven and all that are in Earth, as one whole Family. Ephesians. 3. 15.
As one Household. 1 Timothy 3. 15. and Gal. 6. 10. or, as one City, Heb. 12. 22.
Whence accordingly all, who are at any time in this world, are said to have
their (...).
Citizenship or Corporation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. And all who are admitted
into Christ's Church here, to be (...).
F^llow-Citizens with the Saints, and (...).
Domestics with Prophets, and Apostles, and with all others, who are gone to
God before. Ephesians. 2. 19. What is the one Body, Chrysos. Hom. 10. in Ep, ad Ephesians.
c. 2.
says St Chrysostom on the words of St. Paul, there is one Body? It Is all
believers, of every place, says he, both those who now are, and who formerly
have been, and who hereafter shall be.

And as to the Union of these Spiritual bodies or societies, both the Members of
each particular Church, must keep Unity, or make one society with their own
Church. And every particular and independent Church, with its Members, must
keep Unity, and make one society, with all other particular and independent
Churches. The Members keep Unity with their own Church, by due dependence and
subjection, or by keeping subject and dependant on their own Lawful Bishops.
And one particular Church, keeps Unity with all other independent and sister
Churches, by Fraternal Communion, or the Communion of Saints in the Holy
Catholic Church professed in the Creed; that is, by their readiness to Unite
with their Religious Assemblies, to own their Members, and to ratify their
Church Acts, as if they were their own, or had been sped by themselves.

And this way of fraternal communion, as well as the other, of keeping under
the same visible Governors by due dependence and subjection, is a way to Unite
them, not only as a Sect, who all hold and profess the same Doctrines and
Opinions; but also as a Society, or as one Body. For by this bond of fraternal
communion, they stand obliged, not only to Unity of Doctrine, as men of the
same sect; but to unity, as of internal, so of external society and
incorporation, as fellow citizens. For such are the obligations, of receiving
mutually each others Member as their own free denizens; of admitting of their
baptismal claims, and Church Privileges; of Ratifying of their Church-Acts,
and Censures; of Associating with their Church services, and Assemblies; and of
standing together, as one body and brotherhood, for the same common Tenets and
Religious interests, as if they were incorporated under the same External
Heads, or were the members of the same particular Church. And this is to unite
them in the great things of society; particularly of a spiritual society, which
lies mightily in communion in spiritual acts and offices. And accordingly,
Uniting in the same Sacraments, which are the Highest Acts of Church Communion,
is set out for a way of Uniting all in one body, or corporation. We being many,
are one body, by being all partakers of that one bread. 1 Cor. 10. 17. And we
are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. So that all Christian Churches,
who under Ephesians. 4. 6. etc. 3. 15
one common Father, as Ephesians. 2. 19.
Domestics; or under Ephesians. 4. 5.
one Lord and King, as Ephesians. 2. 19.
Fellow-citizens; are incorporated upon one Charter or New Covenant, to live by
the same Laws, and out of the Ephesians. 4. 4.
same Hopes, and in enjoyment of the same Church-rights and Privileges; and
have one common Form of Incorporation, to Naturalize or Enfranchise them
thereinto, viz. Ephesians. 4. 5.
One Baptism; are to transact as one society, by keeping up one fraternal
Communion among themselves.

Now both this Union of subjection, toward their own Church and its Lawful
Heads; and of fraternal communion, toward all other equal and independent
Churches; all good Christians are bound to keep up, unless some obstacles
happen in either, which are of force to put a bar thereto, or give discharge
thereof. And such obstacles, either in our own Bishops, or in other equal and
independent Churches, are Heresy, when once openly professed by them. Or, their
fixing unlawful Terms of Communion, putting sinful things into their sacred
offices, or not allowing any to Communicate with them, without believing, or
professing some false Doctrine, or partaking with them in some evil worship or
thing. Or, Tyrannical Usupation on their Brethrens Libertys, not admitting
other Churches to their Communion, unless they will give up their own rights
and freedoms, and become their Subjects. When such exceptions lie against any
Bishops, or against any Churches, they have lost their claims of union. But all
Church Members are bound, I conceive, by all the numerous, and earnest
commands, of keeping Unity, to continue subject to their Lawful Bishops; as all
Churches are by the same, to keep up Communion with other Churches; if they
cannot produce any such just obstacles in bar thereof.

Now Schism, is a sinful breach of this union of Church Society. Either, in the
Members of any particular Church, when they unjustly break off their subjection
and dependence upon their own Church. Or, in any Particular Churches, when they
unduly break off Fraternal Communion with other Churches, denying to Assemble
with them, or Communicating with such, as stand Excommunicated by, or have made
a Schism from them.

First, One Great way of Schism, is in respect of Particular Members, when,
against the Gospel duty and Commands of Unity, they unduely throw off their
subjection and dependence upon their own Bishops, and break off from the Unity
of their own Church.

One way of Uniteing Societies, or Bodies of Men, is by uniteing them under the
same Heads. They are all one Body, and Members one of another, as keeping
under, and being United to the same Head and Governor. Thus, of the Association
of Man and Wife, which is the Original Society, and makes a Family, which is
the ground work of all other Societies, it is said, that they two are one, Ephesians.
5. 31. because the Husband is the Head of the Wife, v. 23. And so likewise of
Ephesians. 4. 4, 15, 16
Christ and his Church, that they are one, Ephesians. 5. 31, 32. because he is the
Head of his Church, v. 23. And one way, whereby, as St. Cyprian observes, our
Lord sets off the Uniting of his Sheep, as one Flock; is by uniting them under
himself, as Ad quam unitatem redigens Ecclesiam Suam, denuo dicit, and erit
^nus Grex and unus Pastor, Cyp. E^. 69. p. 182.
the one Shepherd, Joh. 10. 16. It Is the joint-union and dependence, on one
Master of the Family, which makes one House; and on one General, which makes
one Army; and on one KING, which makes one Kingdom. And so on one and the same
Church-heads and Governors, which makes one particular Church. For the Apostle
compares the Union of many Persons, into one Church or Politic Society; to the
Union of many Members, into one Natural Body, 1 Cor. 12. Which Union, is made
by the adherence and dependence of the Members, on the Natural Head: For the
several Members, are no longer one Body, nor one with each other, after once
they are cut off, and parted from it. As to the Unity, we take a Body, when the
Apostle says there is one Body, for that which is under one Head. So that, if
there be but one Head, there is but one Body, says Hom. 10. in Ep. ad Ephesians.
St. Chrysostom,

The Union of the Church therefore, as one particular S^ciety, which Schism
breaks, consists chiefly in keeping united to Church-Heads and Governors.
Church-Rulers, are the Heads, which make the several Parts one with another;
or, as the Scripture sometimes speaks, the Joints and Ligaments, which tie the
respective Members, and compact the whole Body together. The whole Body of the
Church, says St. Paul, is fitly joined together, and compacted by that, which
every Joint, i. e. each Pastor or Church-Governour, supplies. Ephesians. 4. 16. And
we are all the Body of Christ, and Members in particular, as he says again, as
we are under the same Governors which he has set over that Body, having in the
Church set, as first Apostles, so after them Governments, viz. Bishops and
Presbyters, for the standing Governance and Administration thereof, 1 Cor. 12.
27, 28.

More particularly, the Heads of Union in any Church-societies, are the BISHOPS
in their respective Churches. (...), Zon. in Can. 55. and 56. Ap. vid. and Can.
Ap. 34.
They are the Head of the Body of the Church; as Presbyters and Deacons are as
the Hands thereof, as Zonaras observes on the 55 and 56 Canons of the Apostles.
For, since the death of the Holy Apostles, the Bishops are the chief spiritual
Heads, and the ordinary and standing Governors of Christ's Church. They, above
all others, are those (...).
Guides or Rulers, whom the Members of the Church are called to remember and
obey, Heb. 13. 7. 17. The Rev. 1. 20.
Angels of the Churches, unto whom, as the Heads thereof, our Lord directs
himself, when he sends the several Letters to the Churches, Rev. 2. 1, 7, 8,
11, etc. They stand to head the Members of Christ, and to unite and compact
them together, under him the chief Bishop; appearing at the Head of their
respective Churches, as his Deputies, who represent his Person, and supply his
place; acting, 2 Cor. 2. 10.
in the Person of Christ, as St. Paul; or vice Christi, in his place or stead,
as Ep. 59. p. 129.
St. Cyprian; whom we ought to respect, as the Lord himself, as St. Ignatius
(...), Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. page 21.
says.

So that for Church Members to keep the Union of any Church, is to keep subject
and dependant on him, who is the lawful Bishop thereof. Thus, St. Ignatius
makes (...), Ignatius Epist. ad Philad. page 43. Ed. Voss.
men's return from Schism to the Unity of God, to lie in their return to the
subjection and consistory of their lawful Bishop. They make the Church or one
Body, who hold on Communion, and keep one with him, and with those Presbyters
and Deacons, who adhere to him, and officiate under him. The Church, says Illi
sunt Ecclesia, Plebs Sacerdoti adunata, and Pastori suo Grex adherens. Unde
scire debes, Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, and Ecclesiam in Episcopo. Cyp. Ep.
66. p 168. -- Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, Id. Ep. 33. p. 66.
St. Cyprian, is a People united to their Bishop, or a Flock adhering to their
Shepherd. Whence you may know, the Bishop always to be in the Church, and the
Church to go along with the Bishop. And they break off from the Unity of the
Church, who break off from him; and they go to set up another Church, if they
go to set up another Bishop against him. Et si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in
Ecclesia non esse, Cyp. ubi supra Ep 66. p. 168.
If any are no longer with the Bishop, says the same St. Cyprian, they are no
longer of the Church. And to Vos-alium Episcopum fieri consensisse, id est,
quod nec fas est, nec licet fieri, Ecclesiam aliam constitui, Cyp. Ep. 46. p.
89. So, of Novitianus setting up his Pseudo-Bishops in other Churches, he says,
Humanam conatur Ecclesiam sacere, post Dei Traditionem, viz. After those
Ordained in the Churches by Apostolical Succession, ^^. Ep. 55. p. 112. Ed. Ox.
consent to the setting up of another Bishop, is the same, as to consent to the
setting up of another Church, says he to those Confessors at Rome, who had
agreed to the setting up of Novatian against Cornelius. Thus is the one Bishop,
at the head of his Clergy and People, to unite and keep together a Christian
Church, all the Oblations whereof are to be in his Communion, and with his
Allowance; as the one Altar among the Jews, was to keep together the Jewish
Church. For they were to have but Deuteronomy. 12. 4, 5, 13. 14.
one Altar of Burnt-offering at Jerusalem, whither all were to come for
Sacrifice; and were sorbid to set up an Altar any where else. And because of
his being set for the same purpose of Unity, as that was; therefore is the
Bishop and his Communion, Ignat. Epist. ad Philad. p. 41. and Cyp. de Unitate
Eccl. p. 116. and Ep. 43. p. 83.
called unum Altar, the one Altar; and making an Anti-Bishop, is called
setting up aliud Altar, another Altar, in the Ancient Language.

And therefore in pressing the great duty of Unity on the Ancient Christians,
the Fathers enjoin them most strictly to stick to their Bishops. This is done
by St. Cyprian: and before him by Ignatius, that blessed Martyr and
Contemporary of the Apostles. (...), Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrnaeos, p. 6.
Take care all of you, says he, to follow the Bishop; -- wheresoever the Bishop
appears to be, there let the Multitude be with him: Like as wheresoever Christ
goes, the Catholic Church goes too. (...), Id. Ep. ad Polycarp. p. 14.
Let my part be with those, says he again, who keep subject to the Bishop; yea,
let my Soul be pawned for theirs. As many as are God's and Jesus Christ's, keep
with the Bishop, (...), Ep. ad Philad. p. 40.
says he in another place, pressing them to Union, and warning them against
Schism. And because the Church is to be but one, therefore there is to be but
one Bishop in a Church, for the Members all to adhere to, or for the Body to
associate and unite with. This was, and ought to be the Ecclesiastical Rule, as
was (...), Ap. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.
affirmed by Cornelius, saying, there ought to be but one Bishop in a Catholic
Church: And as is also declared Can. 8.
by the Great Council of Nice.

Now, as the Union of any Churches, lies mainly in keeping united to the
Bishops: So Schism, which is a breach of Union in those Churches, will lie
chiefly in breaking off unduly and dividing from them. Especially, in setting
up of opposite Bishops, or in making a second Bishop in a Church, against a
former Orthod x and Rightful Bishop yet living and cla^ming, which makes a most
plain, and consummate Schisin. For, in the same Church, two opposite Bishops,
are two opposite Heads. And two Heads, will make two Bodies; those who set up
the New One against the Old, as likewise all they who afterward come over to
him, making a New Body under him; which apparently destroys Union, and makes
two out of one. And thus, we fee it does in all Societies. If an Opposite
General, is set up by a mutinous Party, it divides the Army; or if an opposite
King is set up in a Realm, it makes a Sedition, and divides the Kingdom. Or, if
the same is done in a College, a Family, or other Societies, as well as in a
Church, opposite Heads do unavoidably make opposite Bodies, and visibly destroy
the Unity of any Society, by breaking into two Societies, or into as many, as
there shall be opposite Heads thereof.

Accordingly, the Ancients place the Schism of Church Members, in breaking off
from Rightful Bishops, or setting up others in the same Church against them.
Thus, in the Apostolical Canous, the Schism of Presbyters, of other Clergy, or
Laics, is expressed by their setting up another Altar, and assembling
separately, in contempt of the Bishop. So also the Council of Carthage
declares, concerning any (...), Can. 31. Ap.
Presbyters, who should do the same, after they had been sentenced and
segregrated by their Bishops, that therein they are Makers of Schisms. And the
second General Council rejects men as Schismatics, (...), Council. Constant.
Can. 6.
though they give out that they confess the Right Faith, if they assemble and
hold Congregations, in opposition to their Canonical Bishops. Hinc ad Haereses
and Schismata prosilitur, dum obtrectatur Sacerdotibus, dum Episcopis invidetur
cum quis aut quaeritur non se potius ordinatum, aut dedignatur alterum far
praepositum, Cyp. de Zelo and Livore p 223. Haec sunt initia Haereticorum, and
Ortus atque Conatus Schismaticorum, etc. ut sibi placeant, and praepofitos
suberbo tumore contemnant. Sic de Ecclesia receditur, and c. Id. Ep. 3. p. 6.
Hence, says St. Cyprian, come Schisms and Heresies, because Men envy (...),
Can 10. Conc. Carthag.
and contemn their Bishops. Inde Schismata and Haereses obortae sunt, and
oriuntur, cum Episcopus, qui unus est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam
praesumptione contemnitur, Cyp. Ep. 66. p. 167.
They have risen, and do rise from this, viz. from some proud Persons
presumptuous contempt of the Bishop, who is one, and presides over the Church.

Especially, if they set up an Anti-Bishop, and oppose a second Bishop to the
first, or to one Canonically Ordained already, and rightfully possessed of the
same Church. This was the Case of Novatianus, whom the three Italian Bishops,
which he called to Rome for that purpose, ordained Bishop of Rome against
Cornelius, who was already the Rightful and Canonical Bishop of that place.
This setting up of Anti Bishops, St. Cyprian tells them, is erecting an
Adulterum Caput, Ep. 45. p. 86.
Adulterous Head, (a second Bishop being no more to be admitted to the same
Church, than a second Husband to the same Wife, whilst the former lives:) and a
spurious or Adulteram Cathedram, Id. Ep. 68. p. 177.
adulterate Chair. And bids them know, that Agnoscant atque intelligant,
Episcopo semel facto, and Collegarum, and Plebis Testimonio and Judicio
compr^bato, alium constitui nullo modo posse, Cyp. Ep. 44. p. 86.
after once a Bishop is lawfully made, and Ordained in any Church, they can no
ways set up another Bishop against him in the same place. He calls it erecting
Illicita Sacerdotia, Ep. 69. p. 180.
unlawful Priesthoods, and opposing against the True Altar and Holy Sacrifice,
a Falsa Altaria, Ep. 69. p 180.
False and Prophanum Altar, Ep. 3. p. 6.
Profane Altar, and Sacrificia Sacrilega, Ep. 68. p. 177. and Ep. 69. p. 180.
Sacrilegious Sacrifices. And he aggravates the Novatian Schism, by saying,
they had Non tantum radicis and matris sinum atque complexum recusavit; sed
etiam gliscente and in pejus crudescente discordia, Episcopum sibi constituit,
and contra Sacramentum semel traditum Divinae Dispositionis and Catholicae
Unitatis, adulterum and contrarium Caput extra Ecclesiam fecit, Ep. 45. p 86.
not only broke off from the Bishop and Church, but had proceeded against the
Ordinance of God, and Catholic Unity, to set up against him another Bishop, an
adulterous and contrary Head. And on like setting up of Anti-Bishops, after
others were first in place, -- Majorinum post Ordinationem Caeciliani
ordinaverunt, Schisma facientes. -- Consequens erit eosdem fuisse Authors
Schismatis, Optat. l. 1. p. 40. Ed. Par. Albasp^.
Optatus Charges the Donatists with Schism afterward. These setters up of
opposite or Anti-Bishops, first break off themselves from their own Bishop,
before they can set another up against him. And being broke off from their
Bishop, they are broke off from the Church, which is in Episcopo, as I showed
before, or goes along with the Bishop; those Members only making the true Body,
which adhere and keep to the Head; and those Si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in
Ecclesia non esse, Cyp. Ep. 166. p. 68.
ceasing to be any longer of the Body, who are separated from the Head. And
therefore these opposite or Anti-Bishops, and opposite Altars, that blessed
Martyr still says are Ep. 3. p. 6. and Ep. 55. p. 104.
foris, and Ep 43. p. 84. and Ep. 45. p. 86.
extra Ecclesiam, and have Ep. 43. p 84. and Ep. 3. p. 6.
receded ab Ecclesia; that is, are not within, but without the Church.

Now from this Account of Church-Union in any particular Churches, and of
Schism, which lies in the unjust Breach thereof, I shall observe these three
Things.

1. First, That when a second, or opposite Bishop, is set up in any Church
against a former Orthodox one, who is still Bishop thereof, the Anti-Bishop,
and they who set him up and adhere to him, make the Schism. For the other, with
his Adherents, as the same Head and Members abide still where they were, and
are still the same Church. But the Anti-Bishop and his Followers, are gone out
from them, which Schisma apud Carthaginem a vestris Principibus factum. -- Non
enim Caecilianus exivit a Majorino Avo tuo; sed Majorinus a Caeciliano, Optat.
Milev. l. 1. p. 38. Ed. Par. Albaspin.
Optatus gives as a plain Proof against the Donatist Bishops, that the Schism
lay at their doors. They have broke themselves off, and by erecting themselves
into an opposite Head and Body, make a new and opposite Church. Alium Episcopum
fieri consensisse, id est, quod nec sas est, nec licet fieri, Ecclesiam aliam
constitui, Cyp. Ep. 46. p. 89.
Consenting to set up another Bishop, they consented therein to set up another
Church, as I observed before from St. Cyprian. So that they rend that Body,
which, by keeping wholly to one Bishop before, was but one, into several
pieces, and break one Church into two Churches.

This, I say, they do, if the former Bishop is Orthodox. For if he is
Heretical, Heresy, as I shall show, dissolves the Union, and cancels the
Obligation of Adherence between such Head and Members. They are bound to own
him as their Head, and to be one with him as his true and genuine Members,
whilst he is at the Head of Christian Doctrines, and necessary Truths; but not
when he falls off from them, into damnable Heresies and Unchristian Errors.

And if he is still the rightful Bishop of that Church. If he voluntarily quits
his Right, and Relation to them, and gives it up by his own Resignation, they
are no longer bound to adhere to him. For these Unions and Dependances, are
contracted by the consent of Men's own Wills, and are kept up betwixt these
Heads and Members, not by natural, but voluntary Communications. So that, if a
Bishop throws up his own Relation, and will no longer preside over them, as
Head of a Church; they are no longer bound, to keep in Dependence and
Subjection, or to stick to him, as Members thereof. Or, if he loses it against
his Will, by a just sentence and deprivation, that also discharges the Members
from their Union and Dependence, and sets them free to receive, and to unite
themselves to another in his place. But if neither Death has put an end to his
Relation, nor he has thrown it up by his own Resignation, nor is deprived
thereof by the finishing of a Regular Process and Synodical Sentence against
him; he is still the Bishop of his CHURCH, and will bar and keep out any other
Person from being Ordained a Bishop over them. (...) Council. Constant. 1 and 2
Dict. Can. 16.
A Bishop can by no means be constituted in that Church, whose own Bishop is
yet alive, and stands vested with his proper Honor, unless of his own accord
he renounce his Bishopric. And as to making a vacancy by deprivation, it
behooves first, that the cause of him, who is to be cast out of his Bishopric,
be canonically examined, and the Process against him be fully brought to an
end. And then, after he is canonically deposed, another may be promoted to his
Bishopric, say the Fathers in the Council of Constantinople.

But if even a Synod of Bishops shall deprive an Orthodox Bishop of any Church,
for adhering to the Truths, or Commands of Christ; he is Christ's true Bishop
still in that Church, and his faithful Peoples spiritual Head, for all that
unjust sentence. For Christ stands by him, who stands by his Doctrines and
Precepts; and unjust Depositions on these Accounts, have no more validity in
his sight, than unjust Excommunications for the same Accounts have, as has been
already showed. But, if there is no Interposition of Synods, but a mere
Deprivation of State, that will much less do it. For there is a spiritual
Subjection and Dependence of People to their Bishops, especially to such as
suffer for adhering to Christian Truths or Precepts, which the civil State
cannot break or dissolve. Christ himself, by his Institution, has made a
spiritual Relation between them, and antecedently obliged his People to this
Union and Adherence to them, as they are vice Christi, his Ministers and
Vicegerents, as St. Cyprian Ep. 59. p. 129. Ed. Ox.
says. Kings and Civil States, may come afterward, and tie this spiritual
Union and Adherence, faster on, by temporal Dependances and Enforcements. And
what they lay on, they may take off again. But the spiritual Relation and
Obligations, do not depend on them, but on Christ himself. Religion lays them
on, and leaves it not in the Power of any Prince, to cancel or discharge them.
They stood fixed, whilst the Church was separate from the State, before any
secular Powers came in to protect it; and will still continue, if they turn all
their Power, to persecute and oppress it. Nor has our Lord left it to their
courtesy, whether there shall be any spiritual Relation betwixt his People and
their Pastors, whether they shall keep up their spiritual Relation and
Dependence, and he shall have a Church on Earth, or no; as is before discoursed
more at large.

The Learned Author, of the Vindication of Their Majesty's Authority in filling
the vacant Sees, p. 19, 20.
owns the Advancement of George the Cappadocean into the place of Athanasius,
to have been Schismatical, and an Usurpation and Breach of Catholic Communion.
The setting up of this Anti Bishop, was by a Deprivation of State. For
Constantius took away the Churches from Athanasius and his Adherents, which is
the State-way of depriving Bishops; and gave them to George the Anti-Bishop and
his Adherents. Nay, he sends an Edict, to the Senate and People of Alexandria,
Athan. Epist. ad Constan. Imp. p. 695. and. Ep. ad Solit. p. 843.
requiring them on their Allegiance, (instead of sticking to him as their
spiritual Head, with the Affection and Dependence of Members;) with their
united Force, to persecute Athanasius. And made it criminal in any Persons, as
Sozomen Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 10. p. 549.
relates, to harbor or conceal him. And accordingly the Imperial Ministers and
Praefects, violently drove him and the Orthodox out of the Churches; and, by
extreme Force, put George and the Arians, in possession thereof: And, having
placed this Anti-Bishop upon his Throne, with all secular Cruelties and
barbarous Usage, compelled the Clergy and People to acknowledge and submit to
him. It was also brought about by Deprivation of Synods. For after the Sardican
Synod, which restored him, Athanasius had been again deposed, both by the Synod
of Arles, and afterward by the Synod of Milan, wherein, besides a few from the
East, above three hundred Bishops of the West met, as Sozomen L. 4. c. 9.
says, and condemned him. And the setting up of George against him after this,
was in a Synod, viz. the Synod of Antioch, Soz l. 4. c. 8. p. 546
which declared the Uncanonicalness of his Restitution, and Ordained George, as
a former Synod at that place had Ordained Gregory before, to be Bishop of
Alexandria in his Room. These, indeed, as the Author of the Vindication p. 19.
suggests, were Heretical Synods. And Dionysius of Alba, Eusebius of Vercelles,
Paulinus of Tryers, and Rhodanus, and Lucifer, who at Milan protested against
their Proceedings, declared, that, through Athanasius, the Emperor and the Arians
his Enemies, were striking at the Catholic Faith; which the event of things,
and the Proceedings afterward in the Synods of Ariminum and Seleucia,
verified, as Sozomen L. 4. c. 9. p. 546.
observes. But in way of external Judicature, the Deprivation, though of
Heretical Synods, must at least carry with it as much Plea, as Deposition by no
Synods can pretend to; there being more show of Ecclesiastical Authority, in
Acts of Heretical Synods, than in none at all.

But for all this Deposition, both by the Imperial Edicts, and Synodical
Sentences, since the true Cause thereof was his firmness and constancy to the
Catholic Faith, Athanasius, as the foresaid Author owns, still kept on his
spiritual Relation, and the People their spiritual and Religious Obligations
to, and Dependence on him. So that George, as he P. 19. 20
says, was an usurping Invader, a breaker of Catholic Communion, and a
Ringleader of a Schism in the Catholic Church, when he set up against him.
And the same it would be, in the case of any other Bishop deprived by the like
Authority, for his Fidelity and fixed Adherence, to any other Truths, or Laws of
Christ. For his faithful Bishops must stick to him, in all other Points of
Christian Truth and Practice, as well as in the Orthodoxy of the Nicene Faith.
And that against the Deprivations, of all other States and Synods, as well as
of the Arians. And their sticking to Christ in these Points, can give no
liberty to their Clergy and People, to break off from them. Their stedfastness
therein, must tie all faithful Members faster to them; but can never be
expounded, as a conscionable discharge of their spiritual Obligations, and
Dependence on them.

If a Schism is made in a Church then, by a defection from the rightful
Orthodox Bishop thereof, laid aside, either by a Civil State or Ecclesiastical
Synod, only for his faithful Adherence to the Doctrines, or Laws of Christ; or
by turning over to an Anti-Bishop, set up against him: It Is plain, the
Anti-Bishops, with their Makers and Adherents, make the Schism. They were all
Members of the one Body, whilst they kept subject and united to the Rightful
Bishop, who is the Head of it. But when they broke off from him, they divided
themselves from the Body; and formed themselves under an opposite Head, into a
new and opposite Body. But he, and his Adherents, still preserve the Unity of
the true Body. The breakers off, make the Division; but they, preserve their
Union. As those Branches do, Ecclesia quoque una est, quae in multitudinem
latius incremento foecunditatis extenditur: quo modo solis multi radii, sed
lumen unum: Et rami arboris multi, sed robur unum tenaci radice fundatum: Et
cum de font uno rivi plurimi defluunt, numerositas licet diffusa videatur
exundantis copiae largitate, unitas tamen servatur in origin. Sic in Ecclesia,
though radii, rami, and rivi, be most Numerous, unum tamen Caput est and Origo
una, and una Matter Foecunditatis successibus copiosa, Cyp. de Unit. Eccl. p.
108.
which still grow to the Tree, when others are broke off from it; and those
Streams, which still communicate with the Fountain, when others are stopped; and
those Rays, which keep connected to the Sun, when others are interrupted: Which
Similitudes, St. Cyprian makes choice of, to set off the Unity of the Church,
and to show that they preserve this Union, who keep to the same Head and
Origin. What they do therefore in these Cases, by sticking to each other as
they did before, when others break off, is not to make the Schism, but only not
to follow and run into it. And they are no more chargeable with the division
for this, than the General and his faithful Soldiers would be in an Army, for
not going over to the Mutineers; or than a King and his Loyal Subjects would be
in a Kingdom, for not turning over and submitting to the Rebels. But as the
Anti-Bishops and their Party make the Schism, by departing from the lawful Head
and true Body, they must amend it by returning to it: And they stand answerable
to God, so far as I see, for all the Guilt, and sad Consequences and Effects
thereof, if they refuse so to do.

2. Secondly, The Unity of any Church does not go with the greatest Numbers:
but when a Schism is made by a defection of Members from their spiritual Head,
and setting up of Anti-Bishops, the Schism is still the same, how numerous
soever the Members are that break off. For breaking off from their rightful
Head and Governor, as I have shown, makes the Schism: And then, the greatness
of the Number of those who do so, can only make it a greater Schism. Number in
Schism, or in any other ill thing, may add Confidence, and leave less Hope of
reclaiming those who are engaged therein. For Multitude, as the Ancient Author
of the In Mat. Homil. 1. in cap. 1. ver. 7. in verba Solomon genuit Roboam.
Comment on St. Matthew, printed among the Works of St. Chrysostom, observes,
is the Mother of sedition, and of contumacy and incureableness therein; whereas
Paucity, or Smalness of their Number, is the Mistress of Discipline. But it
does not lessen the Guilt, nor alter the Nature of it, but Schismatics are
answerable for their Schism, be they never so many of them.

That which makes any meeting of Orthodox Christians, offering up a regular and
established Service, to be in the Unity of the Church, is their meeting under
one, who officiates therein according to their own Bishops approbation and
allowance. For the Unity of the Body lies in keeping one with him. And the
Catholic and Canonical Rule, as I shall Part 3. Chap. 5.
afterward show, of keeping one with them, is by celebrating all Public
Offices and Divine Service, with their allowance and approbation. So that,
where any Presbyters, or Deacons perform the established Offices, according to
the mind of their own Orthodox and Rightful Bishops; they officiate in the
Unity of the Church, though it be but to a few, and to those met in Corners.
And where any others celebrate their Offices, without the License, and against
the Approbation of their own Orthodox and Rightful Bishops; they officiate in a
Schism, though it be among the fullest Congregations, and with secular
encouragements, and in the public Authorized Churches. The having their
Orthodox and true Bishops Approbation and Concurrence, makes them no
Schismatics, and their Meetings no Conventicles, when Conventicle notes, not a
small, or secret, but a schismatical Assembly; as it always does, when it is a
Word of Infamy and Reproach. (...), Balsamon in Can. 31. Council. in Trullo.
The Canon counts it a Conventicle, when any Minister in a private Oratory,
against the allowance and approbation of him, who is chief Priest in the
Country, says Balsamon on the Canon forbidding Ministrations contrary to the
Bishops mind and approbation.

And it has not been so strange a sight in the World, as every good mind would
wish it had, to see Schismatics from the Body make a more Numerous Party, than
those, who keep united to it. In the Division of Israel from Judah, under
Jeroboam, the Israelites, who fell off from the One Altar at Jerusalem, to
other Altars of their own erecting, were guilty of the Schism: Though they who
stuck to that one Altar, were but two Tribes; and those defectors who broke off
from it, were Ten. The Arians, as they were Heretics for subverting the true
Faith; so likewise were they all Schismatics, by breaking off from the
Communion of their Rightful Bishops, as of Athanasius at Alexandria, of Paulus
at Constantinople, of Lucius at Adrianople, of Asclepas at Gaza, of Marcellus
at Ancyra, etc. and by enjoining all every where to break Communion with them,
and to receive and communicate with those Anti-Bishops, whom they had set up
against them. And in the Patriarchate of Alexandria more particularly, the
Meletians, who before had made a Schism in that Church, fell into their Party;
as Nullum Schisma non sibi aliquam confingit Haeresin, ut recte ab Ecclesia
recessisse videatur, Hieron. Comment. in Ep. ad Tit. c. 3. in verba Haereticum
hominem, etc.
Schism, to maintain it self, too often, yea always, says St. Jerome, takes up
with, and ends in Heresy. But these Arians who made the Schism, were
abundantly more Numerous, than those faithful Christians, who kept to the Unity
of the Catholic Church; the whole World at one time gro^ning, as Hieron. adv.
Lucifer, p. 98. ^. Ed. Col.
St. Jerome says, and admiring to see it self turned Arian. Again, the
Donatists were notoriously guilty of the Schism made in the African Churches.
But yet, when they overrun Africa, they could glory and vaunt themselves in
their diffuseness, and in the greatness of their Number. So that Schism is
compatible, with the greatest Numerousness of Adherents, if that Number is of
Men combined together against their Orthodox Righful Bishops; and the Unity of
the Church, with the smallest Numbers, if that Number is of Members, that
constantly adhere to them.

And this may likewise appear from those Similitudes, of the Unity betwixt the
Head and Members, the Tree and Branches, etc. whereby the Ancients set out the
Unity of the Church. For be the Branches more or fewer, which keep united to
the Body, they make the Tree. And be the Members few or many, which stick on to
the Head or living Trunk, they make the Body. And so, be their Numbers greater
or less, do the Adherers to the Orthodox Rightful Bishop, make the one Church.

Indeed, as the Root has the Branches; so the Bishop, has the Clergy and
People, virtually in himself. That is, as he gets Proselytes, he can make them
Christians; and out of these, he can Ordain Presbyters, and Deacons, So to
Ecclesia in Episcopo, and Clero, and in omnibus stantibus sit constituta, Cyp.
Ep. 33. p. 66. And speaking of the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, (...), says
St. Ig^atius, Ep. ad Trallian. p. 48.
Head a Body of Clergy and People professing Christianity, which, according to
the sense of the Primitive Fathers, is a Christian Church. And thus a Bishop,
though appearing only with a few Members about him, will make a Church; and is
qualified duly to spread it, and to make it more Numerous: As the blessed
Apostles did, when they set up at first to gather Churches; and as the first
Bishops did also, who were taken out of the first Converts, and Ordained at the
Head of them, to be Bishops of those who (...), Clem. To. Ep. 1. ad Cor. p. 80.
Ed. Ox.
should afterward believe. So that the reduceing of an Orthodox Rightful
Bishop, to a comparatively little Number of Adherents, will not hinder him and
his Followers from making up the one Body, and being the one Church. And as
such, our Lord-will give ear to them, as St. Cyprian observes, though they be
but two or three gathered together in his Name, rather than to a greater Number
of Schismatical Dividers. To this Promise of his Presence, with two or three,
or such small Numbers, our Lord premises, says De unit. p. 112
he, that these two or three be in the Unity of the Church, and preserve the
Concord of Peace. Oftendit magis esse se, cum duobus aut tribus unanimiter
orantibus, quam cum diffidentibus plurimis, Ib. p. 113.
And shows himself thereby, to be more with two or three such Petitioners, than
with a great Number of Schismatical Dividers.

And if Number of Adherents will not, much less will any Places of Assemblies,
make such Members, as are broken off from their Orthodox Rightful Bishops, to
have the Unity of the Body with them, or to be the one Church. For since the
Anti-Bishop, with his Followers, are all Members broke off from their true and
lawful Head; they must needs be a Schism, though they assemble in the most
Authorized Places, and Public Churches. And since, in the Orthodox and
Rightful Bishop with his Adherents, we see the Members keeping united to their
Head, they musts needs retain that Unity of the Body, though driven to seek
shelter in the Wilderness, or to meet in Corners. Such little Flocks, are still
the one Church; though, like the first Christians, in the Persecution raised
against them by the Jews, they are kept out of the Temple and all the public
Synagogues, and must be content to celebrate Divine Service, and hold their
Religious Assemblies, Acts 1. 13. etc. 20. 7, 8.
in upper Rooms.

3. Thirdly, Therefore in Pressing of Ecclesiastical Unity on the Consciences
of Men, the Preachers of Peace and Unity must press them to keep united to
their own Orthodox and Rightful Bishop, not to unite themselves to any other
Bishop set up against him. For the Unity, which they are bound in Conscience to
keep up, is an Unity under him; so Unity, if rightly urged, will bind all to
him, but rend none from him.

No Precepts occur more frequently in the New Testament, than those requiring
Love and Brotherly Charity, and Peace, and Unity among Christians. And these
are meant to tie them to each other, not only in their private Capacity and
Converse; but as they are incorporated into a spiritual Society, and, as so
many 1 Pet. 2. 5.
live Stones are to be cemented and compacted into one Holy Temple; or, as so
Romans 12. 4, 5. and 1 Cor. 12. 12.
many Members, are to be knit together and built up into one Body Politic, or
Church. They are called to Charity and Peace in one Body, as St. Paul says,
Col. 3. 14. 15. And the Christian Charity, is to be a Charity that keeps Unity
of Society, that edifies, and does not divide the Church, 1 Cor. 8. 1. on which
Account he says, that where the Members are acted by the Virtue, and show the
care of Charity, there will be no Schism in the Body, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. Its
Work, is to compact, and join together the Members, the Body ^difying it self
in Love, Ephesians. 4. 16.

And to do this, or to keep them in united Corporations or Societies, they must
keep them united, not only to one another, but to their Orthodox and Rightful
Bishops in the first place. That Peace, which must secure their Peace as an
incorporate Society, must first bind them to be at Peace with them. And that
Union, which must keep them one Society, must keep all dependant on, and united
to them; and suffer none to break off, or divide from them. And that Love and
Charity, which is to be the Ligament of a Politic Body, must bind the Members
to the Head, or the Subjects to the Governors; and bar all Factious
Combinations against them, or Defection to any others.

And therefore the Scripture-Precepts, of Love, and Brotherly Charity, and
Peace and Unity, must never be pleaded to draw men off from their own Orthodox
Rightful Bishop, but to make them cleave fast to him. And to call men to unite
with an Anti-Bishop, is not to call them to keep these Precepts, but to
transgress them. And thus it is often represented by St. Cyprian. He De Unit,
Eccles. p, 113, 114. and Ep. 55. p. 114.
tells the Contemners of their own Bishops, and Adherers to Opposite Bishops,
that they have none of that Charity which St. Paul requires, and without which
1 Cor. 13. 3.
he declares to the Corinthians, that they would receive no Profit by dying
Martyrs; because -- Exhibere se non potest Martyrem, qui fraternam non tenuit
charitatem, De Unitate Eccl. p. 113.
they have not kept to the Unity of the Church. And gives the Sic Altar
prosanum foris collocatur, sic contra Pacem Christi and ordinationem atque
unitatem Dei rebellatur, Ep. 3. p. 6.
Setters up of opposite and profane Altars, to understand, that so they rebel
against the Peace of Christ, and against the Ordinance and Unity of God. That
they thereby Hinc Dominicae Pacis vinculum rumpitur, hinc Charitas Fraterna
violatur, hinc Unitas scinditur, dum obtrectatur. Sacerdotibus, etc. Cyp. de
Zelo and Livore, p. 223.
break the bond of the Lords peace, and violate Brotherly Charity, and rend
Christian Unity. And to those Confessors at Rome, who had sided with the
Schismatic Novatian against Cornelius, he suggests, how -- Dum vosmetipsos a
Christi Grege, and ab ejus Pace and Concordia separatis, Cyp. Ep. 46. p. 89.
therein they had separated themselves from the Flock of Christ, and from his
Concord and Peace. So that the breach and overthrow of these Christian Duties,
of Fraternal Charity, Peace, and Unity, must not be charged on any, for
adhereing to their true Head, and Orthodox Rightful Bishop, but are justly
chargeable on the other side.

As to the first way of Schism therefore, viz. in particular Members breaking
off unduely from the Unity of their own Church, and from their due Subjection
and Dependence on their own Bishops, to omit other Instances thereof, it is
plain a Schism is then made, when Bishop is set up against Bishop in the same
Church. And the makers thereof, are the New or Anti-Bishop and his Adh^rents,
if the former Bishop is Orthodox, and has not clogged his Communion with any
unlawful Terms, or with requiring a throwing up of Rights and Liberties, and a
Submission to Unrighteous and Uncanonical Usurpations. Yea, though such former
Rightful Bishop, stand deprived by an Act of State, or even of a Synod; if what
he is deprived for, be his firmness in sticking, either to the Doctrines, or to
the Laws and Commands of Christ; and what the other is set up for, be his
easiness in transgressing and forsaking them. So that in Religion they are
Schismatics, though the State espouse them, and set them up for the civilly
established and endowed Church. As the ten Tribes were in Israel, though the
civil State formed that Schism; and the Arians, when they broke off from their
Rightful Orthodox Bishops, albeit they had the Emperors to back them; and the
English Schismatics, when, in the days of the Great Rebellion, they fell off,
not only from their Bishops, but from Episcopacy it self, and were settled and
upheld therein by the Usurpers of that Time; and as the Anti-Episcopal Church
of Scotland at this Day are, notwithstanding all that Establishment the secular
Arm has given them. Yea, and nevertheless Schismatics, though they can glory
over the other, in having by far the greater Numbers; and in having sole
Possession of the Public Churches, and Places of Assemblies. And as the
Anti-Bishop and his Party, in such Cases make the Schism; it lies on them, and
they must be applied to, to mend it. And the Gospel-Precepts, of Charity,
Peace, and Unity, if they are truly pressed, must be urged to make his own
Adherents stick to the Rightful Bishop, and to bring those Members, who are
broken off, to return to him: but are not truly enforced, but corruptly
misapplyed and perverted, even to call for what they directly forbid, if they
are urged for uniting with the other side.

But whoever are guilty of making a Schism, it would be a most pious and
praiseworthy part in any that shall cure it. And in the suffering side most of
all, if, by over-looking their own personal and private Claims, and mastering
all private resentments, as mortifyed and most public spirited Men, they can
make an end thereof by letting fall their own pretensions. And why, will many
good Minds, and sincere Lovers of Peace say, should they not do this for the
Love of Peace, and for Religions sake and the Churches? Their Adversaries,
indeed, can not have the face to ask it. And others, who may move better
therein, would be modest in pressing liberality on Losers, and not go too far
in urging them, who have suffered so much already from the Invaders, as if they
had not taken enough from them, to fall upon themselves and throw them what
remains. Yet they think it would be a noble Pitch in Virtue, full of Glory and
Goodness, if of themselves they would prefer Publick-Weal before private
Passions and Advantages, and be full of Care for others, when that needs to be
shown in caring least for themselves. Which Heavenly-mindedness and
publick-spiritedness, and Mortification to private Interests, God and the
Church, they conceive, must needs take most kindly at their hands.

But as to this, the suffering Bishops can not take this way of Cure, by giving
up their Claims, where they are bound in duty to insist on them. And that they
are bound to do, as I have already shown at large, in the forementioned Cases.
By their quitting there, they would surrender the Souls of their Charge, to
become a Prey to Wolves and Seducers, and to be trained up in wicked and
corrupt Doctrines, Prayers, and Practices. And this, is not to be true to their
Pastoral Trusts. It Is not faithfully to discharge their Cure of Souls, but
perfidiously to throw it off. So that be they never so mortified, and negligent
of themselves, and zealously studious of Unity and the Churches Peace; yet in
Fidelity to Christ, and to the People whom he has entrusted to their Charge,
they must hold on their spiritual relation, I conceive, and diligently
discharge it the best they can at such times; and not desert, but stick to the
Church, over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers.

Besides, the exercise of their spiritual Ministrations is loudly called for in
such Cases, and bound on them and the suffering Clergy their Brethren, by all
the Powers and Characters of the Ministerial Office; as I think may fully
appear from what I have said on that point before. And not only the continuance
of their former Relation, as the true Bishops still of those places; but this
very exercise, must in consequence keep up a schism in the Church, at such
times. For this exercise of their Ministrations, must be in separate Bodies.
The state, incorporateing and espousing the Anti-Bishops and their Adherents,
will give them the Public Churches: And Depriving and Persecuting the other
and their Followers, will also be sure to keep them out thereof. So, their
Ministrations, if they go on Ministering at all, as it is plain they ought, must
be in separate places and Assemblies. Yea, and by different ways of exercise:
the spiritual administrations of one, being purely spiritual, in the way of a
destitute and persecuted; but those of the other, being mixed, in the way of an
incorporate and endowed Church.

And therefore in all the forementioned cases, where the suffering Bishops are
still bound, for the interest of Religion and of Souls, to insist upon their
Episcopal Claims and their Relation to their Churches, and, with their brethren
of the other Clergy, still to go on in a faithful discharge of their
Ministrations; this way of Cure, can have no place. But as the Anti-Bishops, by
breaking off from them, and from those Christian Principles and Practices
whereto they stand firm, have made the Schism; so they alone, by a Penitential
return, are capable to mend it: It not admitting of Remedy in those Cases, and
under such state of things, from any other hands.

And this may be sufficient, as to the true and suffering Bishops, and show how
little the Arguments, from the desirableness and duty of Union, will affect
them in those cases. When the Church is Rent by such a deplorable schism, as
the precedent discourse shows who make it; so this, I think, is enough to show
who can mend it, and to whom alone the lovers of peace and unity are to apply
themselves for remedy at such times.

CHAP. II. Of the Schism of Particular Churches from other Sister-Churches, by
their rejecting of Fraternal Communion therewith.
BEsides this first way of Schism, viz. of particular Members breaking off
unjustly from the Unity of their own Church, by throwing off their due
Subordination and Subjection to their own Bishops: There is a second, as I
observed above, viz. of particular Churches breaking off unjustly from the
Communion of other Sister-Churches. And this is by rejecting Fraternal
Communion with them, denying to worship God in their Assemblies, or to admit
their Members to worship in ours, or communicating with those who stand
Excommunicated by them, or have made a Schism from them.

Our Lord, is not only for having the Christians of every Place of Country, to
keep Unity with their own particular Church: but also, as I noted before, for
having all particular Churches, to keep up the Unity of one Body among
themselves. All his Sheep he has gathered into one Fl^ck, Joh. 10. 16. All the
Assemblies both of Jews and Gentiles, he has reconciled to God in one Body,
Ephesians. 2. 14, 16. calling all his Followers, to profess Christianity in one Body,
as St. Paul says, Col. 3. 15. Accordingly, Baptism, which makes them all
Christians, lists or inrolls them all in one Corporation, we being all baptized
into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And the Holy Eucharist, which is the other Great
Sacrament and solemn Undertaking of Christianity, confederates them into one
spiritual Corporation, we being all made in that to drink into one Spirit, 1
Cor. 12. 13. and, though many, being one Body, as partaking therein of one Bread,
1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. This Union of all Christians and Christian Congregations,
into one Society under Jesus Christ, makes that Body the Church, whereof he is
the Head, Col. 1. 18. which the Scripture sometimes expresses, by one Temple,
Ephesians. 2. 21. or spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2. 5. or one Family and Household, Ephesians.
2. 19. etc. 3. 15. as I observed above. And which is that one Holy Catholic
Church, betwixt all the parts whereof the Communion of Saints is to be
maintained, as all Christians profess in the Creed.

This Union of all particular Churches as one Body under himself, our Lord has
appointed to be kept up by all the Members thereof, as occasion is; but
chiefly, by the Union and Accord of the Bishops and Pastors, who are the
respective Heads of those particular Churches.

This whole Church is made one Body, by one Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. so the Unity
thereof, is called the Unity of the Spirit, v. 3. And one great means of the
Spirits keeping up this Unity, is by the Ministration of Pastors and Teachers,
which he gave as Gifts, for the edifying, or compacting and building up all
Christians into this Body of Christ, v. 8. 11, 12. To these Pastors, the Spirit
has given different Offices, Romans 12. 4. One, having the Office of ministering;
another, of teaching; another, of ruling, v. 6, 7, 8. Or different
Administrations, 1 Cor. 12: 5. setting some in the Church in the station of
Apostles; some, of Teachers; some of Governments, v. 28. placing some in
higher, some in lower stations, according to the measure of that Grace or
Office, (the Word Grace being often Romans 15. 15, 16. Ephesians. 3. 7, 8.
used to express Ministerial Powers) which he saw fit to commit to them, Ephesians.
4. 7. 11. But all those different Offices, are set for keeping all Christians
in one Body, Romans 12. 4. 5. and all the Diversity of Ministries, is to continue
them the Body of Christ, and to cement the Members, who are many, into one
Body, 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28. and v. 12. 20. and all the variety of Gifts (i. e. of
Offices, v. 11.) or distributions of higher or lower stations, are for edifying
or laying together the Members into this Body, and for preserving the Unity
thereof, Ephesians. 4. 4, 8, 12.

The Head of this Body, is Jesus Christ himself. And from Christ the Head all
the Body is knit together, says St. Paul; by those joints and bands which
minister neurishment, i. e. by the Pastors, who are set to feed it, Col. 2. 19.
From Christ the Head, says he again, the whole Body is fitly joined and
compacted together, by those joints which make supplies according to their
measure, or according to their several stations in the work of the Ministry,
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. And on account of this use, of their uniting all Christians
under Christ the Head into this one Body, or all the several Societies of
Christians into one Church; when this one Church is compared to a Natural Body,
they are represented as the Joints, and as the Bands or Ligaments, which unite
and compact the Members, as they are by St. Paul in these places.

And thus it was in the Opinion of the Ancient Church, who placed the Unity of
all Churches, in the Unity and Accord of all the Bishops thereof. Ecclesia,
quae Catholica, una est, -- cohaerentium sibi invicem Sacerdotum glutino
copulata est. Cyp. Ep. 66. p. 168. Ed. Ox.
The Catholic Church, which is one, says St. Cyprian, is cemented or coupled
together, by the glue or joint accord of its Bishops adhering mutually to one
another. -- Christus unus, and una Ecclesia ejus, and Fides una, and Plebs in
solidam Corporis unitatem concordiae glutino copulata, Id. de unit. Eccl. p.
119.
All faithful People, are joined together into the solid Unity of one Body, by
the glue of this Concord. -- And to -- Se ab Ecclesiae v^nculo atque a
Sacerdotum Collegio separat, Id. Ep. 55. p. 112.
fall from this Concord, and separate from the College of Bishops, is to
separate from the Bond of the Church, as he elsewhere says.

To keep up this Unity in the whole Church, they believed all BISHOPS strictly
obliged to keep Unity among themselves. We Quam unitatem firmiter tenere and
vindicare debemus, maxim Episcopi, qui in Ecclesia praesidemus, ut Episcopatum
quoque ipsum, unum atque indivisum probemus, Cyp. de unit. Eccl. p. 108. Ed. Ox.
Bishops, who preside in the Church, ought above all Men to keep firmly united,
that we may maintain the Episcopate it self, one and undivided. They looked
upon the Bishops of all the several independent Churches, to be as so many
Members of one great Fraternity or College. Quia Collegium Episcopale nolunt
habere nobiscum commune, etc. Optat. l. 1. p. 34. Ed. Par. Albaspin.
Optatus calls them, the College of Bishops. And before him, St. Cyprian styles
them, -- A Sacerdotum Collegio seperat, etc. Cyp. Ep. 55. p. 112. -- Copiosum
est Corpus Sacerdotum, si quis ex Collegio nostro haeresin, etc. Id. Ep 68. p.
178. Ed Ox.
the College and Corporation of Priests; and calls all other Bishops, his
Colleagues. Particular Bishoprics, are all Members one of another, and --
Episcopatus unus Episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate diff^sus, Cyp. Ep.
55. p. 112.
all together, as he says, are to make but one Great Episcopate. -- And among
this Multitude of Bishops, -- Christus unus, and una Ecclesia, and Cathedra
una, Ep. 43. p. 83.
as there is but one Church, so there is but one Chair. And -- Nam dum ad
Trinitatis instar, cujus una est and individua Potestas, unum sit per diversos
Antistites Sacerdotium, Symmachus Papa Ep. 1. ad Eonium Arelatensem Episc. page
675. Tom. 3. Council. Ed. Bin.
as three Persons in the sacred Trinity, make up but one God, wherein the power
of all three is one, and undivided: So does all the great Diversity of
Prelates, make up but one Priesthood, says Symmachus.

Now this Unity, the Bishops and Pastors keep up among several Churches, not by
the Subjection of all other Bishops, to some one, or more, set up above all the
rest. Particularly, not by the paramount Authority and Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome, which is neither to be found in Scripture, nor is agreeable to
the Accounts thereof, nor to the Belief and Practice of the Primitive Church,
nor to the Universal Diffusedness designed for Christ's Church, under all the
Divisions of Kingdoms, and Interruptions of secular Accord and Correspondence
here on Earth.

But by maintaining Fraternal Concord and Communion among themselves. They
cement into one Episcopate, concordi m^merositate, by their Concord under this
Numerosity, as we are Ep. 55. p. 112.
told by St. Cyprian. Copiosum est corpus Sacerdotum concordiae mutuae glutino
atque uuitatis vinculo copulatum, Cyp. Ep. 68. p. 178.
They are bound or coupled into one body, by the glue of mutual Concord, as he
says again. Which Ecclesiastical Concord and Fraternal Communion, lies in
owning each other, and all the Christians of their several Churches, as
Brethren and Members; and in ratifying the great Acts of Society passed among
them, as if they had been passed among themselves. And in having this
Communion, not Arbitrary and Discretionary, which may be fixed at will upon
their own terms, and either kept up, or rejected, as they please: But a
Communion kept on out of bounden Duty, and by Rules, being to give account to
Christ the chief Bishop for the breach thereof.

To this it is requisite, that they profess the same true Faith and Christian
Worship. This is the Foundation of all other Communion among them. The one
Body, being made up of those, who hold to the one Faith, Ephesians. 4. 4. and the
Communion in this Body, being required between those, who communicate in this
one Faith and Worship, as shall be shown more fully Chap. 3, 4.
afterward.

And among all Orthodox Bishops and Churches, who profess the true Christian
Faith and Worship, the Rules of Communion and Correspondence, required by
Christ for keeping up this Unity of his Body, are such as these:

1. That all Orthodox Bishops and Churches, receive each others Members, as if
they were their own Members. All the Members of Christ's Church, are
Fellow-Citizens, or enfranchised Denizens, wheresoever they come; and upon any
new Change of Place or Christian Country, have no need of a new Naturalization.
They ought to find a home in all Churches, and may claim their Baptismal
Privileges, or the benefits of the Christian Coporation or Society, and can
not justly be repulsed or denied the same, as being free of the whole Body. For
Baptism, which makes them Members, by the institution of Christ incorporates
them all, not only into those several Churches or Congregations where they
receive it, but into the whole Body or Fraternity. We are all baptized, whether
we be Jews or Gentiles, into one Body, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 13. And
accordingly no Church must exclude them, as Ephesians. 2. 19.
Strangers or Foreigners; but own and receive them as Fellow-citizens, as To.
12. 5. 1 Cor. 12 27.
Members, as (...), Ephesians. 2. 19.
Domestics, as Act. 11. 29 etc. 15. 23. Romans 16. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 9. 1 These. 4.
10.
Brethren, and of the same Ephesians. 3. 15.
Family with themselves. And this is necessary, to maintain that Brotherhood,
which Christ has constituted among all his Members; every Christian being
Brother to another; so that Brother, is usually Romans 14. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 11 etc.
7. 15. Romans 16. 23. 2 These. 3, 6.
put to signify a Christian in the Holy Scripture.

They must also own and receive their Orders, when they have been lawfully
called to spiritual Powers, and to the Work of the Ministry, in their own
Churches. For Ordination, as well as Baptism, is not only in respect to the
Church of such a Place, but to Christ's Church at large. Limitations there are,
as to the Exercise of these Powers, as may make for the preservation of Order
and Union. And in care of Unity and Peace, Bishops and Priests of any Church
must observe these, in acting Episcopally or Sacerdotally, whilst they converse
in other Churches. But having any where received a Lawful and Canonical
Ordination, they are to be owned as Ministers of Christ wheresoever they come,
and need no more to be Ordained, than other Members need to be baeptised over
again.

So that they are Schismatics, and break this Unity of the Body, appointed to
be kept up between all particular Churches and their Members, who reject the
Members, or Canonical Ministers, of any other Orthodox Churches. As they do,
who Unchurch them, or deny Communion to their Members, unless they will submit
to unrighteous Claims and Usurpations, or join in unlawful Worship, or
erroneous Doctrines; or who reject their Lawful and Canonical Ministers, unless
they will receive new Orders: which are so many Breaches of that Brotherhood,
which Christ has Ordained among Churches, and are the making of a Schism in the
Catholic Church.

2. All Orthodox Bishops and Churches, are to refuse each others Schismatics,
and Excommunicates; as if they were their own Schismatics or Excommunicates.
And upon their Reconciliation, and Reunion to their own Churches; to let them
in, and receive them again, as if they had been immediately reconciled, and
reunited to themselves. Which ways, of mutually receiving, or rejecting, of
priviledging or debarring Members; make that Unity of Discipline, which by
Order of Christ, and according to the Sense and Belief of the Primitive
Fathers, is one great way, of compacting the vast number of Christian Societies
into one Body, or of keeping up the Unity of Christ's Church. Corpus sumus, de
conscientia Religionis, and disciplinae unitate, and spei foedere, Tert. Apol.
c. 39.
All we Christians, are incorporated or made one Body, says Tertullian, as by
the Belief of the same Religion, and the Covenant of Hope, so by the Unity of
Discipline. And when any one Bishop or Church has done any thing, Idem enim
omnes credimur operati, in quo deprehendimur eadem omnes censurae and
disciplinae consensione sociati, Cler. To. ap. Cyp. Ep. 30. p. 56.
We are all thought to have done the same, by appearing associated and united
in the same consent of consure and discipline, say the Clergy of Rome to St.
Cyprian.

1. They are to refuse each others Schismatics, as if they were their own
Schismatics. For, as the holding on civil Communion with Traitors, is judged
Treason: So is holding on spiritual Communion with Schismatics, judged Schism.
They must take part, and keep one with the Church. And so, whilst the Breach
lasts, must disclaim and keep off from those separate Members, who stand
divided and broke off from it; avoiding those that cause Divisions, as St. Paul
orders, Romans 16. 17. Accordingly, St. Basil lets the Neocaesareans know, when
they seemed about to break and divide from him, and from his Church of
Caesarea, that (...), Basil. Ep. 75. Verse. fin.
if any avoided, or broke off from his Communion, they would be broke off
withal from the Universal Church, which held Communion with him. (...), Council.
Laod. Can. 33.
We ought not to have Communion in Prayers, with any Heretic, or Schismatic,
says the Council of Laodicea. (...), Council. Antioch. Can. 2.
Nor ought they, who are not of the Assemblies of one Church, to be received or
allowed to assemble in another Church, says the Council of Antioch. (...), Can.
12. Ap.
If he, who is not to be received in one Church, be received without
commendatory Letters in another, let both him who is Received, and his
Receivers, be excommunicated, say the Apostolical Canons. Sed and quisque se
Conspirationi, and Factioni ejus adjunxerit, sciat se in Ecclefia nobiscum non
esse communicaturum, qui sponte maluit ab Ecclesia seperari, Cyp. Ep. 41. p. 80.
Whosoever, says St. Cyprian, speaking of the Schism of Felicissimus, who had
schismatically broken off and divided from himself, shall join himself to his
Conspiracy and Faction, may know that he can no longer communicate with us in
the Church, since he thereby voluntarily chooses rather to separate himself from
the Church.

2. They are to refuse each others Excommunicates, as if they were their own
Excommunicates. For whatsoever is this way regularly bound in Earth, our Lord
declares shall be ratified, or stand bound in Heaven, Mat. 18. 18. and Jo. 20
23. And if it is confirmed in Heaven, it must stand good, and not be thwarted
or reversed by any of his Followers here on Earth. When the Members among any
Societies of Christians, for their 2 These. 3. 6.
disorderly walking, and Matt. 18. 17.
not hearing of the Church, are cast out thereof; they are thrown, not only out
of the Church of that place, but out of Christ's Church at large, whereof all
other Churches are Members; or out of all Christian Churches, into the state of
Heathens and Publicans, as our Lord says, Mat. 18. 17.

Accordingly, Synesius Bishop of Ptolemais, in his sentence of Excommunication,
denounced against Andronicus, and Thoas, and their Accomplices, says, (...),
Synes. Ep. 58.
Let no Temple of God be open to them, but let every Religious Place or
Chapel, be shut against them. And St. Basil bids the Neocaesareans take heed,
how they break communion with him, (...), Basil. Ep. ad Neocaesarianos Nu. Ep.
75.
because, after once he should exclude them, no other Catholic Churches, which
all owned him, and held communion with him, would any longer own, or
communicate with them. Till they are regularly absolved and reconciled again,
all other Bishops and Sister-Churches, are bound to refuse and repel such
Excommunicates, as they come to their knowledge. Thus Synesius requires of all
Sister-Churches, and of all Christians, to shun the communion of Andronicus and
Thoas, and their Adherents. And (...), Conc. Antioch. Can. 2,
it is not lawful to communicate with Persons out of communion, says the Council
of Antioch. (...), Conc. Antioch. Can. 6. vid. and Conc. Sardic, Can. 13.
If any; either of Clergy, or Laity, is excommunicated by his own Bishop, let
none else receive him to communion, till his own Bishop has received him again,
or a Synod has cleared him, say the FATHERS of that Council again. And (...),
Conc. Nic. 1 Can. 5.
concerning those, either of the Clergy, or Laity, who are excluded from
communion by the Bishops which are in every Province, let the Sentence be valid
according to the Can. Ap. 12. 13.
Canon, which decrees, That they, who are cast out by some, shall not be
admitted by others, says the Great Council of Nice.

Thus, when any Persons, or Churches, are schismatically, or by means of just
Censure and Penalty, out of Communion with one Orthodox Church; by the Rules of
Catholic Communion and Accord among Churches, according to the mind of Christ,
and of the Primitive Church, ought they to be out of the communion of all
Orthodox Churches. And if any, either Christians, or Churches, will still hold
on communion with such Persons; by the foresaid Rules of Union, and the Canons
of the Catholic Church, they are thereby made like unto them, and turn makers
of a Schism, and are to lose the benefit of Communion themselves. (...), Synes.
Ep. 5. 8.
If any, says Synesius, in his Excommunicatory Sentence of Andronicus, etc.
shall contemn our Church, as being the Church of a small City, receiving those
whom it has cast out, as if Observance were not due to it, by reason of its
Poverty: Let him know, that he thereby makes a Schism in the Church, which
Christ is for having kept one. And whether he be Bishop, Priest, etc. he shall
be the same to us, as Andronicus himself is. (...), Can. 10. Ap.
If any shall communicate with one out of communion, he himself shall be shut
out of communion, say the Apostolical Canons. Council. Carth. Can. 9.
If any Bishop, or Presbyter, receive to communion, those who are deservedly
cast out of the Church for their crimes, he shall be liable to like
Punishments, says the Council of Carthage. (...), Conc. Antioch. Can. 2.
And if any Bishop, Priest, or other of the Clergy, appear to communicate with
Persons out of communion, the shall also stand excommunicate himself, as one
who confounds the Canons and Order of the Church, say the Fathers in the Synod
of Antioch.

The Reason of all this is, because Christians, as I said, and as the Praeloq.
ante Can 33. Conc. Afric.
African Fathers observe, though dispersed over the most distant Places and
Countries, are but one Society; and, though multiplied into the greatest Number
of Assemblies, yet all these make but one Body. (...), Ep. Synod. Alexand. ap.
Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. p. 10.
We ought to signify to each other what is acted in any of our Churches, says
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, in his Synodical Epistle to all Churches upon
his Deposition of Arius and his Adherents, that whether one Member or Church
suffer, or rejoice; all the other Members or Churches, may suffer or rejoice
with it, or give mutual support, and confirm each others Acts and Sentences.
And this, because the Catholic Church is but one Body, and we are commanded in
the Holy Scriptures, to keep up therein the bond of Uaanimity and Peace. And
Synosius threatening the Receivers of those, whom he and his Church had put
under Excommunication, taxes them therein, as I have observed, (...).
for making a Schism in the Church, which Christ is for having kept one. The
several Orthodox and Regular Churches of Christendom, are all Members one of
another. And from that Communion, which ought to be among Members of the same
Body, what belongs to one, belongs to all; and what is broke off from one, is
broke off from all. (...). Balsam. in Can. 2. Council. Antioch.
The Canon, says Balsamon, (speaking of the 2d. Canon of the Council of
Antioch, which forbids the communicating of other Churches, with those, who
communicate not with their own Church,) says all Temples and Oratories,
wheresoever they are make but one Church. And therefore, if any Person is cast
out of the Church, and regularly shut out of the Temples, and Oratories of the
Orthodox, in one Country; he ought to be shut out of the Temples and Oratories
of all, and not to be received to communion by the Clergy of other Countries.

And like Regard, all particular Churches are bound to have, to each others
Reconciliation and Reunion of Members, as to their separation and exclusion of
them. As in binding, so also in loosing, our Lord ratifies the Acts of his
Officers and Vice gerents, in all Churches. Whatsoever you shall loose or remit
on Earth, the same shall be loosed or remitted in Heaven, Mat. 18. 18. and Jo.
20. 23. And in relaxing or remitting censures, as well as in laying of them
upon Offenders, among their respective Charges, Orthodox Bishops act in the
Person of Christ, as St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 2. 10. or as Judices vice Christi,
Judges that sit in Christ's place, as Ep. 59. p. 129. Ed. Ox.
St. Cyprian notes of them. Till their own Bishop has received them, or a Synod
has cleared them, no other Bishop must receive them to communion, says the Can.
6. Council. Antioch.
Canon of Antioch before cited. And after he has once received them into his
Communion, no other Bishops must reject them from theirs. They are then
reunited again to the Body, and are Brethren and Members; and as such, must be
admitted to the Communion of Saints, by all other Orthodox Members of the same
Body and Brotherhood, in all places.

And thus again they are Schismatics, and break that Unity of one Body, which
Christ has appointed among all Churches, who unduly receive and associate, with
any other Orthodox and Lawful Churches Schismatics, or Excommunicates. If they
would keep one with all Orthodox Churches, as they must look upon all, who are
duly united to them, as united to themselves; so must they look upon all, who
are duly separated and broke off from them, as separated and broke off from
themselves. And to do otherwise, is to break this one Communion, which is to
bind all Orthodox Christians into one Body, and to make a Schism in the
Catholic Church.

And in further care and provision, for the maintenance of this Catholic
Accord and Communion among all Churches, by the Ancient Rule of the Church, all
Orthodox Bishops and Churches, were to keep up an Intercourse by communicatory
Letters. Since the Catholic Church is but one Body, and we are commanded in
Scripture to keep up the Bond of Unanimity and Peace therein, the consequence
hereof is, that we write or signify to each other what is transacted in any of
our Churches, that all the rest, as Members, may bear their part in the same;
says Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, in his Ap. Soc. l. 1. c. 6. p. 10.
Synodical Epistle which I cited before. And Damaso Siricius hodie, qui noster
est socius: cum quo nobis totus Orbis commercio Formatarum in una Communionis
societate concordat, Optat. l. 2. p. 48. Ed. Par. Albaspin.
Siricius of Rome, and together with him, the whole World is united in one
Communion and Society with us, by the Intercourse of communicatory Letters,
says, Optatus of the Church of Africa, as it stood divided from the Donatists.

By these Letters an Account was given to other Churches, of any Bishops
Advancement, when he was Ordained Bishop of his Church: or of his own Faith, to
show that he and his Church were Orthodox, and so duly qualified for Union with
other Orthodox Churches, and fit to be owned as Members of the Body, and
admitted as Partners, in the Communion of Saints. And of their own Members, or
Ministers, their Schismatics, or Excommunicates; that among all, who should
come to them from thence, other Churches might know, whom they were to receive,
and whom they were to reject, as either of the same, or of a different Body
with themselves. And also of any other Church-Acts, or Concerns, wherein they
could either claim the ratification, or desired the concurrence, or needed the
aid, council, or support, or could bear the burdens, help the wants, or
congratulate the welfare, or prosperity of one another.

Now as to these communicatory Letters, certifying each others Members, or
Ministers, Schismatics, or Excommunicates, etc. the Catholic Rule of the
Ancient Church was, That no Strangers or Foreigners, should be admitted to the
Communion of any Church, without them. If they who came, were Clergymen; they
were to bring commendatory Letters, testifying their Orders: Or, if Laity,
pacifical and communicatory, declaring they were in Communion with their own
Churches. (...), Council. Antioch. Can. 7.
No Stranger or Forreigner, shall be received without pacifical Letters, say
the Council of Antioch. And (...), Can. 33. Ap. vid. and Can. 42. Laod.
no foreign Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, shall be received without
commendatory Letters, say the Canons of the Apostles. (...), Council. Chalced.
Can. 13.
If there come any strange, or unknown Clergy, let them not by any means, be
any where received to officiate in another City, without their own Bishops
Letters commendatory, says the Great Council of Chalcedon.

And the Granting of these Letters, was reserved to the Bishops. Without their
own Bishops Letters commendatory, is the Expression of the now cited Canon of
Chalcedon. And (...), Council. Antioch. Can. 8.
others under the Episcopal Order, are restrained from granting them: Even
those C^untry Presbyters, whom Balsamon on the Canon calls (...).
Protopapas, and who, as (...), Zon. in Can. 8. Conc. Antioch.
being in the Country, where the Bishops were not usually at hand to write
them, had more pretense of granting them, as Zonaras intimates. And who else,
but the Bishops of the several Churches, should be capable to grant these
Letters? For, Ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur -- nec Ecclesiae nomine
Literas facere debent, Cyp. Ep. 33. p. 66.
since the Church stands, and is fixed upon the Bishops, as St. Cyprian tells
the Lapsi, it is not for any without the Bishop to write Letters, as they had
done to himself, in the Name of the Church.

But more especially was the Grant thereof reserved to the Primates and
Metropolitanes, who were to write and receive Synodical Letters, and to keep up
Communion between the Churches of several Provinces. Thus St. Basil expresses
his Communion with all Churches, (...), Basil. Ep. 75. Verse. fin.
by all Churches sending communicatory Letters to him, and receiving the same
from him. And on the Deposition of Marcianus at Arles, Significa plane nobis
quis in locum Marciani Arelate fuerit substitutus, ut sciamus ad quem Fratres
nostros dirigere, et cui scribere debeamus, Cyp. Ep. 68. p. 179.
St. Cyprian desires Stephen Bishop of Rome, to signify to him who was
substituted in his place, that he might know to whom he should send the
Brethren, and direct his communicatory Letters. And this, the Synod of Antioch
gives us a Reason, of their writing to Dyonisius of Rome, and Maximus of
Alexandria, and to all other Bishops, on their placing of Domnus in the Sea of
Antioch upon the Deposition of Paulus Samosatenus: Which, say (...), Ap. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 30.
they, We therefore signify to you, that you may write your communicatory
Letters to him, and receive the like from him. So that none, who were out of
Communion with their own Bishops and Metropolitanes, could be allowed to
communicate any whereelse.

CHAP. III. Of just Grounds to break off Communion, particularly of making
impious and unlawful things, or unrighteous Usurpations and Encroachments, the
Terms of their Communion.
FRom what I have said in the Two preceding Chapters, without inquiring further
into any lower degrees and instances thereof, I think it may competently
appear, what Schism is, and who the Persons are that may justly be charged
therewith: either as breaking off from their own Church, by unjustly throwing
off, and dividing from their own Orthodox and Lawful Bishops; or, as breaking
off from other Churches, by unjustly refusing Communion to their Members, or by
unjustly granting it to their Schismatics, or Excommunicates. And more
particularly, that they are guilty of this great and dangerous Sin of Schism,
who unjustly turn Subjects, or side with Anti-Bishops set up over them, against
their own Orthodox and Lawful Bishops. Yea, though such Defectors to the
Anti-Bishops, make the greatest Numbers; or are set up by the civil State, as
the civilly established or endowed Church. And that all other Churches, and
their Members, are guilty of the same, who shall own and come in to them, and
admit them into their Communion, and keep on Communion with them.

I say they are Schismatics, who by any of these ways shall break off from
others unduly, and without just Cause.

But some things, are a just Ground to breako ff, either Dependence and
Subjection to our own Bishops, or Communion with other Churches: Some things,
as I come next to show, not being to be born, nor otqers to be parted with, for
the Love of external Peace and Union. And when these can be justly and duly
alleged for standing off, it is always justifiable, and commonly necessary, to
break Communions. However, to break off Resorting to their Assemblies; though
at the same, we should still allow their Members to resort to ours. For this
later, many times may be allowed longer, where it can be done without scandal;
especially, before the Church has proceeded judicially to censure and
excommunicate the offending Parties: as it was allowed to the Romanists, and
accepted by them, for several years in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign;
and also to the Dissenters, in later days. And if there are such Pleas for
breaking off, either from any Persons, or Churches, there is no Breach of
Gospel-Union, nor Blame of Schism, in such Cases. And of these, I shall now,

2. In the Second Place give some Account, That when we see any Persons or
People, breaking off, either Subjection to their former Bishops, or
Ecclesiastical Concord and Fraternal Communion with other Churches, we may
understand where Schism is, and where it is not to be charged; and be more
clear in several Matters of Importance in this Argument.

Now such just Ground there is for the Members of any Church to break off
Communion, either with their own Bishops, or with other Churches, when they can
allege either some things against the Terms of their Communion, or others
against their Persons and Doctrines. It Is a just Ground to break off from them,
if they make impious and unlawful things, or unrighteous Usurpations and
Encroachments, the Terms of their Communion. Or, though nothing of this can be
alleged against the Terms, if Heresy can be justly objected to their Persons.

These, I say, are just Grounds, and give a Liberty to break off from the
Communion of any Persons or Churches. And I choose rather to express it, by this
giving them a Liberty; than by imposing on them a conscionable Necessity, to do
so. For some Grounds, give a Liberty to break Communion, either with their own
Bishops, or with other Churches, which do not in conscience necessitate Men; as
Unrighteous Usurpations and Encroachments, when they are made the condition
thereof. For though Men need not submit to them; yet, if they are pleased to do
it, they ordinarily may do so without Sin, and suffer such Encroachments in
then own Wrong.

Besides, the Duty of uniting with any particular Persons, or Churches, is
bound upon us by certain Things, or Qualifications, in those Persons or
Churches, which oblige us to their Communion and Dependence. And, as the Being
and Presence of those Things and Qualifications, binds it on; so does the
Failure thereof, unbind the same, and set Men at Liberty to go off from them.

I say to go off from them, not to go off from all, and hold on communicating
with none. For when they are no longer bound to communicate, with such
particular Bishops, or Churches: yet are they still bound thereto with others,
or under a general obligation to Communion. I mean, when they have opportunity
for the same, which is presupposed to all obligation of actual Exercise and
Discharge thereof, by this, like as it is by all other Affirmative Duties. The
Communion of Saints professed in the Creed, obliges us to communicate as we
have opportunity, in all Christian Offices, with all true Christians, who still
retain those Qualifications I spoke of. Though it leaves us free to stand off
from any others, who have fallen from them; and ties us up no further to
communicate with them.

1. First, It Is always a just Ground to break off from them, if they make
impious or unlawful things, the Terms or Conditions, of their own Members, or
of others, keeping on communion with them. I do not say it is the only Ground,
having mentioned others, but it is always a just Ground thereof: And thus it is,

1. When they put impi^us, or unlawful things, into their saecred Offices, and
mix sinful Matters in that Body of Prayers, or Administration of Sacraments,
which they call others to communicate with. What Allowances may be made herein,
for a generally corrupt state of the Church; and how far, in necessity and want
of others, good People may be at liberty still to resort to such, I shall
consider afterward. But such mixture of Sin and Profanation, in what they are
called to communicate in, I think sets People loose, and leaves them no longer
bound to them.

For the Communion, which all Christians are obliged to seek in the Catholic
Church, is the Communion of Saints. This Saintship, though it be not always in
Reality, must at least be always in Profession. The Persons, must all be
professed Saints, whom we communicate with. And the Things and Offices, must all
be of professed Saintship, which we are called to communicate in. And such,
those public Offices are not, that have any gross Sins or Wickednesses, which
are all so many Prophanations, for the matter of them.

This Saintship, wherein this Communion is to be held, lies more especially in
Faith, and Worship. And where they fail in either of these, we are not bound to
communion with any Assemblies. It is so plainly, where they fail in point of
Faith. For Heresy, which is a corruption of Faith, will set us loose, as I
shall show Chap. 4.
hereafter, from the communion of any Persons, or Churches. And Corruptions of
Worship, are to the full, not only as offensive, but as openly dishonorable to
God, who is not more aspersed or provoked by a false belief and confession,
than by a corrupt and wicked worship: So that among those, whose business in
Religious Assemblies, is to see God honored, and to seek that he may be
appeased, any gross Sins made the matter of Worship, which are a corruption of
Worship, will do the same. They not only set God's faithful People free, to
stand off from such corrupt Offices; but oblige his faithful Pastors, to
stand^up for him, and to minister or afford better, out of a just sense of the
Peoples needs, and jealousy for God's Honor, as I Chap. 4. Par. 1.
showed before.

Besides, our chief Obligations to unite our selves to any Religious
Assemblies, is, as they are Assemblies for Worship. We, as so many live Stones,
are joined together and built into a Spiritual House, to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices, as St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Yea, and as they are purely for
Worship; not partly for worshipping, and partly for profaning God: there being
Obligation enough on the Servants of God, to meet together to see him publicly
honored, but none to see him publicly profaned. And therefore we are not
obliged to make part of such Assemblies, as put up sinful Matters, and gross
Wickedness, in their public Offices. For Worship is a Profession of Honor and
Reverence. But Sin and Wickedness, are Professions of Irreverence and Reproach;
and so are not Worship, but Profanations. So that the Obligations incumbent on
God's Servants, to meet there, where Offerings are to be made that are for his
Honor, yea, only such as are for his Honor; will not bind them, but, if they
can serve him any where else, rather forbid them to meet there, where these
Prophanations are.

Thus is the Matter of Religious Meetings, or the Worship and Service there
performed, the chief thing that carries the Obligation to them. I say the
chief, but not the only thing. For we are Members of a Church, as well as
Professors of a Religion; and as Christians, are incorporated into a Society,
as well as instructed in a Doctrine. And both these bind us to Religious
Assemblies. For, as good Christians, we ought to meet there, to show our
Adherence to the Church as a Society, or our Union to it as Members; as well as
to put up Prayers to God by JESUS CHRIST, or to pay our Religious Worship and
Service. That is, our Christianity obliges us to meet together, both to present
our Religious Oblations and Acknowledgments to Almighty God, and to do it in
dependence on our Lawful Pastors, or in the Unity of the Church.

But this Obligation to these Meetings, as thereby keeping Union with the
Church as a Society, is but a Secondary Obligation: and that of paying truly
Christian and acceptable Worship, is the first and chief therein. For the end,
why Christians were formed into a Society; was to keep up the Profession and
Payment of that Holy Doctrine and Worship, which are necessary or peculiar to
them, as they are a Sect or Religion. And the Members are bound to stick to it,
whilst it stands upon this Doctrine and Worship, not when it starts off from
it. It is the Religion, which recommends the Church. And we are to choose our
Church or Assemblies, for the Religions; not our Religion, for the Churches
sake. So that their falling off from pure Christian Worship and Doctrine, which
are necessary to the Religion, to its honoring God, or our acceptance by it;
loosens the bond of Union to any Assemblies, and sets Men free to join with any
others regularly empowered, who stick faster to them.

Agreeably to all this, we find Faith and Worship spoke of, as the Great
Ligaments, that are to bind and unite us to any Church. Of the Ligament of
Faith, I shall treat in its proper place. And as for Worship, which lies partly
in confessions of Faith, but more especially in Prayers and Sacraments, it is a
Ligament too, and Prayers and Sacraments are set off, as compacting us into one
Body, or cementing us into one spiritual House. Thus, of Prayers, St. Peter
says we are set together as one spiritual House, to send up spiritual
Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 5. And of the Sacraments, it is declared, that we are all
baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and that we are one Body, by partaking
all of one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. and by having been made all to drink into one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. therein referring to the one Loaf, whereof we all eat,
and to the one Cup whereof we all drink, in the Holy Eucharist.

Now as that Faith, which is to unite and bind us to any Churches or
Assemblies, is not any Erroneous or Heretical Tenets, as I shall show anon, but
the Orthodo^c and Right Faith: So is that Worship, which is to do the same, not
any sinful and profane, but a truly Christian and Holy Worship; or such an
Oblation of Prayers, and Administration of Sacraments, as Christ has instituted
and appointed, and will not reject and punish, but accept of. It must be a
Worship, not only in Spirit, opposite to the way of carnal Sacrifices, and the
Numerousness of Jewish Ceremonies and external Rites: but also in Truth,
opposite to all false, superstitious, or otherwise sinful ways, which really
are not Worship but Profaneness. For in Christianity, the true Worshippers, as
our Lord says, are they who worship God in Spirit and in Truth, Jo. 4. 23, 24.
Yea, as he adds, the Father seeks such to worship him, v. 23. And if he
seeks such Worshippers, his devoted Servants, who have no other aim, but to
find him, and to be found by him, must seek out such Assemblies, where such
Worship is paid to him. And thus also St. Peter says of those Sacrifices, the
joynt-communion wherein is to bind us together into one spiritual House; that
they must be such spiritual Sacrifices, as are acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

So that the Unity in Worship and Prayers, which we are bound to keep with
other Christians, or Assemblies; is only whilst they meet to put up Holy
Prayers: coming in among them as live stories, to make part of their spiritual
House, whilst they offer up such Sacrifices, as may be fit to find acceptance,
as we heard from St. Peter. And thus the Peace, which St. Paul orders us to
pursue, is with those, who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart; not with
those, who, as the Gnostics were like enough to do, profaned him by a sinful
Worship, or impure Petitions, 2 Timothy 2. 22. And the bond of external Peace, is
where we may lawfully keep the unity of the spirit; which is not to be kept in
sinful Offices, but only in pure ones, Ephesians. 4. 3. or where, in following after
the things which make for Peace, we may withal follow such things, wherewith we
may edify, not corrupt and ensnare one another, Romans 14. 19.

Particularly, as to the Pactors, who are the Heads of those Assemblies, one
chief Character of theirs as they are set over us, and chief ground of our
Dependence and Obligations to keep under them, is as they are Ministers of
Prayers. And that, as they minister such Prayers, as are fit to serve the
necessary ends and purposes of all Prayer; that is, to worship and honor God,
and to benefit us, or to bring down Blessings from him. And if we, who must
seek out for Prayers, are tied to them as Ministers of holy and acceptable
Prayers: that Obligation toward them ceases, when, instead of administering
such, they fall to minister profane ones.

And thus there is a just Ground to break off, or a Liberty of seperating from
Assemblies even of Rightful Pastors, for pure Christian Administrations. Not
for Purity from mere Defects, or for Administrations more edifying; which is
the Pretense of our Anti-Episcopal Dissenters: but for Purity from Sin and
wicked Mixtures. That is, that they may have a Worship and Religious Service,
without mixture, either of Idolatry, or of Immorality. That they may meet with
nothing to reproach, or dishonor God therein; or to disturb, and wound a pious
Affection, when they should be most helped and encouraged in exercise thereof,
being come to serve and worship him. When they are thus barred out, by any
wicked mixtures; unless necessity, and want of better drive them to make shift
therewith, they are no longer tied to resort to such Offices, but are free to
seek out for better at the hands of any other Regular and Authorized Pastors,
and ought to communicate in them if they can have them. For sinful Prayers, are
a sinful Sacrifice; as the Oblations of blemished, of blind, and lame, and sick
for Sacrifice, were among the Jews, Mal. 1. 8. and Levit. 22. 19, 20, 22. and
Deuteronomy. 15. 21. And whatever Toleration it might meet with, in want of better;
yet, if any man has in his Flock a Male, or one fit to make a legal and
perfect Offering, cursed be he, says the Prophet, that voweth, and sacrifices
to the Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 13, 14.

But the Ground of this breaking off, is higher still, if,

2. They do not only put impious, and unlawful things, into their sacred
Offices or Confessions; but admit none to communion, in any of the good parts,
unless they particularly concur in these corrupt ones too. The former, sets men
loose, that they lawfully may, and, where they have opportunities of better,
ought to break off from them: But this, drives and necessitates them, that they
must do so, and can not, for the supply of any Necessities, stay to associate
and assemble with them. And thus it is, when any Bishops will admit no Members,
or when any Churches will admit no other Churches to communicate with them,
unless they will agree, to believe, or profess some false Doctrine; or partake
and go along with them, in those particular and unlawful Matters or evil
Worship, wherewithal they have clogged and corrupted their Communion.

Now when this is the Case, nothing can legitimate Communion with such Bishops
or Churches. For though it is the duty, and ought to be the desire and care of
all good Christians, to keep up the external Unity of the Church, both under
their own Bishops, and with other Churches: Yet must not this ever carry them,
to unite, or to go along with them, in ill things? To be one with them in these
Matters, is to partake with them in their Sins; which is not the Unity and
Communion of Saints or Christians, but of the ungodly, or of evildoers. In
such Points, the more united any Society is, the worse it is. Such is the Union
of all Infidel Churches, who unite in utterly denying, and opposing the
Christian Faith. And of Heretics, who incorporate under their seducing Heads,
to undermine or pervert it. Yea, even the infernal Spirits, are united
Polities, without which Satan's Kingdom could not stand, as our Savior Mat. 12^
26.
says; being associated, and knit together to despite God and all that bears
his Image. But all this Union or Agreement of Men, in damnable Errors or
Wickedness, is only combining against God and their own Souls. And our Blessed
Lord came not to bind up, but to break such Combinations, which the World then
was full of. I came not to send Peace, but rather Divisi^n, says he, that is,
to call People to break off from Error and Wickedness, and to divide from the
Adherers to ungodly ways, Luke 12. 51. So that the lamentableness of Men's not
going all one way, is true here, where the Generality go the right way. But
when they are going wrong, in ways of Guilt and Destruction, to unite in Sin
and Misery is a deplorable thing, and there it is best, when the most divide and
stand off from them.

Nor may they be wanting to their duty in some Points, to keep on united to
them in others. They must not purchase Unity, by sinful Omissions; or buy
peace, with the loss of innocence. And therefore, as I observed, the watchmen
must not be wanting in giving necessary warnings, nor Faithful Ministers let
fall their Ministrations, in the foresaid Cases, on pretense of preserving
unity, or preventing Schism in the Church.

2. Secondly, it is another just ground to break off from them, if they make
unrighteous usurpations and encroachments, the Terms and condition of their
Communion. Both Bishops, and Churches, may turn Tyrannical and Arrogant
Usurpers upon their Brethrens Liberties, not admitting their own Members to
their Communion, without acknowledging and submitting to their unjustly and
illegally assumed powers, nor other Churches, unless they will give up their
own rights and freedoms, and become their Subjects. And when they will allow
Communion to none, unless they are content to purchase it at such rates; good
Christians may pass them by, and unite themselves to other Churches, where they
will be more justly and fairly dealt with. The Communion of Christians, is a
Commuuion of Brethren, upon Brotherly terms; not of Captives, who must submit
to any terms, or bear what hardships and encroachments are put upon them by
their Conquerors. They are not bound to purchase unity, by enslaving of
themselves; or any brethrens communion, by receiving their yoke, and giving up
their own rights and liberties, as the Church of Rome demands all other
Churches, both of the East and West, should do to purchase hers. And thus St.
Paul declares he would not give up their liberties, when false brethren turned
invaders thereof, viz. the Judaizers in their pressing the Circumcision of
Titus, to whom he gave place by subjection, no not for an hour, when they
sought to bring them into bondage. Gal. 2. 4, 5.

CHAP. IV. Heresy a just Ground to break off Communion.
THe last ground which I shall mention, of breaking off, or of being set loose
from the Communion, either of Bishops, or Churches, is, though none of the
foresaid obstacles can be pleaded against the Terms of their Communion, if yet,

3. Thirdly, Heresy can be justly objected to their persons, and Doctrines.
Church Members, are not bound to keep dependant on the persons of their
Bishops; nor one Church, to keep Communion with other Churches, if once they
defect from the true worship and Doctrine of Christ. This worship and Doctrine,
are the Ground and Foundation, of Christian Society and unity. The Church, is a
Body of Men, Associated for them. And must be one Society, by keeping united
under their Bishops, or Associated with other Churches in them. They must keep
one, in standing together upon this bottom, not in going off, or departing from
it.

For clearing these matters, it is to be observed, that our Saviors first end
in coming into the world, was to publish a Religion. I am come a light into the
world, says he of himself, Jo. 12. 46. I must Mat. 9. 13.
Preach the Gospel, for therefore am I sent. Luke 4. 43. On this account, he
calls himself the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Joh. 14. 6. And tells Pilate,
that for this end was he born, and for this cause came he into the world, that
he should bear witness unto the Truth. Joh. 18. 37. And this Truth or Religion,
lies in his Doctrine of worship, faith, and Practice: Or, in his Teaching all
his Disciples, what way they are to worship God; what they are to believe
concerning him, or other things which concern their Eternal Salvation; and what
they are to do for him.

Now this Doctrine, was like to be most advantageously professed, and this
Worship to be best paid, if it were not left to single persons, or to scattered
Families, to do it separately by themselves: But had its several professors
incorporated, into one Regular society and united body, for the joint
profession and performance thereof. Such Regular society, would hold it out, by
more orderly and effectual Ministration; and keep men to it, by the Authority
of Discipline; and be a common help and spur, to excite and aid each other
mutually, and carry them on; and a cover and shelter, to back and embolden them
therein. A Regular Society, or Church incorporated for the Profession thereof,
St. Paul 1 Timothy 3. 15.
says is a Pillar, and Ground, or (...).
Stay, to publish and support it. Accordingly, when Religion was left to be
born out by smaller societies, and sometime even by single families, as in the
Patriarchical Age; we see it was sometimes almost lost, and always made a very
small progress. But when a whole Nation was incorporated into one Church, for
the profession and payment of it, as it was among the Jews; it spread further
in power and influence, and gained more proselytes. And lastly, when all
Nations, as fast as they turned Christians, were embodyed in one society for
the same intent, as Mat. 5. 15.
a Light set upon a candl^stick, or as a v. 14.
City placed on a hill, it desplayed its force far and near, and strengthened
incomparably more hearts in it, and drew more eyes after it.

And therefore our Lord intended and ordered in the next place, that all, who
embraced this Religion, should incorporate or unite together in one Church or
Society, for the Profession of it. Accordingly, he has made baptism, wherein
every professor takes upon him this Religion, to incorporate him, or enter him
a member of this Church: Baptism, as St. 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Paul notes, uniteing us all in one body; and Gal. 3. 27, 28.
as many, as are baptized into Christ, are all one in Christ Jesus. And
requires of every professor of this Religion, that he Keep on professing it in
the unity of this Church. And that all of his Religion, pay this worship, and
profess this Doctrine, not separately by themselves; but socially, in joint
Communion with others. So that all, who come to embrace the Christian Religion,
must perform the worship and profession thereof in Christian Society, or in the
Unity and Communion of Christ's Holy Catholic Church.

But we are first to be all of this Religion, and then to profess and perform
it in the Unity and Communion of this Church. The Doctrine and Worship, I say,
which makes us Christians, are the Foundation of that Society and Unity, which
is to be upheld in the Christian Church. Thus, on Peter's Confession, our Lord
declares he would build his Church, Mat. 16. 16, 18. And the Uniteing of
Christians into one Temple. St. Paul says, is by their being built on the
Apostles and prophets, i. e. On their Doctrines, about worship, faith, and
practice. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. And when our Savior prays so earnestly ly for the
Unity of his Church, at what time he was about to leave it, he limits it to
this, that they may be kept one (...).
in Gods Name. Joh. 17. 11: and calls the Gathering or Uniteing together of
Christians in Congregations, wherein he will be in the midst of them, their
gathering together in his Name, Mat. 18. 20. In his Name, that is, in his
Doctrine, or Profession of Faith and Worship; Name, with relation to Masters
and Teachers, being usually put for Doctrine. As, to bear my Name before the
Gentiles, is to bear my Doctrine, Act. 9. 16. and teaching in Christ's Name, is
filling Jerusalem with his Doctrine, Act. 5. 28. and ver. 41. And the Priests
and Rulers forbidding the Apostles to speak to any Man in his Name, is
forbidding them any more to preach his Doctrine, Act. 4. 17. 18. And so, when
our Lord prays to his Father, that his Disciples may be kept in his Name, to
the end that they may be one; he notes the necessity of continuing in his
Doctrine, to their keeping his so much desired Union, Jo. 11. 17. Accordingly
he adds, that they may be one, as we are, viz. he and the Father. For their
Unity, is by this way among others, viz. by keeping to the same Word or
Doctrine, he teaching them what he had from his Father, v. 8. And this is to be
kept one after his departure, as they had been kept one before, as he continues
to pray, v. 12. For before, they had been united in his Word, which he gave
unto them, and which they had received, and kept, v. 6. 8.

Thus also St. Paul tells us, that the giving of Pastors and Teachers, to
Ed^fie or compact us all into one Body of Christ, is for edifying us in the
Unity of the Faith, and of the (...).
Acknowledgment of the Son of God, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And that the Church is
to be one Body, in holding to the o^e Faith, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. And this has been
the current sense of the Christian Church. (...), Clem. Alexand. Strom. l. 2.
p. 384. Ed. Col. 88.
The Virtue, which keeps the Church together, is Faith, says the Pastor
Hermes, as he is cited by Clemens of Alexandria. -- (...), Conc. Genesis Sext.
Act. 18. p. 271. Tom. 5. Conc. Ed. Bin.
We are constituted one Body of Christ, and Members ^re of another, by having
the same Faith with him, and with one another, say the Fathers, in the sixth
general Council. Caput nostrum, quod Christus est, ad hoc sua esse Membra nos
voluit, ut per compagem Charitatis and Fidei, unum nos in se Corpus efficeret,
Greg. Mag. Ep. l. 7. Ep. 110.
By the joining of Charity, and Faith, Christ binds us up ^^to one Body in
himself, says St. Gregory the Great. Corpus sumus, de Conscientia Religionis,
etc. Tert. Apol. c. 39.
And we Christians are a Society, says Tertullian, incorporated on a Belief of
the same Religion: Or, as he elsewhere expresses it, Universas [Ecclesias]
quaeillis [Apostolicis] de Societate Sacramenti confederantur, Adv. Mar^. l. 4.
c. 5.
confederated in the F^llowship of the same Profession.

As to Points of Faith, I understand this more particularly of those Points,
which are more important, and called Fundamental, and are all contained in the
Apostles Creed. These, are the necessary and grand Points of the Christian
Religion, and the Belief thereof makes us Christians; and accordingly they are
all professed in our Baptism, when we take this Profession upon us. And this
Faith, is one necessary Bond of Union, to keep Christians together in one
Society. Their first care must be, to keep to this Faith, which makes them
Christians; and in this Belief of the Christian Religion, their next care must
be, to keep to any particular Society or Christian Church. Other Points of
Belief, which are more remote from the Foundation, do not so generally
influence Men's Salvation, nor so necessarily break off Communion, but that Men
may hold on joining in the same Offices, notwithstanding their embracing of
some erroneous Opinions. And under such Errors, Peace, and one Communion, were
pressed by the Apostles, I conceive, on the Churches in their Days. But these
being more necessary, and essential to the Religion; are more necessary also to
the keeping of Society and Communion, which is to be kept up among those, who
are united and agreed in this Religion.

And since all Church Association, is to be on this bottom, of Chrian Worship
and Doctrine; good Christians Unity or Dependence on their Bishops, or one
Churches Communion with other Churches, is only to be, whilst the Bishops and
Churches themselves keep united to Christian Worship and Doctrines. It Is to
their Bishops, as to their Spiritual Teachers, on whom they are to attend as
obedient Disciples; and so, whilst they instruct and train them up in God's
Truths, not in ungodly Errors. It Is to them, as they are Christ's Ministers; and
so, whilst they minister his Word, not their own. As joints, Ephesians. 4. 16. and
Col. 2. 19. And joints, are to compact or pin the Materials or Members
together, whilst they rest upon the Ground and Bottom, viz. the Doctrine; not
when they start aside, and go off from it. And of an Heretic, St. Paul says,
that (...). Tit. 3. 10. 11.
he is turned aside, or like a cornerstone started out of the Building; So
that the other Parts, are no longer to be knit together into one spiritual
House, by him.

When People come at first to be Church Members, and to unite under their
Bishops, the Doctrine and Worship is first laid, as the Groundwork, for both
the Head and Members to stand upon. Thus we see it was, in the first Formation
of Churches, and setting up external Union and Dependence, under Bishops. The
Christian Doctrine, was first taught, and received, which was the Foundation
laid. I have laid the Foundation, says St. Paul, when he had planted the Faith,
1 Cor. 3. 10. And on the Foundation so laid, a Church was raised, and Bishops
chosen out of the First Fruits of the Converts, as St. Clemens Clem. To. ^ Ep.
ad Cor. p. 89. Ed. Ox.
says, and set over those that believed. And ever since, before Men receive
Baptism to make them Church Members, there is a Profession made of the Doctrine
of the Apostles, both in Faith, or the Articles of the Creed, and in Practice
or the Commandments.

So that it is Bishops heading of this Doctrine and Worship, which bring Members
to incorporate, and unite under them. And as their heading it, brings People to
them; so their rejecting or defecting from it, loosens the Tie, and sets them
free to go off again. Their Fellowship with the Apostles, and our Obligation to
hold Fellowship with them, is tied to their keeping the Apostolical
Declarations, of what they had heard, or seen, 1 Jo. 1. 3. And in the Account
of the Communion of the Primitive Christians, the Fellowship of the Apostles,
and of the Bishops their Sucessors, is linked to the Apostles Doctrine, and to
their breaking of Bread and Prayers, Act. 2. 42.

If a Bishop then defects from Christian Doctrine and Worship, or falls into
Heresy, or Unchristian Worship; that is a Discharge of his People from their
spiritual Dependence and Relation, and supersedes the Obligation of keeping
Unity under him. If we, the Apostles, or even an Angel from Heaven, should
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have already preached unto
you, (...).
let him be A^athema, or Accursed: that is, have no more communion and commerce
with him, than with those, whom the Synagogue, or Church has cut off; Anathema
being the Word for one excommunicate, both in the To. 9. 3.
Scripture, and in the constant Language of the Church, Gal. 1, 8, 9. And this
he says, as St. Chrysostom ^n loc.
notes, not only against those, who subvert the whole Gospel, but against those
who go a little beside it, or overthrow any Parts thereof. And if a Church
defects from the same, it sets other Churches loose in like manner from the
Obligation, of holding on communion with them. Unity of Faith, binds them
mutually to observe the Rules of fraternal communion; and defection in Faith,
gives discharge from them. Accordingly, this the Clergy of Rome put the
granting or denying communion upon, in their Answer to Marcion: Telling him,
they could not receive him to communion in their Church, (...).
without his Fathers consent and allowance, (...), Epiphan. Haer. 42. Sect. 1.
because his Father the Bishop of Sinope, who had cast him out of communion,
was of the same Faith with themselves.

And this discharge such defection gives, upon the evidence of the Fact it
self, before synodical Cognizance, or judicial sentence and declaration thereof.

As for other Crimes, which concern only the Persons or conversation of
Bishops, not their Doctrine or Ministrations; they give no discharge, to the
Clergy or People who are subject to them, before the offending Bishops are
regularly deprived for the same, by judicial sentence. And if before synodical
sentence, any Clergy or People, break off from their Bishops; or Bishops, from
their Metropolitanes; or Metropolitanes, from their Patriarks, on pretense of
them; they make a Schism, and are censured by the Church for so doing. If any
Presbyter, or Deacon, Can. 13, 14, 15. Council. Constan. primi and secundi Dict.
etc.
says the Council of Constantinople, on pretense of Crimes, (meaning (...). Not
for those who do it, (...), Can. 15.
such personal Crimes,) shall dare to withdraw themselves from (...) Communion
of their Bishop; or Bishops, from their Metropolitan; or Presbyters, Bishops,
or Metropolitanes from their Patriack, (...)
. before Synodical cognizance and perfect condemnation past upon him: He makes
a Schism, and shall incu^ the penalty of deposition.

But as for Heresy, or any damnable corruptions of Doctrine or Ministrations,
they give this discharge, as soon as the Bishop, etc. is notoriously guilty of
them, before any Synod has sat, or Sentence has passed upon him. Thus, St.
Jerome expounds that Passage, an Heretic is (...).
condemned of himself, Tit. 3. 10. 11. Propterea vero a semetipso dicitur esse
damnatus, quia Fornicator, Adulter, Homicida, and caetera vitia, per Sacerdotes
Ecolesiae propelluntur. Haeretici autem in semetipsus sententiam serunt, suo
arbitrio de Ecclesia recedentes, quae recessio propriae conscientiae videtur
esse damnatio, Hieron. Comment. in loc
Which, says he, is therefore said of Heretics, because when other Offenders,
as Fornicators, Adulterers, Murderers, are not cast out, but by the Sentence of
the Bishop or Church censures: Heretics, on the other hand, pass sentence upon
themselves, on their own accord receding from the Church, which recession seems
to be a condemnation of their own conscience. (...), Council. Chalced. Part 2.
Act. 1. p. 191. Tom. 3. Ed. Bin.
As many as attempt any t^in^ against those Constitutions of the Fathers, which
concern the Faith, thereby without more ado incur, and bring on themselves the
Censures contained in the Canons, says Thalassius Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, in the Great Council of Chalcedon. When an Offense is only against
the Canons of the Church, (...), Council. Constable. sub Agapeto and Menna, Act. 1.
p. 10. Tom. 4. Conc. Ed. Bin.
the Desence of the Divine Canons we know is proper only to the Bishops; but
the Desence of the right Faith, belongs not only to them, but to every Orthodox
Christian, say the Holy Monks against the Patriark Anthimus, fallen to the
Heresy of the Eutychians, in their Lib^l in the Council of Constantinople
under Agapetus and Mennas. Quasi revera, etiam si nullus ante damnaffet, non
habuerit Orthodoxae and Apostolicae Communionis, cujus Praevaricator extitit
and Desertor, participatione excludi. Sicut etiam quilibet, qui fuerit ante
Catholicus, cuicunque haeresi communicans, merito judicatur a nostra societate
removendus, Gelasius Ep. 1. ad Euphemianuns, ap. sin Tom. 3. Conc p. 620.
Though no Synod has before condemned him; yet he that has prevaricated and
deserted the Orthodox Faith, as Acacius he says had done by communicating with
the Eutychians, has enough for which he ought to be denied communion. As also
any one, who before being a Catholic, shall fall to communicate with any
Heresy, is justly thought to be thereby removed from our Society, says Pope
Gelasius. Though, in case of other Crimes, they may not do it before Synodical
Sentence; yet, in case of any (...), lb. Can. 15.
Heresy condemned by the Holy Synods, or Fathers, they may depart and separate
from the Communion of their Prelate, say the foresaid Canons of Constantinople,
when once he comes to preach it publicly, and to teach it barefaced in the
Church. And then to withdraw from him before Synodical cognizance, is not to
incur the foresaid Canonical pains, but to show themselves worthy of that
Honor, which belongs to the Orthodox. It Is not to condemn Bishops, say they,
but Pseudo-Bishops their Teachers; not to rend the Unity of (...) Church by a
Schism, but to study to free it from Schisms and Divisions. So that in these
Cases, when the Defection of Doctrine and Worship is apparent, and plain to
their eyes and ears; the People and Clergy may judge for themselves, and
withdraw from the Communion of such Heretical or Erroneous Pastors. And
accordingly, the Apostolical Rules to the People are, without staying for the
declaration of a Synod, if any turn a bringer of false Doctrine, contrary to
what they had delivered, without more ado to hold him as Anathema, or as one
Excommunicate, Gal. 1. 8. 9. and not to bid him God speed, 2 Jo. 10. 11.

By such defections then from Christian Doctrine, or Worship, the Ligaments of
Union are broken toward the Governors of any Church, or between one Church
and another; and there accrues a Liberty, without any Breach of the Unity of
the Church,

1. For People to break off from their own Local Guides, or for People and
Clergy to break off from their own Bishops. Though they were Apostles, or Angels
from Heaven, they are to be held then as Anathema, as St. Paul says, that is,
not as Heads of Unity and Church Communion, but as Excommunicate Men. If they
cause Divisions from the Doctrines we have learned, he bids the Church mark and
avoid them, To. 16. 17. The Peoples duty of adhering to, and following them, is
no longer, than they continue to be followers of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. etc. 4.
18. But if they break off from his Truth, and turn False Prophets, however they
come dressed up in soft Pretenses or in Sheeps-cloathing, he tells us to beware
of them, and to fly them as Wolves, Mat. 7. 15, 16. to (...).
look to them, and avoid them, as St. Paul cautions against the Judaizers,
Phil. 3. 2. If they become bringers of False Doctrine, bid them not God speed,
nor receive them into your Houses, says St. John, 2 Jo. 10. 11. Thus when John
of Jerusalem fell to err in Point of Faith, Epiphanius writ to the Monks, as
St. Jerome Cunctis Monachis ab eodem Epiphanio Scripta venerunt, ut absque
satisfactione fidei nullus ei temere communicaret, Hieron. Ep. 61. ad
Pa^machium adv. Errores Johannis Hierosol. verse. fin.
says, that till he gave satisfaction in Point of Faith, none of them should
communicate with him. And Ierom himself asks him, Alicubine dictum, aut tibi
alicubi mandatum. est, quod fine satisfactione fidei communionem tuam
subiremus? Ib.
where it is required that they should come under his Communion, before such
satisfaction were given. And tells him, it is because Quod tibi non
communicemus, fidei est, Ib.
of their difference in point of Faith, that they may not communicate with him.
Plebs obsequens Praeceptis Domini, and Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito
separate se debet, Cyp. Ep. 67. p. 171.
A People, says St. Cyprian, that would fear God, and obey his Precepts, ought
to separate it self from an erring Prelate. Such Persons, if Metropolitanes,
are no longer to have neither any Authority over the Bishops of their
Provinces, nor the Communion of the Church, as is decreed in the General Can. 1.
Council of Ephesus.

They are to leave their Guides, when they fall to misgu^^ them; and to stand
off from their Persons, lest they be corrupted with their Tenets. And this is
no more, than is needful for them, even in point of Caution; being their
keeping out of the way of Temptations, which our Lord directs us to, for a
general Guard of all Virtues. And standing off thus from Heretical Leaders,
they will approve themselves in the midst of Heresies, by being steadfast in the
Truth, 1. Cor. 11. 19. They will not be tossed too and fro, by the slight of
subtle men, with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. nor carried about, when
their Teachers fall off, with diverse, and strange Doctrines: Strange, as
opposite to the firsttaught Truths; and diverse, as contrary to their own former
Principles, Heb. 13. 19.

2. For the Bishops and Pastors of one Church, to break off from the Bishops
and Pastors of another. A Bishop, must hold fast the faithful Word, when others
fly from it, Tit. 1. 9. An Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, he
is bid to reject from his Communion, Tit. 3. 10. And when any teach otherwise,
contrary to wholesome Words, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness,
from such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5. If any teach corrupt, and contrary
Tenets, it is not fit to mingle and have Communion with them, In Ep. 4. Hom. 11.
says St. Chrysostom. (...), Can. Ap. 33.
If any foreign Bishop, or other Clergy, come, and bring along with them
commendatory Letters testifying their Orders, let them not be received, or
admitted to Communion, unless, on Examination, they be found Preachers of
Piety, and teach sound and pure Doctrine, say the Apostolical Canons.

And this Liberty for both these, is not only in defections from necessary
Doctrines of Faith; but also, (especially in general and professed ones) in
defections from grand and necessary Doctrines of Practice. For we are tied to
them, not only as to Ministers of Prayers, who are to lead and go before us in
holy and acceptable Devotions, which sets us free to leave them, as I showed
Chapter 3.
before, when they corrupt their Liturgies. But also as to Teachers, who are to
give us true Information of all that is necessary in the way to Heaven, or to
save our souls: they being set over us, and we being ordered to keep subject to
them, as Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
Pastors, who are to Jer. 3. 15.
feed us with understanding; and as our Heb. 13 7, 17.
Guides and Ephesians. 4. 11.
Teachers, as the Scripture says. Now to be taught aright, in necessary points
of Practice, as well as of mere Belief, or Fundamentals of Faith, is necessary
to these purposes: For Obedience, is no less necessary in Religion, than Faith
is; and a defection from the true necessary Doctrine of either, is most
dishonorable to God, and destructive to men's souls. And if teaching us aright,
in all grand and necessary Points of both these, ties us to them; will not
their turning False Teachers, or falling, openly, and incureably, to misteach
us in either, set us free to go off from them?

Accordingly, St. Paul, treating of Servants Duties, whose Honor, Obedience,
and Fidelity toward their Masters, is necessary to prevent the Christian
Doctrines being evil spoken of, bids Timothy, if any teach otherwise, and
consent not to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, from such to
withdraw himself, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2, 3, 5. And thus also, when he gives order to
turn away from the false Teachers of the later days, the defection of those
false Teachers, he sets out more particularly, in Practical Points: Such as
were a denial of the power of Godliness, which lies in practice; though still,
as he says, they retained the form thereof, which lies more in speculative
Professions and Opinions. Viz. by being Lovers of themselves, or of Pleasure
more than of God, so throwing off the Doctrine, of taking up and bearing
Crosses; and being disobedient to Parents, Natural or Civil, and Traitors to
Government, so discarding all sober Principles of Civil Obedience; and being
Truce Breakers, finding out ways to evade, or fly off from the most solemn
Promises, and Oaths; and the like, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

I speak not of such practical Errors, when got only among the People, by means
of some false Teachers privily creeping in, and dispersing the same; but not
among the lawful Pastors themselves: as seems to have been the Case at Corinth,
where some Members had imbibed Gnostick Infusions, and thought it lawful to 1
Cor. 8. and cap. 10.
communicate in Idol-fcasts. For here, the sound may attend on the
Ministrations of their Orthodox Pastors, though they be to meet some unsound
Members there, or to worship in mixed Communions. Their Brethrens Errors will
not drive them to withdraw themselves, but they may leave them to be remedyed,
or removed by Church Censures.

Nor of such others, as have tainted the Pastors themselves, if it is not clear
of the Points objected to them, that they are Errors; or, supposing them
Errors, if they be not of dangerous consequence. The Guilt of some, is neither
so gross and heinous as to the Nature, nor so clear and indisputable as to the
proof of it, as it is in others. And these may be born, or remedyed other ways,
and must not always break Communion.

Nor of all other Errors in practice imbibed by the Pastors, that are clear,
and of higher consequence.

For though the practical Errors are more clear and important, yet sometimes
the Guides and Pastors abetting them, is not full and barefaced. They may not
be come (...), Conc. Constable. 1. and 2. Can. 15.
to teach them publicly and barefaced in the Church, as the Council of
Constantinople speaks in the case of Heresy, for which the Church is to break
off from them. They may show connivance, or countenance to them; as the Pastors
at 1 Cor. 5
Corinth seem to have done, in the case of incestuous Marriages; and as,
perhaps, they did in the case of 1 Cor. 8 etc. 10.
communicating in Idol-Feasts: but not doctrinally maintain, and preach them
up. And thus also Leontius did, whilst the Orthodox kept on meeting in the
Arian Assemblies under him at Antioch. For though he secretly favored, and
encouraged the Arians, who used a derogatory Doxology, of Glory be to the
Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost; not as the Orthodox, to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: yet in repeating the Doxology at the end of
the Psalms, he repeated all the first Part, wherein they differed, privatelhy
to himself; and then only repeated aloud, when it came to in saecula
saeculorum, or world without end, wherein both were agreed, as Theodorit Hist.
Eccl. l. 2. c. 24.
reports.

Yea, I may add, that at other times, when the Pastors preach them up
barefaced, they may do it generally: so that the People may have none else,
but such Erroneous Teachers, to communicate with. As was the case of the Jews,
I think, at our Saviors coming, when the Priests, I conceive, generally agreed
in preaching up those practical Errors and doctrinal Salvo's, whereby, as our
Lord Mat. 15. 6.
charges them, they made void Gods Commandments. And in such a corrupt state of
the Church, till they could have the same from more Orthodox Ministers; they
were to go on communicating in Religious Offices and Sacrifices, whilst there
was nothing but good in them, with these otherwise erroneous Ministers. And
were not to disclaim Communion with their Ministrations, but to Mat. 16. 6. 12.
beware of the Leaven of their Doctrines: Or, in other Points, where they
taught true, Mat. 23. 3.
to follow their Doctrines, not their Practices, as our Savior cautions.

But when they saw Souls endangered by such Salvo's, it was the Duty of true
Prophets, and Priests among them, and would be so in all other places, on like
occasions, by their preaching and Ministrations to keep up sound knowledge
among the People in these Points; yea, though such preaching and ministrations
made a Breach between them, and those defecting Teachers. And it was the
Peoples duty to follow any among them, who would teach them better, when they
could have such Teachers, as they had in our Blessed Lord, and his Apostles.
Whatever Allowance, under the favor of Necessity, men may have to keep on with
such, of which Plea of necessity, I shall say more hereafter; yet, where there
is choice of others more Orthodox, they are no longer tied to such Pastors, as
openly and obstinately preach up damnable practices, to disgrace Religion, and
endanger Souls. Bear they may for a time, in hopes of Reformation; and, because
it is easier, to prevent, than to patch up Breaches, wise Lovers both of Peace
and Truth, would not be hasty in coming to extreamities. But if still they will
persist, and go on in such pernicious Ways and Doctrines; good People and
Pastors may withdraw themselves from their Communion, as St. Paul says in the
places already cited.

And the Reasons of breaking off, on such defections from necessary points,
either of faith or practice, are still more urgent, if there is no Liberty left
in any Churches, for other Pastors to stand up ministerially, or exercise their
Ministry in defense of those necessary points, whilst they continue with, and
adhere to them. For then, the Concealment and Suppression of necessary Truths,
is made a condition of Communion; and other Pastors, if they will hold on with
them, must suffer 2 Timothy 1. 14.
that good thing, which has been committed to their Trust, to be extinguished,
without standing up, according to their duty and solemn undertaking, to
minister the same. Which will make it necessary for all, who will choose to
stand by Christ and his Truths, rather than by such his Apostatizing Servants
and Corrupters thereof, to depart from them.

When therefore the Bishops and Pastors of any Church, fall off from ministering
necessary Christian Doctrine or Worship; and especially when they come to allow
their Communion to none, who will go on administering the same; they thereby
loosen the bands of Union, and break that spiritual dependence and relation,
which the People, and other inferior Pastors, ought to have upon them. They
are no longer the true Joints, to compact the Members; nor the Head of Unity,
to keep together the Body of the Church. And thus it was at the Reformation,
under Queen Elizabeth, with the Popish Bishops; whose corrupt Worship and
Doctrine, yea, and rigorous exaction of compliance with both from all who
expected to hold Communion with them, had set their Churches at liberty to go
off from them, as I formerly observed, and to seek more Orthodox Bishops in
their room. And so it would be in the case of other Bishops, especially of
those who espouse a Schism, and communicate with Anti-Bishops in opposition to
the true Bishops, if they fall from ministering necessary Christian Truths,
whether of Faith, or of Moral Doctrine and Worship, as in the forementioned
Cases.

And when the Church is thus loosed of its dependence on their Persons, by the
defection of such erring Bishops; It may be free to unite it self, to other
Orthodox Bishops. Either to receive such an one, for its own local Bishop, as
was done at the Reformation, by substituting Orthodox and Reformed Bishops,
into the Sees of Popish Bishops. Or, till it can have that, by receiving the
Benefit of Episcopal and Priestly Acts, from any other Orthodox Bishops and
Clery, as they can be met with. It may fetch all Orthodox Ministrations and
spiritual Functions, from other places, when it cannot have them from an
Orthodox Pastor, or in the Unity of the Church, at home. This it may do, says
Quid enim si in mariportus aliquis munitionibus suis ruptis, infestus and
periculosus esse Navibus coeperit; nonne Navigantes, ad allos proximos Portus
Naves suas dirigunt, ubi sit tutus and salutaris introitus, and statio secura?
Aut si in via stabulum aliquod obsideri; and teneri a Latronibus coeperit, ut
quisquis ingressus fuerit, insidiantium illic infestatione capiatur: Nonne
commeantes hac opinione comperta, stabula alia in itinere appetunt tutiora, ubi
sint fida hospitia, and receptacula Commeantibus tuta? Quod nunc esse a pud nos
esse debet, ut Fratres nostros, qui vitatis Marciani scopulis petunt Ecclesiae
Portus salutares, suscipiamus, etc. and stabulum Commeantibus praebeamus, etc.
Cyp. Ep. 68. p. 178.
St. Cyprian in this Case, As well as the Mariners, when their own Port is
sanded, or otherwise insecure, may pass it by, and put in at another. Or, as
well as the Travelers, when their own Inn is beset with Thieves, may take up
their Lodging at another, which is more safe.

And as the People of such defecting Bishops and Pastors, may seek out, and
unite themselves to others, for all necessary Ministrations; so may those other
Orthodox Bishops and Clergy, who are sought to, be free to receive and supply
them. This is plain of both, because the Church, whereof the one are Members,
and the other are Bishops or Priests, is a Catholic Church. For being
Catholic, its Baptisms, and Ordinations, are Catholic; and make, as the one
Christians, so the other Bishops and Priests, that must be owned for such over
all the Christian Church, and not only in some limited Parts, or Districts
thereof. And betwixt the Members of this Catholic Church, there is to be a
Communion of Saints; so that the one may receive as Members, and the other
administer all spiritual Acts and Functions as Pastors, as there is
opportunity, and as need requires. When the Orthodox Members of such defecting
Pastors, come to them; considering the Catholicism of the Church, though never so
far remote in place, they must own them as their Brethren: and professing the
Communion of Saints, they must receive them to their Communion. When, shuning
the Rocks in their own defecting Church, they seek a more safe harbor in
theirs, it is their part Fra^res, qui vitatis Marciani scopulis petunt Ecclesiae
Portus salutares, suscipiamus ad nos prompta and benigna humanitate, and
stabulum Commeantibus praebeamus tale, quale est in Evangelio, quo a Latronibus
sauciati and vulnerati suscipi, and foveri, and tutari ab stabulario possint,
Cyp. Ep. 68. p. 178.
to receive them with a prompt humanity, and to give them such reception, as
was given to him who had fallen among Thieves in the Luke, 10. 30, etc.
Gospel; not only to let them in, but to take all due and needful care of them,
says St. Cyprian.

Yea, and as Christian Bishops, they are to look upon this Reception, and these
Ministrations, as one part of their Episcopal Charge. For they are Bishops of
the Catholic Church, as well as of their own Sees; and have relation to the
whole Church, as well as to their own Diocese. The Administration he has
received, is not only for his own Flock, but (...), Ignat. Ep. ad Philad. p.
39. Ed. Voss.
for the Church in common, says St. Ignatius, of the Bishop of Philadelphia.
And Universalis vobis a Christo Jesu commissa est Ecclesia, ut pro omnibus,
etc. Eleutherius Papa, Epist. ad Galliae Provin^ias, Tom. 1. Conc. p. 92. Ed.
Bin.
Christ has committed to you, not only your own, but the Universal Church, says
Eleutherius to the Gallicane Bishops. And though, as being more especially
Bishops of that place, they have more particular Obligation to look after their
own Flocks: Yet, as Catholic Bishops, they must be concerned for the whole
Church, and look on it, or any destitute parts thereof, as their own, as
occasion requires. Omnes enim nos decet, pro corpore totius Ecclesiae, cujus
per varias quasque Provincias membra digesta sunt, excubare, Ap. Cyp. Ep. 36.
p. 71.
It behooves us all to extend our Care, and watch over the Body of the whole
Church, whose Members are disposed through each of the varicus Provinces, say
the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome to Cyprian, on his informing them of the
Deposition of Privatus Lambesitanus the Heretic. And unum Gregem pascimus,
though we be many Pastors, yet we are to look upon all as one Flock, Ep. 68. p.
178.
says St. Cyprian in this case. Though holding it in Partnership, we are
several Bishops; yet, as there is but one Church, so there is Episcopatusunus
est, cujus a singulis in Solidum pars tenetur. Ecclesia quoque nna est, etc.
Cyp. de Unit. Eccles. page 108. vid. and Ep. 55. p. 112.
but one Episcopate, says he again, whereof every particular Bishop holds a
part; but holds it so, as to stand obliged and answerable, on occasion, not
only for his own particular proportion, but, as Partners in a Bond, each of
them pro Solido, as the legal Phrase is, or for the whole Sum.

Thus Eleutherius told the Gallicane Bishops, That Hujus rei gratia universalis
vobis a Christo Jesu commissa est Ecclesia, ut pro omnibus laboretis, and
cunctis opem far non negligatis, Eleuth. Papa ubi supra.
for this very Cause Christ had committed to them the Universal Church, that
they should labor for all, and not neglect to afford Help to any, as their
Needs should require. And Simplicius of Rome, told Acacius of Constantinople,
That -- Ut Creditorum ^bimet dispeusatione Dominica Talentorum, in hac
multiplicatione fidelis Servus ostendaris, si non tantum in Ecclesia, cui
praesides, sed ubicunque potneris, pro Unitate Catholica, and pro Paternis
Definitionibus suadere non renuas, Simplicius Papa ad Aca^ium Con^iantinop. Ep.
17. p. 592, Tom. 3. Council. Ed. Bin.
to approve himself faithful in his Episcopate, he must strive for Catholic
Unity and the Decrees of the Fathers, not only in that Church where he
presided, but wheresoever he could. And Chrysostom says, St. Eustathius Bishop
of Antioch, had well learned by the Grace of the Holy Ghost, that a Bishop of
the Church (...), Chrysostom. Hom. in S. Eustathium Antioch, Hom. 93. Tom. 5. p.
631. Ed. Sav. and Ed. Front. Duc. Tom. 1. Hom. 52.
ought to take care, not of that Church alone, over which he is specially
appointed: but of the Universal Church through the World. This general Care,
has appeared conspicuous in the Lives and Labors of Holy and Faithful Bishops:
as of Cyprian, Alexander, and Cyril of Alexandria, Eustathius of Antioch, and
Chrysostom. And of the Great Athanasius, S. Basil. Ep. 52.
who took as much care of all other Churches, as he did of his own, as St.
Basil says.

Nor ought they to be hindered from such Ministration, and Reception of the
Members of other Churches, by any Canonical Rules for Unity in the Church. For,
that Heresy, or Defection from Christian Doctrine, whether in Faith or
Practice, and from Christian Worship, which sets aside the Obligations of Unity
toward those defecting Bishops and Pastors, must also of course therewith set
aside those Canonical Rules, which are for maintenance thereof. So that the
Ecclesiastical Rules, of (...), i. e. Ignat. Ep. and Smyrn. p. 6. and Council.
Laod. Can. 57.
of Clergy and People doing nothing in Church Communion without the Allowance
of their Bishop: and of(...), i. e. Can. Ap. 35. and Conc Antioch, Can. 13. and
22. and Council. Constant. 1 and 2 Can. 2.
of ones not officiating, or ordaining another Subjects, or interm^dling in
another Diocese; are no Rules, nor of Force toward such Persons. And
accordingly at Arles, when Marcianus their Bishop was fallen to the Novatians,
Ep. 68. p. 176. etc.
Cyprian thought it behoved him and other Bishops, to see the Needs of the
Faithful there supplied, That they might no longer be left a Prey for Wolves,
without all hopes (after the Novatian Rigor) of the Churches Peace and
Communion after once they had fallen. And under the Arian Heretics, the Great
Athanasius, when out of his own District, (...), Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 24.
p. 115.
held Ordinations in other Churches, as he passed through them, as Socrates
reports. Even the Great Council of Constantinople, in that very Canon, which
forbids (...).
Bishops to intermeddle, either in Ordinations, or in other Ecclesiastical
Administrations, without their own Precincts: yet makes an Exception (...),
Can. 2. Council. 1. Constantinop.
of those Churches, that are in Barbarous Nations, for whose Relief they might
do this: As Eminent Preachers, when they went among them, (...), Bals. in Can.
2. Conc. Constant. ^ vid. and Zonar. in Canonem.
might still confirm those they had gained to the Faith in other Provinces,
according to their Custom: Which, though against the Canons, the Council still
allowed, say Bals^mon and Zonoras upon the Canon; for the necessity of the
thing.

And thus also Presbyters and People, may hold Assemblies independent on their
own Defecting Bishops, or on any others. The Apostolical Canons allowing
Priests to have Meetings separate from their Bishops, when they do it (...),
Can. 31. Ap.
as condemning them of Impiety [in (...), Zon. in Can.
Doctrine] or of Injustice [in Administration, as deposing them for the sake of
Truth, or of a good thing, etc.] And the Council of Constantinople, though it
Council. Constant. 1 and 2 Can. 13, 14, 15.
forbids Inferiors, before Synodical Sentence, to cast off the Communion of
their Superior on pretense of Criminal Causes, as (...), Bals. ad Can. 15. and
so Zonoras lb.
Fornication, Symony, or Transgression of the Canons, as Balsamon comments: yet
allows it in case of Heresy condemned by former Synods, or by the Holy
Fathers, so soon as he begins barefaced to teach it in the Church. And the
Council of Carthage, when it Can. 10. Conc. Carth.
Condemns Presbyters for setting up separate Altars from their Bishops, makes
this Exception, (...), Can. 11. Council. Carthag.
unless they have against him a just Expostulation. And an (...), Bals. in Can.
11.
Allegation of False Doctrine, or leading the Church wrong, is such a just
Expostulation, as Balsamon observes upon the Canon. These Rules, for preserving
Order and Concord among Bishops and Churches, are binding toward any Bishops,
who are in the Unity of the Church, and are Orthodox. But if either they are
fallen to set up Unchristian Worship, or Doctrine; or, as I observed before, are
turned Schismatics, or set up as Anti-Bishops in Christ's Church: They bind
none toward such Bishops. They are no longer Heads of Union, and so cannot
claim the Benefit of these Rules for Unity; which, by their Schism, or
Defection, is at an end toward them.

Thus does Heresy, or a defection from necessary Doctrine or Worship,
discharge Church Members, from their Spiritual and Canonical dependence and
union, with their defecting Bishops and Pastors. Priests are no longer tied to
such erring Bishops, nor the People to either, in such Cases. So that a
defection to sinful Worship, and damnable Doctrine, bereaves Men of all
Argu^ments from Scripture or Canons, for their Subjects to depend on them, or
to unite with them.

If therefore in any division of a Church, it can truly be Objected to one
side, that they are saln from holy and true Worship and Doctrine; it is not for
them to plead the duty of Union, or to tell People of their Obligations to
unite with them. If before they were the true Heads, and the Regular and
Canonical Bishops of those places; yet would their falling into those
Unchristian Errors, strip them of those Claims. The Union taught by Christ, and
the Holy Scriptures, and directed by the Rules and Canons of the Church,
supposes Men Orthodox; but is not to unite with such defectors. Nor is any
Charity, which they can pretend to in seeking to keep all others united to
themselves, the Charity which he requires. For that Charity, which is the end
of the Commandment, must be out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and
faith unfeigned, as St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1. 5. It must be out of a pure heart,
and a good conscience: and so is only a seeking to have them one with us,
whilst we go together in keeping the Commandments, or in the practice of good
things; not like the Charity or Love of Thieves, and Murderers, that associates
and binds them together in the practice of ill things, as St. Chrysostom In Loc.
notes. And it must also be out of faith unfeigned; and so is a seeking to
unite them to our selves, not in dangerous Errors, but only in Orthodox and
Christian Doctrines. Whereas, the pains that is taken to bring all over to them
in the Breach of Gods Laws, and embracing of Unchristian Doctrine, or to be one
with them in Error and Wickedness; is not Charity, but destruction, to those
who are seduced by them.

If such defection from pure Worship and Doctrine is their Case, the guilt of
making a division lies plainly at their doors. In such Breaches, St. Paul notes
the Dividers from the Doctrine, as making the Schism; and not the faithful
Adherers to it, who refuse to break off from it, in order to their keeping on
with them. Mark those, as causing the Divisions or Offenses, who go contrary to
the Doctrine which ye have learned, says he, Romans 16. 17. And divisions made
by such defection, are incureable by any thing, but their own repentance and
return to their former ways. Their Brethren can not heal, or close them, by
following them in their desection; because that is to be false to Truth, and to
their own and others Souls, which are all in danger of perishing by straying
from the same.

Nay, should they do as they desire, and all come over; that would only be a
false and seeming Cure, but really make the Breach wider. For the whole Body of
Christians, from the beginning to the end, are but one Church. And those
Christian Societies, which make up this one Church, are the several Churches of
all times and places. All true Christians, which now are, or formerly have
been, or hereafter shall be, are all Members of one and the same Body, as I
formerly showed.

So that the Unity, which good Christians are to aim at, is to appear of one
Society and Communion, with the whole Body of faithful Christians, from first
to last: with all the faithful, who have kept to this Unity, and are now in
Heaven; as well as with all, who either now are, or hereafter shall be in
earth, doing the same. Or, to be found united, and in the Communion of that
Body, or general Collection and Assembly of Saints, who shall all appear
together as one Body, that has kept up the Faith and Unity of the Church, in
opposition to all Heretical or Schismatical Oppugners thereof, at the last Day.
And they are lamentably out, and take their Aim too narrow, who look only at
keeping an external Union, with the Assemblies and Religious Societies of their
own place and time; though that be in breaking off from the Way and Communion,
of all the faithful Christians of other places at that time, and of all that
are gone before them, and will make them appear separately from the general
Assembly and great Collection of Saints, at the last Day.

Now true Doctrine and Worship, as I have shown, are among the chief Ligaments,
in this Body of Christ's Holy Catholic Church. And if even any regular Bishops,
or Metropolitanes, with their respective Societies or Churches, break off from
any necessary Truths, or Worship of Christ, they break off at the same time,
from all this great Body of faithful Christians of all other other places and
times, who are all united and incorporated in them, and stand upon them. And if
these defectors, appear to make the Generality, or great Number, in their own
particular Times, and Countries; yet are they but a handful, compared to that
General Body or Collection on the other side, whom they have defected and broke
from, and who will stand all in one compact Body against them, at the last Day.
viz. the Catholic Church of all Times and Places. So that those few faithful
among them, who continue sirm, and stand out against their defection, do not go
off from the main Body, or greatest Numbers, but stick to them; the Catholic
Church of all Ages and Countries, which makes the vast Body, and infinitely the
greatest Number, being in reality with them. The Catholic Church, consisting
of our Savior Christ, of Apostles and Prophets, Martyrs and Confessors, and of
all the truly Faithful, who have gone before us, are now, or shall be after us,
when all is done will make the Body. And those few Faithful Christians sticking
to this, when the numerous Defectors in those Countries start from it, stick to
the Body. So that, as the Council of Constantinople declares of those, who
break off Communion with their Bishops, yea, before Synodical Sentence, when
once they openly teach any Heresy condemned by the Holy-Fathers or Councils;
by so doing, (...), Conc. Constant. 1 and 2 Can. 15.
they do not rend the Unity of the Church by Schism, but study to free, or
defend it, against Schisms or Divisions. So at such times, they must bespeak
their Brethren, as St. Cyprian did the Confessors, who sided with the
Schismatic Novatian. Cum Unanimitas and Concordia nostra seindi omnino non
debeat, quia nos Ecclesia derelicta for as exire, and ad vos venire non
possumus, ut vos magis ad Ecclesiam Matrem, and ad nostram Eraternitatem
revertamini, quibus possumus hortamentis petimus and rogamns, Cyp. Ep. 46. p.
89.
Because we can not leave the Church, and come over to you, which, instead of
patching up, would be to break and divide the Churches Concord and Unanimity:
We beseech you, by all the ways we can, that you would return and come back
again to your Mother the Church, an^d to our Fraternity.

By keeping then to the necessary Doctrines and Worship of Christ, of the
Catholic Church, and of our own Church, we keep united to them; and so far, as
we break off from these, we answerably break off from them. And therefore the
running in of more into such defection, instead of closing up the Schism, would
increase it. It would only make the more People guilty, of dividing, and
standing off from Christ, and from the Catholic Church, as that contains all
Orthodox Christians and Right Churches, who are gone before us, or are now, or
shall be after us. Yea, from all their Ancestors, during all the Successions of
them to their unhappy defection, in their own Church. And even from themselves,
in all their own best days, whilst they stood true to their own pure Worship
and Orthodox Principles. Which is such a way of healing Schisms, as Rebellion
is of remedying Grievances; that is, instead of taking any off, it brings
abundance more upon us.

And this makes the Charge of Schism stronger, and more aggravated in the
forementioned Cases, where the Corruptions of Doctrine and Worship make them a
corrupt Church, as well as the setting up of Anti-Bishops makes them a
Schismatical Church. There is plainly a Schism in making of Anti-Bishops, which
is a setting up of opposite Altars. But it is a more wicked and ungodly Schism,
when these opposite Altars are set up for wicked and ungodly purposes, to head
sinful and unchristian Worship and Doctrines. That Schism, is complicated with
Heresy, or other dangerous depravation of Religion. It is not only making a
Breach in the Church; but withal, it is forming a Party against Truth and
Holiness. It is giving Religion a second Blow, to maintain a former; and
setting up one ill thing, to secure a worse. It seeks to confederate Men in the
Breach of Unity, that it may hold them fast in Breach of Piety, or Moral
Honesty. And a Schism so set up to strike at Religion, is more impious in the
sight of God, and of all good men, and the Guilt thereof is more flagrant. And
besides, it is incureable by any, but themselves. For the Schismatics run into
such a Breach, to maintain a Quarrel against Truth and Righteousness. And in
that, they must go by themselves; for none who will take any due care of their
precious Souls, ought to bear them company. So, there can be no Reunion, till
they return from their wicked and ungodly Schism, to the way of Truth and
Righteousness, which they had forsaken.

CHAP. V. Of the Communion of good Christians, or with whom they are to join in
Divine Offices, under a Schism.
HAving said thus much, to show on any division of Churches, whilst faithful
Pastors stand firm to their Ministrations in the forementioned Cases, who make
the Schism, and who can cure it, I now proceed,

3. In the Third place, to Treat of the Communion of good Christians under a
Schism, and how they are to carry themselves toward Schismatics.

As for their Communion, it is plain, in division between Right and Wrong, both
as to the Church-Heads, and Religious Doctrines and Worship, they ought to take
the right side.

As they who are at the Head of that, are the Canonical and Rightful Bishops,
they are bound to communicate with them. For the Rightful Bishops being the
true Heads of Union, the Members must keep true to their Head, and hold
Communion therewith. And this they are tied to, by all the Gospel-precepts
about Union, which require their Jo. 17. 11.
being one, or Ep. 4. 4.
one Body, or Ver. 3.
keeping the Bond of Peace in Churches. For this Unity and Peace of Churches,
must bind them to keep united and at Peace with their Bishops, who, under
Christ, are the Governors, and Spiritual Heads thereof. And by that grand
Virtue of Charity, so often and earnestly 1 Cor. 16. 14. and cap. 13.
required of the Members, and that Col. 3. 14.
above all things, that 1 Cor. 8. 1.
they may edify or build up one another into a spiritual Society. For this
Charity, which is Col. 3. 14. ^.
the Bond to bind the Members together, not only in private Affections, but
into one common Body or Church, must bind them all to these Rightful Bishops,
who are the Heads and Rulers of that Body, that by keeping united to those
Bishops, they may keep one Society, and not be broken into several Societies.
And accordingly St. Cyprian presses that Charity, which 1 Cor. 13.
St. Paul makes so necessary to the acceptance of all other Virtues, even
Faith, or Martyrdom it self; as indispensably obliging all good Christians, to
keep in the Communion of their true and rightful Bishops, as I observed Chapter 1.
Part 3.
before.

And as these true and rightful Bishops, are at the Head of necessary
Gospel Worship and Doctrines, when their Opposers fall off from them, good
Christians are yet more bound to hold to their Communion. They are tied thereto
then, not only for the rightful Bishops, but also for pure Worship and
necessary Truths sake. For true Christians, must seek to communicate in these.
And that must be, by communicating in the Ministrations of those Pastors, which
hold to them. Besides, these, in any competition, are Christ's true Shepherds,
and trusty Watchmen, and faithful Guides, and incorrupt Teachers, and faithful
Ministers: because they are the Men, who faithfully minister his Word, and give
his Warnings, and dispense that Food, which is to keep those Souls alive whom
he has given them the Care of. And all these, are no idle Characters, but speak
answerable Obligations in the People, as I have shown Chapter 7. Part 1.
before, to attend on their Ministrations, and unite themselves to them. And
this, the Scripture requires in those Precepts, which command us, in Romans 15. 6.
glorifying God, to have one mind and mouth; to be 1 Cor. 1. 10.
perfectly joined together in the same mind and judgment, and speak the same
things; and the like. For this speaking the same, is speaking the same with
those who speak right, not with those who speak wrong. And this Union of minds
and judgments, must be in uniting with men of Orthodox minds, or that hold all
necessary Christian Doctrines: For if any fall off from these, we must not be
of one mind with them, but of different minds. I add moreover, that Association
and Union of Church Members under Bishops, is for visible Profession and
Ministration of pure Worship and Doctrine. And therefore they must unite with
those Bishops, who profess and administer the same. Yea, their care of their
own Safety, no less than the love of Truth, will make them fly to such Pastors:
As the Saylors do to the next safe Port, when their own is sanded; or the
Travelers to the next secure Inn, when their old one is beset with Thieves, as
St. Cyprian Ep. 68. p. 178.
observes in this Case.

And as they are thus to hold Communion, and unite themselves to those rightful
Bishops, who keep to pure Worship and Doctrine: So are they, on the other hand,
to stand off from those, who make the Schism, to maintain a sinful Worship, or
corrupt Doctrine.

I do not say, they are to look on these Schismatics and Defectors, as quite
fallen from the Relation, and Title of Brethren. A Schismatical, or Excommunicate
Christian, is still a Christian, not an Infidel, or Heathen. And whilst they
continue Christians, they retain, though not so much Claim as others, yet some
Claim to Christian Brotherhood, albeit they have lost their Claim to Communion.
Have no Company or Communion with the segregated Man, says St. Paul; yet count
him not as an Enemy, but admonish him as a Brother, 2 These. 3. 14. 15. And
Optatus calls the Schismatical Donatists, Brethren; though -- Omnibus notum sit,
quod nolunt se dici Fratres nostros.
they would not call the Catholics so, or be called so by them. And says, that
-- Sunt sine dubio Fratres, quamvis non boni. -- Non possunt no^ esse Fratres.
Est quidem no^is and illis una spiritualis Nativitas, etc. Optat. Milev. de
Schism. Donat. l. 1. p. 34.

-- Non enim potestls non esse Fratres, quos iisdem Sacramentorum visceribus,
una Matter Ecclesia genuit: quos eodem modo adoptivos Filios Deus Pater excepit,
ld. l. 4. p. 77. Ed. Par. Albaspin.

-- Propter Communia Sacramenta Frater meus est, Augustine. in Collat. Carth. 3.
c. 235.


they can not but be our Brethren, though they are no good Brethren; because we
and they have one spiritual Nativity: Their Baptism, which is the Christians
Birth, being a valid Baptism, though administered in a Schism; and the Catholic
Church, as -- Itaque est una Ecclesia, quae sola Catholica nominatur, and
quicquid suum habet in Communionibus diversorum a sua unitate seperatis, per
hoc, quod suum in iis habet, ipsa utique generat, non illae. -- Haec itaque in
omnibus generat, cujus Sacramenta retinentur, unde possit tale aliquid
ubicunque generari; quamvis non omnes quos generat ad ejus pertineant Unitatem,
quae usque in finem perseverantes salvat, Augustine. de Bapt. Cont. Do^^^. lib.
1. cap. 10.
St. Austin says, thereby generating Sons unto God, which Sons must be our
Brethren. For Brotherhood, they looked on, as consequent on Nativity, and going
along with it; but Communion, as going with spiritual society and conversation.
Though at other times, by Brotherhood they understood, not only the spiritual
Nativity, but also the spiritual society and communion of Brethren: And then,
Heretics and Schismatics were shut out, from that Name and Salutation.

But though, as not having fallen from their Baptism and Christianity, they may,
on the score of their common Nativity, still admit them to be Christian
Brethren: Yet, as being schismatical and defecting Brethren, they must reject,
and stand off from their Communion. They must disown the erroneous and
schismatical Bishops and Ministers, disclaiming all Ecclesiastical Dependence
upon them. And hold off from their Religious Assemblies, and not come to join
in their Prayers, and Sacraments, and sacred Offices: Church Communion, lying
mainly in joining in these Assemblies and sacred Offices; as Excommunication
lies, in the excluding and debarring from the participation thereof.

They are to avoid them, as they are Associates or Adherents of Anti-Bishops,
and makers of a Schism. For the Scripture-direction is, to mark those, which
cause Divisions and Offenses, and to avoid them, To. 16. 17. And if any man is
disobedient and refractory to Church-powers, which he is to the height, who
throws them quite off, and sets up others against them, to note that man, and
to have no company with him, 2 These. 3. 14. And Schisms or Sedirions, the
Apostle reckons among Works of the Flesh, which exclude from the Kingdom of
Heaven: So that they, who would secure that, must be careful not to join, or
partake with them, Gal. 5. 20. 21. Especially, if to the Guilt of Schism, they
also add that of Heresy, which the Apostle also there ranks among the deadly
Works of the Flesh; or make Parties, especially consummate them by setting up
of Anti-Bishops, to head destructive Errors, or a defection from Gods pure
Worship and Doctrines. If any turn bringer of false Doctrines, bid him not God
speed, nor receive him into your houses, which were to be partakers of his evil
Deeds, says St. John, 2 Jo. 10. 11. Thus St. Paul bids them (...).
look to the Judaizers, and avoid them, Phil. 3. 2. And St. John, when he went
to bath himself at Ephesus, leaped out of the Bath unwash'd when he espied the
Heretic Cerinthus, declaring he would not stay with such an Enemy of the
Truth, as Adver. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus reports from Polycarp. Yea, and Polycarp himself, as he adds, refused
the Heretic Marcion any friendly commerce or fraternal salutation. So
studiously cautious, says he, were the Apostles and their Disciples, of entering
into any communion, so much as of discourse, with those who adulterated the
Truth.

And of this Obligation, to shun the communion of Schismatics and corrupt
Teachers, Christians had a great sense, in the first and best Ages of the
Church. Thus St. Ignatius, that blessed Martyr and Contemporary of the
Apostles, when he bids (...), Ignat. Ep. ad Philad. p. 40. Ed. Voss.
the Sheep to follow the Shepherd, and tells them, (...), Ib.
they who are Gods and Jesus Christ's, will go with their Bishop: to caution
them against siding with any who set up against him, (...), Ib.
tells the Philadelphians, that if any will turn follower of him, who makes a
Schism, he has no inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. And St. Cyprian, is
abundant therein. When New, or Anti-Bishops set up opposite Altars, he is full
of Zeal against the Impiety and Wickedness thereof. Adulterum est, impium est,
sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore instituitur, ut dispositio divina
violetur. Speaking of the Novum Sacerdotium, and of the aliud Altar praeter
unum Altar, Cyp. Ep. 43. p. 83.
It Is adulterous, says he, it is impious, it is sacrilegious, whatsoever is so
set up by the madness of men, in violation of the Ordinance of God. Arma ille
contra Ecclesiam portat, contra Dei dispositionem repugnat; hostis Altaris,
adversus Sacrificium Christi rebellis, pro Pide persidus, pro Religione
sacrilegus, inobsequens Servus, Filius impius, Frater inimicus. contemptis
Episcopis and Dei Sacerdotibus derelictis, constituere audet aliud Altar,
Precem alteram illicitis vocibus facere, De Unit. Eccl. p. 116.
He, who leaving the true Bishop, sets up another Altar, and presumes to
celebrate another Prayer or Divine Service different from his, bears Arms, says
he in another place, against the Church, and resists Gods Ordinance: he is an
Enemy of the Altar, and a Rebel against Christ's Sacrifice, for the Faith he is
persidious, for Religion he is sacrilegious, he is an undutiful Servant, an
impious Son, an Enemy instead of a Brother.

And having set out these Schismatical Associates, as so full of Sin and
Provocation, he warns all, who would be careful of their own Innocence or
safety, to stand off from the Communion of such Men. Plebs obsequens praeceptis
Dominicis, and Deum metuens, a Peccatore praeposito separate se debet, nec se
ad Sacrilegi Sacerdotis Sacrificia miscere, Ep. 67. p. 171.
A People, that would fear God, and keep his Commandments, says he, must not
mix it self, or join in the Sacrifices of such sacrilegious Dividers. Vitate
Lupos, qui Oves a Pastore secernunt, etc. Discedite a talibus, etc. -- Pereant
sibi soli, qui perire voluerunt. Extra Ecclesiam soli remaneant, qui de
Ecclesia recesserunt. Soli cum Episcopis non sint, qui contra Episcopos
rebellarunt, Ep. 43. p. 84.
Avoid those Wolves, says he again, who seek to separate the Sheep from their
Shepherd, warning against those five Presbyters, who were then forming a
Schism, and soon after set up one of themselves, viz. Fortunatus, an
Anti-Bishop against himself at Carthage. If they will perish in their Schism,
let them be alone in perishing. Let them remain alone without the Church, who
have broke off from it. Let them alone be without the Bishops, who have
rebelled against the Bishops. But depart you from such Men, and be not ye
Partakers with them therein. Docet Dominus, and admonet, a talibus recedendum
-- aversandus est talis, atque fugiendus, quisquis fuerit ab Ecclesia seperatus
-- vitate quaeso ejusmodi homines, and a latere atque auribus vestris
perniciosa Colloquia velut Contagium mortis arcete, De Unit. Eccl. p. 115, 116.
The Lord admonishes us, adds he, to depart from such Men. And Si autem qui
Ecclesiam contemnunt, Ethnici and Publicani habentur, multo magis utique
Rebels and Hosts, falsa Altaria, and illicita Sacerdotia, and Sacrificia
sacrilega, etc. fingentes, inter Ethnicos and Publicanos, necesse est
computentur, Cyp. Ep. 69. p. 180, 181.
If they are to be held as Heathens and Publicanes, who only contemn the
Church, according to the Words of our Lord, Mat. 18. 17. much more are the
setters up of false Altars, and unlawful Priesthoods, to be held as such,
because they are plain Rebels, and professed Enemies thereof.

And besides, their shuning these opposite and false Altars, and keeping firm
to the true, he tells them is necessary to give them the benefit of Christian
Communion. Quisquis alibi collegerit, (the Assemblies or Synaxes being called
collectae) spargit, Cyp. Ep. 43. p. 83.
For whosoever assembleth otherwise, says he, than under the rightful Bishop,
does not get, but scatter abroad. Si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in Ecclesia non
esse: and frustra sibi blandiri eos, qui pacem cum Sacerdotibus Dei non
habentes, obrepunt, and latenter apud quosdam communicare se credunt, Cyp. Ep.
66. p. 168.
If any are not with the Bishop, they are not in the Church. And it is a vain
flattery and self-deceit, for any, who have not Peace and Communion with their
Bishop, to fancy it is the same thing, and that they may still have the Benefit
of Ecclesiastical Communion, by creeping in privately, and being admitted by
others set up against him.

Such was the sense, which the Holy Apostles had instilled, and which the
Primitive Christians had carefully retained, of their strict Obligations, to
keep united to their own Orthodox rightful Bishops, and to shun the Communion
of all Schismatical Opposers of them, or of Heretical Teachers. And this
shunning of such Communion, must not be looked upon, as the effect of Anger, or
Peevishness; or, as an Expression, not of Religion, but of mere human Passions,
which took place in the Church, as Charity grew cold and wore off. For this was
most, in the days of the Aposties themselves, and of their Contemporaties, and
their nearest Successors; as may appear from the fore cited Scriptures, and
Testimonies of Ignatius, Irenaeus, and Cyprian. When Charity was the highest,
as it will be confessed to have been in those times; they were the choicest in
their Communions, and stood furthest off from all Schismatics and Heretics,
refusing them the Commerce, not only of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Ministrations, but even of Civil Offices and Respect. And this, by the
direction of those Apostles, St. Paul and St. John, who abounded more than any
in pressing Charity; not bearing to 2 These. 3. 14.
keep company, or to 1 Cor. 5. 11.
eat with them, as St. Paul: to give them the common salutation 2 John 10. 11.
of God speed, or to receive them into their Houses, as St. John, who would not
so much as stay in the Bath with Cerinthus, nor his Disciple Polycarp give the
Salutation to the Heretic Marcion, as I observed from Irenaeus.

So that Charity, when at the height, was highest toward God, for sustaining
his Worship and Doctrine, visibly bearing it up by the Church, and in the Unity
thereof. But was not for being any ways wanting to a Church-Profession and
Maintenance of them, in tenderness and compliance to those who defected from
them. But Christians abated of these first Rigours, in shuning all Commerce
with such Persons, as the first Charity and Zeal for pure Doctrine and Worship
grew less, and as they were driven thereto, especially in point of civil
Commerce, by Heretics and Schismatics growing more numerous, and (through the
lamentable Divisions of Christendom,) lying intermixed in all places, which
rendered the former renunciation of civil Commerce, as less advisable, so less
practicable in the Church. For when they filled all places, they would be met
with in all places, and intermix in all dealings. And then, not to have any
Company or Dealings with such, they must needs go out of the World, which St.
Paul gives as one Reason of Relaxation and Allowance in this Case, 1 Cor. 5.
10. So that continuing still to shun Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Communion
with such Makers of Schisms; especially for the setting up of a sinful Worship,
and Unchristian Doctrines and Practices; is so far from being a defection from
the Apostolical and Primitive Charity, that it is a keeping up to it, and is
only a retaining of their first Love, which ought in all times faithfully to be
kept on in all true Churches.

Now as to the Persons whom this will affect, and whose Communion by this Rule
is to be shuned in such Cases; it bars this Communion with those, who set up
and make the Anti-Bishops, or who side and take part with them.

1. It affects the Electors, who chose the Men; and their Ordainers and
Consecrators, who laid hands on them. For these, give Heads to the New Bodies,
and create the Schism. Others, may seditiously call for it, or come in to it
when once it is formed; but their part is to give it a Head, which formally
constitutes and sets it up, so that they are Principals therein.

2. And those, who own subjection and dependence on these Anti-Bishops, in
opposition to their Old Ones; and, as Members, unite and incorporate under them.

Thus it is among the Pastors, by whom their Authority is received, and who
thereby all break off from the rightful Bishop, to whom in all their
Ministrations they ought to keep subject and dependant. The Rule of Communion,
for Priests and Deacons toward their Bishop, is to do all Public
Ministrations according to his Allowance and Consent. (...), Can. 39. Ap.
Let the Presbyters or Deacons do nothing without the Consent of the Bishop,
say the Apostolical Canons, and the Council of -- (...), Conc. Laod. Can. 57.
Laodicea afterward; for it is the Bishop, to whose Trust the Lords People is
committed, and from whom an Account of their Souls will be required. And (...),
Conc. Gangr. Can. 6.
If any will be for having the Offices of the Church without the Concurrence of
a fitting Presbyter, who officiates according to the Bishops approbation and
allowance, let him be Anathema, says the Council of Gangra. And (...), Council.
Constant. 1 and 2 Can. 12. and Council. in Trullo, Can. 31.
If any Clergy celebrate Divine Offices in private Oratories, or baptize, not
(...), Can. 31. Council. in Trullo.
according to the Mind and Allowance of the Bishop, but besides, or contrariant
to it, let them incur Deposition, say the Council in Trullo, and the Council of
Constantinople.

Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem
praepositos gubernetur, Cyp. Ep. 33. p. 66.
The Church is settled upon the Bishops, and every Act of the Church ^ught to
be governed by them, says St. Cyprian. (...), Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn. p. 6. Ed.
Voss.
Let none do any of those things, which concern the Church or public Service,
without the Bishop, says St. Ignatins, that Holy Martyr, and Contemporary of
the Apostles. But let that he reputed a valid Eucharist, which is celebrated by
those who keep under him, or which is administered with his Leave. And that a
due Baptism, which is with his consent or approbation. (...), Ignat. Ep. ad
Tralles. p. 47.
It Is necessary, says he, that ye should do nothing without the Bishop, like as
also ye do. (...), Id. Ep ad Philadelph. p. 43.
The Spirit, adds he in another place, has preached this, saying, Do nothing
without the Bishop, -- Love Unity, fly Divisions. (...), Id. Ep. ad Magnes p.
32.
And they who continue to call him Bishop, but yet do all things without him, I
think are not men of good Conscience, because they do not celebrate their
solemn Assemblies according to Christ's Precept. And to like purpose, De Bapt.
c. 17.
Tertullian, Hieron. Dial. adv. Lucifer, Tom. op. 2. p. 96. Ed. Col.
St. Jerome, and others. And this way, of administering all Offices with his
approbation and allowance, St. Ignatius declares is the way for them to keep
Unity with their Bishops. For, says he, (...), Ignat. Ep. ad Magnes. p. 33.
as our Lord does nothing without his Father, being united to him, not acting
without him, either by himself, or by his Apostles: So neither do you any thing
without your Bishop, and his Presbyters.

But when the Priests and Deacons of a Diocese, turn over from their rightful
Bishop to the Anti-Bishop, they live in a slagrant Breach of these Rules of
Communion. They do all their Ministrations then, without their Bishop; putting
in some things into Divine offices, and putting out others; and observing Days,
and other things belonging to their Ministrations, not only without, but quite
against his consent and approbation, and altogether by the Authority and
jurisdiction of another, who is set up against him. Which is to separate as far
as they can, from him, who ought to be their Principle of Union, and to
minister in a state of full, and Flaming Schism.

And thus it is also in the Assemblies, over which those Rightful Bishops ought
to Preside, or in the Churches of their own D^oceses. If they would keep in the
state of Unity, they should keep united to their Rightful Bishops, who are the
Heads of Union to their several Flocks; and should stick to them, and the
Clergy of their Communion, for Divine Offices. (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn.
p. 6. Ed. Voss. Oxon.
Where their Bishop appears, there let the multitude be with them: Like as
where Jesus Christ goes, there the Catholic Church goes too, says St.
Ignatius. But if they break away, from all Dependence on them, and from all
recourse to their ministrations, to Depend on the Anti-Bishops, and to resort
to theirs; that makes them all Schismatics. For all these Assemblies of People
and Pastors, make the Schismatical Bodies, whereof the Anti-Bishops are the
Heads. As the Bishops, set up for the Schismatical Heads; So the Pastors and
People, who turn over to them, and assemble under them, come in to be their
Schismatical Members. They Form themselves into one Church, by erecting an
Ecclesiastical Union and Communion among themselves. And this is a Schismatical
Church, as Consisting all of a Party of Members, broke off from their True
Heads, or lawful Bishops.

3. Further, it may also affect other Bishops and Churches, who will take their
Part, and Communicate with them. For Catholic Unity is to be preserved in the
Church, i. e. Unity and Communion is to be kept up among all Churches. And this
is, by Rules of Accord, and Correspondence, which give the same Church Acts or
matters, the same effects in all places; Of which Rules, I have Part 3. Chap. 2.
before discoursed more at large. And these Rules, will keep up Catholic
Unity, and the Communion of Saints, between all Bishops and Churches; since,
this way, they all Communicate, or all in Common refuse to do it, with the same
Persons.

And therefore if any Bishop of one Church, would side and have Communion with
Anti-Bishops, or with the Schismatics or Heretics of other Churches: He
thereby broke the Rules of Union, as well as they, and became involved in
Schism like one of them. For he was as much obliged as others, in care of
maintaining Unity to keep off from the Communion of such Schismatics: Yea, in
care of Catholic Unity and Communion, to keep off from the Communion of those
who make a Schism from other Catholic Bishops, as if they made it from
himself. And if still he will Communicate, and join himself to them; he
violates Unity, and joins in a Schism, as any other Man would do, who should do
the same. And being found in the Schism with them, he would have been treated
as they were, and have fallen from the Communion of all other Orthodox and
Catholic Bishops, whose Rule was, to refuse and shun the Communion of
Schismatics, and of their adherents and partakers. Communicating with men out
of Communion, he himself would be put out of Communion, as the aforecited
Councils say. And thus it was, with Marcianus Bishop of Arles, when he fell to
Communicate and join himself to Novatian, who was set up as a Schismatical
Anti-Bishop against Cornelius, the Rightful and Canonical Bishop of Rome.
Thereby, says St. Cyprian, he himself became separate from our Marcianus
Novitiano studens, and ejus pervicaciam sequens, a Communicatione se nostra
segregaverit, cum Novatianus ipse, quem sequitur, olim abstentus, and hostis
Ecclesiae judicatus sit. Et cum ad nos in Africam, Legatos misisset, optans ad
Communionem nostram admitti, hinc a Concilio plurimorum Sacerdotum sententiam
retulerit; se foris esse coepisse, nec posse a quoquam nostrum sibi
communicari, qui Episcopo Cornelio in Ecclesia Catholica ordinato, profanum
Altar erigere -- tentaverit. -- Novatiano se conjungens -- ab universis
Sacerdotibus ipse est judicatus, Cyp. Ep. 68. p. 177. and 179.
Communion, and from the Fraternity of Catholic Bishops, because Novatian was
so, to whom he joined himself. The Bishops met in Council in Africa answering
him, when he sought their Communion, that not one of them could communicate
with him, since he had set up Altar against Altar at Rome, and made a Schism
from Cornelius, who before was Legally Ordained the Bishop of that Church.

4. Besides, for surer maintenance of Union, and to compact several Churches
together into a closer dependence, there are other Heads of Union among the
Bishops themselves. Such are Metropolitanes, and Primates, as Titus, I
conceive, was left by St. Paul at Crete, where he was to Tit. 1. 5. 6. 7.
ordain Elders or Bishops in every City; and Timothy at Ephesus, where he is 1 Timothy 3. etc 5. 1, etc. and v. 19, etc.
Directed how he shall exercise jurisdiction, and receive accusations against
Bishops; which Metropolitanes and Primates, are to Unite and incorporate many
Bishops and their Dioceses, into one Province; or several Provinces, by their
Concurrence, into one National Church. And such an Head of Union, the
Archbishop of Canterbury is, among the Bishops in the English Church. And the
Ecclesiastical Union to be kept up among us, is a Provincial, yea a National
Union. We are to stand united, by our Articles, and Homilies, Liturgy, and
Canons. And these unite, not only the Christians of each Diocese or District,
to their respective Bishops, as so many Diocesan Churches: but likewise the
Bishops and People of all Diocesses, into the Provinces of Canterbury and York;
and those two Provinces, into one National Church. Accordingly, those Articles
and Homilies, Liturgy and Canons, which are the Rules of keeping Unity among
us, are Provincial and National Acts, passed by concurrence of Convocations of
both Provinces; where the Bishops and Clergy, meet in Union with, and
dependence on their respective Metropolitanes, who are the respective Heads
thereof.

Now, in care of Unity, and the Communion of Saints, the respective Bishops of
each Province or Country, are to keep dependant and united to their
Metropolitanes. (...), Can. 34. Ap. So also, Can. 9. Conc. Antioch.
The Bishops of every Nation, ought to know him, who is their Primate, and to
account him as their Head, say the Apostolical Canons. (...), Council. Constant.
1 and 2 Can. 14.
It behooves every Man to know his own proper measure, say the Fathers in the
Council of Constantinople, and that neither a Presbyter contemn his own Bishop,
nor a Bishop contemn his own Metropolitan. And, Ib. Can 15.
bating the case of Heresy, if any Bishop, on pretense of other personal
Crimes, shall depart from the Communion of his Metropolitan, before Synodical
Sentence passed upon him, he is guilty of Schism, and, though there is nothing
else against him, the Holy Synod decrees him to incur a Deposition. And so
strict was this dependence, upon the Alexandrian Patriark or Metropolitan of
Egypt, binding them (...). P. 312.
in all things to wait for his Sentence, to (...), Ib.
do nothing without him, nor (...), P. 314. Council. Chalced. Part 2. Act. 4.
Tom. 3. Conc. Ed. Bin.
beside or against his Approbation: that, on the deposition of their
Metropolitan Dioscorus in the Council of Chaliedon, the Egyptian Bishops pray,
they may not be compelled to subscribe Pope Leo 's Epistles, before they had a
New Metropolitan to head them: and Ib. p. 315.
accordingly, their subscription was respitted by the Council, till they should
have got one.

And for maintenance of this Union, of several Diocesses into one Province, by
a joynt-dependance of the several Bishops on their Metropolitan, and adherence
to him; it has been the great Rule of the Catholic Church, that none shall be
made a Bishop of the Province without him. In Consecration of Bishops, (...),
Conc. Nic. 1. Can. 4.
the validity of all that is done shall be reserved to the Metropolitan, says
the great Council of Nice: and (...), Conc. Nic. 1. Can. 6. vid. and Conc.
Antioch. Can. 19.
if any one is Ordained a Bishop without his consent, it determines, (and calls
it a thing altogether manifest,) that he ought to be no Bishop. It has likewise
been another Rule thereof for the same purpose, that no Synods for the common
Concern of the Province, be held without them. (...), Conc. Antioch. Can. 20.
The Metropolitanes being to summon the Bishops of the Province, and it not
being lawful for any to make Synods of themselves, without them who have the
Metropoles committed to them, as the Council of Antioch declares. Yea, that no
matters of common concern to the Church, in any Country or Nation, be
transacted without him. (...), Can. 34. Ap. and Council. Antioch. Can. 9.
The Bishops of every Country and Nation, being in duty bound to own him, who
is the chief among them, etc. and to do nothing that looks beyond their own
Precincts or Diocesses, or referring to the common state of the Church, without
his sentence, as is Ordained in the Apostolical Canons, and repeated in the
Council of Antioch. And the more firmly to secure this regard and dependence,
which, for maintenance of this Provincial Union, is due from Bishops to their
Metroplitanes, they make solemn Oath at their Ordination, to pay all due
Riverence and Obedience to him, as in our own Office of Consecration.

And as there is this Provincial, and National Union of Churches, which is thus
secured by the dependence of Bishops on their Meropolitanes; so may there be
National and Provincial Schisms, or Breaches thereof. And such there are, when
Bishops, and their Clergy and People, break off from their Metropolitan, not
falling or receding from his Ecclesiastical Authority over them; and create to
themselves an opposite Primate, whom they set up against him. For then, they
will make ordinations, and hold Provincial or National Synods, and dispatch
matters of common or National concern, without him: so breaking all the Rules
Provincial or National Union, and dividing themselves from their Head, as he is
called in the Can. 3. 4. Ap.
Apostolical Canons. And when once an Anti-Primate or Metropolitan is made the
Head of a Schism, it spreads it into all Dioceses, which will own him, and
profess to bear Canonical Obedience and Subjection, or adhere to him. So that
in such a Schism, all Dioceses of the Province come in, who do not disclaim the
Schismatical Head, and stand off from him.

5. Lastly, when there is not only a setting up of Schismatical and opposite
Heads, but moreover this is done in opposition to pure worship and Doctrine,
and to support unchristian Corruptions of both: Then the way of worship and
Tenets themselves, are Formed into Parties. Men are divided then, in opinion
and devotion; and each way has a distinct body or society visibly to bear them
up, and profess them. And when opposite Communions, are thus set up for
opposite Worship and Articles, men's Communion must go according to their
Opinion of the worship and Doctrine. For in a breach made for these, it will
not be expected, that men should Unite themselves to those of a contrary mind,
and keep off from those of the same mind; but take part with those, who agree
with themselves. We must Choose the Church, for the sake of the Religion, and
Unite to that as Christ's True Church, which sticks to the True Religion:
Church-Unity and Association, always supposing, and following True Christian
worship and Doctrine, but never tying any to * Chap. 3. and 4. Part, 3.
go off, and separate themselves from the same, as I showed before.

Such will be the effect of the preceding Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Rules,
for keeping the Unity of the Church, and for avoiding Communion with the
Schismatical breakers thereof, and their Assemblies, when a Schism is made, by
setting up Anti-Bishops, to Head immoral, or otherwise sinful worship,
Doctrines, or Practices, as in the forementioned Cases. The meeting or
Communicating in a Schism, has a Guilt and Criminalness of its own, though the
matter of all the Prayers were Good, and the Preaching Orthodox, which they
were called to communicate in. ^^ It alone were a Bar to Communion, and would
have the forecited Effects, as I have shown. But it is stronger, when it is set
up for the Maintenance of Error, and corrupt Devotion; and when Men are (...)
into Schism, to be drawn on to other Wickedness, viz. to make (...) of Moral
Conscience, and to profane God by immoral-Prayers, as they are in the
abovenamed Cases.

CHAP. VI. Of Ordinations of Anti-Bishops, which, though always Schismatical,
are not always Nullities.
WHat I have said in the foregoing Chapter, I think may be sufficient as to the
Point of Communion with Anti-Bishops and then Adherents. But I conceive it may
not be amiss to add something further concerning their Orders; since the
validity or invalidity thereof, ^^ of greatest Consequence and Importance to
the Church at such Times.

One thing, indeed, is said by St. Cyprian, about the Ordaining an opposite or
Anti-Bishop against another, in a Church already filled, as when Novati^n was
set up at Rome against Cornelius, viz. That the Anti-Bishop is no Bishop:
whence some conclude, that in reality he has not the Episcopal Powers conferred
on him. Et cum post primum, secundu^ esse non poff^^, ^^ quisquis post unum,
qui solus esse debeat, sactus est; non jam secundus ille, sed nullus est, Cyp.
Ep. 55. p. 104. Ed. Ox.
Since after the first, there cannot be a second Bishop, says he, or two
Bishops at once in the same Church, whosoever is Ordained after one is already
in, who ought to preside alone, he is not really a second Bishop, but no Bishop
at all.

And if such opposite or Anti-Bishops, receive or retain no Episcopal Powers,
it is sure they can confer none. And then, they are really neither Bishops, not
Priests, who are Ordained by them. And so, neither good Baptisms, at least
according to the Opinion of the Africanes, nor good Sacraments, which are of
their administering. As Vid. Cyp. Ep. ad Magnum. Ep. 66. and ad Jubaianum Epist.
73. and Council. Carthag. de Bapt. Haeret. sub Cyp. ap. Cyp. page 229. and
Epist. 75. page 221. Ed. Ox.
St. Cyprian, and the Africanes, answerable to this nulling of the Ordinations,
null also the Baptisms made by Schismatics. And then, on every Ordination of
Anti-Bishops against them, there would be a new and indispensible Necessity,
for all the suffering and oppugned Bishops, to insist upon their own Powers and
Claims; lest otherwise the Church should neither have Bishops nor Priests, nor
the People any valid Sacraments and Church Administrations.

For the Anti Bishops receiving no Power or Authority for these
Administrations, from their Ordainers, their Ordination being null, as he says:
They can not be empowered, according to the Christian Rules of conferring
Powers, without a New Ordination. The conferring of Orders, or of Ministerial
Powers, is tied, by our Lord himself, to a particular way, viz. Imposition of
hands, by empowered Persons. In point of Orders, as of Baptism and the Holy
Eucharist, the effect is affixed to the Rite of God's Institution. So that such
Imposition of Hands, must give them. And if the former Imposition of Hands was
null, in these Competitions they can not have these Powers of Orders, but by a
New one. The receding of the former Bishop, or his ceasing to make any further
Competition, were they already vested with these Powers by their own
Ordination, would give the Anti-Bishops scope to exercise the same, and to do
it alone, without any Rent or Division. But such Recession, is no Ordination,
nor gives them the Episcopal Powers, if they had them not before. Yea, I add,
nor would any mere Allowance, or after-Ratification of Synods, confer the same,
as I conceive, without such New and Valid Imposition of hands. When Men pretend
they have already received these Spiritual Powers, meet Allowance admits of
their Pretenses. But I see not, how that alone should confer the Powers, if
before they wanted them. Nor does mere saying, I allow thee to be a Bishop or a
Priest, without Words not only pre-supposing, but actually and from that time
conferring Authority upon the Persons, seem enough to make them such: Which in
my Apprehension, would make little of the Power of Orders; and would be a very
lax, and cheap Salvo, to make good the Usurpations, which either now, or at any
time heretofore, have been made by Sectaries upon the Priests Office. Besides,
when they would empower Persons, even Synods themselves, or Bishops met there,
can not confer Orders, as I say, more than Sacraments, by what way they please,
but are bound up, as I apprehend, to Divine Institutions: and are not left to
dispose of Ministerial or Episcopal Powers, by way of Sentence, or of
Legislation, but only by Imposition of Episcopal Hands.

But however it might be, in the Opinion of St. Cyprian, and the African Church
of that Age; the Africans carrying the effect of Schism farther than others, to
the Nulling of their Baptisms and Ordinations: I think this nulling of all
Ordinations of Opposite or Anti-Bishops, or making them null in themselves, is
no Catholic Doctrine, nor did the Church tie it self thereto, or proceed
thereby in other Ages.

The two most Famous Schisms, headed by opposite or Anti-Bishops in the
Primitive Times, and consisting of Men, who retained the same Faith with the
Catholic Church, were those of the Novatians, and Dona^ists. But the
Ordinations of Anti-Bishops, were allowed to make Men Bishops and Priests, in
both these Cases.

One, was the Schism of the Novatians; which I think, presents us with the
first setting up of Anti-Bishops in the Christian Church, against other Bishops
keeping to the same Faith that was professed by themselves, and which is of the
more Account in this Case, because of this St. ^yprian himself speaks, saying
on Account of Novatian, when Vid. Cyp. Ep. 44. p. 85, 86. and Ep. 55. p. 103,
104. Ed. Ox.
he set up as an Anti-Bishop against Cornelius, that the second Bishop is not
really secundus, but nullus; not a second, but none at all. This Ordination of
Novatian against Cornelius, entailed a great Division and Cum per omnes
Provincias, and per Urbes singulas, ordinati sunt Episcopi, in aetate antiqui,
in fide integri, in pressura probati, in persecutione proscripti, ille
[Novatianus] super eos creare alios Pseudo-Episcopos ausus est, Cyp. Ep. 55. p.
112. Ed. Ox.
Competition of opposite Heads, upon the Church. And the Novatians, as may be
seen in Sozomen, could produce a Succession of Bishops, set up to head their
Party against the Catholic Bishops, in the great Churches. But yet, excepting
St. Cyprian and the Africanes, whom Canon Ep. ad Amphiloch. Can. 1.
St. Basil Notes to have strained the Effects of Schism too far, and to have
out-shot the Mark in these Points; though these were Anti-Bishops, the
Catholic Church did not look upon them, and the Priests Ordained by them, as
mere Laymen, or null their Ordinations, Baptisms, or other
Church-ministrations. For, on their Return to the Catholic Church, the great
Council of Nice Decrees, That (...)
such of them as should be found in the Clergy, should be in the same Order and
Degree, as they had been Ordained to in their own Party. And, that * having
received imposition (...)
of Hands, or being Ordained before: So, according to their Degree, they should
remain in the Rank of the Clergy. So that (...), etc. Conc. Nic. prim. Can. 8.
in any City, or Town, if there were none else in Orders, they still should be
the Bishops and Priests thereof. But if at the Time of their Reconciliation,
there should be a Catholic Bishop, or Priest, living there, that then the
Catholic should have Preference, and the Novatian should be content with the
Title of a Bishop, (without the Administration); or with a Presbyter, or
Chorepiscopus's Place, that there may not be two Bishops in a City at once.
Yea, and before such Return or Reconciliation to the Church, in great
straitness or want of opportunities for Worship otherwise, the Catholics
resorted to their Churches, to partake of Ministerial Offices from them, as
Hist. Ecc l. 4. c. 20. and Soc. l. 2. c. 38.
Sozomen reports they did in the Arian Persecution under Constantius.

The Other, was the Schism of the Donatists, Optat. Milev. l. 1. p. 40, 41, 42,
etc. Ed. Par. Albasp.
begun by Men professing the same Faith, by the setting up of Majorinus as and
opposite or Anti-Bishop against Caecilian, the true and Canonical Bishop of
Carthage. This Schism set Africa in a Flame, and quickly multiplied into a
Number of Anti-Bishops and their Abettors, to confront the regular. Bishops of
the African Churches. The Case of these Anti Bishops, came about the Year of
Christ 314, to be determined by the Synod under Melchiades at Rome. And there,
to heal the Division, Melchiades and the Synod, as St. Austin Beati Melchiadis
ultima prolata est sententia -- paratus Communicatorias Literas mittere, etiam
iis, quos a Majorino ordinatos esse constaret: ita ut quibuscunque locis duo
essent Episcopi, quos dissensio geminasset, eum confirmari vellet, qui suisset
ordinatus prior, alteri autem eorum, plebs alia regenda provideretur. O Virum
Optimum! O Filium Christianae Pacis, and Patrem Christianae Plebis! -- Quam
innocens, quam integra, quam provida atque pacifica Sententia! August, Ep.
Donatist. Episcopis Glorio, Eleusio, etc. quae est Ep, 162. Tom. Op. 2. p. 732.
Ed. Froben. Anno 1569.
relates, declared their readiness to send Communicatory Letters to them; even
to those, that appeared to be of Majorinus 's Ordination. And decreed, that
wherescever, by reason of the Breach, there were two Bishops, he should be
confirmed, who was first Ordained; and that for the other, another Church or
Bishopric should be provided. Which St. Austin applauds, as an innocent, and
perfect, a provident, and pacifick Judgment. And afterward, in the Council of
Carthage under Aurelius, about the Year of Christ, 419. whereas St. Austin
himself was present, concerning the Reception of the Donatists into the (...),
Conc. Carth. Can, 71.
Church, it is decreed, That the Donatist Clergy, on their return to the Church,
shall be received in their proper Honors, or Degrees of Orders; like as it is
manifest, they have been received in Africa, in Times foregoing. And when any
People, or Diocese, are converted from Donatism, if, at the time of their
Conversion, they have Donatist Bishops, who come over with them, (...), Can.
103.
without Controversy, say they in another Canon, they may have them still.

Besides these famous Instances of opposite or Anti-Bishops, the same may
likewise appear of others.

Flavianus, from a Presbyter of that Church, was set up as an Anti-Bishop, and
Ordained at Antioch against Paulinus, who had for a good while lived a Bishop
of the Orthodox in that Church, and by Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 5. p. 262.
Agreement with his Competitor Meletius, sworn to by Flavianus himself, was to
hold it alone without any New Opposition, after Meletius 's Death. This
Paulinus moreover, after the setting up of Flavianus against him, was owned for
the Bishop of Antioch, not only by the Bishops of Egypt, of Arabia, and Cyprus;
but also by the Bishop of Rome and the Occidentals, who directed their
Synodical Epistles to him, and none to Flavianus, as is related by Lib. 5. cap.
10. page 269.
Socrates, and Lib. 7. cap. 11. page 717.
Sozomen. But yet, Flavianus's Ordination was not judged null, the great
Chrysostom himself having his Priests Orders from him, as may be learned from
Vit. Chrysoft. cap. 5. page 42.
Pallqdius; and, whilst he was one of his Presbyters, preaching such excellent
Homilies, as we have of his to the People of Antioch. And without any pretense
of Nullity in his Ordination, on account the Church was filled by Paulirus at
the time thereof; after the death of Theod. Hist. l. 5. c. 23. and Sozom. l. 3.
c. 3. and l. 7. c. 15. and Soc. Hist. l. 5. c. 15. and Niceph. l. 12. c. 24.
Paulinus, and of his Successor Euagrius, without any New Ordination, he was
admitted to Communion, both by the Bishops of Alexandria and Rome, who had
rejected him as a Schismatical Bishop, whilst Paulisus and Euagrius were alive.

In the Succession of Bishops in the Church of Rome, there have been numerous
Ordinations of opposite or Anti-bishops, which have made no fewer, than 27
Schisms. And some of them, of long continuance, that, by the Ordination of
Clemens 7th. as an Anti-bishop against Urban 6th. being reckoned to have lasted
Fifty Years. But neither Bishop Bramhal asserts the Ordination of an Antipope
to be as valid, as that of a true Pope. In his defense of the Protest.
Ordination, p. Op. 1007.
these Anti-bishops, nor those Ordained by them, have been thought to want the
Powers of Orders, nor to make any breach of the continued Series and
Succession, of Apostolical Ordination, in that Church, Nor is it judged to do
so, by our selves; we concluding our own to be a right and uninterrupted
Succession of Orders, and not difowing it, in good part at least, to be derived
from them.

In the Arian Persecution, of Athanasius and the Orthodox Faith, numerous were
the unjust Deprivations of Orthodox Bishops; as of Athanasius at Alexandria,
Paulus at Constantinople, Liberius at Rome, Asclepas at Gaza, Lucius at
Adrianople, etc. These Bishops, being deposed for their adherence to the Truth,
there was a Nullity in their deprivations, as I showed Part 2. Chap. 4.
before; and notwithstanding those deprivations, they still filled those
Churches, and were the true Bishops thereof; and accordingly Soz. l. 3. c. 8.
etc. 11. and 12.
were communicated with and received as such, by the Western Synods. And that,
because the depositions were not really for other Faults, which were falsely
fixed upon their Persons; but for their holding the Nicene Faith, as the Soz.
l. 3. c. 11. p. 511. and Soc. l. 2. c. 20. p. 101.
Sufferers pleaded, and upon Examination, the Soz. l. 3. c. 12. and Julii Ep.
ad Alexand. ap. Soc. l. 2. c. 23.
Synods, and the Emperor Soz. l. 3. c. 10. and Soc. l. 2. c. 21.
Constans, found. But on their depositions, Anti-bishops were set up against
them, and obtruded on their seeral Churches, * as Gregory, and afterward
George were, against Athanasius at Alexandria; and Eusebins of Niconiedia, and
after him Macedonius, were against Paulus at Constantinople; and Felix, against
Liberius at Rome; and Quintianus, against Asclepas at Gaza; not to mention
others, in other places. And yet these Anti-bishops, being for the most part
Hen ^^ul, as well as Schismatical Bishops, were not held to want the Powers of
others, nor, if any of them left their Heresies, and returned to the Faith of
the Church, was there any new Ordination required of them, or of those who had
been Ordained by them!

Besides all this, instead of Anti-bishops being absolutely null, and in
reality no Bishops; to heal, and compose the differences, of a miserably
harassed and divided Church, on such Competitions it has been sometimes agreed,
that, whichsoever of them were the Right, on the death of either, the Survivor
should be owned, and the Church should have no other Bishop; and so all the
Ordinations, and Episcopal Acts therein, should pass through his hands, and
stand on his Authority, whilst he lived. Thus it was at Antioch, where the
Church was divided into Two Parts, (...) for the cause of the Faith, which was
common to them both; but of the Bishops, as Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 9. p.
266.
says, some owning and adhering to Mele^ius, and others to Paulinus. For, to
heal and close this lamentable Schism, it was agreed, which L. 7. c. 3. p. 700.
and Soc. l. 5. c. 5. p. 261, 262.
Sozomen calls an admirable Counsel, and expedient, that, on the death of
either, the survivor should hold the Sea alone for his Life, without being
confronted and opposed, by the Ordination of any other Person. To prevent
which, an Oath was exacted, of all in that Church, who seemed to stand fairest
for the Episcopate, and of Flavianus among the rest, that on the death of
either of the Bishops, they would not be Ordained Bishop of Antioch, whilst the
other survived. Which Agreement and Oath, being afterward Soz. l. y. c. 11. p.
717. and Soc. l. 5. c. 9. and 10.
broke by Flavianus, when, on the death of Meletius, he was Ordained Bishop
against Paulinus, cost him so much trouble and difficulty, as he found to get
himself received for the Bishop thereof, both in Egypt, Arabia, and Cyprus; and
at Rome, and among the Western Bishops, afterward.

Thus, though Men in a Schism, did ill in Ordaining others: yet were not those
Ordinations null in themselves; but really conferred the powers of Orders,
which the Persons might exercise if the Church pleased. And when once the
Persons were reconciled, and had satisfied the Church for their Schism, they
have often been allowed to officiate in Virtue of that Ordination, without
being Ordained over again, by the greatest Councils, and through the early and
later Ages of the Church.

And this shows, that their Ordinations were not null in themselves. For if
such Persons, had never received any Spiritual powers in their Ordinations,
they had none to exercise. And had the Church been of this persuasion, it would
never have admitted them to exercise those POWERS, which it believed were never
Conferred on them.

But, though these Men, even after they had fallen into a Schism, or others who
were Ordained therein, had Orders: yet was it in the power of the Church, to
deny them the Ministerial Exercise of their Orders. Men must have the Communion
of the Church as well as Orders, before they can exercise their Orders, and
minister to the Faithful in any Religious Assemblies. And though their Schism,
does not utterly divest, or exclude them from the Powers of Orders: yet it does
from the Communion of the Church, without which the Faithful, (who are not to
seek, but to shun the Ministrations of Schismatics, and Excommunicate persons)
must not partake with them in any Exercise of Orders. And to this Communion,
after once they have justly lost, and fallen from it, they are to be restored
again in Degree more or less, and to be received to the Communion, either only
of Lay-members, or else of Clergy, and to officiate according to their former
Honors, as the Church pleases.

And as to this Admission and Allowance, to exercise their Orders in its
Communion, the Church has acted variously, according as it saw cause. When
Ordinations have been made against the Rules of Unity, though the Offenders
thereby received Orders; yet, in care of these Rules, and to assert and keep up
Discipline, it has at some times denied, as well as at other times granted its
Communion to them, for their Exercise of the same, Where it judged that Rigor
expedient, on their submission, it, would receive them, to communicate as
Laymen. But, they should not be allowed the Privileges, nor permitted to act
and officiate, as Bishops and Priests, in her Communion; nor should other
Churches receive them, and join with them as such, till moreover satisfaction
had been first given to those Rules of Unity in Ordinations, which had been
broken in theirs.

And this it has done, not only in case of this great Rule, of not Ordaining a
Bishop into a full Church: but, also in case of other Rules, which are of less
Account, than it is. Thus, of Ordination into a Church already vacant, if it is
made without the Metropolitanes consent, the Council of Nice, and afterward
the Council of Antioch, (...). Con. Nic. 1. Can. 6. and Council. Antioch. Can.
^^9.
De^rce, That the Church shall not receive such an one for a Bishop. And of
Ordinations at large, without declaring the appropriate Church or Place,
wherein the Person Ordained is to officiate; the Council of Chalcedon decrees,
(...), Council. Chalced. Can. 6.
that they shall be invalid. Not to mention or insist also, on the Council of
Nice's, rejecting of the (...).
Anti-bishops Ordained by the Schismatic Meletius, (...), Epist, Synod. Conc.
Nic. ap. Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 9. p. 28. and Ap. Theod. l. 1. c. 9.
till they were confirmed by a more holy imposition of hands, as their
Synodical Epistle says; because there was an incapacity more than ordinary for
giving Orders, not only to Anti-bishops, but to any others, in his Case; which,
because it may be of use in this Argument, I shall give an Account of.

Meletius, was Bishop of Lycus in Egypt, under the Sea of Alexandria; and, as
Epiphanius Epiph. adv. Haeres. l. 2. Tom. 2. Haer. 68. c. 1.
relates, was next in dignity and power to Peter the Bishop of Alexandria
himself, And he, with his Adherents, broke off from the Unity of the Church,
and set up a Schism, separating from Peter the Bishop of Alexandria, and (...),
etc Epiph. ib. c. 3.
assembling for Prayers, and other Divine Offices by themselves; and (...),
etc. (...), etc. Ib. c 3. vid. etiam Epist. Synod. Conc. Nic. 1.
Ordaining opposite Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, for the erection of opposite
Churches, in several places, as Eleutheropolis, Gaza, and Aelia, as Epiphanius
says. And these separate erections of Churches, and opposite Ordinations, he
made, after he had been justly deposed by Peter in a Synod, (as we are assured
by Athanasius, who had the best Opportunities to understand the Truth of these
Matters, and the most cause to inquire into them, and also by Socrates
afterward.) And that too, -- (...), Athan Apol. ad Constant. page 777. Ed.
Col. and Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. page 14. and Theod. l. 1. c. 9.
among other Crimes, for his having fallen in the Persecution, to deny the Faith,
and to sacrifice to Idols. Which Crimes, when any Bishop or Clergy, were once
convicted of, by the great Rule of Church Discipline, they were never
afterward to exercise any Clerical Powers, or to officiate as Bishops and
Clergy; but, upon their Reconciliation, were to be received only to
Lay-Communion.

After such Falls, says St. Cyprian, it is in vain for any to seek to usurp the
Episcopacy; since it is manifest such Men can neither preside in the Church of
Christ, nor ought to offer Sacrifice to God. Chiefly, since it has been Decreed
by Cornelius, and by Us, and by all the Bishops of the whole World, concerning
them, that after such Offense, they may be -- Decreverit ejusmodi homines ad
Poenitentiam quidem, agendam posse admitti, ab Ordinatione autem Cleri, atque
Sacerdotali honor prohiberi, Cyp. Ep. 67. p. 174. Ed. Ox.
admitted to Penance, and the Peace of the Church, but must stand removed from
the Honor of the Priesthood and Clerical Orders. Accordingly, Basilides the
Bishop, after he had denied and cursed Christ, was very thankful, as -- Satis
gratulans, si sibi, vel Laico communicare contingeret, Id. Ep. 67. p. 173.
he says, and looked upon it as a great Favor to him, that he could be
received to communicate as a Layman. And likewise Trophimus the Bishop, when
he had sacrificed to Idols, was -- Sic tamen admissus est Trophimus, ut Laicus
communicet; non, secundum quod ad te malignorum literae pertulerunt, quasi
locum Sace^dotis usurpet, Cyp. Ep. 55. ad Antonian. p. 106. Ed. Ox.
admitted, as he tells Antotianus, only to communicate as a Layman, not to
usurp the Priests Office any more, as some malicious persons had informed him,
which made Antonianus complain of the same to Cyprian, as a Violation of this
known Rule of Discipline. And in Virtue of this, being the known and received
Rule of the Church, the Donatists sought to invalidate and overthrow the
Ordination of Caecilian, against whom they had set up their Anti-bishop
Majorinus at Carthage: Optat. de Schis. Donat. l. 1. p. 41. 42. Ed. Par. Alb.
pretending, that Caecilians Ordainers, particularly Faelix of Aptisng, had
been Traditors in the precedeing Persecution, or had fallen from Christ, and
delivered up their Bibles to be burnt by their persecutors. Which Charge, had
it been true, as it was false; would have been received and owned for a just
Exception, on both sides. And the Catholics would have rejected Caecilian,
till he could make out some better Ordination; as well as the Council of Nice
did these Egyptian Anti-bishops, that had no better Ordainer than Meletius, who
stood guilty of the like Offense. But it was rejected in Caecilians Case, as
being a malicious Forgery, the Donatists thereby impudently laying their own
Crimes on others, hoping that would hinder men from inquiring after the same in
themselves.

Indeed, as Epiphanius Epiph. adv. Haer. Haer. 68. c. 2. ^.
relates this Matter, Meletius made this Schism, and Ordained these
Anti-bishops, not after he had sacrificed to Idols, and had been Synodically
condemned by Peter for the same; but whilst he, as well as Peter, was a stout
Confessor for the Faith against Idols, and in his Zeal for the Discipline of
the Church, against Peter's easiness in admitting the Lapsers, who sought to
them, whilst they were together in Prison, for the peace of the Church. But
Athanasius, who was nearer to this Transaction, and who, after some others, was
chosen to su^ceed Peter in the same Church, is more like to understand the
Truth of this Affair, than Epiphanius was. Whom Baron. An. Tom 3. p. 41. 12,
13. ad An. 306.
Baronius, and Petav. Animadr. in Epiphan. ad Haer. 68.
Petavius look upon as mislead into this account, by some false Acts or
Histories of the Meletians, who dealt injuriously with Peter and the Catholics
in Egypt, like as the Donatists did with Caecilian and those Catholics in
Africa; on whom they labored to fix the Crime of being Traditors, whereof the
Catholics were free, but they themselves were notoriously guilty.

Thus, though their Orders were valid in themselves, without which they could
have been received at no time; yet have they not always availed to Claim and
obtain the Churches Communion, without which the persons could not be received
by the Faithful to exercise the same. And this has been, when the Church saw
fit and expedient, to insist upon the Rules of Unity in Ordinations, and more
vigorously to assert Ecclesiastical Law and Discipline.

And this, it might assert, or relax, as it saw Cause. Ecclesiastical Law and
Discipline, is not a Rule of indispensible Obligation to the Church; but such
as it may, and oft-times has receded from, on great reason and necessity. What
Rules the Church makes, the Church may alter and go off from in particular
Cases, as need shall require, and as may best serve those ends for which it
made them.

Accordingly, Rules of Discipline, have not been one and the same in all Ages.
For, to omit others, the ancient Councils asserted the Can. 4. Conc. Nic.
primi, and Can. 13. Conc. Carthag.
free Election of Bishops, (nominated here by the Prince,) to the Bishops of
the Province: And for bid the Can. Ap. 14. and Conc. Nic. Can. 15. and Conc.
Antioch. Can. 21.
Translation of Bishops, from poorer to richer Sees: And the Attendance of
Bishops, about Courts of Princes, the Council of Can. 11.
Antioch, confirmed afterward at Conc. Chalced. Can. 1.
Chalcedon, and in Conc. in Trullo Can. 2.
Trullo, forbidding them to go to the Emperor, without the approbation and
Letters of the Metropolitan. And Can. Ap. 6. and 81. and 83. and Conc.
Constant. 1 and 2 Dict. Can. 11.
excluded both Bishops and Clergy, from intermealing, and incumbring
themselves, with Secular Trusts and Administrations. All which are otherwise in
these latter Ages.

And such Rules of Discipline, as have been observed more strictly, have not
had one equal and uniform Tenor of Observation; but have been sometimes
remitted, and sometimes exacted and stood upon, as the Church was driven
thereto by prudential Reason. Thus it has been with the Canons or Rules of
Discipline, about Ordinations. Which, as the Church has sometimes insisted on,
as I noted, to vacate the Ordinations, which any Bishops made against them; I
mean, to deny the Persons its Communion, without which, whatever powers of
Orders they had received, they could not be received in any Assemblies of the
Faithful, to exercise the same: So were they at other times relaxed and
overruled by the necessities of the Church, and the Persons, on their
reconciliation, admitted to officiate in virtue of such Orders, as I think may
abundantly appear by the forecited instances. And this very Reason is given
for it, by the African Fathers in the Synod of Carthage, when they admit of the
Ordinations of the Donatists, which the Transmarine or Italian Synod had
rejected: telling Pope Anastasius, that this Reception of them to the same
Orders, was for the (...).
great necessity of Africa, -- for a better provision for Catholic Unity, and
for (...), Conc. Carth. Can. 71.
the benefit and peace of the Church.

These instances and proofs, I think may be sufficient to show, that
Anti-bishops, and others of their Ordination, have Orders; though, being in a
Schism, the Faithful ought not to join with them in their use thereof. Their
Schism, makes them Sinners in receiving, and in using their Orders, and shuts
out others from communicating therewith. But it does not utterly destroy, and
null their Orders; nor must it be said, I conceive, that by such sinful
Ordination they receive nothing or, that whatever they had formerly received,
they lose by falling into Schism, so as that thenceforward they have no Orders,
nor are Bishops or Priests at all.

The Donatists indeed, as St. Austin reports, asserted this, and taught, that
Ipsi explicent quomodo Sacramentum baptizati non possit amitti, and Sacramentum
ordinati possit amitti: quoniam dicunt, recedens ab Ecclesia Baptismum non
amittit, jus dandi tamen amittit, August. cont. Ep. Parmen. l. 2. c. 13. Tom.
Op. 7.
by breaking off from the Church, though men did not lose the Baptism which
they had received before, yet they lost their Orders, or the Authority and
Power of Baptizing. And on pretense thereof, they rebaptized those, who, since
the Breach, had been baptized by any of the Catholic Clergy,

As to which, he owns, that whilst they continue in their Schism, they sin in
exercising their Orders. Non rectedat, qui ab Unitate discedit.
They do not do right, says he, in giving Baptism to others, whilst they
themselves are broken off from the Church. -- Utrumque quidem ad perniciem
suam, quamdiu Charitatem non habent Unitatis
And it is to their own destruction, so long as they have not the Charity of
Union. -- Question nulla est -- quin perniciose habeant, pernicioseque tradant
extra vinculum Pacis.
The having Baptism themselves, and confering it on others, are both
pernicious, whilst they continue out of the Bond of Peace.

But, though they ought not to use these powers, till they have amended their
Schism: yet, as he says, they have them if they will use them, and the Acts of
Orders are not Nullities, which are done by them. De iis, qui ab Ecclesiae
Unitate seperati sunt, nulla jam quaestio est, quin and habeant, and dare
possint, and quin perniciose habeant, pernicioseque tradant extra vinculum
Pacis. Hoc enim jam in ipsa torius Orbis Unitate discussum, confideratum,
perfectum atque firmatum est.
There is no Question now to be made, says he, and it has been a thing
discussed, considered, and established through the whole World, that they, who
are broken off from the Unity of the Church, do for all that retain, both their
Baptism, and their Orders or Power of Baptizing. Siquando ex ipsa part
venientes etiam praepositi, pro bono pacis correcto Schismatis errore suscepti
sunt; and si visum est opus esse, ut eadem Officia gererent quae gerebant, non
sunt rursus ordinandi, sed sicut Baptisma in i^s, ita Ordinatio mansit integra:
quia in Praecisione fuerit Vitium, quod in Unitatis pace correctum est; non in
Sacramentis, quae ubicunque sunt, ipsa vera funt.
-- When correcting the Error of their Schism, they are received to the Unity
and Peace of the Church; if it seem needful, or expedient to have them bear
their former Offices, their Prelates are not to be Ordained again, but as their
former Baptism, so their former Ordination remains entire in them, For their
Fault lay in their Schism, which is corrected by their being settled anem in
the peace of U^ity: not in the holy institutions, either of Bapism or Orders,
which wheresoever they are really, are of validity, -- Et cum expedire hoc
videatur Ecclesiae, ut praepositi eorum venientes ad Catholicam Societatem,
honores suos ibi non administrent: non eis tamen ipsa Ordinationis Sacramenta
detra^u^tur, sed manent super^eos. Ideoque non eis in populo manus imponitur,
ne non homini, fed ipsi Sacramento fiat injuria, Aug. ^b. l. 2. ^. 13. cont.
Ep. Parmen.
-- Yea, and when on such reception to the Communion of the Church, it seems
expedient not to admit them, to the administration of their former Orders; yet
even there, adds he, is not the power of Orders withdrawn from them, but
remains still lodged in them. Which also may appear from hence, because, on
their Reconciliation, they are not made to stand among the Penitents, as other
Offenders among the people are, and there to receive penance, and absolution,
by imposition of hands: Which is omitted toward them, not because it would be
an injury to their persons, (Schism being as Criminal, if not more Criminal in
them, than it is in others;) but because it would be an injury to their Orders,
which Orders therefore must be still inherent in them at that time to give them
that Exemption: For no -- Confirmatum est, ut siquando Presbyteri, vel Diaconi,
in aliqua graviori culpa convicti fuerint, qua eos a ministerio necesse fuerit
removeri; non eis manus tanquam Poenitentibus, vel tanquam Fidelibus Laicis
imponatur, Conc. Carth. 5. Can. 11. Tom. 1. Council. p. 734. Ed. Bi^.
person in Holy Orders, as Bishops, Priests and Deacons, was liable, or ever
made to do penance, by the ancient Rules and Discipline of the Church.

And before them, Conc. Carth. sub Cypr. Suffragiis 4. 16. 19. 48. 65. 76. ap.
Cyp
St. Cyprian and the Africanes of his Age, together with Firmilian of Caesarea
in Cappadocea, carried the effect of Schism so far, as quite to set asi e all
Ministerial Acts of Schismatics. And on that Account, they equally nulled,
both their Ib. suffrag. 4. and Ep. ad Steph. 72. p. 197.
Ordinations, and their Baptisms. The powers of Baptizing, and Ordaining, and
of doing other Ministerial Acts, are powers of the Holy Ghost. And by Schism,
in their Account, the (...), St. Basil. Canon. Ep. ad Amphiloch. Can. 1. vid.
and Ep. Firmil. ap. Cyp. Ep. 75. p. 221. Ed. Ox.
Schismatics fell from the Grace of the Holy Ghost; and, having lost it
themselves, were no longer empowered to confer it on others, either in Baptism,
or Ordination, being thence forward, as to these powers, as mere, Laymen, as
St. Basil recites their Opinion.

But this, St. Basil thinks was a straining things too far; and others of Asia,
as he Can. 1.
says, were altogether of another Opinion: So, in his Canonical Epistle, which
was received into the Code of the Universal Church by the Can. 2.
sixth Council in Trullo, he admits those Ministerial Acts and Baptisms, when
done by Bishops, or by others of their Ordination, in a Schism.

Yea, and even Cyprian and those Africanes, who were for nulling these Acts and
Baptisms of Scismaticks, seem to have been for this only in regard to their own
Communion, or by denying Communion to them in their own Churches, in way of
asserting Discipline and Canons; but not to have thought them naturally, and
essentially null in themselves. And this, I think, is plain from hence.
Because, though, in care to keep up Discipline, they nulled these Acts as to
their own Communion, in the case of any of their own Members: Yet they declare,
that if any other Churches admit them, they will not break Communion with them,
on account thereof. Neminem judicantes, aut a jure Communionis aliquem, si
diversum senserit, amoventes. Praeloqu St. Cyp. in Synod. Carthag. de Rebapt.
Haeret. ap. Cyp. p. 229. and Cyp. all: Jubaianum Ep. 73. p. 210. Ed. Ox.
We judge none, nor will exclude any from our Communion, who shall be of
another Opinion, says St. Cyprian at the Head of the Council of Carthage, when
they made this Determination. And again, in another Council, when they writ to
Stephen of Rome to concur with them, in rejecting, Si qui Presbyteri, aut
Diacon^ -- postmodum Perfidi ac Rebels contra Ecclesiam steterint -- and
contra Altar unum -- Sacrificia foris -- offerre conati sunt; eos quoque hac
condition recipi cum revertuntur, ut communicent Laici, and satis habeant quod
admittantur ad Pacem, qui Hosts Pacis extiterint, and c. Cyp. and caeteri
Stephano Fratri, Ep. 72. p. 197.
not only the Baptism, but the Ordination of Men in Heresy or Schism, and in
receiving them, when they returned to the Church, only to Lay-communion: They
declare, that Scimus quosdam quod semel imbiberint nolle deponere; -- sed salvo
inter Collegas pa^^^ concordiae vinculo, -- Qua i^ re nec nos vim cuiquam
facimus aut Legem damus, I^. p. 197, 198.
if any of their Brethren, who have imbihed another Opinion, are still for
sticking to their former Sentiments, they are not forcing any, nor for breaking
Communion with those, who are for preserving that Bond of Concord and Peace,
which ought to be upheld in the College of Bishops. So that if any Persons of
such Baptism, or Ordination, came to them with Communicatory Letters from any
other Bishops; they would admit them to all Acts, whether of Lay, or Clerical
Communion, in Carthage and Africa, which they had been admitted to at home, the
denial whereof, as I showed Ch 27 Part 3.
before, had been to break Communion with other Churches, which they disclaim.
And if they would admit them to communicate thus with them in their Churches,
they could not think, either their Baptisms or Ordinations, null in themselves.
For the Communion professed in the Creed, is a Communion of Saints, or
Christians, who are listed or made Christians, by Baptism; and Clergymen, by
Ordinaetion: and there is no admission of Un-baptized Persons, to those Acts
which are proper to the Faithful; or of Un-ordained Persons, to those
Privileges and Functions which are peculiar to the Clergy, in the Church (...)
Christ.

But against all this it may be Objected, that there it to be but one Bishop at
once in a Church, as Quisquis post uhum, qui solus esse debeat, etc. Cypt.
Epist. 55. page 104.
St. Cyprian alleges, and as the great Council of Nice afterward (...), Conc.
Nic. primi Can. 8.
provides: and that the Bishop in the Church, is the Principle of Unity. And
that the admission of the Ordination of Anti-bishops, will be against the
Nature of the Spiritual Monarchy, the Nature of Monarchy not admitting of two
at once. And, as the Throne can hold but one, so the Electors, where the
Monarchy goes by Election, can choose but one: who being once chosen, they can
elect no more, nor can confer the same powers on any other, till the Throne
becomes vacant again.

But as to the Bishops being the principle of Unity, that respects the Peoples
Duty, of holding Communion with him; his being the Principle of Unity to the
Church, binding the Church to depend on him, and incorporate under him, and to
communicate with him. And as to this, the Members, who are already subject to a
rightful Bishop, are not to admit of a second Bishop. That is, if such an one
is set up, they are not to unite themselves to him, and turn over to his
Communion, as I think may sufficiently appear, from what I have Part 3. Chap.
1. and 5.
above discoursed on that Point; but are to stand off from him, as from one
that makes a Schism. And thus every Church as a Spiritual Monarchy, is not to
be possessed by two at once, since all must adhere to one: And though the
second, who is set up in opposition, be a Bishop, yet he is not their Bishop,
nor may any of them break off from their rightful Head, to join in his
Communion.

But though the Anti-bishop in any Church, can not oblige or hold all the
Members thereof to himself, as the principle of Unity; yet may he have all,
that is of the essence of Episcopacy. For, to be an Head of Union in the
Church, is not of the essence of a Bishop. It may be separate from the
Episcopal powers; as it is, in all Bishops falling into Heresy, or Schism. For
they are no longer Heads of Union, since none are Vid. 1 Part 3. c. 4, 5.
bound to follow them, but all are to break Communion with them. But yet they
are Bishops still, and do not thereby fall from the powers of Ordination, nor,
on their Reunion to the Church, need to be Ordained again.

It Is true, one main use of Episcopacy, is to be a means of Unity. But yet, it
is not so for this use, as to be nnll, or cease, when it misses, or fails
thereof. Even as Baptism, or the Eucharist, are for Unity: 1 Cor. 12, 13.
We being all baptized into one Body; and being 1 Cor. 10. 17.
one Body, as partaking all of one Bread, as the Apostle says. But yet, they do
not always cease, or fail of their effects, when administered in breach thereof:
and Baptism, as was held by the ancient Church, and as we all hold now, is
still valid, though performed by Schismatics. When they miss of this, they
have other uses. As the Sacraments, besides keeping Unity among the Members,
enter and ratify the Covenant of Grace. And Episcopacy, besides the use, of
keeping the Church one and unbroken is for administration of the Word, of
Prayers, and Sacraments, and for Ordaining others to do the same. And though
all these ought to be exercised in the Unity of the Church, and it is a great
Sin when it is otherwise: yet such sinful Exercises, are no Nullities, as if the
Persons had no powers, or as if the Administrations had no effect at all.

In the State Monarchy, I grant, that the Regal Powers, and this use of their
being a principle of State-Unity, are more closely and constantly connected.
And that, as he, who has the Regal Powers, is the principle of State-Union: so
he, who is no such principle, and to whom the People are not bound to unite,
has truly no Regal Authority or Powers. And in Elective Kingdoms, if, whilst
the Throne is full, the Electors, (whose power of choosing is only in
Vacancies,) pretend to choose another; they really confer no Regal power, nor
make a King; but an Usurper. This is, because secular powers, are more limited
to Territories and Precincts; and because no King, can be a King at large, but
must only be a King, of such or such a Place, or Countries.

But in the Spiritual Monarchy it is otherwise. For the Collation, and Reception
of the Episcopal Powers, is not with precise Limitation to such a particular
place or Diocese; but indefinite, or with respect to the Church at large. Or
expressed, as it is in our Form of Ordination, by receiving of the Holy Ghost
for the Office of a Bishop, for the Church of God. Which makes any person, not
a mere Local, but a Catholic Bishop; or one vested with Episcopal powers, and
under no want of inherent Authority to exercise Episcopal Acts, (if, as a
Conscientious Lover of Unity, he be not otherwise restrained by Rules of
maintaining Unity and Order,) in any part of the World. The first Bishops,
being chosen from among the first Converts, were first vested with powers; and
then, by gathering more Profelites, were to get Subjects, and enlarge
Territories, being Ordained Bishops of those, (...), Clem. To. Ep. 1. ad Cor.
p. 89. Ed. Ox.
who should afterward believe, as St. Clement says. And the Holy Apostles, who
stood vested with all the Episcopal powers, were not tied to any place; but, by
Christ's Commission, were left equally, and indefinitely, to the whole Church.
And till the great Council of Chalcedon, which was held about the Year of
Christ 451. were the Periodeutai or Circuitors; so called, as (...), Zon. in
Can. 57. Council. Laod.
Zonoras observes, because they were to go about hither and thither, to keep
the Faithful in their Duty, not having any fixed Place or Chair of their own. At
the Synod of Laodicea, about the Year of Christ 36^. it is Vid. Council. Laodic.
Can. 57. and Bals. and Zonar. in Can.
left to these Periodeutas, to supply the want of Fixed Bishops, in those places
and Countries, that were not thought considerable enough to have a Bishop fixed
among them. And afterward, at the time of the Council of Chalcedon, mention is
again made of them. As of one (...), Council. Chalced. Part 2. Act. 10. p. 382.
Tom. 3. Council. Ed. Bin.
Balentius, whom, being a scandalous Liver, Iba^ is accused in the Council, to
have Ordained Presbyter and Periodeutes. And of one (...), Ibid. Part 2. Act.
4. p. 323.
Alexander, who, in the same Council, is styled the most Reverend Presbyter,
and Periodeutes.

This great Council of Chalcedon, indeed, (...), etc. (...), Conc. Chasced.
Can. 6.
forbids any Presbyter, or Deacon, to be Ordained absolutely, or at large, i.
e. without having, and declaring the appropriate place, or seat, wherein he is
to officiate; and (...), Ib.
vacates the Ordinations, which shall be made otherwise. And the same has been
done since by the Canons of other Councils, Council. Lat. 3. c. 5. and Conc.
Londin. Anno Dom. 1200. ap. Bin. Tom. 7. Conc. p. 788. and Canon. Eccles.
Anglic. Can. 33.
forbidding any to be Ordained sine Titulo, without a Title, to some certain
Place, or Benefice.

But these Local Limitations, or Appropriations of place in giving Orders, come
not in, for the necessity and essence of Ordination. And therefore some are
excepted therein, and allowed still to be Ordained without them; whose
Ordinations are notwithstanding as valid, as theirs who are Ordained with them.
Thus, Fellows, and Chaplains of Colleges; and Masters of Arts, who have been
able to live five years of themselves in the Universities, etc. are excepted by
our Can. 33. Eccl. Anglic.
own Canon: and Nisi sort talis, qui Ordinatur, extiterit, qui de sua, vel
Paterna Haereditate, subsidium vitae pos^it habere, Council. Lat. 3. cap. 5. p.
658. Tom. 7. Council. Ed. Bin. Paris. 1636.
they, who have Patrimony, and Provision of Maintenance of their own other
ways, are excepted by the Canon of the Council of Lateran. And if such
Limitation of place, were of the essence of Ordination; they could be but once
placed, as they are once Ordained, and not remove from place to place without a
new Ordination. But they were brought in, for a prudent provision, to keep the
Clergy from being burdensome; or to prevent more entering into Orders, than are
requisite for the Churches Needs, or can live upon its maintenance, as appears
by the Canons themselves.

Moreover, Bishops, when for this purpose, and for maintenance of Unity and
Order, they are tied up to places in their Administrations; besides the local
relation, of Bishops of such a place, who are to have a more special regard for
their own proper Division: they stand also, as I have Part 3. c. 4.
already showed, under another relation, of Cathalik Bishops, or of Bishops of
the Church at large, who, as there is need of it, and as occasion is offered,
are to have a general inspection and regard too for all the rest. Etfi D^stores
multi sumus, unum tamen Gregem pascimus, Cyp. Ep. 68. p. 178. Episcopatus unus
est, cujun a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, De Unitate Eccles. p. 180. Ed.
Ox.
The collection of all Churches, as St. Cyprian says, is but one Episcopate;
and those many People, who are fed, and inspected by so many Pastors, make all
but one Flock. Whereof particular Dividends are so entrusted to every single
Bishop, as to make them stand obliged and accountable, not only for their own
rata pars, that is their proper share or division; but, as Partners in a Bond,
each of them pro solid, i. e. for the whole sum.

These local Limitations, and Appropriations of Precincts, to have every Bishop
the Bishop of some place, and to have but one Bishop at a time in a City or
Place, are great and necessary Rules, it is true, of Order and Unity. And all
the Pastoral Powers, are most highly served by having them to direct their
Exercise; and would be mightily disturbed, and hindered of their end, by the
want thereof: So that they are conscientiously, and carefully to be observed,
and maintained in the Church.

But their Necessity, is for Order and Unity, not for the Being of Episcopacy.
And when there are two Bishops, heading separate Churches at once in a place;
that duplicity, must only prove one to be a Schifmatick; but does not prove
him, as I think may sufficiently appear from what has been here discoursed, to
be no Bishop. Nay, while this separation of Churches could be without the Guilt
of Schism, as it was in the first standing off of the Jews from the Gentile
Converts, and as the blessed Apostles themselves allowed it should be for a
time, till the Jews could be brought to see the Lawfulness of communicating
with Gentiles, which was contrary to all their former received Opinions: I say,
whilst such separation was to be tolerated without imputation of Schism, to
suit the necessity of the Church during their prejudices, it is very likely
there were two Bishops set up in the same place by the Holy Apostles
themselves. Thus, in the City of Rome, it is probable, that at first there were
at once two Churches, one of Jews, and the other of Gentiles, gathered there by
the two Great Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul. Epiphanius says of both these
Apostles, that at Rome, they were (...) Epiph. Haer. 27. Sect. 6.
both the first Apostles, and the first Bishops. And sets down the Bishops in
the first Succession of that Church, double. Of the Roman Bishops, this, Ib.
says he, is the succession, Peter and Paul, Linus and Cletus, Here Clemens is
the first who is set single, under whom, I suppose, was the Union of both
Churches; who, on this score, is made the first Bishop in some Reckonings, viz.
as being the first over both Churches so united.
Clemens, Euirdstus, Alexander, Xystus, and so on. And this is thought to be
the best Reconciliation of those various accounts, of the first Successors to
the Holy Apostles, in that Church. And the like may reasonably be thought of
other Churches, where Jews and Gentiles lived intermixed; Epiphanius noting it
as a thing extraordinary and unusual in the Church of Alexandria, (which was a
place much inhabited and resorted to by the Act. 6. 9.
Jews, and where the Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 16. and Niceph. Call. l. 2. c.
42. etc. 35.
first Church was planted by St. Mark, who was made Bishop thereof by St. Peter
the Apostle of the Jews,) (...), Epiph. Haer. 68. Nu. 6.
that it had never at any time had two Bishops in the same City at once, like
other Cities. So that, what the having of two Bishops in the same City at once,
strikes at, is the Duty of Church-Unity. But where it could be tolerated
without imputation of Schism, and was not destructive of the required Unity,
(as it was not in those first beginnings of the Church, when God was pleased
for a time to tolerate the former separation between Jews and Gentiles, till
the Jews had out-grown their Prejudices against communion with Gentiles,) it
was not destructive of, or inconsistent with the Being of Episcopacy.

Thus, is not the opposite or Anti-bishops Ordination, but only his Communion
excluded, by having but one Bishop in a Church at a time, and by the rightful
Bishops being the Principle of Church-Union. Because another is their rightful
Bishop, he can not be the Bishop of that place or Diocese, since they can not
have two Bishops at once. And because that other is their principle of Union,
they are not to communicate with him, as I have shown at large in the preceding
Chapters. But though he is not their Bishop, nor is to have the communion of
the Faithful by reason of his Schism; yet he may be a Bishop, and have the
powers of Orders, by imposition of Episcopal Hands in his own Ordination. So
that among such Anti-bishops and their adherents, we are to lament the loss of
Unity and Church communion: but not of all Orders and Baptisms, as if, by such
Schism, they were rendered utterly incapable, either to baptize or ordain, and
so were like to have neither Priesthood nor Christianity left among them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Excuseableness of the Peoples receiving Ministerial Offices
from Men in a Schism, rather than live without any at all.
BUT under such Divisions, the rightful Bishops and Clergy, supposing the
sufferers to be in the right, may be too few to give general opportunities, for
all those good Christians who would keep to them, to communicate in Ministerial
Offices. And in vast numbers of places, for the People to shun communion with
the Clergy adhering to the Anti-bishops, or taking part with them, will be to
have no communion at all in any Ministerial Offices, since they can not have
them from any others. I do not say it will be so with the Clergy themselves,
whose part and place being to afford Ministerial Offices, they need not want
them unless they please: and if they can have any, though but one or two to
join with them therein, they may minister in an Holy Assembly, who have Christ
in the midst of them, as Matthew. 18. 20.
he himself says. But though they will not fall under this necessity, nor have
such ground to plead the favor of this Case; yet the People often may. And
supposing the Schism, what is to be done by the People in this case? If they
are careful to shun these Ministerial Offices from the hands of Schismatics,
in places where they can have them from others; may they not, without
imputation of overlooking the criminalness of Schism, have recourse to them as
a Make-shift, especially if they profess and give out that they do it only on
that account, where they can have none else, or rather than live without any at
all?

I hope, See Dr Ha^mond's Pract. Catech. l. 2. Sect. 1. on the Beatitude of
Meekness.
they may, and that the necessity of having public Worship and Ministerial
Offices, will excuse the fa^iltiness and obliquity of having it at the hands of
one communicating in a Schism, or out of the Unity of the Church.

To persuade this, I observe, that Schism is breaking the one Body into
Parties, or making sedition in the Church. And the spirit of Schism, or the
malignity of having to do with a Sedition or Party, is as it is an owning or
esp^usal thereof, and that in opposition to the true Body. But when in mere
necessity, men, who live among them, have to do with such, and profess they
take up with them only because they are in want of others, whom, as they ought,
so they gladly would associate and join with; such professed serving of their
own necessity, and disapproving of the others Party, is not to own and espouse
them. And much less is it to take their part, and stand by them against the
true body: since this coming near them at all, is only for want thereof; and
before they appear to oppose the right, they should be put into the opportunity
of siding and closeing with it. So that where they can have no assemblies for
right communion, the making a shift with the other for that time, speaks no
opposition against them.

I grant, to stand quite off from them, and to have no communion or
correspondence with them in their separate ways, is the clearest disclaiming of
any Schism, or Sedition. And this, as it may be paid, so is more reasonably
exacted, under the settlement of a right Government. But under others, when the
disobedient have got all into their hands, and make the number in all places,
this way of disclaiming, by refusing all communion and correspondence, admits
of some relaxation and abatements. It does so plainly in the Civil State, where
some dealings and correspondence of the dutiful and well affected with the
Rebels, which would have been sentenced as Rebellion in better times, will not
then be reputed rebellious. And under like prevalence of Schisms, which leave
no opportunities of communicating with any else, I think such abatements may
also find place in the Church too. Especially, considering the necessity of
public communion and Church assemblies, the great defectiveness and scarcities
whereof had almost dropped and lost Religion in the Patriarchical Age. And also
considering the necessity, which our Religion in particular lays upon
Communion, the Communion of Saints being one of the things professed in the
Creed; which may make it more reasonable to presume such abatements in favor
thereof. when there is no opportunity of Ministerial Offices by any others, to
communicate with.

But that the necessity of having some Ministerial communion, will be an excuse
in such case for the faultiness of having this at the hands of one ministering
in a Schism, when it can not be had from others; seems reasonable to me, from
considering the Nature and Importance of things; and the abatements God himself
has been willing to make on such necessity, with other like Duties; and I think
it was so held and practiced by the Church and People of God, when they could
have no Ministerial Offices but from Schismatics, and also to give Relief in
some other compassionable cases about communion, which have only like plea for
abatements, as this case has.

1. As to the Nature and Importance of the things themselves, public worship,
or communion in Ministerial Offices, is a duty more of natural and essential
Obligation; to pay such public worship, being naturally incumbent on all men.
And withal, it is so important in it self. For Communion in Ministerial
Offices, or in common and public Worship, must both declare, or testify the
sense, which Mankind have of their common or public Lord; and also sustain, or
bear it up in the World. It is the way for God, who most justly claims and
expects the worship and service of all his reasonable Creatures, not to be left
without Witness, but even in a degenerate and rebellious World, to have some
always visibly standing by him, and paying him his due honor and homage. It is
also the way for him, to preserve alive a sense thereof among all his other
Subjects and Children, whom he, as a common Lord and Father, is concerned
continually to make acquainted therewith, and to try with the power and
influences thereof.

For by this means, he sets forth his worship and truths, as a Light, to shine
out to all that are in darkness; and sets this light upon a candlestick, or
collects the bearers thereof into a body or City; and places this City upon an
Hill, as our Savior Mat. 5. 14, 15, 16.
says, to make it conspicuous, and that it may force it self upon the
observation of all, who are at a distance. And if any are willing, to pay this
Almighty Lord, his due honor, and homage; it will train them up daily, in the
knowledge, and observance thereof. If they are unwilling, and averse thereto;
it will serve to make them willing by degrees. For such daily representation,
of God's public worship and homage before their eyes, will be a daily reproof
of their ungodly Violations, or Neglects thereof; and make them uneasy
therein, and by degrees awaken, and stir up those natural and innate feeds of
Truth and Piety, which God has planted in all men's Souls, though, under such
Neglects or irreligious ways, they lie dormant, and seems as if they were
buried, or almost quite lost, in theirs. Or, if after all, they shall
obstinately shut their eyes against this Light so shining out upon them, and
persist in their wickedness and irreligion; it will clear the Justice of an
Injured God, when he comes to punish them for the same, and leave them wholly
without excuse.

Yea, this public worship is necessary, at least as to a great part of Men, or
as to the keeping them up in any considerable Numbers, to keep up Religion and
Devotion, not only among others, but in their own breasts. For Devotion is to
be upheld and improved in our Spirits, by exercise: which, as they have
Provisions for, and are called to; so all devout People are careful to comply
withal, on the constant returns of these opportunities. But though we need to
use this exercise to keep it on, we need use none at all to wear it off our
minds, which by mere neglect thereof, will sink into forgetfulness of what is
good, and into sloth and indevotion, of themselves. Their progress therein, is
like that of heavy Weights up hill, which need a constant hand to raise and
carry them on, but, when that is once off, have enough in their own Weight to
make them roll down again. And this, all may find by their own experience, men's
pious affection, as any heedful Observer will soon perceive, unavoidably
decaying, and going back back for want thereof. Which makes devout minds,
justly to dread the want of such opportunities for Ministerial Offices, as a
starving of their Religious affections. And for this Reason, among others, St.
Paul is earnest in pressing attendance on Religious Assemblies, and cautions
them against for saking the same, because that would endanger the loss of
Religion it self. Not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as the
manner of some is, says he to the persecuted Hebrews, when he labors, to fix
them in holding fast the Christian Profession without wavering, and to guard
them against such things, as would most dispose them to draw back, and
apostatize from it, Heb. 10, 23, 25. 26. 39.

And for these, and such like Reasons, public worship is of so great account
in God's sight, that he has framed much of our Holy Religion, with a particular
eye to it; and instituted several great, and most important things, for the
sake of it. Such is the Church it self, which is instituted for joint and
public worship. The Society thereby introduced among us, is to associate us in
the common worship of that God, whom we all confess: and the Fellowship arising
thence, is to make us all Fellow-worshippers. Such also is the Ministry, which
God has appointed for his public Service, or to minister unto him, either as
his Mouth unto his People, or as their Mouth unto Himself, in public
Assemblies or Congregations. Such likewise are those set and solemn Times for
worship, which he has instituted both among Jews and Christians, and which are
all designed for public worship in Joynt-Assemblies. Yea, even our Prayers,
which are the Acts of worship, express communion and joynt-society, being put
up according to his appointment in the plural number; he having taught us to
say, Our Father which art in Heaven, and give us this day, etc. which speaks
the communion and concurrence of more besides our selves. And the Holy
Sacraments, those most eminent Acts and Instances of worship, are ordained for
Asts of society and partnership, or of communion therein. 1 Cor. 12. 13.
We are all baptized into one body. And 1 Cor. 10. 17.
We, being many, are one bread and one body. And v. 16.
The bread which we break, is the communion of the body of Christ; and the cup
of blessing which we bless, is the communion of the blood of Christ, as St.
Paul says. And because by their institution, they are not only to be Acts of
worship, but of public worship, or of joyntconcurrence or communion therein;
therefore does Rubr. in Commun. of the Sick.
our Church allow no Sacrament even to the Sick, without three, or two at the
least, to make a Congregation; and condemns the private and solitary Masses of
the Church of Rome, which are eaten by the Priest alone.

Such is the natural obligation, and such the necessity and importance of
public worship, which is one of the greatest visible supports of Religion,
without which it is to be feared it would sink, and be in danger to fail in the
Earth.

Whereas the paying of this worship in Church-Unity and dependence on a Bishop,
though it be a duty too, yet is a duty more of positive obligation. For to have
Bishops, and to pay all our public worship in communion with them, is no
natural duty, which always was incumbent on all men; but came in with
Christianity, by positive Institution, or particular Revelation. And besides,
though important in it self, yet, in comparison, it is of less importance, not
only the natural parts of the Ministration, but the positive too, as the Holy
Sacranients, etc. being, I conceive, of more Weight. And though the want of
this Union under our own Bishops, by the opposite Passions and angry Tempers
which Schism introduces, do greatly eat out true devotion; yet does it not
make so wide a breach and waste therein, as the want of any Ministerial Offices
at all would do.

Now in any competition of Duties, the Rule is, that things of positive
obligation, shall give way to things of natural obligation; and positives of
less importance, to positives of more importance; in those cases, and times,
where we can not do both. The natural there, takes place of the positive; and
the greater, sets aside the less. Particularly, as to the keeping up Religion,
and Church-unity and Association, if in any case we can not maintain both, but
a competition happens to arise between them; the care of Church-unity, must
give way to the care of Religion. We must look then to keep up as much
Church-unity, as we may do in keeping up Religion, which being once lost,
Church-unity and association signifies nothing. And not begin the other way, to
content our selves with keeping up so much of Christian Religion, as we do in
strict observance of the Rules of Church-society and Union. For Christ's first
and chief design, was to plant and preserve the Religion. And that
Church-unity, which is either valuable, or desirable in the sight of God, is
Church-unity with true Religion, not Church-unity without it: and we are tied
to keep up Church-union for Religion's, not Religion for Union's sake, as I
showed Part 3. Chap. 4.
before. And therefore the duty and obligation to communicate in some
Ministerial Offices, will be a fair excuse for doing this out of the way of
Church-unity or dependence on our own Bishops, when both can not have place.

And thus I think the Scripture determines in such cases, and that,

2. These abatements, are what God himself has been willing to make on such
necessity, in other like duties. He has not required, that men should stick so
fast to those duties, or parts of duty, which are inferior, or subservient, or
appendages unto others; as that for their sakes, they should drop other duties,
which are principal or superior to them: nor is he willing, that in care, of
preserving their practice of lesser Virtues inviolable, they should at any time
let the weightier fall. So that to think he will abate, and relax something of
the duty of Church-union, when that is necessary to keep on the more important
duty, of public Ministration; and that he does not the the People up to such
strict care of communicating in the Unity of the Church, as must drop and let
fall all communion in Ministerial Offices, when they are not to be had, but at
the hands of those who minister in breach thereof: is only to think, that he is
ready to make the same equitable allowance, on any competition in these, as he
does on like competitions in other duties.

And that Almighty God is willing to make these abatements on such necessity
and competitions, I conceive may sufficiently appear by the following Instances.

Circumcision, and Sacrifice, and the Sabbath, are all positive duties. But
Circumcision and Sacrifice, being of more importance, they were to take place
of the Sabbath; and whenever it so fell out, that they could not observe
both, men might be excused in breaking the Sabbath Rest, Jo. 7. 22, 23.
to labor in Circumcision, as they did whenever the eighth Day of the Child's
Age, which was appointed for his Circumcision, fell to be on the Sabbath Day;
or in Sacrifices, with the labor whereof, Mat. 12. 5.
the Priests in the Temple continually profaned the Sabbath, and were
blameless, as our Lord determines. And God himself declares, Hos. 6. 6.
I will have Mercy before Sacrifice: which imports, according to our Mat. 9.
13. etc. 12. 7.
Lords allegations and applications of it, that Men should drop the duty of
Sacrifice to attend the duty of Mercy, when, for the time, they must let one
fall, and could not pay both. So, making the necessity of performing natural
duties, an excuse for the omission of positive; and the necessity of performing
more important duties, an excuse for the omission of less important, when there
is a necessity of letting one fall.

Thus also it was a positive duty, and rule among the Jews, that the Priests
should kill the Sacrifice, according to what is said in 2 Chro. 29. 24.
the Law, Lev. 1. 4, 5. The People, who brought it, as it is there ordered,
were to lay their hands upon the head of the Sacrifice. But it was left to the
Priests to kill it, as Josephus Antiqu. l. 9. c. 13.
relates. Whence the Priests were able to give the number of the Paschal
Sacrifices at any Passover, as they did to Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 17.
Cestius Gallus, as the same Author testifies. And this, is the account of the
Vid. Episcop. instit. l. 3. c. 3. p 74. and Grot. Annot. in Mat. 26. 18.
Jewish Doctors. But under 2 Chronicles. 18. 23, 24, 25.
Hezekiah, when, by reason of the great and general defection, which had been
in the days of his Father Ahaz, the Priests, who had sanctified themselves,
were too few, as the Text says, to slay all the burnt-offerings; rather than
any of the Sacrifices should drop, their Brethren the Levites slew them, and
helped the Priests therein till the work was ended, and till the other Priests
had performed their legal Cleansings, or Sanctified themselves, 2 Chronicles. 29.
34. And the same, on a like want of the regular and appropriate Ministers, to
have recourse to for this Ministration, was done again, 2 Chronicles. 30. 17.

Again, it was a positive Duty and Rule, that the legally unclean, as Lepers,
or they who had touched Dead Bodies, or any persons, either Men or Women, under
any accidents or things which their Law judged Uncleanness, should not eat of
the Passover, or other Holy things, Lev. 15. 31. etc. 22. 4, 5, 6. and Numb.
9. 6. But yet, rather than lose the Passover, at a time when there was the
greatest Reason for them to partake therein, they were allowed to let fall this
legal Rite, and the legally Unclean were admitted under Hezekiah. When he came
to the Throne, his first and chief care, was to set up a Reformation of
Religion, which had suffered so exceedingly in Achaz's Reign. And in pursuit
thereof, he calls, not only Judah, but also Israel, to the keeping of his first
Passover, at the House of the Lord at Jerusalem, which he had cleansed and
restored from the Pollution of Idols, to the worship and service of the true
God, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1. And when, upon his Letters, not only they of Judah, but
several also of Israel were come; that he might not baulk the beginning of the
Reformation, nor the People lose the end of their coming, especially they of
Israel, viz. out of Ephraim, Manasse, Issachar and Zebulon, who had never been
there before, Ver. 26
since the days of Solomon; they were admitted to eat in their legal
Uncleanness without legal Cleansings, rather than go without the Passover, tho
this was to eat it otherwise than it was written, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. And in
so doing, it is said God accepted them, v. 20.

The like I may observe of the Christian Passover, or of our Holy Eucharist.
This, by a Positive rule among us, or by our Blessed Saviors Mat. 26 27. 29.
Luke 22. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25.
Commandment, and Institution, is to be Administered in Wine. And it is not
lawful to Consecrate, or Administer the same in any other Liquor but Wine, or
the juice of the Grape, after it is perfected and purged by Fermentation. But
this positive Duty, of Doing it in Wine, seems to be meant strictly, only
whilst Wine can be had, wherewith to keep up this Holy Administration; and with
allowance to those Christians and Countries, who have no Wine, rather than live
without the Blessed Eucharist, to Administer it in some other Liquor, which
comes as near it, and is made as like to it, as they can. And Julius Bishop of
Rome, directed the -- Nam quod de expresso Botro, ^d est de uvarum Granis
Populus communicatur, valde est omnio confusum: sed si^necesse sit, botrus in
Calice comprimatur, and aqua misceatur. Julius Papa Episcopis per Egyptum.
Decreti Tert. Part, de Consecratione, Distinct. 2. cap. 7. De his qui
Sacrificando vary errabant.
Egyptian Bishops, that in case of necessity, where they could not have Wine
for this purpose, they should squeeze a cluster of Grapes into the Chalice, and
mixing some Water therewith, use it instead thereof. And like to this, is done
at this day, by the Christians of Habassinia (that large and potent Christian
Kingdom in Africa) who, Ludolf, Hist. Aethiop. l. 1. c. 9. Nu. 19. and Com. ad
Hist. Aeth op. p. 139. Nu. 71.
though they have good Grapes, yet through the heat of their Climate, or other
causes, can make no Wine thereof; and also by the Coptiles in Egypt, and by the
Christians of St. Thomas in India; who, for want of true Wine, all use Water
infused on Raisins, and fqueezed from them, as we are told by Vid. Ludolf.
Hist. Aethiop. l. 3 c. 6. Nu. 81, 82. and Com. ad Hist. Aethiop. p. 378.
those, who have given the best accounts of those places.

3. Thus the People and Church of God have held, and practiced, under the
greatest Schisms of former times.

1. It did so, I conceive, in the Schifm of the Kingdom of Israel, or of the
Ten Tribes. The good people among them, were not without Sacrifices, and
Ministerial Offices, to be had in their Synagogues and High Places, as well as
at Jeroboams Calves. And the Worship of the true God, must needs have failed,
much more, and much sooner in Israel, than it did, had it been otherwise.

In some Persecutions, indeed, raised against the Worshippers of the true God,
there were none left to Minister to them. As it was in Jezabels Persecution,
when she cut off the Prophets of the Lord, and when those Hundred Prophets,
whom good Obadiah saved, were all hid, and kept secret in two Caves, 1 King.
18. 4, 13. So that Elijah knew of none, who went about affording any Religious
Ministrations, but himself; and accordingly tells God, that of all his
Prophets, he was left alone, 1 King. 19. 10, 14. And then, the Seven Thousand
Souls, who, as God tells the Prophet, had not bowed the Knee to Baal, but kept
true to him all that time, ver. 18. could not resort to Ministerial Offices,
because they were not in the way of those, who could afford them. Or,
sometimes, when the Kingdoms were not at Wars, and when that would be connived
at, notwithstanding the Order of the Kingdom of Israel to the contrary, made at
first by 1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28.
Jeroboams wicked policy; they might go up now and then, to the Temple at
Jerusalem. As Tobit, who lived under such failure of True Worship and
Ministrations, Tob. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7.
says he did at the Feasts, carrying his First Fruits and Tenths with him, to
give to the sons of Aaron: Though in this going up, he says he was alone, when
all the Tribes, and the House of his Father, sacrificed to Baal, before they
were led away Captive by the Assyrians.

But that way of keeping up Religion, and the Worship of the true God, in those
Ten Tribes, which was both General, to the body of good People among them; and
Constant, or a way of doing it in all times: was the Ministrations of their own
Kingdom; or such Ministerial Offices, as were performed among themselves. That
is, by their own Prophets, trained up in their own Schools or Colleges; and by
their own Priests, who were to preach the Law, and to minister Religious
Offices. These Priests and Prophets, being in the place of Shepherds, were
bound to administer these Offices, and are severely. Ezekiel. 34. 2. etc. 13. 2,
3, 4, 5, etc. and Isa. 56. 8. 10, 11. and Jer. 23. 1, 2, etc.
blamed and threatened by God in Israel, as well as others were in Judah, if,
instead of Feeding their Flocks, they should only Feed Themselves. And if he
required the One, to minister them; since the Relative carriage and dependence
ought always to be reciprocal between Relatives, he must in consequence allow
the Other, I think, under this necessity to Resort to them. For I conceive, the
Pastors can not stand bound, to Preach to those, who are bound never to Hear
them; or to Minister to those, who are in no wise allowed to partake in their
Ministrations. And these Ministrations, those good People had to Communicate
in, not only at Jeroboams Calves, where God was profaned by the Worship of
Images, but also in their Synagogues, or High Places.

But now, all this Communion of the good people among them, was Communicateing
with those, who Minister'd in a Schism. For the Altar at Jerusalem, God himself
had Deuteronomy. 12. 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 26, 27. and Hos 8. 11
appointed as the only Altar, whereon they should offer any burnt offering;
setting it up for the Principle of Union, or as that, which should compact
together, or keep at one, all the Tribes of the Jewish Church and Nation. And
the New Altars at Dan and Bethel, were set up 1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28.
by Jeroboam, in opposition to the one Altar at Jerusalem. As were also all
those other Altars, which the people set up, and whereat they offered sacrifice
and burnt incense, in the usual places of their Religious Assemblies: Lev. 23.
2, 3, 4, etc.
all the Children of Israel being required every Sabbath Day, and at other
set-times, to hold holy Convocations in all their Dwellings. Or, in their
High Places, where 1 King. 12. 28, 31. etc. 13. 32.
Jeroboam built him Houses for Worship, at the same time when he set up his
Golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, and made Priests for them of the lowest of the
people; out of 1 King. 12. 32.
which Priests of High Places, he took some to be Priests at his Altar at
Bethel. At which high places, when they were free from all Heathen Idols, the
people, for their devotion and convenience, were very prone, and strongly bent
to offer their incense and oblations, as their Ancestors had done, in the 1 Sa.
9. 12. 19.
days of Samuel, and also of 1 King. 3, 2.
Solomon before the building of the Temple. And thus Prone they were, not only
in the ten Tribes of Israel, but in that of Judah too; where, under great and
careful Reformations of Religion in other respects, we read so often of the
peoples burning incense still, and offering sacrifices in the high places: As
under 1 King. 22. 43.
Jehosophat, and 2 King. 15. 3. 4.
Azariah, and Jotham, and under Mannasseh after his Repentance and Restoration
to his Throne, when though he reformed Religion, 2 Chro. 33. 17.
nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the
Lord their God only. v. 34, 35


So that the Priests in the ten Tribes, offering all their sacrifices at one or
other of these opposite altars, set up altar against altar, and called all the
people to take part with new altars, or to Cypr. ep. 69. p. 182, 183.
become guilty of a Schism. Of the Criminallness and danger whereof, they were
admonished by Hezekiah, 2 Chro.
who sent Posts and Proclamations through all Israel, to invite and call them to
come and keep the passover at Jerusalem, according to what is Deuteronomy. 16. 5, 6.
written. And this, to 2 Chro. 30. 6. 8.
prevent Gods further wrath, and carrying of the Remnant away to Babylon,
whither, ver. 7.
for this, among other provocations, he had already carried part of them. Yet,
the necessity of some public worship or ministerial offices, Legitimated this
Communion of good people in all lawful services, with these Schismatical
Ministers, after the division, when, the Kingdoms being no longer one, the
people were 1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28.
stopped from going up to worship at Jerusalem.

2. It did the same, in Legitimating Communion with the Schismatical Novatians,
when the Catholics were sore straightned by the persecuting Arians, and at a
loss for ministerial offices in other places. The persecuting Arians, were not
for Tolerating opposite Communions, but for forceing all others to Communicate
with themselves: Persecuting, as Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 2. cap. 38. p. 142.
relates, not only the Catholics, but also the Novatians, because, though
Schismatics as to point of Discipline and Anti-Bishops, they were Orthodox
concerning the Nicene Faith. But their greatest severities were against the
Catholics, to whom, as lib. 4. cap. 20. p. 571.
Sozomen says, they left no Oratories; treating the Schismatical Novatians
something more gently, to whom, as Socrates lib. 2. cap. 38. p. 144.
adds, they allowed three Churches, even in the Royal City, or Constantinople
it self.

Now in this want of Catholic Oratories, or of Ministerial Offices in
adherence and unity with their own Bishops; The Catholics, say lib. 2. cap.
38. p. 144.
Socrates and lib. 4. cap. 20. p. 571.
Sozomen, resorted to the Novatian Churches, and joined in their Assemblies and
Prayers. And yet, at that time when they did this, the Novatians were
Schismatics, who having an Anti-Bishop of their own distinct from the
Catholic Bishop of that Church, and being incorporated as a Distinct Body
under him, thereby kept up two Heads and two Bodies in the same Church, which I
think is plainly a state of Schism. Yea, and those Rigors, of refusing
reconciliation to those, who had falln in persecution, (on pretense whereof
they fell into this Schism at first, by ordaining Novatian an Anti-Bishop at
Rome against Cornelius) they still kept on. And by reason of this, which they
alleged and insisted on as their (...).
Original or Ancient Precept, they refused, as the aforesaid Authors Soc. Ib.
p. 144. and Soz. p. 571.
testify, to come to a perfect Union. And accordingly, the Communion, which
they both mention as passing betwixt them, is a (...), Soc. p. 144. (...), Soz.
p. 571.
Communion in Prayers; because, according to this Ancient Precept alleged, the
Novatians (...), Soc. l. 4. c. 28. p. 245.
denied the Communion of Mysteries or Sacraments, which are the Seal of
Remission, which, in the case of those who had fallen, they would reserve, as
Socrates observes, to God himself. So that what Communion the Catholics
thought it excusable to hold with them, in this Necessity, or want of
Ministerial Offices from their own Clergy, was held with men, who plainly
Officiated in a state of Schism.

3. It did the same in our own great Rebellion, when our Bishops were all
driven cut, and Deposed with the King. For then, the Orthodox and
Loyal-Adherents of the King and Bishops, took up with the Communion of the
Parish Churches, and thought, that for the sake of public worship and
ministerial offices, they might do so, where they had no Ministers of their own
to Communicate with. And yet, what Assemblies were, not only in a more
barefaced and wicked Rebellion, but also in a more Flagrant Schism, than the
established and complying Churches and Assemblies of that time. So that in the
Opinion of those our Ancestors, it was a good excuse, for having Divine offices
in such Assemblies, when they could have better no where else.

4. Lastly, this necessity of having some Ministerial offices, is generally
thought to Legit^mate Communion in those Churches, which have no Bishops. Thus
it is in some Foreign Protestant Churches, who have no Bishops, to Head and
Unite them; (as our own Churches had not here at home, in the days of the Great
Rebel^ion.) And yet, the people there must Unite with their ministrations,
because they must Unite with some. They must have some Divine service and
Religion. And if they must have it, they must resort to some who Minister it.
And if they can have no Ministration thereof in an Episcopal Communion, they
must take up with it from such other as they can have.

I speak of the case of the People in those Churches; and it is not the
Clergies, but their Liberty, of taking up with Ministerial Offices from the
hands of Schismatics, in want of others, which I am here discoursing of. And
in their case, the necessity is full for their excuse. For it is plain, they can
not have those Ministrations in Episcopal Communion, unless their Clergy, whom
they can resort to for the same, would receive Episcopal Ordination. And since,
in the place where their Lot is fallen, they can not have Episcopal Communion,
they will be excused for wanting it. Though worshipping God, or communicating
in Ministerial Offices, is a natural duty; yet the confining this to the
communion of a Bishop, is a positive Limitation. And necessity, though it can
discharge no natural duties; yet may sometimes excuse, and supersede positives.
So that when they can not communicate in Ministerial Offices under Bishops,
they will be excused, I hope, for communicating in the same without them.

And as to the Clergy, though I will not here discuss, or determine their case,
yet is this necessity, where it can be justly, and fully pleaded, thought by
many to bid fair, for excusing and warranting them, in Ministering without
Episcopal Powers. For at one time, the Priest hood belonged to the Firstborn.
At first it was lodged in the Patriarks. And thus we read of Abraham, that he
would command and instruct his Children, and his Household after him, in the
true Religion, Genesis 18. 18. And of him, and Jacob, and Job, and other Patriarks
offering Sacrifices. And from the Patriarks, it came to be vested in the
Firstborn, till the Levites among the Jews, were appropriated and given to God
in exchange for them, Numb. 3. 41. And this limiting it afterward to one
Tribe, or Family, as the Line of Aaron among the Jews; or to men Episcopally
called and Ordained, as it is among the Christians; were Limitations of
positive institution. And therefore necessity, which supersedes, or excuses the
want of positives, though it leave them still under the force of Naturals, is
thought to bid fair toward taking off the exactness of these latter
Restraints, and bearing men out in parting from them in those things where they
can not avoid it, so long as they still keep close to them in others, where
they can; if they have this necessity, honestly and fairly to plead for
themselves.

Now, if this necessity of Peoples communicating in Ministerial Offices, will
excuse their communicating with Ministers who have no Bishops; I see not but it
should do the same, in point of communicating with Ministers, who are broke off
from their own Bishop. For surely it is a more flagrant breach of Union, to
break off from Episcopacy it self, than from any particular Bishop; and a
deeper Schism, to cast off all Bishops, than to cast off one. And therefore
that necessity of communicating in Ministerial Offices, which is allowed to
legitimate and excuse the one, will not be denied to legitimate and excuse the
other too.

4. Besides this, of Gods People having held and practiced thus, under the
greatest Schisms of former times; in further confirmation of this Liberty, I
observe, Lastly, how it has done the same, to give Relief in some other
compassionable cases, about communion, which have only like Plea for
abatements, as this case has.

For great purposes, (and what will be alleged greater, than preventing a
total want of public worship and Ministerial Offices?) the Church has abated
in shunning the communion of Schismatics, especially before they are cut off
by judicial Censures; and of excommunicate persons.

For, in abatement of this keeping off from their communion, it has allowed men
to communicate with them at the beginning, ere Schism, yea, or Heresy it self
is fully formed, and whilst it is capable of being prevented. An Heretic, Tit.
3. 10.
St. Paul orders not to be rejected from communion, before he has had a first
and second Admonition: So that till then, in hopes of prevention, they might
Communicate with him. And accordingly, the Catholics did for a good while
Communicate with the Arians, after the bursting out of that Heresy, whilst, by
that forbearance, and by the other parties seeking still in their definitions
to come as near as they could to the truth, they conceived hopes of remedy, or
cure thereof. There being no breach of communion, on account of their different
judgments, for some time, but all Assembling together, and joining in the fame
ministrations, as Sozomen L 2. c. 32. p. 492. and l, 3. c. 13. p. 514.
says.

Or, after the Breach of Communion is made, and different Churches are set up,
though we do not go to theirs, it has allowed them to come to our Assemblies, in
hopes to cure them. Thus, at the beginning of our Reformation, after the
division from their Church, notwithstanding their Adherence to the Pope, and
all their Errors both in worship and Doctrines, the Papists were Camb. den.
Eliz. ad An. 1570.
allowed for several years under Queen Elizabeth, to come to our Churches. And
the Dissenters from the Episcopal Communion among us, are all Schismatics; but
yet they have not been driven out thereof, but allowed to join with us in
public offices, when they would come into our Churches, as still they have
been invited and encouraged to do, if they were not under sentence of
Excommunication from the Bishops Courts. Yea, though their offenses were liable
to ipso Facto Excommunications by several Can. 6, 7, 8. 9. Ecc. Ang.
Canons: Such ipso Facto Excommunications, being only sententia lata ab ipso
jure, a sentence passed by the Law, which, as the Canonists say, needs
sententiam latam a judi^e, another sentence passed by the judge, On the Words
ipso facto in a Constitution, his Note is, Et sic est Constitutio latae
sententiae. Requiritur tamen Sententia Declaratoria, Lind. in Constit. Joh.
Peccham. c. Quia incontinentiae vitium. And ib. on the Word Ferimus; Sic est
Poena sententiae latae, quam incurrit inobediens, ipso jure. Executio tamen
hujus poenae fieri non debet, nisi prius per ipsum, ad quem pertinet, Sententia
Declaratoria super hoc fuerit promulgata,
an ipso facto excommunication by any Canons, not barring men from Communion,
till there be a declaratory sentence, as Lyndwood notes. Thus also, they, who,
in Heathen Persecutions, fell to sacrifice to Idols, Cyp. Ep. 34. p. 68.
were Segregated, or shut out from Communion, by the Primitive Canons. And with
men excluded, it is made unlawful to Communicate by the Can. 10. ap.
Canons of the Apostles, and others, as I showed before. And Gaius Diddensis,
and his Deacon, were Suspended from Communion themselves, for Communicating
with Lapsers. And yet, in great need thereof, and when there was hopes thereby
to recover them; when in prison, the Egyptian Martyrs did in great Charity
Communicate with them, both at their Common Tables, and in Prayers, as (...),
Ap. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 42. p. 241. Eccl. Hist.
Dionysius Alexandrinus reports. In these and other Rules of Discipline, where
there are great Reasons for Favor and abatements, the Church it self would have
no want thereof. (...), Can. 102. Conc. in Trullo, vid. Bals. and Zon. in loc.
and Can. 3. S. Basil. ad Amphiloch,
In things, that will not bear extremities, or the Rigor of Law, as the Fathers
in the Council in Trullo, and St. Basil also in his Canons, say, they are to
Relax and make abatements, according to Custom, and the form received.

Thus, on great reason, have some equitable abatements of the Rigor of the
foresaid Rules, for shunning of Communion with men fallen into Heresy, or
Schism, or other depriving crime, still been made in the Church, and some
reasonable liberties indulged in those cases. It was thought reasonable to
recede thus, and to take these Liberties, when put thereto to serve other
peoples necessities; must it not needs be to the full as much so, when put
thereto to serve our own? It was allowable, to serve the spiritual wants of the
offenders: Can it be less so, to serve those of innocent men? So that, as it
suits, as I showed before, with the reason of things, and with the equitable
allowances made by God himself on such Competitions: It suits no less, I
conceive, with the Practice of the Church, and with the Concessions and
Allowances thereof, to take up with ministerial offices from one in a Schism,
rather than to live without any at all, or when they cannot be had at the Hands
of other men.

Albeit therefore, to avoid the the Guilt of Schism, men are to disclaim, and
stand off from the Communion of Anti-Bishops and their Adherents, and not to
Participate in their ministrations: Yet is that strictly, I think, on supposal
of Room or Opportunity to Participate more Regularly with others. But want of
other ministrations, will be an excuse for the faultiness, of seeking them from
them; and it will be allowed, I conceive, to take up therewith from
Schismatics, rather than to live without any ministerial offices at all.

And thus, under the paucity or small number of the Rightful Bishops and Clergy
their adherents, and their insufficiency, as is alleged, for affording general
opportunities, especially in a Persecuting time, which allows no freedom of
open and promiscuous Assemblies: will both a Due Conviction and Conscience of
the criminalness of Schism, and the Exercise of ^ullick Worship and Devotion,
be kept up, and provided for in the Church of Christ. They will preserve a
Conscionable sense of Schism, by owning the Unlawfulness of Communicating with
the Ministrations of Schismatics, where they can have others, perhaps on all
occasions, however for the most part, at least in competent measure, though not
in returns so constant as they wish they could; yea, and though in these cases,
they must be at some pains for these Ministrations, or have them with Peril, or
Persecutions. I say, though with Pains or Persecutions. For, in such DIVISIONS,
we must not think it an indifferent thing, which Assemblies we resort to for
Communion: nor hold our selves Free, to go among those, who are met in the
unity of the Church, in the Morning; but to a Schismatical Congregation, in the
Afternoon. Nor must any fancy themselves at Liberty, to seek Religious Offices
from men ministering in a Schism, when that is necessary to qualify themselves
for some secular office or advantage, or to serve a worldly Turn. Nor when it
is necessary to save their pains, or to shun fleshly perils, where they might
have the same Religious Offices in the Unity of the Church, but with
Persecutions. For in the abatements here pleaded for in the present case, from
Necessity, I speak not of worldly Necessity, or of abateing where it is
necessary for our worldly interests and convenience, or to prevent outward
losses and sufferings. But of Necessity for Religion, and Gods Service; for our
Duty, not for our Carnal ends: Or, of abateing of the strict observance of this
command of keeping Unity, where it is necessary to the keeping and discharge of
other of Gods Commandments happening to stand in competition therewith, which
he sets more by. And they will keep up the practice of Devotion, and the
public Ministries and profession of Religion, by admitting the necessity of
some Ministrations for an excuse; and so taking up with Ministerial Offices
from them, when they can not otherwise, though with Persecutions, be supplied
therewith, but must live without any at all.

CHAP. VIII. Of Communicating in like Necessity, where there are some Prayers
sinful in the Matter of them.
BUT in Communicating with Anti-bishops, and their Adherents, set up to head
immoral Prayers and Practices, as is set forth in the forementioned Cases,
there is not only the Schismaticalness of the Assemblies, but the sinful Matter
of the Prayers to be considered. There is a Fault in what they pay, which is a
corrupt and sinful Worship; as well as in the Society where they pay it, which
is not in the Unity of the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace, but in Schismatical
Congregations. And though the Necessity of having some Ministerial Offices, and
the want of opportunity for any others, will excuse the first faultiness, viz.
The Schismaticalness of the Assemblies: What shall such People do to get over
the second, viz. the Unrighteous Petitions, or sinful Matter of the Prayers,
which are offered up to God therein?

As to this, to concur and go along in any immoral or unrighteous Petition, or
Thanksgiving, is certainly an immoral and unrighteous thing; as praying, is
most solemnly taking part with, and endeavoring for them. Nay, to offer up
these, in Prayers and Religious Addresses, is a most impudently and horribly
profane thing; it abuses the Great and most Holy God, by making him a Present
of the most hateful Abominations; it blasphemes and asperses him, for an
immoral and unrighteous God, who can accept a Present of Unrighteousness, who
can be pleased, or think himself honored therewith, or be entreated to become
the patron and Maintainer thereof. So that when such Prayers occur in Sacred
Offices, or when they have the accessional allotment and furtherance, of set
Days, of Fasting, or Thanksgiving; no Man, who would preserve any Reverence for
God, or Respect for Religion, or Care of his own Soul, must concur therein:
but, instead of helping on, all true Worshippers of God, and Lovers of
Righteousness, as I conceive, most utterly detest and abhor them.

But in mixed Prayers, where some are holy, and some are sinful, what may be
done by those, who would pick and choose, and join with them only in the good,
but keep off from the evil?

Now as to this, the sinful mixture may be of Idolatrous Worship or Prayers.
And not to discuss, whether it may be excuseable in any Cases, to resort to
Churches, where there are such Mixtures of idolatrous service; I think however,
these are not on the same Level with others, but that there is a greater bar to
all Communion in Worship, by such Mixtures. For Idolatry, does more peculiarly
and heinously affect worship. In respect of it, God declares himself a Ex. 20.
5. etc. 34. 14.
jealous God: and so is less likely to accept of any worship in partnership
with Creatures; or, in sacred Offices, to admit of, and go halves with Rivals.
And with particular respect to this, St. Paul sets out the incompatibleness of
2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.
communicating, both with Christ and Belial; and the Scripture-precepts, of v.
17. and Rev. 18. 3. 4.
be ye separate, and come out from among them, do more directly and forceably
affect this, than other sins in Religious Assemblies.

Or the good parts of the worship, which are intermixed with the evil, may not
afford them all that is necessary in Christian Worship; or not in such a way,
as it is necessary they should have it. And then, there is a ^ar to Communion
in such worship, not only from the Mixture of ill Prayers, from which the
partakers in other parts would separate; but also from the defectiveness of
those good parts thereof, which are to recommend it, because they do not supply
the Worshippers with all that is necessary in Christian worship. Thus, instead
of whole, they may administer half Sacraments, sacrilegiously withholding the
Cup from the People, which Christ has appointed to be received by all the
Communicants, as well as the Bread. Or, what good Prayers and Oblations they do
put up to God, may be all in an unknown Tongue: which is not to pray in that
way that is necessary for Christians, who are to offer up a Joh. 4. 23, 24.
spiritual worship, which is to be done by 1 Cor 14, 15, 16
praying with understanding.

Or the evil parts, which are intermixed with the good, are indispensably to be
performed together with them, and he, who would communicate in one, must not be
allowed to let the other alone. As there can be no receiving of the Sacrament,
without worshipping it, in the Church of Rome. It imposing a compliance with
its Corruptions, as a condition to those, who would partake in any sound parts
of its Offices.

And these are such hindrances of Communicateing with that Church in the Mass,
which are not to be urged in Bar of Communion, under all immoral mixtures of
worship and devotions.

And much less is the allowance of some communion under such immoral mixtures,
to be extended for a justification of the same communion, in the Assemblies of
Jews, yea, or even of Mahometans, on pretense of joining, in like manner only
with the Good, but standing off from the ill parts of their Offices. For that
Church Communion, which, as Christians, in our Creed we all profess to believe,
and seek, is the Communion of Saints, that is, in the language of those times,
of Christians, not any Church communion of Professed Unbelievers.

But suppose, that in a Christian Church, retaining all the Essentials of
Faith, or Articles of the Creed, all that is necessary in Christian Worship, is
to be had pure, and unspotted; and in a Tongue, which all understand; but some
immoral petitions, or Prayers, are intermixed therewith, which people may be
Tolerated to pass over, and to express dissent from, whilst they show
Concurrence with all the good Prayers, which come along with them. Are they
barred from such Communion, by such mixtures?

As to this, it may depend much upon the degree thereof, according as the evil
passages, are Tolerable or Intolerable, (I mean not to be done, as if any man
were to expect a Toleration to do a wicked Action, but to be born,) on the
point of this unlawfulness. In care of keeping Union, much would be bore
withal for peace, and in hopes of seeing a cure thereof, whilst more modesty
is shown, in these unrighteous and immoral petitions. And, in want thereof
other ways, for the benefit of Communicateing in some Ministerial Offices and
public devotion, men would bear more. If such unlawful and immoral passages,
were fewer in number, and occurred more seldom in the service, to shock and
gall good minds; or, if they are any ways uncertain, and less Peremptory in
signification, and some way or other accomodable to an innocent and lawful
sense: Good people, though they could not Concur in, would yet more patiently
endure them. But they are less to be born, when more express and unavoidable in
signification, and more grown in number. So that as any Assemblies multiply
these petitions, they increase these difficulties and discouragements to those,
who, for the sake of peace; yea, or (on the setting up of a Schism, after which
they are no longer bound to maintain Ecclesiastical Peace and Union with them,)
for the benefit of having public Offices and Ministrations, would fain meet at
their public service.

If once the Minglers of such immoralities in Prayers, shall, to this
impediment of immoral mixtures, add another, viz. Of breaking the Unity of the
Church, especially by setting up of Anti-Bishops, and forming a Elagrant
Schism: There is an end of beaning with these mixtures for the sake of peace,
and for maintenance of Communion with them. For this peace and Union, is not to
be kept with Schismatics, as I have shown; the Scriptural and Ecclesiastical
Rules, being not to seek, but to shun Communion with such Persons. It is to
keep United to those Bishops, who are the Orthodox and Rightful Heads, and to
such as depend on them, and adhere to them; not to such Heterodox Dividers, as
break off from them. So that this bearing with the irksomness of such mixtures,
for the sake of Union, is a Reason of bearing only before the Formation of the
Schism; but is never to be urged that way more, but has all its force turned,
another way, when once that is done.

Or, before such Formation of a Schism, the immorality of those petitions may
be so express and unavoidable, the iniquity of them so staring and heinous, or
the repetitions thereof so numerous, and the use thereof so flxed and settled;
that good people neither would, nor ought to bear them, could they have any
opportunity of doing otherwise.

Indeed, sin and wickedness, especially in any plane, gross, and great
instances thereof, if once evidently made the matter of worship, and put up in
Prayers, sets people at liberty in any Church, as I have Chapter 3. Part. 3.
shown, to refuse them, and join in others, whose matter is pure and sinless.

When once therefore corruption gets into the matter of Prayers, and sin makes
a part of sacred offices, it gives a liberty for people to withdraw from those
Prayers, though administered by their Lawful Pastors; and, if any Ministers
Regularly empowered will give them the opportunity thereof, to change them for
a pure and sinless service. And still, the higher and more open the iniquity of
such Prayers or Clauses, and the more numerous the Repetition of them is; the
more are they, not only set free, but forced and necessitated to this. And the
more answerably, are the Orthodox and Faithful Ministers necessitated, to
afford them opportunities thereof.

Lovers of Peace, out of an Ardent desire of Union, may forbear a while, so
long as those Churches are more modest in their Corruptions, or whilst there
may be hopes of cureing them, especially at the beginning, and of closing the
breaches. And this Allowance of forbearance, for a time, in Case of such
Corruption of Worship; is no more than we see is made in Case of Heresy, which
is a Corruption in Faith. This Corruption of Faith, as well as Corruption of
Worship, gives a discharge of Communion, as I have Chapter 4. Part. 3.
shown. And yet Communion is not so discharged thereby, but that it may be kept
on for a time, as I observed it was with the Arians in the beginings of that
Heresy: The Rule being, not to Tit. 3. 10.
reject an H^retick from Communion whilst he may be thought sanable, or not
till he has had a first and second Admonition. And thus it was judged and
practiced, by those Orthodox at Antioch, who kept a meeting for some time in
the Arian Assemblies under Leontius, after their error and impiety was
introduced into their public Offices and Ministrations, and was put up to God
in Derogatory Doxologys. In which Union of Assemblies, these Orthodox were
Headed and lead on by Flavian and Diodorus, that admirable Pair of best Men, as
they are styled by Theodorit speaking of this business, and who first brought
in the Doxology at the end of the Psalms, which continues ^^ll to be used at
the reading thereof, in our days. But who, whilst they showed Concurrence with
the Arians in all the good parts of their Office, thought fit to show their
standing off from them in their Corrupt and Derogatory Doxologys, as often as
they came in the course of the public service. For when, Theod. Hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 24. Soz. l. 3. c. 20. and Niceph. l. 9. c. 24.
at the end of the Hymns, the Arians Sung, Glory be to the Father, in the Son,
or, as others, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Holy Ghost, aiming by
this change of particle, to intimate dissimilitude and inferiority: The
Orthodox Sung, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
by that particle of Conjunction, making the three Persons all alike in Receipt
of this Glory, or expressing their equality.

But whatever compliances may be made thus for a time; yet, as the sinful
mixtures grow more fixed, and the iniquity is more open and barefaced; when it
greatly and evidently pollutes Devotions, and corrupts men's Principles and
Practices, and is carried on by all arts and endeavors to entrap and catch
Souls: there is more apparent necessity to stand off from them. And then, they
are bound, I conceive, and as I think, I have shown Part. 1.
, to afford Gods faithful people, more safe, and salutary, and Christian
Administrations: and the People, without any hindrance from the Precepts of
Peace and Union, are to break off from the other, and to join therein. So that
such unlawful matter in Prayers, especially still as it grows more apparent and
heinous, and more firmly fixed therein, is enough to carry people off,
notwithstanding their desires of Peace and Union, from any Assemblies, though
they had not added Anti-Bishops to head their unlawful mixtures, or made an
open Schism in the Church.

As to this mixture of immoral Prayers then, with such a service as is wanting
in nothing else, but has all that is necessary in worship, if these additions
might be let alone: The desire of keeping Peace and Union in Assemblies or
Churches, whatever it may do for a while, or in some cases, will not always
get over them. And if once the makers of immoral additions, do moreover set up
Anti-Bishops, and make a Schism for maintenance thereof; Unity is no longer in
Duty to be kept, but broke with them; so that the desire of Unity, will be no
Reason to bear therewith, but to do quite contrary, after that time.

But there is besides another, and a stronger ground of bearing, viz. The
Necessity of having some Ministerial Offices, and Public Devotion, when they
live under a want of better opportunities, and must take up, either with these
or none. And this, as it will excuse the Faultiness of Meeting with those who
are in a Schism: So, I conceive, See Dr Hammond's Practic. Cat. l. 2. Sect. 1.
on the Beatitude of Meekness.
will excuse men too, in bearing with these corrupt matters and immoral
Additions, whilst they can be allowed sufficiently to signify, and express
their Dissent from them.

They come then, it is true, and, (as the forementioned Orthodox Christians did
at Antioch, under the Derogatoriness of the Arian Doxologies) for the sake of
many Good Prayers, submit to be present at others, whereby they will see Gods
Worship profaned, and hear his sacred Name dishonored and Libelled, which is,
and ought to be, a grievous Mortification to every Pious mind. But they submit
to be present at all this, in the way of a Necessary Duty, viz. attending on
some Ministerial Offices. And in want of all opportunities, of having those
more Pure in any other Places: as was also the case of those Orthodox at
Antioch, where Theod. l. 2. c. 12. Soz. l. 3. c. 20. Niceph. l. 9. c. 24.
Constantius had refused to allow them so much as one Church. And meeting it
that way, though they may see and hear it, they are only aggrieved and wounded,
but not polluted thereby. As Servants, or any others, are not polluted by
hearing Gods Name Blasphemed, or seeing other wickednesses committed, which
they are like to meet in the necessary duty and discharge of their attendance
or stations: who are not guilty of the evil, that is uttered or acted,
especially if they are allowed to show dislike, and to be Reprovers of it. So
that when others are Guilty, by concurring in these immoral Petitions; he
contracts no guilt, by being present at them much against his will, and in the
necessary and due payment of some public Devotion, which he has no
opportunities of paying any where else, so long as he apparently singles out
the Good, and lets all the Bad alone.

Nor is his mere presence at these additional immoral Prayers, an
interpretative Profession of his concurrence in them. It Is too rigorous, I
think, to make coming to any Religious Assemblies, a profession of concurring
in every particular, which, in any part of the ministration, is professed, or
put up to God there. Men are liable to have various apprehensions, about some
passages or other, that may happen to be in the public Service, whether in the
Professions which are made to God, or in the Prayers which are put up to him.
And also about some Undertakings, Events, or Transactions of this World, which
may be brought, as occasion is, into the common Service and Devotion, though
all are not of one mind or belief about them. And under this liableness, to
such variety of apprehensions about these matters, we could never be able to
keep up public Communion, especially to keep it up so fixed and constant, and
to keep all persons in one Communion, as our Lord requires they should be kept,
upon these terms. And they are more liable still, to have the same variety of
apprehension, about Private Composures in Pulpit-Prayers; which may be more
Subject to the Tincture, either of some particular opinions, or expressions,
which all cannot Assent to, or approve of. Considering which, it would be
harder still to keep up such Communion, under the Allowance of these
Pulpit-Prayers of Private Composure; which yet, besides what they have been
formerly, or are at this time in other places, are now allowed of by our own
Church.

In public Fasts, indeed, or Thanksgivings, where the very Meeting or
Assembling is made significant of any purposes; to be present at them, is a
profession of what is signified by them. And it is insincere for those, who
abhor that Design, which they are appointed to carry on, to afford their
presence, or meet at them. But I think it is not so, with any particular
passages and petitions, in the ordinary Devotion at other times; and that
coming to Church Assemblies at such times, which are for Devotion at large, is
no determinate and limited profession of concurrence in those passages, from
which, though a man would profess to dissent, yet might he still resort to the
Assemblies for so many other purposes. And of this difference betwixt these
Two, as to their being a profession of concurrence, they who list, may see more
in a Chapter 6. Sect. 1,
Book entitled, Of Christian Prudence.

It Is true, it will give some presumption of concurrence in these Petitions, if
they visibly manifest no dislike; but, whatever they are in their Hearts,
appear externally to join in them, as much as they do in others. And therefore,
I conceive, it were not amiss, as they come in the course of the Service, by
some external sign, to show they disclaim, and stand off from them. As I noted
the Orthodox did, whilst (in the beginnings, and, as was hoped, more sanable
Age of the Arian Heresy, before they broke communion quite off) they met in
the Arian Assemblies under Leontius at Antioch. But there is no room, or
pretense for such presumption of concurrence, (and they would be strange
presumptions, that should be made in contradiction to express Declarations) if
we signify the contrary by some external sign. For none must presume, or we
are not answerable for it if they do, that we join in such passages, if by some
external sign we protest to all that we stand off from them; whilst, by like
visible signs, we show concurrence in all those good Prayers, which are put up
together with them.

I grant, the Communion of Prayers, should be an entire Communion; and no
Petitions of public Assemblies, should be the private desire of some, but the
joint desire of all in common. And where any thing is inserted, which all
cannot join in, it makes a broken Communion. But there, the inserters thereof
make this breach; and others, who are driven by Necessity to bear the same,
only suffer it as their misfortune. And when they can have no other, which they
would embrace, though with persecutions; yea, and it may be are illiterate, and
unable by Reading, to carry on the Worship of God, and the work of instruction,
in their own Families: It is better, I think, to take up with a broken
Communion than with none. And though their wishes are to have one more entire,
yet till they can have their wish, I conceive, their way will be to communicate
in most Prayers, rather than in none at all.

Whilst they are careful then, by some sufficient external sign, to show their
standing off from these additional immoral passages; the necessity of having
some ministerial Offices and Devotions, will bear them out, I conceive, when
they can have no better, in resorting to such mixed Service, for concurrence in
the body of other good Prayers. But all this, as I say, is whilst such visible
signification and refusal of the sinful matters, will be allowed of. For if
all, either in reality must, or in external show and appearance must seem to
concur therein: They ought not to be guilty, either of Iniquity, or Hypocrisy;
and so, upon that account, are utterly barred and shut out from such Communion.

And thus much, as it is greatly needed, so I have adventured to say on this
Point, concerning that liberty and allowance, which, in compliance with the
love of Peace, and the necessity of some Ministerial Offices, may, as I
conceive, be made in abatement of the strict Rules against Communion with
Schismatics. I know all the use some are apt to make of such Concessions, is,
instead of making them Relieve others, only to turn them against the Authors,
and taking hold of them as Principles, to try if thereby they can overthrow the
main Cause. I think this is very dis-ingenuous; and a wrong way of Reasoning
too. For it is beginning at the wrong end in these matters. These Concessions,
are not set up for main Principles, much less as points to be held against
them; but as points of favor and ease, that may be thought fairly and
equitably consistent with them. Which, should it happen otherwise, the
Principles must stand firm, (unless they can be overthrown by Arguments
intrinsic, and proper to themselves;) and all that can be said as to these
Concessions of Ease, is, that there is an end of them. So, by that course, men
do not so much oppose the Established Principles, as themselves; and what they
show is, that, in consistence with Truth of Principles, no Concessions can be
made; and that the Truth will not permit them to make such Approaches, or to
come so near to them, as they fain would do. But these liberties in the present
case, seem to me fairly Reconcilable, on the grounds here given, with the
Reason and Reality of things; and with the intent of the foresaid Principles:
And every man is left to judge for himself, whether they are or no.

And thus, I think, it may appear, both how careful we ought to be, in shunning
the Communion of Anti-Bishops, and their Schismatical Adherents, where we have
other opportunities: And ^^w, for the benefit of some Ministerial Offices, we
may be at liberty to take up with them, when we can have the same from none
else. Yea, for all they happen at any time to have made an addition of immoral
mixtures, to a body of otherwise good, and sufficient Prayers, if we openly and
sufficiently express our dislike and standing off from them, whilst we as
openly concur, and join in others. And as it was before shown, who make the
Schism in any Divisions of Churches, and who can cure it in the foresaid Cases:
So, having found who are to answer for the Schism, this may suffice to show
what Communion may be held with such, and how good Christians are to carry it
toward both parties.

As to that exercise of spiritual ministrations then, which Faithful Pastors
stand so many ways obliged to, notwithstanding any Deprivation of State, yea,
or of Synods, as I have shown: The Care of Preserving Unity, or preventing
Schism in the Church, ought to be no stop thereto in the foresaid Cases. Nay,
if to Head their immoral Prayers, Doctrines, and Practices, the defectors shall
set up Anti-Bishops, and so make a Schism in the Church: The Conscionable care
of preserving unity, will bind them fast to such Faithful Ministers, who are
their Rightful Pastors. And the Conscionable and truly Christian dread of
Schism, will make them effectually keep off from the Communion of those
defectors, who, by Erection of Anti-Bishops, have set up, Altar against Altar,
and Schismatically broke off from them.

And thus I have gone through those particulars, which I thought sit to be
considered, and of most force to clear up this Argument. And from what has been
offered in these papers, I think it will not be difficult for honest inquirers,
to see what their duty is, under any unhappy differences or divisions of
Churches, at such times. I pray God neither the desire of Thriving, nor the
fear of Suffering, may make men afraid to see it, or to follow what they see
they ought to do, when they are tried with such Cases.

It extremely concerns all men, who would show any serious care of their
immortal Souls at such times, to discern the right way, and to take it in these
matters. It Is not for any to think lightly of these points of difference: For
it is hard to say what things would concern their Eternal Salvation more, or
wherein to go wrong would be of more Fatal Consequence. If any things will lie
hard upon us at the great day of accounts, sure the breach of Faith, and of the
most Solemn Oaths, of Civil Subjection and Obedience, and of Common Honesty and
Justice, will sting and terrify us to the height, and be a burden
unsupportable. Such wickednesses will sink Heathens; how much more Christtans,
who Act them against so much plainer Revelations and Spiritual advantages. They
are any of them enough to condemn those, who at any time have been guilty of
them, unless they truly repent and amend them. How much more must all of them,
everlastingly confound those who always live in them, and daily repeat the
same; whose hearts, have resisted all Reproofs, and Convictions; whose
consciences, are thereby hardened therein, and grown callous; and who, not
content to provoke God thereby in their daily practice, have horribly presumed
as daily to profane him at such times, by a Blasphemous tender thereof in
their daily devotions.

Nor is it safe, on pretense of any subtleties started about these points, by
irreligious and ill employed wits on such occasions, to hope for finding an
excuse, by pleading mistake or Ignorance, should those subtle Salvo's prove
False. For whatever it may with some persons, whose sincere care, as well as
desire, to see and follow the right, is best known to God himself: Yet in the
general, I must reminde them, that it is ill trusting to Ignorance, in such
plain matters of Natural Conscience, as men cannot ordinarily mistake or be
ignorant of, till they have blinded themselves. It needs no skill, nor
learning, to fee the wickedness of all these ways. And accordingly, when they
are first tried with them, the consciences of most persons, who can pretend to
so briety and justice, and are not debauched with Corrupt principles, are
startled at them, and in their first judgments, when they judge of themselves,
and from Natural Sentimentts and Convictions, they scruple and condemn them.
But it needs much learning, or pains, to blind our own eyes, and overcome our
Natural Convictions, and see no wickedness in them. And if Men of Parts, should
set their Parts and Learning as much to work, (which God avert) to baffle Men's
common Convictions of any other Wickednesses and Immoralities; I do believe,
they would give the Disobedient as much pretense for Mistake and Ignorance in
those Offenses, as, after all their pains, they are able to allege in these.

The Zeal against Popery, is given out often in these latter days of the World,
to go furthest in blinding many. But though Popery, on account of the many
dangerous Errors and unlawful Practices thereof, is a most dangerous Religion;
yet must they be a strange sort of Religious Persons, who can think nothing but
Popery will endanger them. Whatever be the Religion, of false, and for sworn
Men, of Rebels, Thieyes, and Murderers; their Religion shall do nothing to save
them, but Perjury, and Rebellion, and Unrighteousness, will be sure, without
true Repentance, to condemn them. So that if they are afraid of Popery, because
of its sinfulness, and of the dangers it brings upon their precious souls; they
must not be less afraid of gross injustice and immoralities, which are not less
sinful, and are more surely destructive, than it is, having less Favor and Plea
of Ignorance and Mistake, for well-meaning minds to offer for their excuse. And
I beg all such, as are in earnest for the Salvation of their Souls, to
consider, that it is as wretched a part, both of Folly and Wickedness, to throw
away their Souls, in any immoral or otherwise unlawful ways, to keep out
Popery; as it would be, to throw them away in turning to it.

There is also the consideration of Schism in these Matters. And how light
soever too many, God knows, may make of it, yet, in the account of God, it is
full of Guilt; and in the lamentable experience of the World, it is fruitful in
other Wickednesses, and abounds in Mischief. It rends Unity, which Christ,
among his last Requests to his Father, was so earnestly concerned to have kept
up in his Church. It breaks Peace, and, like a Canker, eats out the heart of
Charity, which ought to be the very Badge of his Disciples. It turns Devotion,
into Contentiousness; and Humility and the Love of our Brethren, into Pride and
Self-pleasing, and a studiousness by all ways to maintain what we have once
done ill, and bear up our own Reputation; into bitter Zeal, and angry Passions,
and a deplorable train of other Wickednesses. And therefore if all the Guilt of
Schism supervenes, to that of the foresaid immoralities in any Case, how broad
is the Net spread there for destruction? How many there, are like to be drawn
into the snare, and how loud will the Blood of those Souls cry, who are caught
therein?

Methinks, this must needs be enough, to show Men the infiaite Weight and
Consequence of these Debates, and to cure all indifference, and unconcernedness
about them, on such occasions. If they are careless what becomes of their
Souls, and care only or chiefly for worldly interests; all these things,
indeed, will easily be slighted and overlooked, when they oppose the Clamours
of Flesh and Blood. But Men, who would pretend Religion, or secure their
Eternal Happiness in the world to come, must needs see how deeply, and closely
these Matters affect it, and how infinitely it concerns them, not to go wrong,
or to be mistaken therein. And it is only to Men so disposed, that Discourses of
this Nature are like to do any good. To such therefore this is tendered with a
sincere and charitable intent, of ministering to give them right Notions and
Apprehensions of these Matters, and of serving them in the way of their
everlasting Concerns. I humbly request of them, for their own sakes, that they
would faily resolve to set up God, and not this World, in these Matters. And if
they will seek Truth sincerely, and consider and examine what they read
impertially; then let them judge of all, and apply what is here said, for the
determination of their own minds, and for making such Judgment of Practices on
such unhappy Differences, as they see Cause.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
The principal places which the Reader is desired to Amend, are these:

PArt 1. page 2. line 7. put a, after excellency. p. 3. l. 18. r. united to the
Anti-Bishops. p. 4. l. 16. put a: after persons. p. 26. l. 14. r.
circumstantiate, which give. p. 29. l. 5. r. irruption. p. 51. l. 29. r. but to
put. p. 55. l. 32. and ib. l. 33. and p. 56. l. 7. for cessation r. Cession.

Part 2. p. 9. l. 2. marg. after Can. 1. add, and Can. 36. p. 16. l. 7. at
Ecclesiastics, in marg. add Act. 25. 10, 11. p. 20. l. 15. r. affect. p. 36.
l. 33. r. that they aere. p. 37. l. 2. r. discharges.

Part 3. p. 8. l. 21. r. breaking it into. p. 37. l. 36. r. true there. p. 46.
l. 28. marg. r. in Ephesians. p. 51. l. 7. r. Di^cesses. ib. l. ult. marg. for 37. r.
17. p. 58. l. 19. marg. for chapter 7. r. chapter 6. p. 64. l. ult. r. with him. p. 83.
at the bottom, for 265. r. 365. from p. 84. it is paged wrong to p. 93. p. 78.
(should be 86.) l. 1. r. Euaristus. p. 83. (should be 91.) l. 25. r. we may do.
p. 84. (should be 92.) l. 4. r. not tie the.


