THE Christian Sufferer supported: OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning the Grounds OF
Christian Fortitude.

SHOWING At once that the Sufferings of good men are not inconsistent with Gods
special Providence, as also the several supports which our Religion affords
them under their Sufferings, and particularly against the fear of a Violent
Death.

By Richard Kidder, Rector of St. Martin Outwich London.

LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1680.

THE PREFACE.
THough many of the evils of this life, which we daily complain of, are
Fantastic and imaginary as our happiness in this world generally is; And many
others, under which we are uneasy, are entirely owing to our own folly, and
the just fruit of our wicked lives: Yet certain it is that we are born to
trouble as the Sparks fly upwards, and we are beset with very many, and very
severe evils. And we can hardly turn any way but we may meet with one or other
ready to entertain us with the sad story of what they feel, or what they justly
fear. And those very persons, who seem most prosperous to the stander by, have
those troubles mingled with their prosperity which render it not at all
desirable. Consolat. ad Polyb.
Look upon all Mortals (says Seneca) and you will every where find a large and
constant occasion for weeping. One man's pinching Poverty calls him out to his
daily Labor. Another man is soliciteed by his restless ambition. Another man
fears those riches which he had desired before, and is afflicted with what he
himself prayed for. One man is racked by care, another by labor, a third is
disquieted with a multitude and crowd of Clients or Visitants. This man is
sorrowful because he has Children, another because he has lost his. Many are
the evils to which we are incident, and which we may therefore justly expect:
Such are Reproach and Poverty, Sickness and Pain, Oppression and Violence,
Sorrow for the death of our Friends, and the dread and fear of our own. There
are many in the world whose misery is great upon them, and who are perpetually
bowed down with some or more of these evils.

It is great wisdom therefore to provide against these evils, and to contrive
how to turn them the right way. And since it is so that we shall meet with
these troubles, it is the highest wisdom to arm our selves that they may
neither surprise, nor hurt us; But that we may be able to continue in great
patience and well doing, and at last receive an unspeakable reward.

It is a very sad consideration to think how commonly men fear the evils which
threaten them, and how rarely they prepare for them. They use their endeavors
to keep off the stroke, when they take no care to bear it, and to make it a
blessing. They live in perpetual anxiety and disquiet, and at last go in sorrow
to their graves, whiles they have been negligent of making the right use of
their fears, and other afflictions.

It is a certain truth, that God does not take any delight in afflicting the
Chlidren of men. He does it for our profit and advantage. And considering the
lapsed and corrupt condition of mankind, these evils are necessary for us. They
are not only justly inflicted, but they are medicinal also. A constant
prosperity is a very formidable condition; Magna ira est, quando peccantibus
non irascitur Deus. Hier. Epist. ad Castrutium.
and God is then angry with us when he does not chastise our follies. It is our
duty to look up to him that strikes us; and to see that we improve our evils to
the best advantage, as well as to bear them with courage.

It is a poor and mean thing barely to design to save our selves from the blow,
or only to project that it may do us no harm. Plutarch. de Capiend. ex host.
utilitate.
We ought to consider how we may turn these things to our profit. Men at first
were only careful that wild Beasts did them no hurt, this was all their design
when they fought them. But men in aftertimes learnt the way to make these
Beasts useful to them. They did then eat of their flesh, cloth themselves with
their hair, arm themselves with their skins, and make use of some parts of them
for Medicines in their distempers. We ought to learn this Art, and to use our
evils as instruments of great good. The loss of our Goods, the death of our
Friends, the pain of our Bodies, and our fears of Death may be so ordered as to
make for the advancement of Piety in us, and the securing our precious and
immortal souls.

And then in the mean time it stands us in hand to bear up under our troubles,
and to possess our souls in patience; and not to suffer our selves out of the
fear of a temporal evil, to part with an eternal good, and plunge our Souls in
everlasting horror and misery.

But then, if we would do all this, we must have recourse to those helps and
powerful motives, which Christian Religion does afford us. The Doctrine of
Jesus Christ will give us the best directions, and furnish us with the most
effectual assistances. They are mean and low arguments which are to be found in
the Philosophy of the Heathens, in comparison with those which our Religion
lays before us.

And what those helps and assistances are you will find in the following
Discourse, and I make no doubt but we shall also find them effectual to gain
their end, if we apply our selves with great care and diligence (calling in
with all fervency the divine grace to our assistance) to the use of them.

They disparage their Religion that think it a mean and ineffectual Principle:
And they reproach it greatly who affirm that it renders men sneaking and
cowardly: For as the Author of it showed the greatest fortitude and courage
when he contemned the world, and witnessed a good Confession before Pontius
Pilate, so do the Principles of this holy Religion mightily fortify and
encourage all the Followers of Jesus to follow the glorious example of their
Lord and Master.

It is an argument of great fortitude to contemn the World, not to be drawn
aside by its blandishments, nor dismayed with its threats; He shows a generous
and great mind that in cold blond chooses to die rather than deny the truth,
and that can forgive an enemy that thirsts after his blood. This our Savior
did, and both by his Example and his Precepts commends this lesson to us. On
the other hand to be transported to revenge upon every little trespass is a
certain argument of a weak and feeble mind. And to that purpose it is well
observed that generally those who are of the weaker frame, that are most
contemptible, and of the shortest wit, are ever most inclined to revenge: And
those of the truest valor, and best judgment are the farthest from it. The
truth of it is, these men have the same, and no better, pretense to Fortitude,
that the Atheist has to Wit, who is for all his pretenses but a Fool. ^titer
ille facit, q^i miser esse potest.
He is a man of true courage that can endure the greatest misery.

For the following Discourse I am very sensible of its defects, and know very
well that the Argument required a more skilful hand; But be it as it will, I
have the satisfaction of a sincere intention of doing well: And as (I bless
God) I am competently weaned from popular applause, so I do not find my self
much concerned at the censures of uncharitable men. And if I have done any
thing amiss in publishing the following Papers, though I could justly divide
the blame between my self and some other person who is much wiser, yet I shall
be content to bear it all my self.

I am very well assured in the mean time, that the several grounds toward our
support laid down in the following Discourse, are such as our Religion has
suggested, and such as are only able to bear us up.

But the Reader is to be put in mind, thet it is equally his interest and his
duty to dispose himself for all events of things by an useful and holy life.
Godliness is accompanied with unspeakable advantages, and he that makes
Religion his care and his delight will find Joy and Peace which the world knows
not of, and grace to help in the time of need.

As we grow in grace our fears will abate, and as we make Progressions in true
piety, so will our strength and courage increase at the same time. If we spend
much time in abstractions from the world, in subduing our irregular desires,
and in a faithful discharge of our duty, we shall be in great measure delivered
from the slavish fear of death whatever shape or form it shall appear in.

If our disquiet and trouble were traced to its original, it would be found
that most of it would flow from the neglect of our duty: And we can never take
a better course to rid our selves of our uneasiness, and our fears, than by a
diligent betaking our selves to our neglected duty. Who is he that will harm us
if we be followers of that which is good?

I have nothing farther to request of the Pious Reader, than that he would pray
for him that has made these Papers public, and especially that he may succeed
in his endeavors of doing good to the Souls committed to his charge.

These following are the greater, though not the only faults of the Press,
which are not to be imputed to the Author, he not having a sight of the Sheets
as they were wrought off.

PAge 29. line 10. read pray for, p. 77. l. 1. r. yet in. l. 5. r. pursue. p.
82. l. 5. r. Theocrasie. p. 91. line the last, r. it is. p. 93. l. 16. r.
assures us. p. 100. l. 20. blot out death. p. 103. l. 9. r. shall this. p. 110.
l. 9. r. this is. p. 113. l. 19. blot out it. p. 177. l. 18. blot out And. p.
196. r. a good man. p. 201. l. 12. r. very great. p. 222. l. 13. r. they crave.

CHAPTER I.
THough Christian Religion will not allow any of its followers to do any
injury, nor yet to return, or revenge any; yet it directs and it enables them
to bear them. It does not keep off the affliction, but yet it gives them
strength to bear it. The sincere Christian is liable to persecution and
violence, as well as any other man, but then his Religion affords him supports
beyond any Philosophy or Institution whatsoever. His Religion does not protect
him from reproach, and from pain, from rude usage, and a violent death; But
then it secures him from sinking under his burden, and from receiving any hurt
from it.

If is my intention, in the following discourse, to represent the aids and
supports that our Religion does afford to them that are afflicted and
persecuted for righteousness sake: And this I shall do for the sake of those
who are prone to be amazed and astonished at those evils which they suppose
they may be exercised withal. Amongst which, because a violent death is one of
the most astonishing, I shall therefore have a particular respect unto that;
and it will be very well worth our while to apply our selves to the serious
consideration of those things which will be of use to us against so great an
evil.

But before I come particularly to consider the aids which our Religion affords
against the greatest evils of this world, I shall premise some things for the
better making way to my following discourse. And since it is here supposed that
good men are exposed to severe afflictions and violent death as well as other
men, I shall before I go any farther,

First, consider how the sufferings of Holy and good men in this world are
reconcilable to the care and good Providence of God. For some men may hence be
tempted to think that there is either no God at all, or that he does not
concern himself in the government of the world, when the most God-like and best
of men are observed to meet with the worst of things.

We are obliged by our Religion to believe the particular care and Providence
of God: He that denies this has advanced far toward Atheism, than which there
cannot be a more foolish, or uncomfortable belief; we shall soon question the
being when once we do deny the Providence of God. Mihi enim qui nihil agit esse
omnino non videtur. Cicero de Nature. deorum. l. 2.
The very heathen could say that, To him He that does nothing seemed not to be
at all, The denial of Gods care and Providence subverts all Piety and true
Religion. This puts a bar to all virtue and real Godliness. He that comes to
God must believe not only that he is, but that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: Were it not for this belief I do not see how there could
be any such thing as a pious man, For he that does deny Gods care and
government destroys all the motives to and foundations of true Piety, Were it
not for this belief men would want a ground for their devotion, and their
patient suffering of persecutions for righteousness sake. We should have small
encouragement to pray to Him that does not hear and regard us; we shall return
him cold thanks for the mercies we enjoy when we do not believe they came from
him; And shall be tempted quickly to forget him whom we do not think concerned
in any of our affairs. It is not likely we should support with courage under
our evils when once we judge that God concerns not himself in what passes here
below. This opinion will soon Cramp us, it will enfeeble and dispirit us, and
we shall not abound in the work of the Lord, unless we first bebelieve that our
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. This world is now an uncomfortable
place, but then it would scarce be tolerable. It is a sense that God governs
that makes it any thing easy. We were in an ill plight did things come to pass
by Fate or Chance. (...). Mar. Ant. l. 2. Sect. 8.
How could I live in the world (says the Heathen Emperor) that is empty of
God, and void of a Providence?

Our Religion gives us great assurance of Gods particular care and providence;
I do not design at present to enter upon that argument: I shall show that the
miseries that befall good men in this life are not inconsistent with this
Providence of God. And to that purpose I shall desire that the following
particulars may be considered.

First, the persons upon whom these evils fall.

Secondly, the evils themselves.

Thirdly, the ends and usefulness of these things.

Lastly, the sudports of good men under these evils.

I. The Persons upon whom these evils fall, and they are supposed to be
righteous and good men: Now here it is to be considered,

1. That this is sometimes supposed when it is not really so. They are not all
righteous and holy men that are reputed so. God knows who are his, we know it
not. We ought in charity to judge all men good of whom we know no evil. But we
do not then always judge of the thing as it is. We are often mistaken: A man
may deceive himself, and very easily impose upon us. Hypocrisy does lurk very
frequently under the disguise of Piety. And there are some faults and
irregularities that have the appearances of virtue. We see but the surface of
men's conversation, we are not acquainted with their principle, and their aim.
Besides men appear at their best in company; They are dressed up when they go
abroad: God alone sees the heart, and searches the reins: He alone knows the
inward thought and purpose of a man.

It is much more easy to discern a man to be wicked, than to be sincerely
pious, and truly good. The works of the flesh are manifest, Gal. 5.19, 22.
says the Apostle, but he does not say so of the fruits of the Spirit also.
Bonum ex integris, malum ex quolibet defectu.
Besides that many things must conspire to make him righteous and good, whereas
one vice is enough to render him evil. Goodness and true Piety are very
comprehensive things. (...)
Righteousness implies all virtues in conjunction; He that is righteous must be
godly, just, and temperate: Every man that makes a great profession is not
universally and strictly righteous. The Apostle tells us, that the grace of God
teaches us that we should live soberly, Tit. 2.12.
righteously, and godly in this present world. These are but few words, but
they are very comprehensive.

Godliness or Piety contains much, that is, our whole duty toward God. It is
not enough that we believe aright, that we be Orthodox in our Faith, and that
we be of the most Reformed Church and Communion; that we be kind to the
Ministers of Religion, and contend for the Faith that was once delivered to the
Saints; That we read the Scriptures, that we hear them Preached, and frequently
receive the Holy Sacrament. All these things do not speak us godly and pious
men. Before we can be that, we must arise higher; we must love God with all our
heart, fear him above all, pray to him fervently, and give him hearty thanks
for his mercies: We must cheerfully submit to his Will, and not murmur against
his Providence; we must honor his Name, and his Word, and all his Divine
Institutions. We must breath after Him, delight in Him, and refer all to Him.
Our Religion must be no Mechanical, Theatrical, or affected thing: It must be
in us a principle of life and of power; He that is truly Religious has a faith
in God under all events of things, and will choose to suffer rather than offend
Him. In a word, he commits all his concerns to God, and it is his meat and
drink to do his Will: He does not only do Him outward Homage, but he inwardly
loves and fears Him, and desires to be like Him.

Righteousness and Justice also is very large and comprehensive, and contains
many duties under it. It is not enough that we do no wrong, we must revenge
none that is done to us. We must not only not oppress, but we must also not
covet. It is not enough that we do no hurt, we must also do good to our
Brother, that is, to every man as we have opportunity. We must do as we would
be done by; And we are obliged severally as we stand related to each other. The
righteous man hurts no man in body, goods, or same; he is merciful to the poor,
and strictly just to all men. He is faithful to his Prince, dutiful to his
Parents, true to his Friends, grateful to his Benefactors, and gentle to his
Inferiors; affable, and of easy access, void of malice and guile in all his
words and actions. So far is he from attempting to kill that he does not hate
his Brother; and so far from unchaste embraces that he does not indulge himself
in an undecent word, or an impure thought; so far from speaking evil that he
thinks it not. His love is without dissimulation or design, his Compassions are
great, and his Alms hold proportion to his ability, and his brothers needs. He
is tender of his brothers goods and reputation, and rejoices in his prosperity
as sincerely as in his own, and is so far from obstructing it that he does not
envy it. He is the most diligent Governor, the most Loyal Subject, the most
dutiful Child, and kind Parent, and true Friend; He is true to all his trusts,
and righteous in all his relations, and in all his dealings is all of a piece.

Sobriety also contains much in it, And he that is sober is far from pride and
vanity; He does not indulge his lust and sensual appetite, and his ambition and
vainglory, but governs himself by Religion, and by Reason: He allows himself
as to his meats and drink, his garb and his refreshments, what his nature and
his circumstances, not what his lust demands.

Thus I have given you a short Character of the pious and good man: It is to be
feared the number of them is small among those that profess the Religion of
Christ Jesus. We do commonly under all our forms of Godliness deny the power of
it: And when we show great zeal for some things of Religion we are far from
pure Religion and undefiled. We judge of our selves by false measures, and
therefore think our selves to be something when we are nothing. We judge our
selves good because our Principles or our Party is so, or because we are better
than some others are. We judge well of our selves because we comply with the
Letter of the Law, and live so well that the world cannot reprove us. It is to
be feared that the number of those that are strictly and universally good is
but small, and that among the crowd of Professors there are many Hypocrites and
Unbelievers.

2. Supposing these sufferers sincerely and universally good, yet they are but
imperfectly so. There is some folly bound up in the heart of the wisest and
best of men; There is some defect in the most perfect Saint. All menneed some
grains of allowance: Nullum magnum ingenium sine venia placuit. Sen.
And as there is some flaw in the greatest wit, so there is some defect even in
them who have made the greatest proficiency in goodness. And whatinjustice is
there in chastising the follies of good men; especially when this chastisement
is for their Emendation? It is folly and fondness to suffer an otherwise
towardly Child to go on in an evil and unbecoming course. It is greater
kindness to correct than to indulge him. There is no man so good but does
sometimes go astray. It is no impeachment of the Divine Providence to correct
the faults of the best of men: This is just and very consistent with the Divine
care and providence: It rather confirms it, and strengthens our belief of it.
Psa. 89.20, 22, 27, 28, 29.
I have found David my Servant, with my holy Oil I have anointed him. The enemy
shall not exact upon him, nor the Son of wickedness afflict him. Also I will
make him my firstborn, higher than the Kings of the earth: My mercy will I
keep for him for evermore, and my Covenant shall stand fast with him, his Seed
also will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the Laws of heaven.
These are great Promises, and such as give assurance of a very particular Care
and Providence: But all these great things do not imply that David's Children
shall not be chastised: They may be corrected for their sin without the least
diminution to the Promise, or impeachment of Gods care and Providence. Ver. 30,
32, 33, 34.
It follows, If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments --
then will I visit their transgression with a rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness I will not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips. It is an act of mercy and kindness in God to
correct his Children; Heb. 12.6.
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth. If God did it not, Intelligimus esse nos
Deo curae, quibus quoniam peccamus ^rascitur. Lactant. Inst. l. 5. c. 23.
we might have greater cause to impeach his care, and doubt of his Providence.
We commend the care of that Master of a Family who does correct the disorders
of his own house: Good men are Gods peculiar, His Church is His Family. Amos
3.2.
You only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities; not to do thus would be cruelty and
disregard. And it is the greatest Plague to meet with none at all. It is said
of the worst of men, Psa. 73.5.
They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men.
And it is a severe threat, no merciful promise which we read, Hos. 4.14.
I will not punish your Daughters when they commit Whoredom, nor your Spouses
when they commit Adultery. As the faults of good men make it just that they
should be corrected, so their relation to God makes it necessary. God may
justly do it because they deserve it, and He does it because they are His.
There is in it Justice, and Kindness at once.

Be it then, that the good man suffer, yet has he deserved it from God; Be it,
that he is sincerely good, yet he is imperfectly so; He fails in many things:
He is too cold in his Prayers, or too weak in his Faith; too contracted in his
Charity, or too propense to the world. Be it, that he be Gold, there may be
some dross that may be taken away by the Discipline of Heaven. Let us consider
in the next place,

II. The evils themselves which are in this world the lot and portion of good
men. They meet with Evils, but what Evils are they? How great, and how durable,
or what proportion do they bear to their demerits or their mercies? They meet
with Evils indeed, but not with the worst of things. And this will appear, if
we consider,

1. That the evils which good men meet with are not strictly evils. They are in
some sense Evils, but not of the greater size and character. That is indeed a
great Evil which makes us evil, and is not consistent with real goodness. As
that is truly good which makes us good, so that is only an evil in the truest
sense which makes us so. Poverty, restraint, reproach, sickness, death are in
some sense evils: But they are not such evils as Pride, Wantonness, Profaneness,
Injustice, a guilty mind and unquiet Conscience. They are evils, but they are
tolerable ones. The Spirit of a man may bear his infirmity, but a wounded
Spirit who can bear? The good man meets with evils then, but not with the worst
of things, for such things will imply him not to be good. A good man may be
killed, but he cannot be hurt: Men may kill his body, they cannot deprave his
soul: He may be banished from his Country, not from his God: Men may make him
poor, they cannot make him covetous and proud, earthly and sensual; They may
load him with Calumnies, but not with Guilt: He has goods of which he cannot
be rifled and stripped. He may fall under the anger and power of a Tyrant, or
popular Tumult, but is not by that force robbed of his integrity. The good man
is well dealt with, he has good things which no malice or force can take away.
(...); Arrian. Epictet. l. 3. c. 17.
Why do we blame Providence which allots the best of things to the best of men?
Is it not better to be modest than to be rich? Is it not better to be good than
to be great? Is not integrity of mind better than health of body? If it be,
then the good man does not meet with the very worst of things, and though he
may be afflicted with sundry evils which other men avoid, yet he has many very
good things belonging to him which other men want.

2. The evils which good men meet with are but Temporal evils at most. Sharp
they may be, and painful to the flesh, but they are but short. The best man may
meet with a fiery trial, he will not fall into everlasting burnings. His
sufferings bear no proportion to a future misery or glory.

If we think of eternal sorrows, we cannot think our short ones worthy to be
compared with them; The good man meets with all his pain here, there is none
remains for him in reversion. Alas! what compare is there between a fire and
faggot, and eternal fire? Between a Gibbet and a Rack, and the Worm that never
dies, and the fire that never goes out? What proportion is there between Time
and Eternity? Between a sorrow that lasts for a moment, and that sorrow which
excludes all hope of an end?

But then if we think of the Joys of Heaven, that are the portion of the Pious
and persevering Christian, we shall find that all the sorrows of this life bear
no proportion to them. The Apostle tells us that they are not to be compared. I
reckon (says he) that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18
If then we turn our Eyes from Time upon Eternity, from the sufferings we feel
to the glory which we wait for, we shall not easily sink under our burden, nor
any longer impeach the Divine Care and Providence. 2 Cor. 4.16.
For which cause we faint not (says the Apostle) For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen. Let us now
consider,

3. The ends and usefulness of these Evils which happen to good men in this
life: For though we call these sufferings evils, yet are they occasions of very
much good. And,

1. They are for the general good of the world, and the advancement of Religion
amongst men. Hereby men have taken occasion to enquire into the Principles of
them that suffer, and to acquaint themselves with that Religion which they
overlooked before: Hence they have been convinced of the truth of Religion, and
that it is a reality, and will bear men up under all the evils of this world.
The patient sufferings of Holy men have greatly adorned, and spread the
Religion for which they suffered. Hence many new Converts have been brought
into the Faith, and hereby men have been confirmed in the truth: The undanted
sufferings of good men for Religion have spread it more than learned Books, and
subtle Arguments could do. Every man is not able to judge of the strength of an
Argument, nor to detect the Sophistry of cunning men. He that is constant to
the death does more by his patient sufferings than he could have done by his
Wit and Learning.

We gain a great credit to our Religion when it supports us under our Evils
which we suffer: They that see this are convinced greatly in their Consciences:
They now believe Religion not only true, but a Principle of power and great
efficacy, and that the pious man serves God for greater respects than any
worldly thing: It was a great Calumny against Job, that he served God for his
worldly ends only; Job 1.11.
But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse
thee to thy face, Thus does Satan accuse Job unto God: How false this
Accusation was appeared from what followed. By his patient enduring he showed
that he was a perfect and upright man, that feared God, and eschewed evil. It
is a cheap thing to profess Religion when there is no danger in it: This does
not recommend it unto others. Men will suspect that this profession either
serves a worldly interest, or was owing to our education, or some chance. But
he that dares to die for his Religion does greatly commend it to the
Consciences of men.

By this means the world was vanquished, and Christian Religion planted among
men. This course was of great power toward the confounding of Infidels, and
the gaining new Believers; It served to strengthen the weak, and confirm the
strong: The blood of Martyrs was the Seed of the Church, and he that died for
his Religion spread it. This was of greater moment than learned Arguments, or
carnal weapons. Our Religion was founded upon sufferings, and built upon a
Crucified Savior.

2. As the sufferings of good men are for the good of the world, so they are
for the good of those men who suffer: They are gainers by their sufferings, and
this Consideration does serve to clear the care and Providence of God.

It may seem strange that the severe afflictions that befall us should be for
our advantage. That I should bury my only Child, and my dearest Friend, lose my
Estate, and be cast in a righteous cause, that I should meet with contempt and
scorn, and great disappointments are indeed great trials, but such as may
conduce (if I be not wanting) greatly to my advantage. It is true, that the
sorrowful sufferer does not see how this can be; But yet afterward he sees it
clearly, and lives to bless God for those very evils under which he sometimes
groaned. We know that Fire and the Lance, rough and harsh medicines and methods
cure some men that were in danger of perishing. Joseph's imprisonment was no
likely way to his advancement, but yet God made it the occasion of his rise. We
do not presently understand these things, but what Jesus said to Peter we find
often verified in the case before us: Joh. 13.7.
What I do (says he) thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter. One
would think Clay and Spittle might put out the eyes of him that sees, and yet
we know our Lord by this means cured the blind.

I shall lay before you some of the advantages which a good man receives from
the sufferings which befall him in this life.

First, These evils conduce much to the destroying of the remainders of sin in
a good man. Our evil habits are not rooted out all at once: There is some folly
bound up in the hearts of good men, which this rod of correction serves to beat
out. Prosperity generally hides our wickedness from us; Afflictions are
faithful friends, they tell us our fault plainly, they awaken us, and conduce
much toward our amendment. And that they may gain their end, it is frequently
so contrived by the wise Providence of God that we may read our sin in our very
suffering* As our affliction is the unhappy offspring of our fault, so it has
upon it some features and signatures that speak it like its Parent. We may very
often read in our suffering what was our sin. It were very easy to give you
many instances to this purpose were it not too much out of the way of the
present discourse. It is very certain that our afflictions are instructive and
very faithful Monitors to us. Psalm. 119.67, 71.
Before I was afflicted I went astray (says the Psalmist) but now have I kept
thy word. Again, It is good for me that. I have been afflicted, that I might
learn thy Statutes. There is nothing so formidable as a constant and
uninterrupted prosperity. We are generally the worse for being prosperous: And
it is too often so, that our Vices and our Prosperity grow up together. It is
rarely seen but even good men are somewhat the worse on this score. It was a
saying of one of the Ancients, That he thought none could be more unhappy than
that man, who never met with any adversity. It is very rarely that we make any
great seize unless we meet with Crosses.

Secondly, They are very useful to the weaning of good men from this world and
all worldly things. They teach them to make a right judgment and estimate of
things; And this is a fruit of great wisdom, and a step to the greatest
perfection. He that prospers knows but one part of the world, he looks upon it
on one side, and does not know it thoroughly. We do not know it perfectly till
we come to suffer; Till then we see the fair and glozing and false side of the
world. He that sees no more than this runs a great hazard. The Shepherd in the
Fable, was tempted out of the hopes of gain to turn a Merchant; He did so, and
lost his adventure upon a rough and tempestuous Sea: But then he gained this
wisdom by his loss, not to trust to the Sea when it was calm. The world does us
the greatest mischief when it smiles, and never does us a greater hurt than
when it speaks us fair. It is a great proficiency to be able to contemn the
smiles and Courtship of the world.

Thirdly, They are of great use to make us more earnest contenders for heaven.
They bring the good man nearer to God, and to his happiness. By these
sufferings the good man is prepared for the enjoyment of God. The contempt he
meets with here makes him aspire after a future glory: His poverty and pain,
and confinement put him upon breathing after the plenty, and the joys and
enlargement of a future state, what he loses here he gains above. And we are
very happy when we do, whatever the occasion be, endeavor earnestly after an
incorruptible Crown.

Fourthly, They give us an experiment of our selves; We know not what we are
till we are tried, It is easy to be valiant when we are in no danger: Our
courage is then proved when we are surrounded with danger; It is the Storm that
shows the skill and courage of the Seaman. We are reproached; we shall now
know whether or no we can pray and forgive them that speak evil of us without a
cause. We are injured; now we shall know whether or not we can forgive an
enemy. We lose our goods; we shall now see whether our faith and patience be
genuine or not. We are affronted; this is the time to take a proof of our
meekness. If these things had not happened the graces of good men had not been
known to others, nor to themselves. But by this means good men have the comfort
of this experience and others an advantage also. It is much better to bear our
evils well than to meet with none at all. Jam. 1.2, 3.
Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the trying
of your faith works patience. Romans 4.3, 4.
We glory in tribulation also (says St. Paul) knowing that tribulation works
patience; wherein ye greatly rejoice (says St. 1 Pet. 1.6.
Peter) though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through
manifold temptations: That the trial of your faith being much more precious
than of gold that perishes, though it be tried in fire, might be found unto
praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Though we had
these graces before, we might yet have been without the comfort, and our
Brother without the advantage, and God without the glory had we not been tried.

Fifthly, Good men that have suffered much, and in a good cause, and with an
undanted courage, shall have a greater reward in an other life. There are
degrees of glory in the other state, and these holy men shall be placed in the
higher Stations of glory. Romans 8.17.
If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together. If we bear an heavy
Cross, we shall receive a glorious Crown. I consider,

IV. That good men are supported under their sorrows and troubles here. And if
God enable them to endure, well may he lay upon them what he pleases. For the
good man is well dealt with when he is enabled here, and has a sure Reward
hereafter. I do intend to discourse of the supports which the pious man will
meet with in another place.

CHAP. II.
HAving cleared the good Providence of God, and showed that the sufferings of
good men are very consistent with his particular care and government, I shall

Secondly, Show you the great reasonableness of the Laws of Christ, by which we
are oblige to suffer for righteousness sake, no only reproach, and the loss of
o^^ worldly goods, but even life it self* Our Saviors Precept is plain (...)
this matter. Luke 14.26. with Mat. 10.37.
If any man come to m^ (says Christ) and hate not his Father and Mother, and
Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, ye^ and his own life also, he
cannot be (...) Disciple. The meaning of the^^ words is plainly this, that we
ca^ not be the true Disciples of Christ if we do not prefer his command before
Father and Mother, and^ and our very life it self. To hat^ these things is to
love them less tha^ we do our Savior, as appear^^ from a parallel place. Luke
9.23.
It is but f^^ we should choose to dye rath^^ than deny our Savior, and
renounce our Religion. And we a^^ frequently commanded by ou^ Lord to deny our
selves, Mar. 8.34.
to take up his Cross, to follow him: And we are assured that he that loses
his life for his sake shall find it. O^ the other hand we are excluded from the
hopes of mercy in another life if we do now deny our Savior before men. If we
suffer, Mat. 10.39.
Ver. 33.
2 Timothy 2.12.
we shall also reign with him. If we deny him, he will also deny us. It is our
interest as much as it is our duty to part with life it self in the confession
of the truth. Mat. 10.28.
Fear not them (says our Savior) which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul; But rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
Hell. And in another place he tells us; Joh. 12.25.
He that loves his life shall lose it: And he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

Now certain it is that our Lord is no hard Master, and that all his Laws are
very righteous and good: Our Blessed Savior promises us rest if we will
become his followers, and assures us, Mat. 11.29, 30.
that his yoke is easy, and his burden light. He that undertakes the Laws of
Christ, and sincerely sets himself to obey them, will never have any cause to
complain of his Master, or his Work. They that find fault with the Laws of
Christ are those that do not understand them aright, or never did seriously
apply themselves to the practice of them. That we should choose to die rather
than break his Laws, and renounce his Religion, is indeed one of the hardest
Laws of Christ: But yet I shall show the reasonableness of it. And to that
purpose shall commend to your serious consideration the following particulars.

First, Let us consider whose Law this is, and we shall find that the Author of
the Law does greatly recommend it to us: How hard soever it may otherwise seem,
yet that it is the command of our Lord Jesus Christ, that consideration is of
great moment to reconcile us to it. We ought not to think any thing
unreasonable or hard which our Blessed Lord, and dear Redeemer lays upon us:
For we are well assured of his great love and affection toward us; He has
given us great proof that he loved us, when he was content for our sakes not
only to become a man, but to die a shameful and painful death to bring us unto
God.

Let us stay a while upon this consideration, and meditate upon the unheard of
love of our Lord Jesus, and we shall soon see great cause to think him a good
Master even then when he does oblige us to die for his sake. If our hearts be
cold and chill, if we find them dampt and sinking, let us then meditate of our
Lords love, and that will be of great use to inflame them, and give them
spirit. Does Jesus say, that we must not fear them that kill the body, that we
must hate our own lives if we will be his Disciples. Good is that word of our
Dearest Lord, will the pious Soul say: Death shall be welcome when ever it
comes, and it will be not only our duty to die when our Lord would have us, but
our honor and great Privilege to be thought worthy to die for him who was
contented to die for us. Alas, this is but very little to what our Lord and
Master has done for us. He was from everlasting the eternal Son of the Father;
He was happy and glorious, and yet for our sakes he was content to stoop from
Heaven to Earth, from the happiness and glories above to the pain and contempt
of this lower world. He that was the brightness of his Fathers glory was
willing to be eclipsed and obscured with our flesh, and with our infirmities.
He, that upheld all things by the word of his power, was yet contented to be
enclosed in the Womb of a Virgin, to be wrapped up in swaddling clothes, to lie in
a Stable, to be subject to his Creatures, to be tempted by the Devil, to be
hungered and thirsty, to be buffeted and hanged on a Tree, that he might save
lost Mankind. He was at these pains for the helpless, and for sinners, for
Caitiffs and Rebels, for them who had dishonored his Father, and ruined
themselves. Here is a love without a Parallel, a love that passes knowledge, a
love that is stronger than death, and that surpasses the love of women. Here
are all the dimensions of love; here is height and depth, a length and breadth:
Jesus did that for his Enemies which rarely has been done for the greatest
Friends and Benefactors. Greater love than this has no man, that he should lay
down his life for his Friend. This is the highest flight of friendship, and we
have but few examples of it. Our Lords kindness rose higher by far: He died for
the ungodly, for the weak, and them that were without all hope.

Who can seriously think of this and not find himself constrained by the ove of
Jesus to be willing to die for him? It is an easy task that lies upon us, to
love him that has first loved us, and to die for him that died for us; This is
very reasonable, and a most gentle command, to lay down our life for him who
first laid down his for us. We see some Servants will hazard their lives for
the sake of their Masters; Loyal Subjects will not stick to shed their blood in
defense of their King and Country. There are those would dare to die for a good
man, or for a faithful friend: My Lord must needs be dearer to me than any of
my Relatives, or my fellow Creatures. I must be very ungrateful if I forget his
love.

But that which still does farther recommend this Law to us, is this, That our
Savior commands no more than what he himself did. He would we should die in
bearing witness to the truth. It is fit we should do it, and he led us the way.
He has recommended this Precept to us not only by his Doctrine, but by his
Example also. Indeed, our Lord was silent when he was reproached, and
inconsistently accused, but he was not so when he was adjured by the High
Priest to tell him whether he were the Christ, Mat. 26.63, 64.
the Son of God or not. He witnessed a good Confession before Pontius Pilate,
and tells him, To this end was I born, Joh. 18.17.
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
truth. Our Lord sealed the truth with his own blood, and does not put his
Followers upon that which he declined himself.

This Example of our Lord does give great force to his Law: And it is very
reasonable we should do what the great Captain of our Salvation has done.
Every where we judge this very reasonable: The Soldier thinks himself obliged
to show courage when he sees his General expose himself to the thickest of the
danger. And the Servant thinks himself well dealt with when his Master commands
no more of him than what he is willing to do himself. The Disciple is not above
his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. That is not thought an hard Law
which the Lawgiver suffers himself to be concluded by.

2. Let us consider the command it self, and that is, that we should rather
part with this life than to deny our Lord, and forfeit our hopes of a better
life. This may at first sight seem a very hard saying, but when we draw near,
and consider it well, we shall find it a very reasonable Law, and that it is no
objection against what our Lord has said, when he tells us, that his yoke is
easy, and his burden light.

The truth is, we disquiet our selves in vain, and as our happiness is but
fantastic and imaginary, so is a great part of our misery also. We make a
false judgment of things, and set a very unequal rate and price upon them. And
this we commonly do in the account we make of life and death. For as we esteem
of this life at a greater rate than we ought, so we judge death to be a greater
evil than indeed it is. I desire that you would (under this general head)
consider well the following particulars. And,

1. That barely to live is not in it self a thing of any vast moment; It is no
high Prerogative and unvaluable peculiar. For the smallest Mite or Ante, the
vilest Worm or Serpent live as well as we. When Marcellinus was sick, all that
were about him flattered him, and said that which they thought would please him
most; Every man gave him that Counsel that they thought would be to him the
most grateful. But there came to him an honest Stoic, that dealt sincerely
with him. He told him, that he need not much afflict himself as if some great
matter were before him: Non est res magna vivere, omnes servi tui vivunt, omnia
animalia, etc. Sen. Ep. 77.
It is (says he) no great thing to live; All thy Servants live, and every
Animal does it: It is a great thing to die well, wisely, and undauntedly. Life
considered abstractly is of no great price, and there are many Creatures that
have it which we do not greatly value upon that score. And when our Lord
requires us to give up our life, he does not command any great thing of us in
doing that. Life it self is at best but a manner or circumstance of being, and
there are those Creatures which have it, whose condition is yet very mean and
low. Life alone does not import any happiness at all: Instead of that, it often
serves to make them who have it sensible of their misery.

2. That supposing life more valuable than it is, yet it is but a very little
of it we lose when we part with it by the hands of violence. It is indeed of
very great moment how we live, of very little how long. He that takes our life
away does rob us of very little. And when God calls for it, we have no cause to
murmur and complain. We generally take false measures here, and there is
nothing in which we more frequently miscount than we do in this matter. And
hence it is that we judge so much amiss of our Saviors Laws. For what is this
life that we put so great a price upon? What it is at the most? I reckon that
what we have spent of it is not at all, and what is to come is not yet. That
which is past is gone irrecoverably, and that which is to come is not yet at
all; so that all we have, and all that we can be said to lose is the present
moment. In all things else we cannot properly be said to be deprived of what we
had lost before, (...). Mar. Ant. l. 3. c. 8.
or to lose what we never had. No man can be deprived of more than what he has
in actual possession. We live the present moment only: For all the rest, we
either have lived it, or it is uncertain whether we shall or not. This is all
then that we lose, and indeed all that we can enjoy at once, the present
moment. So that one of the Ancients said very truly, That he that died very
old, and he that died very young los^ but one and the same thing: Id. l. 2. c.
12.
For said he, the present time is that only which any man can be deprived of
Agreeably hereunto the Apostle speaks when he calls the suffering^ of this
life, (...). Romans 8.18.
the sufferings of this present time. It is but a moment that we suffer, for it
is but a moment that we live at once. It is true indeed, we flatter our selves
with a long time that we have to live, but we cannot promise our selves that
which is to come; and we cannot with any propriety of Speech be said to lose
that which we never had.

3. That supposing we might have lived longer, had we not been cut off by the
hands of violence, yet is this a very inconsiderable ^oss; Our Savior is no
hard Master if he call us hence in our youth and full strength, and suffer us
to fall under the hands of violence. What does all this amount to? We do but
die a little sooner, and after another way. And sure we have little love for
our Lord and our Religion if we think much to do this.

For suppose we might have lived longer yet, that is not much which we lose.
Perhaps a few years or months, and what does it signify? What proportion does
this hold to Eternity? Or of what moment is it if you consider the boundless
love of God and our blessed Savior? A long life is no infallible token of Gods
favor under the Gospel. This was indeed a blessing under the Law of Moses. But
we are now received into a better Covenant. We know it was otherwise before the
Law of Moses was given. Enoch, that walked with God, and that pleased him lived
the shortest life of any of the Patriarchs from Adam to Noa^ And many times so
it is, (...).
that he di^ in his youth whom God loves. I has been esteemed a favor to b^
removed hence betimes. We mu^^ die, and if we are sure of that, i^ is of small
moment when we di^ And therefore when we die for our Religion, we do not lose
mu^^ for the sake of it; For we must all die: We are but deprived of tha^ which
we knew before would e^^ long be taken from us. If our house had not been
pulled or fired down, yet in a little while it would have fallen of it self. He
that kills me does not by doing so make me mortal, Si mortem possemus evadere,
merito mori timeremus. Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 6.
he found me so. We have no cause to fear death when we know we cannot escape
it. When we are killed, it is life, not immortality which we are deprived of.
Let us not fancy that our Lord requires any great matter of us, when he
commands us to lay down our life for his sake. We must have died if he had
never made this Law, and it is a small matter which he requires of us when he
would have us die for him. Dlogen. Laertius. Socrat.
When one told Socrates that the Athenians had decreed his death: He told him
that Nature had decreed theirs also. His death was hastened by them, it was
determined by a superior Power. We have no cause to complain, but great cause
to bless God, that since we must die, he is pleased to call upon us to do it in
a righteous cause. We are very foolish and fond, if we now murmur and complain.

I know very well that we are affrighted with the pain of a violent and
unnatural death; And perhaps the shame and reproach of it is also irksom to us.

For its reproach and shame it is the most trifling pretense imaginanable. And
I can hardly think that a wise man upon second thoughts can be moved with so
vain a consideration as this. The truth of it is, there is not any shadow in
this pretense. For to die for our Religion, whatever our death be, is not more
our duty than it is our privilege, and our honor. The first Christians judged
thus. They rejoiced in this, that they were esteemed worthy to suffer for the
name of Christ. It is no reproach to suffer any death in a good cause. He that
dies for his Country is not by any wise man reproached because he was found
dead in a ditch. It is the Crime, not the kind of death, that makes death
dishonorable. He falls well, whatever hand pull him down, that falls in a good
cause. Our Lord died upon a Cross. His was a painful, and the most shameful
death. It was the punishment of Slaves, and the most infamous Criminals. Now it
is said of our Lord, Heb. 12.2.
that he endured the Cross despising the shame. The pain was very afflictive to
his flesh, but yet such was his love that he endured that: But then his death
was as shameful as his Enemies could have devised, but the shame our Lord
despised. (...). M. Antonin. l. 7. 2.23.
And sure if our Lord did this for us, well may we do it for him. Well may we
glory in that Cross which our Lord has born.

But then for the pain of a violent death we shall not need much to disquiet
our selves; we affright our selves without cause, and we do disquiet our selves
in vain. We think of Racks and Wheels, of fire and faggot when we think of our
Enemies, from whom we expect no mercy. But it is certain, that we often torment
our selves with evils that shall never overtake us: But yet we will suppose
that we meet with great pain: What then? This pain will be tolerable, or not:
If it be tolerable, we may endure it; if not, we shall not be long troubled
with it. That will end, or we shall. We cannot last long under extreme pain.

Besides, it is not unlikely but a disease may put us to sharper and longer
pains than a Tyrant will ever do. A Calenture may be more troublesome to us than
fire and faggot, and the flames of a Fever may scorch us more severely than
other flames: And they that have felt the extremity of the Gout and Stone will
easily grant that it is a favor to die by the Sword of a Tyrant. Quid refert
in Equuleum an in lectulum torquendus ascenderis? Petrarch. Arrian. Epictet. l.
2. c. 6.
We do not know but we may be tortured on our Beds; and what great matter is it
whether we be exercised upon a Bed, or upon a Wheel. It is very likely that a
Tyrant will sooner release us than a disease. What need thou care (says the
heathen Philosopher) what way thou go into another World? They are alike.
But yet if thou art willing to know the truth, that is the shortest which a
Tyrant sends. Never was any Tyrant six months in killing any man: A Fever has
often detained men a whole year. What is it then that we fear? Is it the Sword
of an Enemy? But are we sure we shall die an easier death? Perhaps this Sword
may may rescue us from greater pains and miseries. Arrian. l. 4. c. 7.
When once I had learnt (says the same Philosopher) that he that is born must
also die. I am indifferent whether I die by a Fever, or the fall of a Tile, or
I be killed by a Soldier: But if I must compare, I know that a Soldier will
destroy me with the least pain. It is very inconsiderable, since we must die,
after what manner we do it. And if there be any difference, perhaps this way of
dying by a Tyrant may be the gentler.

4. That the life which we part with, when we die for our Reliligion, is not
worth the keeping upon those terms, upon which alone we have the liberty to
preserve it. Life, I grant, is a very valuable thing; Especially the life of a
man: But let us consider a while what that is that makes it so: It is not
because it gives us the opportunity of eating and drinking, and sporting our
selves in the World. This is the life of a Brute, and not the life of a man,
much less of a worshipper of God. But our life is desirable as it relates to a
better life, and it serves the purposes of Eternity. They are the causes or
ends of life which make it desirable. So long as they continue, life is not
only a blessing, but a most unspeakable one. The great ends of life are the
service of God, and doing good to one another, in order to a future glory and
immortality. It is here we lay a foundation for a future bliss and happiness.
This life is the Stage on which we act our parts well: This is the state of
trial, and this life is very valuable considered with its reference and
subordination to that glory which we expect hereafter. We know there is a
reward for the righteous, and out of respect to that it is that we strive to
abound in all the fruits of righteousness, and perfect holiness in the fear of
God. Whiles our life serves so great an end it is worth the preserving, but
without this it is nothing worth. For barely to live is not the happiness and
perfection of a man. If then it come to this, that we must lose our life, or
prostitute our Consciences, and deny the faith, our life is not worth the
keeping upon these hard terms. For when the end of life is gone, what is life
it self but a burden and reproach to him that has it?

In other things we judge thus. We value things by their end and usefulness.
And when they are rendered unfit for their end, we value them not any longer.
Who regards any thing any farther than as it answers its end? Who regards an
unfruitful and dry Vine or Fig Tree; Who values adulterate Coin, or useless
Beasts? It is the end and usefulness of things that sets a rate and price upon
them. We reject those things that are useless as we do Salt that has lost its
savor.

But nothing is more vile and contemptible than our life when it is deprived of
its end. A man that has Shipwracked his Faith, and prostituted his Conscience
to save his goods and his life is of all Creatures in this lower world the most
deplorably miserable. He lives indeed, but he is an uneasy burden to himself,
and a cumber to the Earth. He lives, but his life is nothing worth when he is
bereft of his integrity, and has forfeited his future hopes. Life is not worth
any man's keeping upon such terms as these are. Plat. Ap. Socr.
Socrates told the Athenians, that if they would offer him his life upon
condition that he should no longer Philosophize, he would thank them indeed,
but not accept of life upon those terms; And adds, that he would rather obey
God than them. Hence it was that the first Christians would rather die than do
that which was evil. And some of the honester Heathens did thus also. Arrian.
Epictet. l. 1. c. 8.
Priscus Helvidius was a Senator of Rome, and considered the duty of his place.
The Emperor sent to him, and forbid him to come into the Senate: Priscus told
him, It was in his power to remove him from being a Senator, till that was done
he would go into the Senate: Then the Emperor commanded him, if went into the
Senate, to hold his peace: But Priscus told him, that he would speak what he
thought was just and right.: But Priscus added, If you say you will kill me,
when did I affirm that I was immortal? Do you your part, I will do mine: It is
your part to kill: It is mine to die undauntedly. It is your part to banish, it
is mine to go away without grief. Our life is worth preserving, but not with
the loss of our integrity. It is its end and its relation to a future state
that gives it value.

3. Let us consider the ground or reason of this command of our Lord. The truth
is our Lords will in this case ought to be ground enough to us. It should be
enough that our Lord has said it; it will not become us to dispute our
Saviors Law. But yet our Savior deals with us with great condescension, he
does not govern us after an arbitrary manner. His Laws are founded upon
Justice, and do carry with them a great conviction that they are just and
reasonable. And as it is thus every where else, so it is in the matter that
lies before us. Our Lord requires us to part with our lives, but it is upon a
good account that he requires it. And we cannot but judge this very reasonable
when it is considered, that, when our Lord requires this, he does it only then
when by our obedience we are assured to avoid a greater evil than what we
suffer, and to attain a greater good than we forego.

By our obedience to this Law we are sure to avoid a greater evil than that is
which we suffer. And this will be evident if we will but take the pains to
consider what it is we suffer; and what evils we avoid by it. For our suffering
it can amount to no more than the loss of this present life: This is the utmost
that we can suffer. No force or malice can reach any farther than this comes
to. Let us make the most of it, it will not be much we lose. And whatever evil
the loss of this life is, yet it holds no proportion at all to the evils, which
by this means we avoid; And they are these two:

1. We avoid the horrors and clamours of an accusing Conscience. Say that we
decline our suffering, and deny our Religion; that to avoid death we wrong our
Conscience: Do not think your trouble is now at an end when you have taken this
course, and that you shall live pleasant days for the future. This is but as if
a man did flee from a Lion, Amos 5.19.
and a Bear met him; Or went into the house and leaned his hand on the Wall,
and a Serpent bit him: Alas poor man, thou do but run from one evil into
another, and, which is the saddest, from the least into the greatest: From
bodily pain, into the horrors of a guilty mind. And sure I am there is no
compare between the one and the other. There is no sorrow like that of a
wounded Spirit. Others may be avoided, or they may be cured, they may be
diverted, and they have been born: But a wounded spirit who can bear? This is
an evil from within, a perpetual disquiet at home. The other evils are but
foreign, and from without. There is no plague like that of the heart. All other
strokes they do but batter the outworks, this throws down the main Fort.
Greater madness cannot be than to wrong our Consciences that we may save our
lives; To wound our Souls that we may keep our Skin entire. This is to regard
the Garment more than we do what it covers. What is it that bewitches us? Can
we meet with any evil in this world to be compared with the guilt and horrors
of our own minds? Will any thing comfort us when our own minds upbraid us? Will
any thing be able to hold us up when our hearts sink within us? Surely, all
other sorrows are very trifling things to this one sorrow of a guilty and
unawakened mind. For we find that it is this that makes our other sorrows sharp
and poinant; it is this that gives them a keen edge, and makes them pierce
deep. Guilt renders even our outward Crosses and sorrows double. It is this
that presses and weighs us down under our other burdens. We run into a greater
evil than we run from, when to escape a suffering we commit a sin. We do but
divert the blow from our body, and receive the deadly stroke upon our souls.
For sure I am that Fire and Faggot, Wheels and Gibbets, all the Instruments of
cruelty and death are very gentle Evils to the horrors and lashes of a guilty
and accusing Conscience. But then,

2. We avoid by this means an eternal and unspeakable misery: The flames of
Hell, I mean, which opens its mouth to receive those profane sinners that
choose that everlasting burning before the sufferings of this present life.
What proportion is there now between a Temporal and an Eternal death? Between
the sorrows of this present time and those everlasting sorrows; Is there any
burning to be compared to that fire which never goes out? Any Dungeon or Prison
fit to be compared with those chains of darkness? Does not that worm that never
dies speak infinite more terror than any Cr^^^^ or Gibbet, any pain or torment
here below? Can we conceive what it is to die eternally? Is there any evil like
unto this? Is any sentence so formidable as that of Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels? Mat. 25.41.
Certainly the parting of the soul from the body is but a small thing to the
parting of the soul from God the fountain of its being and happiness. We look
upon death as formidable which strips us of our worldly properties, divides us
from this body, and from this world, but what is it then to be eternally
separated from our God? To depart from God, to depart with a Curse, to depart
into everlasting fire, to depart into the portion of Devils and apostate Fiends
is more than can be expressed in time.

My God, my God why do thou part from me!
Was such a grief as cannot be.
The Son of God cried out when he was for a while deprived of a sense of Gods
favor, when he was in that agony which he underwent upon our score. But who
can tell, nay, who can think how sad this will be, when God will be merciful to
a man no more? When we die for our Religion, it is that we may not die
eternally. When we lose our life here, it is that we may not die the second
death. Having premised these things, I shall now proceed to lay before you the
helps and assistances that our Religion does afford us against the severest
trials that we shall meet with in our Christian Course and Warfare.

CHAP. III.
FIrst, Our Religion lays before us the hope of eternal life for our support
under the sufferings and calamities of this short life. Rejoice (says the
Apostle) in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.13.
that when his glory shall be revealed ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.
I shall take the liberty to enlarge somewhat upon this Theme, and consider: 1.
The greatness of the reward; 2. The clearness of its revelation; 3. And the
fitness of it to work upon us.

1. The greatness of the reward. Here is enough to make us happy amidst all the
evils of this world. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake, Mat. 5.10, 11.
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake. Here is that which will enable us not to endure only with patience, but
to rejoice also, if it be duly considered.

But it is certain that Eternal life is a vast and wide Ocean, a boundless
Theme that it will not be easy to speak of as we should, who know but in part,
and see through a glass darkly. Howbeit I shall say something, and leave very
much more to be understood.

It is called in the Scriptures a Rest, Heb. 4.9.
or Sabbatism, and that expression does both tell us what Heaven, and what this
life is. That this life is, a life of toil and labor, the burden, and back
part of the Week; Just as of old the first days of the week were, days of
labor and work. The other life is the everlasting Sabbath which does relieve
and deliver us from our toil, and refresh us after our pain and toil. We are
here solicited by our fears, bowed down with sorrow, worn with labor, pained
with sickness, affrighted with evil tidings, and with the apprehensions of
death. We are much afflicted with the malice and power of evil men, and not
suffered to be at rest. There the wicked cease from troubling, there the weary
be at rest. There the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor.

This is a state of Change and great Vicissitude, and when things go well with
us, we are not secure, they will continue in that posture. The Clouds of a
sudden gather together after the clearest Shine. And the most settled course of
things in this world, is yet full of change and variety. When things are as we
would have them, they do not long continue so; something or other arises that
disturbs the order of things, or at least ruffles the calm of our minds. The
dark night sends away the brightness of the day, and casts a black Mantle over
the gaiety that entertained us. The delights of the Spring are removed by the
heat of Summer; and a keen and sharp Winter robs us again of the pleasure of a
more open season. Thus it is here below: We are entertained with various
things; and we are soon stripped of that pleasure which we embraced with the
greatest welcome. In the first days of the Week (in the Book of Genesis) It is
constantly said, for six days together, that the Evening and the Morning was
such and such a day. But when we come to the seventh day we read no such thing:
It is said, Genesis 2.3.
that God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. This gives us a fair
representation of this, and the other life. This life is the burden of the
Week, it has its Evening as well as its Morning: The life to come is all
alike. There is no Evening there that shall remove the light from the place
where God dwells. Rev. 22.5.
There shall be no night there, and they need no Candle, neither light of the
Sun: For the Lord gives them light.

This one consideration does greatly recommend to us the happiness of a future
state, viz. that it is a state of rest. To think that we shall be out of the
reach of power and malice, that all our labor, our toil, and care is at an
end. That we shall no more be harrassed and disturbed by the evils of life.

But this is not all that recommends to us a future state. It is represented to
us in the Holy Scriptures as a state of great joy and pleasure: And it is
consequently expressed by such terms as do import no less, and such as do imply
more than can be expressed or understood. Thus it is sometimes expressed by a
Kingdom, or a Crown, by a Feast, and by Pleasures, but then we are assured that
it amounts to more than all these things speak, and that it is beyond what eye
has seen, or ear heard, or what has entered into the heart of man to
conceive. It is indeed a Crown, a Kingdom, a Feast, and it is much more than
all this: It is the best of all this, and more than this. It is a Kingdom
without Cares, a Crown without a Cross, a Feast without Satiety. It is called
by these little names because these are the greatest things which this lower
world has. These words among us sound high, they speak power and honor,
plenty and pleasure, and what the world calls good, and therefore Heaven is
represented by such things which we understand and regard. But then these are
but low and short representations of the things themselves. Such Images of
heaven as the Tabernacle and Temple among the Jews were of this and the other
World, or of Earth and Heaven. They were Images in little, but came greatly
short of what they represented. For as Hell is represented in the
Scripture-style by Fire, and by Darkness, and by the Valley of Hinnom, which
were things in themselves very sad, and things that were easily understood, but
yet far short of what they represent: So is Heaven represented to us by the
best things below, but these things come infinitely short of that which they
represent.

At other times we find our future happiness otherwise expressed, by being with
the Lord, by seeing of God, by knowing as we are known, and being like our
Lord. These are expressions that are very big indeed, but still they import
more than we are able in this state fully to comprehend: They imply the
greatest perfection that our natures are capable of, and that our imperfections
shall be quite taken away. We are mightily struck and affected with seeing what
we had but heard of, we are strangely pleased with apprehending a thing clearly
which we knew not, or knew but imperfectly before. We are greatly taken with
the company of our dearest friends, and by our approving our selves to the
virtuous and the good: And therefore Heaven is represented to us in terms that
speak the greatest and most rational satisfaction. But then still we live in
houses of clay, we are dull of conceiving, and clogged with our flesh. And
these things are spiritually discerned, and to apprehend them to good purpose
we bust be greatly abstracted from the body, subdued to the world, and weaned
from our sensualities. And when we are so in great measure, we shall be
mightily affected with these things.

Especially, when we remember that in that estate we shall be perfect men: That
our weakness and our folly shall be taken away, and all that which hinders and
indisposes us in this lower World shall be taken out of the way. Our
Understandings shall then be clear, and we shall no more be troubled with the
fumes and mists that now are before our eyes. We shall judge no longer by false
Rules and Measures; we shall not be blinded by prejudice and prepossession, by
passion, and by secular respects: We that now know as Children do, shall then
know clearly, and as we are known. And then our Wills, that are now crooked,
and perverse, and in great measure unresigned, (which is the source of our
trouble in this life) shall be rectified, and swallowed up into the Divine
Will. Our Passions shall no longer disturb and blind us, but we shall be
perfected and completed, thoroughly refined, and purified, and perfectly relish
the Joys of a future state, which as much surpass all the good things of this
World as the Heavens surpass this lump of Earth we tread on.

After all this it must be remembered that that state shall abide for Ever. We
shall there for Ever be with the Lord. Our Kingdom shall have no end, nor shall
our Crown fade away. We shall not know what the infirmities of Age, and what
the fears of Death mean. There will be an eternal Day without a succeeding
Night; a Shine without fear of Clouds or Tempest; a perpetual Triumph without
mixture and Allay. This gives an unspeakable weight to that Crown of glory, and
it will not now sit uneasily upon our heads, we not being burdened with the
anxious thoughts of death and a future reckoning.

2. I consider the clearness of the Revelation of this Eternal life. For this
is a Consideration of great moment in the case that lies before us. For had not
the revelation been clear, the thing it self could not have wrought very
powerfully upon us.

The heathen world wanted this discovery to animate them to worthy actions. And
for the Jews, we read nothing in the five Books of Moses, of Eternal life. I do
not deny but that devout and holy men amongst them, had about them an
expectation of a future Bliss: Nay more, I make no doubt they had also among
them some shadows, and obsecure Images of this Blessed State. But then as this
was not on Gods part any express Promise, so it is certain that they had but
very obscure notices of this happiness. But thanks be to God the case is better
with us: Our Lord has abolished death, 2 Timothy 1.10.
and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. We have it now
clearly and openly revealed, and have by the Religion of Jesus Christ received
the utmost assurance of it. It is not now obscured under Types and Veils, under
the wealth and plenty of a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, but it is now
revealed clearly, and our Lord has given us the utmost assurance that we could
desire in the case.

He has not only taught us this Doctrine, but confirmed it to us by many
Miracles, and particularly by his own Resurrection from the dead; and after
that he himself ascended into Heaven, in the sight of his Disciples. What shall
we say now? Can we forbear to use the Apostles words? 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope (or to the hope of
life, as one Greek Copy has it) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
dead; to an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for you. We are now begotten to the hope of life and
immortality. The Blessed Tidings thereof was brought us from heaven by the Son
of God, and he confirmed what he said by Miracles that were unquestionable; and
to give us the greatest assurance, he did himself rise out of the Grave, and
ascended thither visibly. What is there wanting now to confirm our faith, if we
do but credit the very History of the Gospel? That tells us the many wonders
that Christ did, even besides what are written, and that these are written that
we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing, Joh. 20.31.
we might have life (or, as one Greek Copy has it, eternal life) through his
name.

3. I consider how fit this hope of Eternal life is to work upon us, and to
render us patient and constant under the sufferings which meet us in our way to
Heaven. Surely, the Apostle judged so when he said, Rejoice, 1 Pet. 4.13.
inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall
be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. It will have a mighty
force upon us, if we be not much wanting. 2 Cor. 4.16.
For which cause we faint not -- while we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

There is enough in the thing it self to support us: And if it do it not, it is
because we do not believe it, or do not keep our eye fixed upon it. For we find
that the hope of other things incomparably less, has a mighty force and
influence upon us. Out of the faint hope of Riches we endure labors and
Watchings; we patiently dig into the bowels of the earth, and adventure our
lives upon the uncertain Seas; we deny sleep to our eyes, and slumber to our
eyelids. We are content to endure repulses, and disappointments, that we may
get preferment, and enjoy our pleasure afterward. We keep something in our eye
that supports us under our pain and labor of life. And in yet these things we
have not that assurance of success; nor yet, if we had, can we have any
certainty that we shall long enjoy what we so vehemently pusue. Besides, all
the mean while we do but grasp at a shadow, and court a trifle.

Let us then be persuaded to keep our eyes fixed upon our Reward, and we shall
find our selves much at ease under the labors and sufferings of this life. Let
us raise up our wearied hearts and eyes to that state of Rest and Bliss into
which our Lord is entered, to prepare a place for us. If we think of the good
Land we are going to possess, we shall support our selves under the labors of
a barren Wilderness. And if our hearts be but thoroughly set on Heaven, we shall
not greatly complain of the roughness of the way to it. The hopes of a Child to
be born into the world reconciles the, otherwise fearful, Mother to the pains
of her Travail. What will not then the hope of Eternal glory be able to do? We
are here but forming a new for a more blessed state of things: We hope to be
brought forth ere long into a state of liberty and joy. Let us think of this,
In alium sumimur partum. Sen. Ep. 102.
and we shall not be cast down at our painin our passage thither. Let us under
our Throws and pain look up to that immortality for the sake of which we
suffer. Think of Eternity; He that apprehends that, will not be dismayed at
force, nor terrified with the instruments of Cruelty. Let it never be said, the
hope of Riches and Honor here, has more force than the hopes of Heaven; That
other men shall do and suffer more for earthly, than we do for heavenly things:
That Temporal hopes can effect that which the hope of Eternals cannot do.

CHAP. IV.
SEcondly, Our Religion gives us the utmost assurance of Gods gracious and
particular care and Providence; and being assured of this, we are provided with
another great support under all the Evils of this present life.

These two things have a mighty force to quiet us when they are duly
considered. The hope of Heaven hereafter, and the assurance of Gods care and
special Providence here. If our hope lies beyond this World, and we be in the
mean time assured that God rules among men, there is nothing that can afflict
us greatly.

If we have no greater design about us, than that we may be happy with God in a
future life; we shall not be much cast down at the troubles of this present
state. For these troubles will be so far from hindering our attainment of that
great end, that they rather advance us and set us forward. Death it self, which
is the extremest Evil, does but put us into the possession of our eternal rest.
And whatever Storm or Tempest befalls us, we ought to welcome it when it drives
us nearer to our desired Haven.

But let us in the next place consider the support which we have from that
assurance which our Religion gives us of Gods special care and Providence. If
we live under a lively sense of this truth, we shall be in great measure rid of
our anxious cares and troubles. For now though we should be tossed upon a
Tempestuous Sea, and the Keel wherein we are should be in in danger from the
proud and swelling Waves, yet we may rest securely when we remember who sits at
Stern: And here,

First, I shall lay before you the assurance our Religion gives us of Gods care
and special Providence.

Secondly, I shall show you how potent an argument this is toward our support.

Thirdly, I shall make some application of it.

1. I shall lay before you the assurance our Religion gives us of Gods care and
special Providence. By his special care and Providence I mean his care of Men,
and especially of his Church.

I might here put you in mind of what God did of old for his Church and People
before the coming of the Messiah. The Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament will
afford you many instances of Gods special care of the Jewish people, whom he
had chosen out of all the Nations of the World. He ruled among them, and though
he appointed Governors over them, yet was he their great Lord and King. And
indeed their form of Government was a peculiar one. For it is, not without
cause, by one of the Ancients called a Theocrasie: God was their King, from him
they had their Laws, their Defense, and Protection. And God gave that People
very many, and very great Demonstrations of his special care of them. He dwelt
among them, they were under his Wings. And were of all people in the world the
most happy while they continued obedient unto God. I should be endless if I
should go about to reckon up what proofs God gave of his great care of that
Church, and of his especial Providence over it. He showed it by Miracles of
Mercy, by Wonders of Love, by most singular and remarkable deliverances which
he wrought for them.

In due time God sent his Son into the World, and after that, as he enlarged
his Church and People, so he continued his care of them too. And by his Son he
has given us farther assurance of his very particular care and Providence. And
the Son of God did in his Sermons and Discourses assure his followers of this
truth; And by that means did prepare them for suffering, and dispose them to
patience and contentedness, and to an unshaken and steady faith in God, under
all events of things. By this course our Lord would deliver us from those cares
and anxieties, from those fears and distractions that render this life the
greatest burden to us. And because we are apt to be mightily concerned for the
necessaries of this life, and very apt to be afraid of Death, especially of a
violent and unnatural one, therefore we find our Lord fortifying us against
these evils, and that he does by giving us a full assurance of the special care
and good Providence of God. For this (as I shall show afterward) is a most
powerful consideration to render us quiet and contented, and to rid us of our
distracting cares, and those fears that make this life a burden to us: And to
this purpose our Savior discourses most divinely in his Sermon on the Mount; a
considerable part of which incomparable Sermon was spent in this Argument: And
it tends directly to free us of that anxiety and care which is the great burden
of our lives. But I had rather you should hear the words themselves which our
blessed Lord spoke. And these they are: Mat. 6.25. to Ver. 33.
Therefore, I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink: Nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on: Is not the
life more than Meat, and the body than Raiment? Ver. 26.
Behold the Fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much
better than they? Ver. 27.
Which of you by taking thought can add one Cubit unto his Stature? Ver. 28.
And why take ye thought for raiment: Consider the Lillies of the field how
they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. And yet I say unto you, Ver. 29.
that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. Ver. 30.
Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is, and to
morrow is cast into the Oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little
faith? Therefore take no thought, saying, Ver. 31.
What shall we eat? Or what shall we drink? Or wherewithal shall we be
clothed? Ver. 32.
(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things.

Can any thing be more effectual to rid us of our anxious and uneasy thoughts,
than these Arguments which our Lord has laid before us? Show me any Philosopher
that ever discoursed at this powerful rate. These words are very divine, and
mightily fitted to gain their end. They are words that couch under them very
great Arguments to move us by. If God have given us life (which nothing but his
kindness could move him to do) we need not doubt of meat to preserve that life.
He that has given us a body that needs clothing, will surely give us
something to cloth it withal. The Fowls are fed, that can neither sow nor
reap, nor do they gather into Barns; and shall we distrust? Our anxiety is
burdensome indeed, but it does not advance us: It neither feeds nor clothes us.
God clothes the flowers and Lillies of the field (which are not capable of care
and anxiety) and that after a more gay manner than what any Monarch, even
Solomon himself, was clothed. And if the grass of the field, which was not
designed for any long continuance, be thus beautified by God, shall we fear
nakedness? These cares may better become the Heathens (who had but a slender
belief of God's special Providence) they become us not, who do profess a belief
that God knows what our needs are. These are the powerful Arguments that our
Lord lays before us. And can there be any thing more convincing than what our
Savior has said? Can any thing be more effectual to rid us of our troublesome
cares for ever? Can any thing be added to this Discourse? If there may, it is
that surely which our Lord himself has added in the next words: Mat. 6.33, 34.
But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: For
the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self: Sufficient unto the
day is the evil thereof. If we will be careful, let us take care to do the Will
of God: Let us do our part, and God will take care of us. We shall have enough
to do with our present work, let us leave futurities to him that is only wise
and good.

But perhaps it is the least of our care what we shall eat and drink, and
wherewith we shall be clothed: We are careful about greater matters than these
are: And that is the smallest of our care what provision we shall make for our
bodies: We are full of thoughts how we shall be able to suffer persecution, and
continue constant to the death: We may be brought before the great men of the
World, and how shall we do then for Wisdom and Courage? We may be delivered up
into the hands of powerful men; What shall we then do? Our Lord does not leave
us in that case. When they deliver you up (says he) take no thought how or what
ye shall speak: Mat. 10.19.
For it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. It will be
enough that we have help when we need it: We ought to consider that we shall
not be forgotten by God: That nothing shall happen to us without his knowledge
and permission. Ver. 29, 30, 31.
Are not two Sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall on
the ground without your Father: But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many Sparrows. These
words give us assurance of the very particular care and Providence of God, and
therein the greatest support under all our afflictions that is imaginable. The
World was greatly in the dark in the question of Gods Providence, and there
were great and foul errors crept into the World concerning it. Thus Epicurus is
said to have denied the Providence of God altogether; Aristotle, to have
confined it to the Heavens; Some of the Arabians to have restrained it to
Universals only; and some of the Jews to have limited it to Mankind, and not
extended it unto Beasts. Nay, some of the Jews were narrower still, and would
needs confine the Providence of God to the Jewish Land or Nation only, Vid.
Jacchiad in Dan. 7.3. Cum Annot. L. Emper. v. Abraven. on Exodus 23.20.
who were Gods Portion and Lot. But our blessed Savior does, in the words
abovenamed, assure us that Gods care is not to be bounded and restrained. And
thus though he be not equally concerned for all his Creatures, yet they are all
a part of his care: And he has not only a general care of Mankind, but a care
of the Individuals also, and a very special and particular care of his
Worshippers and Followers. Nay, the very Beasts themselves are part of his
care; and not only Oxen, Beasts of great labor and usefulness, but the
smallest fowls of the air, even the Sparrows, those cheap and inconsiderable
ones. Nor is God only concerned for the life of a man: Our Savior descends
lower, when he says, The very hairs of your head are all numbered.

We are further assured by the Apostle that God cares for us, and that
therefore we ought to cast all our Care) or burden, 1 Pet. 5.7.
as it is in the Psalmist, Psalm. 55.23.
to which these words seem to refer) upon him. But then he would have us cast
all our care upon him. Not only our care for meat and drink, etc. Our care for
our selves, but our care for our Friends and our Relatives; Our care for future
Events and Contingencies. Phil. 4.6.
Be careful for nothing, says another Apostle; 1 Cor. 7.3^.35.
And elsewhere he tells them to whom he writes, that he would have them be
without carefulness, and that they might attend upon the Lord without
distraction. That is, we must from the consideration of Gods special Providence
discharge our selves of all our tormenting and disquieting cares, giving up our
selves entirely to the will of that God who rules and governs this lower World.

2. I shall now show how powerful an argument this is toward our support. And
that is,

First, As by it we are discharged of our anxiety and disquiet of mind, which,
for want of this consideration, afflicts and burdens us. If God govern the
World, we may be quiet and still: We have nothing to do but obey his Will, and
to submit cheerfully to his disposal of things. We are not fit for the
government, and well it is for us that we are not concerned. We want Wisdom and
Power, and are too shallow and too weak for so great a weight. We have nothing
to do now but Adore the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, and to follow God. It is
well for us that we are discharged from a burden which neither we nor our
Fathers were ever able to bear. Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the multitude of Isles be glad
thereof.

Secondly, As by this Doctrine we receive assurance that all things will be
well administered, and tend to a good account at last. We shall not now need to
fear: We need not disquiet our selves with the things that happen, as if they
came to pass by chance, or an inevitable fate. God governs the World: And it is
well for us that so it is. We are safer much in his hands than in our own, and
dearer we are to him than to our selves: We rejoice under the Government of a
wise and good King. We have greater cause to rejoice in this, that God reigns.
And that if we consider his infinite Wisdom, his Goodness and Almighty Power.

His Wisdom assures that he will do what is best. And we are not fit Judges of
that: We are not able to see into the secrets of Government: It is enough to us
that God is infinitely wise, and so not only knows what is best, but what is
best for us, and what is the fittest time of helping us.

But then his Goodness, and Holiness give us a full assurance that he will not
let them that are truly good, and suffer upon that account, lose their reward;
That he will not govern Arbitrarily, but will do good to them that are good.

And since his Power is infinite also, we are secure that he will not be
defeated in bringing his own Counsels to pass. And therefore the holy and pious
soul give^ it self up entirely unto Gods disposal; being well assured of Gods
good will to him, and knowing well that his infinite Wisdom cannot be deceived,
nor his Almighty Power defeated.

3. I shall make some Application of this: And that I shall do in the following
Particulars.

First, This may serve to reprove our murmuring and impatience under the evils
which we meet with here below. We complain bitterly under our several troubles
and afflictions, not considering the hand that lays them on us. We do not, as
we ought, when we are distressed, look up with great reverence to our Creator;
but we curse our Stars, or we are angry with our Brother, who is the immediate
Instrument of our trouble; or we impute our misery to our inadvertence, and do
disquiet our selves in vain. If our Child or Friend die, we accuse the
Physician, or our selves: If we suffer in our Goods, we quarrel with our
Servants, or are angry at the Times. In a word, we are uneasy and restless,
not considering that God governs the World, and that the very hairs of our head
are numbered. Our Friend did not die without Gods knowledge; Our Goods were not
lost without his regard; And who are we that we should murmur and complain, and
say unto God, What do thou? If God govern the World, we may well be shamed to
repine and murmur. If he disposes things below, we shall be very blameable if
we murmur at our own Lot and Portion.

Secondly, Hence we may be seasonably exhorted to acknowledge this great truth
by a suitable life and conversation. It is a great influence which this belief
ought to have upon us; It ought to render us contented with our Lot and Portion
of things; To endue us with courage to encounter difficulties; It ought to
quicken us in our devotions; Let us not faint under the sorrows that overtake
us. If God govern the World, we ought quietly to commit our cause to him, and
not go about to wrest the Government out of his hand. It becomes greatly to
trust in him at all times, and not to let go our Faith and our Hope whatever
troubles befall us in this mortal life. 1 Pet. 5.10, 11.
The God of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you: To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. V.
OUr Religion does assure us of the power and presence of the holy Spirit of
God under our sufferings for righteousness sake, and this is another great
support which the sincere disciples of Christ are furnished with. 1 Pet. 4.14.
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye: for the Spirit of
glory and of God rests upon you -- It is worth our observing by the way, that
this Spirit is in this place represented to us under the Character of the
Spirit of glory, and that very fitly also when the Apostle assures those men of
this divine assistance who are reproached for the name of Christ. The Spirit of
glory will sufficiently support good men under the reproach and scorn they meet
withal. (...). vid. N. T. Edit. Curcellaei.
There is a certain Greek Copy that has it, the Spirit of glory and of power;
I shall not need to contend for that reading, being well assured, that he who
receives the Divine Spirit, receives the Spirit of power also, as I shall have
occasion to show you afterward; It is to be observed, that the Apostle assures
them to whom he writes, that this Holy Spirit, whom he calls the Spirit of
glory and of God, shall rest upon them. He shall not only give them a visit in
their sorrows, and so leave them, but he shall stay and abide with them. And
this agrees with what our blessed Savior promised. Joh. 14.16, 17.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever. Even the Spirit of truth, etc.

But for my more orderly speaking to this matter, I shall

First, Show you the sufficiency of this divine assistance.

Secondly, I shall lay before you the great assurance which we have, that we
shall receive this heavenly aid.

Thirdly, The condition on our part required for the obtaining this assistance.

Fourthly, The Application of it.

1. I shall show you the sufficiency of this Divine assistance which God has
made us the Promise of: We shall have great cause to believe that our help will
bear proportion to our work, and that whatever is laid upon us does not exceed
the proportion of the strength which we receive to bear it. And then we shall
have no cause to find fault of our Master, or of our work when our help bears
proportion to our work and duty. Now we need more than an ordinary help in
these two Cases.

First, To enable us against persecutions for the sake of our Religion.

Secondly, To support and comfort us under our losses and other afflictions
which we shall meet with in this present life. I shall therefore show you that
the Spirit of God will afford sufficient help in both these cases.

1. We need more than ordinary assistance to enable us against persecutions for
the sake of our Religion. The Christian has as quick a sense of pain as other
men, his Religion does not destroy his flesh and blood, and change it into
Brass: Heb. 12.11.
He is as apprehensive and as sensible of the evils of life as any other man
is: And besides that, he is is by his Profession exposed to all the miseries of
humane life; To cold, and nakedness; To hunger and thirst; To scorn and
reproach; To stripes and to buffetings; To Wheels and Racks; to restraint, and
to death death it self. It were not an easy thing to recount the very many
miseries with which holy men have been persecuted: Apostles and Prophets, wise
and holy men, men of whom this World was not worthy; have been sawn asunder,
stretched upon the Rack, tormented on the Wheel, exposed upon Gibbets, torn
apieces by violence, roasted upon the fire, and taken off by death that has
been not only violent, but merciless. Now these trials require a mighty aid,
and no less than an heavenly and a divine assistance. It is an easy thing for
us to despise the danger that is at a distance; To speak big words when we know
the Enemy is afar off; To profess that we will rather die for Jesus than we
will deny him. Our Lord has many such forward Disciples as these, who give him
their word that they will not forsake him, and yet for all their good words
they deny him in a time of danger. And indeed so it is, that we shall then need
a great assistance: Nor can we tell how soon we may be put to the trial. It is,
much for our Interest to discern whence our strength is to be expected.

The Holy Spirit is able to strengthen us to undergo undantedly all these
evils. And no aid less than that of the Holy Spirit would be sufficient. It
must be a power from above, an help from God that can enable us to stand up
against all the Wit and Malice, the Craft and the Cruelty of men and Devils.
Indeed we are very apt to despond, and our hearts fail within us: We fear we
shall never hold out under great pains and torments, and we do much disquiet
our selves about it. But here is an help at hand, and we shall find, that he
that is in us is greater than he that is in the world. And this will appear if
we consider the following particulars:

1. That this Spirit is a Spirit of power, and that power is Divine also. The
Holy Scriptures give us a large and very particular account of this matter; and
therein we have a full assurance, that by the help of this heavenly aid we may
be able to do more than we can think. He that has this Spirit of God is endued
with a mighty power from above, a power that is sufficient against all the
powers of darkness. When the Virgin asked the Angel (who had told her she
should conceive and bring forth a Son) How this be, seeing I know not a man?
Luke 1.35.
We find what answer he made, viz. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the Highest shall overshadow thee -- and then it follows: Ver. 37.
For with God nothing shall be unpossible. The Holy Spirit is called the finger
of God: Luke 11.20.
And the great and mighty works which Jesus and his followers did, were wrought
by this Holy Spirit of God; And these works are an irrefragable proof of the
mighty power of the Spirit of God. To this purpose we read of the demonstration
of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4.
and of power. And where in one place St. Act. 6.5, 8.
Stephen is said to be full of the Holy Ghost, in the other place he is said to
be full of Power. He that receives the Spirit receives Power: 2 Timothy 1.7.
God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of Power. St. Peter says, 1 Pet.
3.18.
That Christ was put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. St.
Paul expresses the same truth in other words, and that Variety confirms the
truth of what I am now asserting; St. Paul says, That he was crucified through
weakness, 2 Cor. 13.4.
yet he lives by the power of God.

Here can be no defect of Power then, where the Holy Spirit is. The mighty
works wrought by this divine Spirit sufficiently declare, that no Power is
wanting where he does assist. And therefore why should we distrust and despond
when we have the promise of this Power from on high? We shall not need to fear
even death it self if we be possessed of this heavenly help: Romans 8.11.
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you.

We have just cause to distrust our selves indeed, and we may well suppose that
we cannot be able to stand upright; but what shall be too hard for us when we
have received that Spirit that raised Jesus from the dead? Well may God lay on
us what he thinks fit, when he thus assisteth us with his Divine Spirit.

2. This Holy Spirit is promised to this end, to help us in these straits and
necessities: Luke 12.11, 12.
And when they bring you into the Synagogues, and unto Magistrates, and Powers,
take ye no thought how, or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say.
For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say. It is
enough, and we ought to think it so, that we have this assistance when we need
it, and are to use it: And the Apostle tells us, that we are happy, even then
when we are judged most miserable by the World, 1 Pet. 4.14.
when we are reproached for Christ's sake, because the Spirit of God and of
glory rests on us: God has provided well for us under the Gospel, which is
the ministration of the Spirit, that he has promised a more than ordinary
assistance in cases that are extraordinary.

3. Besides, we have sufficient proof that this heavenly assistance has not
been wanting to others in these difficulties. We have to this purpose very
great examples of those that were assisted by this holy Spirit in all their
sufferings and persecutions. They were by the Holy Ghost enabled under all that
pain and suffering which they endured, to glorify God in the day of
Visitation. And whereas before they were weak and feeble as other men, had the
same fears and despondencies which other men are importuned with, yet when they
were assisted by this good Spirit of God, they were full of Courage, and
undaunted amidst the severest trials which they underwent, We know that St.
Peter, before the descent of the Holy Ghost, was so fearful, that he denied his
Master when he was questioned by a silly maid: But after the Holy Ghost
descended, he was bold as a Lion, and durst confess him before all the House of
Israel. Acts 2.36.
Now those men that were ready to forsake their Lord before, they do not only
own him publicly, but they departed from the presence of the Council, Act.
5.41.
rejoicing that they were counted worth^ to suffer shame for his name.

Nor was this Divine and supernatural assistance a Peculiar belonging to the
Apostles and first Preachers of Christianity, nor was it limited to those early
days of Christianity; It was continued in the Church of Christ, and does still
continue according to the Promise of our Lord and Savior, Joh. 14.16.
And hence it came to pass that holy Martyrs, and those that have been
persecuted for righteousness sake, have been able to persevere in bearing
witness to the truth, notwithstanding all the torments which they did endure
from their enemies hands. They that were tortured endured with singular
patience their Tormentors Cruelties, and wearied out those men who were their
Executioners. Nor were they only the Ministers of Religion (who might be
supposed to be endued with a greater measure of the Spirit) that endured with
undaunted resolution, but the Laypeople also, even Women were able to endure
the greatest severities: I should be endless if I should go about to tell what
great examples we have in former and later Ages upon record to this purpose.

2. We need a more than ordinary assistance to support and comfort us under the
losses and other afflictions which we meet with in this present life.

The Comforts of this life (what price soever we may set upon them) are at best
very uncertain to us; And we very often outlive those blessings which rendered
this present life comfortable to us. We are deprived of the delight of our
eyes, and the labor of our hands, and of that which was the joy of our hearts.
Our dearest Friends are snatched away from our Embraces; our Children and our
Relatives are taken from us by a sudden and an unlooked-for death, and we are
bereft of the plenty and the store which once we did enjoy, and are left
solitary, and there is none to comfort us.

In this case the devout and pious Christian is of all men in the world the
best provided for. He has peace and comfort which the world knows nothing of.
And that he has from the Holy Spirit of God, which he is endued with. In this
dry and barren Wilderness he has his fresh Springs; And after all his losses
and his toil, he ha^ a Comforter that visits him, and abides with him for ever.
Thus the Promise runs which ou^ Lord made a little before he les^ the World.
Joh. 14.16.
And a most gracious Promise this to us who live in these houses of clay, and
that are fa^^ removed from our Country and our Fathers house. We shall be sure
to meet with tribulations here, to hear store of evil tidings, and very sad
stories of the miseries that befall others, and that threaten us. Thanks be to
God for the comforts of the Holy Ghost: It is to be hoped that we shall thereby
be so^ far refreshed and relieved, as to support us under all our other sorrows
in our way to Heaven. This Holy Spirit is like the Rock that followed the men
of Israel in the Desert, and furnished them with water in a dry and thirsty
Land: This is that Oil of gladness that makes us rejoice in the midst of the
sorrows of this mortal life. The Seal of God, that tells us to whom we do
belong, and the Earnest of our future inheritance, which does ascertain us of a
great reward in Reversion. And by this means we are upheld by this heavenly
Comforter, under sickness and poverty, pain and reproach, confinement, and the
fears of death, till we are set at liberty, and placed among the Spirits of
just men made perfect.

2. I shall lay before you the great assurance, that we shall receive this
heavenly aid. For we cannot but be thoroughly convinced that this Promise of the
Holy Spirit is an exceeding great and precious one. We are next to consider
what great ground we have to expect that this heavenly gift shall be bestowed
upon us.

So it is, that if we look down into our own breasts, we shall find our selves
in so ill a case, that we cannot think them fit Temples for so pure and holy a
Being as the Spirit of God. Our Souls are like the Earth when it was without
form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the Deep. We may soon discover
the need we have of this Divine assistance to digest and put in order, to
cherish and enlighten this dark and confused Chaos. But all this while we have
no assurance that we shall be thus favored.

But, blessed be the name of God, we have great assurance that he will send his
Holy Spirit into our hearts, and not forsake us: And what that assurance is,
you may take in the following particulars:

1. We have the Promise of God, and that to us ought to be enough. God had of
old foretold, Isa. 44.3. Joel 1.18. Act. 2.17.
that in the times of the Messiah he would pour his holy Spirit plentifully,
even upon all flesh. A Promise that was in great measure fulfilled at the day
of Pentecost, next after the Ascension of the Son of God: He did before that
command his Apostles, Acts 1.4, 5.
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the
Father, which, says he, ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with
water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. Our
Lord had given them before this a great assurance, that this Comforter should
come and abide with them for ever. And we need not doubt, but that he that
promised would make good his word to us.

2. Especially if it be considered how necessary this Holy Spirit is for the
completing and finishing the work of man's Redemption. It It is true, we were
redeemed by the blood of Christ, but then we are renewed by the Holy Spirit,
and by him enabled to give obedience to his Laws, Heb. 5.9^.
who is the Author of Eternal Salvation, but it is to them that do obey him.
Since God has given us his Son we need no longer doubt but that he will with
him give us all things; especially all things needful for life and godliness.
We need not doubt of receiving the supports of the Holy Spirit to enable us to
profess that truth constantly which the same Spirit dictated to holy men, Heb.
2.4.
and which was confirmed by Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles and gifts of
the Holy Ghost. There is no room left for doubting, but that we shall receive
this Holy Spirit if we constantly and fervently implore him.

3. Again, our Savior has given us the utmost assurance in those words where
he says, Luke 11.13.
If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.
Parents do not use to deny their Children what is needful for them: Nor do they
need a positive Law to oblige them to it. There is a Law in their nature does
direct and determine them in this case: And those Parents that are otherwise
evil men, are yet very prone to bestow good things on their Children. Now then
who can doubt of Gods readiness to bestow his Holy Spirit upon them that ask
him? Earthly Parents are evil, they are so by nature, and more so by custom and
a course of sinning: But our heavenly Father is constantly and immutably good,
and will not deceive, or deny those that ask him. That love and kindness, and
all the degrees of goodness in any Earthly Parents was derived from God, who is
infinitely and unalterably good, and will not fail to fulfill the word which he
has spoken, nor can he be deceived or defeated: He has said it that cannot
lie nor repent; He has promised who is able to do it; And we may as justly
disbelieve his Being as distrust his veracity, and doubt of his Propensity and
his power. I proceed to

3. The condition required on our part for the obtaining this assistance. And
that is a very gentle and easy one. Luke 11.9, 10.
God will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. Ask, and it shall be given
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every
one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds, and to him that
knocks, it shall be opened.

I do readily grant that we are not heard in all the Petitions which we put up
to God: And it is very well for us that so it is. For we should soon destroy
our selves if we should obtain that which we sometimes pray for. But then this
is to be understood with reference to the things of this life, where the well
instructed and modest man is to refer himself to God, who knows what is best
for him: (...). M. Antonin. l. 10.
In this case the good man prays that God would give him, and remove from him
what he thinks fit. And the very Heathen could teach men this Lesson.

But then for the case before us, God has declared his Will, and put us upon
Praying, and that fervently also, for the Holy Spirit: And we have great need
of his heavenly aid and assistance; and now we can have no doubt but that we
shall be heard, because we are sure that we pray according to the Will of God.
1 John 5.14, 15.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that he hears us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him.
And especially may we be assured of success when we are provided of so
effectual an Intercessour as the Son of God; He has said, Joh. 14.13
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in the Son. And we are certain moreover, that when we pray for the
Holy Spirit in the name of Christ, we pray for that divine assistance which our
Lord went into heaven to send among us. This he told us, saying, Joh. 16.7.
I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: For if I go not
away the Conforter will not come unto you, but if I depart I will send him unto
you. Nay, our Lord assures us, that he will hear our Prayers, that he will
intercede in this very case; so that we have here abundant security that we
shall receive an answer to our Petition. Joh. 14.14, 16.
If ye shall ask any thing in my name I will do it -- And presently he adds,
And I will pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter that he may
abide with you for ever. For our other requests which we put up for health, or
riches, and the good things of this life, our Lord has given us no particular
promise of his effectual Intercession, but he has done it in this matter, and
has thereby removed our fears and doubts of being heard.

And sure if God many times prevent our very Petitions, and give us some
measure of the Holy Spirit, even before we ask him, we shall then have no cause
to fear but he will give greater measures of this Holy Spirit to them that do
ask him.

All our care must be that we ask as we should: That we pray for this heavenly
assistance with great fervor and constancy; that we cry mightily unto God; and
that we greatly humble our souls before him: That we address to him with
hunger and thirst and restless importunity; that we seek as for Silver, and
search as for fine Gold: That we vehemently desire what we pray for, and thirst
as the parched earth does for showers from heaven: That we strive mightily in
our Prayers to God, and send up many strong cries: That we pierce the Heavens
with our cries, and that we put forth all our strength: That we employ all the
powers that we have received, and summon up all that is within us to call down
this heavenly aid: That we cherish and improve the measures of the Spirit which
we have received, and be greatly cautious that we do not by a careless and a
trifling, a profane and worldly temper grieve this Holy Spirit, and send away
this divine and heavenly Comforter. That we do not seek our comfort elsewhere,
and oppose the divine assistance by our self-will and our inordinate affections.

4. I proceed now to make some Application of what has been said. And

1. This speaks very much to the comfort of the weak and the fearful, at least
to all among them that are sincerely good, and do desire greatly to become
better. Here is an help at hand that is sufficient, and we need not now be cast
down. I shall speak to such in the words of the Prophet, Isa 44.2, 3, 4.
Fear not O Jacob my servant, and thou Jesurun whom I have chosen. For I will
pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will
pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my blessing upon thine Offspring: And they
shall spring up as among the grass, as Willows by the watercourse. This
blessed time is now come, and it is well for us that so it is. We are not now
unprovided of an heavenly aid; God is ready to pour out upon us his Holy
Spirit: Our Lord came, Isa. 61.2, 3.
To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord -- To comfort all that mourn: To
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the
oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness,
that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord,
that he might be glorified. Let us not now fear nor be dismayed under all our
afflictions and persecutions: Greater is he that is in us, than he that is in
the world. This heavenly Comforter will abide when earthly comforts leave us.
And may we but receive the Joy of the Holy Ghost, we shall not need be
overwhelmed with our earthly sorrows.

2. This speaks our duty as well as our Privilege; And we may learn what we are
to do, as well as what God has done for us. The Holy Spirit is promised by
God, but must be implored by us. God will give him, but not to the careless and
cold, the formal and indifferent, the loose and the profane.

Let us then be exhorted to ask, and seek, and knock: Let us now fervently
implore this Holy Comforter, this Spirit of truth and power. I need not tell
you what great need we have of power from above: We are weak Creatures, full of
our fears, exposed to many evils and sufferings, and need an help from above to
confirm and strengthen us: We know not how soon we may be called forth to
suffer the extremest evils, or may be stripped and deprived of all our worldly
Goods and Possessions: We cannot tell how soon we may lie upon our dying beds,
when our Soul shall sit ready to take its flight from our trembling lips, when
our Flesh shall fail us, and we shall be abandoned by our earthly comforts and
supports. Whither shall we go for comfort then? What will support us under
these trials but the sense of Gods love, and the Joy of the Holy Ghost? This
Comfort will reconcile us to Prisons, and to Poverty, and to Death it self. We
shall then have hope even in Death it self, Romans 5.5.
And such an hope as makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.

CHAP. VI.
I Shall in the next place consider the Example of Christ, and of holy men, who
have suffered the greatest evils, which this world could inflict upon them. And
for the better speaking to this, I shall,

First, Take notice that the Holy Scripture calls upon us to reflect upon these
Examples under our afflictions.

Secondly, I shall give you a very short account of their sufferings.

Thirdly, I shall show you the great usefulness of these great examples unto us.

1. I shall take notice that the holy Scripture calls upon us to reflect upon
these examples under our afflictions.

The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews gives us a large account of the
sufferings of holy men: And then subjoyns, Chap. 11.
Heb. 12.1, 2.
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the Race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; Who for the joy that was set
before him endured the Cross, despising the shame, etc. He animates them by
these great examples, which they were therefore obliged to keep in their eye.
And they are at once put in mind to reflect upon the exemplary sufferings of
holy men, and of our blessed Savior. To the same purpose St. James exhorts
those to whom he writes, Jam. 5.10, 11.
Take my Brethren the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an
example of suffering affliction and of patience -- Ye have heard of the
Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. -- i. e. as ye have read or
heard of the Patience of Job, (who lived many Ages before, and probably
suffered before the Law of Moses was given) so ye have many of you seen how
patiently our Lord Jesus suffered. It was one end of our Lords sufferings that
we might learn patience from his example: 1 Pet. 2.21.
For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example that ye should follow his steps. And indeed the holy Scripture is
very large and very particular in giving us an account of the sufferings and of
the patience of Christ, and of holy men, that we might learn to write after so
fair a Copy, and imitate them in patience and resignation to the Will of God,
which in them was so exemplary: For whatsoever things were written before time,
Romans 15.4.
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope.

2. I shall give you a very short account of their sufferings. And,

First, Of the sufferings of Jesus the Author and the finisher of our faith.
His whole life was little else than a continual suffering. And he was a most
unparalled example of Innocence, and of suffering; and not only of
sufferings, but of the greatest meekness and exemplary patience under them. He
was born in a Stable, and died upon a Cross. Born among Beasts, and died among
Malefactors. He was persecuted as soon as he was born, and when he was capable
of doing no evil, he was hunted after as a Malefactor. His Persecution began
from Herod an Idumaean, it was carried on by the Jews his Countrymen, and
completed by Pilate the Roman. And though he hurt no man, yet he was pursued
by all. His great Poverty did not protect him from Envy, His profound Meekness
did not preserve him from the Contradictions of Sinners; And his known
Innocence did not save him from the Sentence of Death.

His body was like one of ours. He was as sensible of pain as we are: And
certain it is that his Enemies loaded it greatly. What part of him was exempt?
His Head was Crowned with Thorns, his Hands and Feet were pierced with Nails,
his Side was goared with a Spear, his Shoulders loaded with a Cross: He was
spit upon, buffeted, and scourged; And at last hanged on a Tree without regard
and pity.

His Soul was afflicted greatly: Mat. 26.37, 38. Mar. 14.33.
He was sorrowful and heavy, and that even to death. He was sore amazed, Luke
22.44.
and very heavy. He was in an Agony, and sweat as it were drops of blood. Psalm.
22.14.
His heart was like Wax, melted in the midst of of his Bowels. At length he is
forced to bear his Cross, on that he is hanged, there he bleeds, and there he
cries out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

But as he endured the Cross, so he despised the shame: For his death was
ignominious, as well as painful. He died among Criminals, and the death of the
worst and vilest of men.

Thus did our Savior suffer. Thus entered he into his glory. And all this he
bore with invincible patience. He did not want power to rescue himself, and to
punish his Enemies; nor did he want the greatest provocation: He was innocent,
and had lived an useful life, But for all this he is not provoked against his
Enemies, nor does he complain against God. For as he prays for his enemies, so
he resigns himself unto God.

Secondly, For the sufferings of Holy men both before and since our Saviors
death I must not undertake to give you an account. It would fill some Volumes
to be particular in this Argument: We read of those before our Saviors
sufferings (of whom this world was not worthy) that had trial of cruel mockings
and scourgings, Heb. 11.36.
of bonds and imprisonments: That were stoned and sawn asunder, tempted and
slain with the Sword, that wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being
destitute, afflictted, tormented: They wandered in Deserts and Mountains, and
were in Dens and Caves of the Earth.

And for the times afterward, we have very large accounts of the sufferings of
the Apostles and Primitive Christians for a long time, and a very particular
account of the exemplary patience and meekness, courage and undauntedness of
them that suffered. These are things very well known to them that have read the
holy Scriptures, and the ancient Writers of the Christian Church: Besides the
many examples we have upon record of those who have with great patience
suffered for the truth in the later Ages of Christianity. We have many examples
of those who have cheerfully gone into Goales, and given their bodies to be
burnt for the sake of the truth.

Thirdly, I shall show you the great usefulness of these great examples to us.
For when we are directed to reflect upon them, it is supposed that it is for
our advantage that we should do so.

For it cannot be denied but that the Church has gained much by the exemplary
sufferings of holy men. The blood of Martys has been a fruitful Seed: And the
Church did then grow when it was persecuted. Phil. 1.12, 14.
I would ye should understand, Brethren, that the things which happened unto me
have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel. -- And many of the
Brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds are much more bold to speak
the Word without fear. Holy men have done great service to the Church by a
resolute dying for the Truth. Their death has been like that of Samson's, who
destroyed more Philistines then, than he had at any time before. The Heathen
could say of good men, That if in their life they were profitable, v. Arrian.
Epictet. l. 4. c. 1.
they were much more so in their death.

For by this means the Truth has got ground, and the Religion has been spread
in the world. Men are very prone to favor the persecuted and afflicted side,
and where they see the afflicted support undauntedly, they are very much
inclined to judge favorably of their Cause. Hence in the Primitive times men
came into the Church, when they saw the Christians suffer the greatest torments
with the most invincible patience. They began to enquire what this Religion was
which did thus support its Followers; And hence they were induced to the
Profession of that Religion which did so powerfully support its Followers:
Plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis. Tert. Apol. c. 45
And thus when some were cut off, others came in from the Heathen world. But I
shall particularly consider the usefulness of these examples to us: I shall
show you what benefit we may receive from the patient sufferings of Martyrs and
other holy men.

1. We are by this means assured that the greatest torments may be endured, and
supported under. We do very often fear that we should never be able to bear the
scorching flames, that we can never endure the torments of a Rack, extremity of
cold and hunger, and other pains. For we have been tenderly brought up, and
have been uneasy under small pains: And have not known what hunger and thirst,
cold and nakedness mean: Hence we conclude, that we should never be able to
endure great severities.

The truth is, It were much to be feared that we should rather renounce our
Religion, than hold out under the sharpest perseution did we only look into our
selves. But when we consider the power of God, and look upon the examples of
holy Martyrs, we have great cause to hope that we shall be able to submit to
torments, and to death for the sake of our Religion: For if we are weak, if we
have been brought up tenderly, if we are of a timorous nature, etc. so were
many of those Martyrs, who yet rejoiced afterward in Prisons, welcomed the
Fire and Faggot, and rejoiced that they were thought worthy to die for the name
of Jesus. And those have done this who did suspect themselves, and were
suspected by others also. We are hereby encouraged to hope well, when we see
that men that were subject to the like passions with us have continued steadfast
to the last.

2. We are further hereby assured that God will not fail to give assistance in
the time of need. Which is a truth, the belief whereof does much tend to quiet
and comfort us amidst our many fears and distractions. Hence we are encouraged
to hope that God will stand by us, and help us when our burden is heavy upon
us, and we can now come boldly unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. This is
the use that we are called upon to make of the sufferings of our Lord: Cha.
12.3.
Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest
ye be wearied and faint in your minds.

Indeed, God has been pleased to assure us, Heb. 13.5.
that He will never leave us nor forsake us. And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.13.
There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: But God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able: But
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it. In which words we are assured, that God will give us a good event if we
call in, and depend upon his help and assistance. 2 These. 3.3.
The Lord is faithful, who shall establish you, and keep you from all evil. And
the same Apostle elsewhere speaks to the same purpose, 1 These. 5.22, 23, 24.
saying, Abstain from all appearance of evil: And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly: And I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he
that calls you, who also will do it. These are great promises and assurances
which God has been pleased to give us, and we ought upon all occasions to
consider them. But so it is, we are of little faith, and very prone to fear:
But then seeing we are encompassed with so thick a cloud of Witnesses, to whom
these promises have been made good, we are farther confirmed that he, who has
done it, will still perform the word which he has spoken. For these examples
before our eyes have a great force toward the ridding us of those fears which
are apt to solicit us: For from them we learn what weak Creatures can do, when
they are assisted by a power from above.

3. We are by this means farther confirmed in our Religion, and consequently
thereupon the more firmly obliged to continue steadfast in the Profession of it.
He that dies for his Religion, and does it undauntedly, does more than he that
defends it by learned Discourses. It is not every man can discern the force of
Arguments: He that lives well, and that dies with courage for his Religion,
it is he that defends his Faith, and commends it to the Consciences of men. This
man does most effectually vindicate his Religion from those aspersions that are
cast upon it. No man does more effectually refute the slanders against Religion
than he that dies for it cheerfully; as for example:

This course confirms the truth of Religion. There are those who would
insinuate that Religion is a State-Engine, contrived for worldly ends, and for
the better government of men: That Heaven and Hell are no realities, but
contrived for the interest of humane Societies. He that is willing to part with
his life in defense of his Religion, does destroy this insinuation, and makes
it evident that his Religion does not serve a worldly interest, and that Heaven
and Hell are great realities.

There are others that insinuate, that Religion is an ineffectual Principle:
And if you were to judge of Religion by the Lives as well as Doctrines of some
men, you would be apt to think it a very dull and ineffectual Principle, that
were destitute of all power to enable men to do what it does command.

But then the man that forsakes this world, that despises all its glories, and
continues undaunted under all its threats and frowns; He that dares to be good,
whatever he suffer on that behalf, such a man as this makes it appear, that his
Religion is a very powerful Principle, and that it is accompanied with a Divine
Assistance.

Again, They that suffer for Religion do recommend the excellency and inward
glories of Religion: They discover the beauties of it. And that they do when
they give so great a proof of what it commends to us, viz. A fervent love of
God, a contempt of the World, a profound Meekness, Patience, and Charity,
Justice, and Truth. These are those things which shine in these examples, and
do speak aloud the perfections of that Religion which does produce them.

CHAP. VII.
I Come now to lay before you some other helps and assistances that the
afflicted and persecuted Christian is provided with. And in the next place I
desire you to consider,

The Intercession of the Son of God: And this is an unspeakable comfort and
support where it is duly considered. And that so it is, we may learn from what
we read of St. Stephen; You know very well that he was accused; and though he
made his defense, yet he was so far from appeasing his Enemies thereby, that
they were more enraged. We read, that they were cut to the heart, Acts 7.54,
55, 56.
and they gnashed on him with their teeth. But though his Enemies were enraged,
and disturbed, yet this holy man continues calm and quiet: And what was it that
kept him so? We read what it was, in these words: But he being full of the Holy
Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God. Here was that which kept him undisturbed,
when his Enemies were transported with fury: Hence he had his strength and his
undauntedness: He says himself, Behold I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of
man standing on the right hand of God. And now, though his Enemies gnash on him
with their teeth, though they cry out with a loud voice, though they stop their
ears, and run upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the City, and stone
him: Yet the holy man is not for all this discomposed; nor so far disturbed,
but that he was able to continue to call upon God, and his blessed Savior, and
to pray for his Enemies that put him to death. And after this, it is not said
that he was killed, or stoned, that he was murdered, or the like, but that he
fell asleep. Ver. 60.
After this gentle manner is this Saints death expressed: But that which made
his death so easy to him was, that as he was full of the Holy Ghost, so he saw
Jesus at the right hand of God. And we shall find that this sight of Jesus at
Gods right hand will be of great moment toward our support under the greatest
and sharpest miseries of this life. Romans 8.33, 34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? says St. Paul; It is God
that Justifies Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died. But we have
greater comfort than this, and therefore he goes on, Yea, rather that is risen
again; nor does the Apostle stay here neither; who is even at the right hand of
God; he goes farther still, who also makes intercession for us. This is a
great height indeed; we are now very secure from danger, since Jesus did not
only die for our sins, and rise again for our Justification; but, after this,
went into Heaven, and is there concerned on our behalf. Well might the Apostle
now Triumphingly go on, and he does so, when he says, Ver. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or Sword? (as it is written,
for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter) nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerours through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

But for the better proceeding in this comfortable Argument of Christ's
interceding for us in Heaven I shall,

First, Show where Christ now is, viz. in Heaven, at Gods right hand.

Secondly, I shall show you how far he is there concerned on our behalf.

Thirdly, I shall show you how this tends toward our support and comfort under
the troubles of this life.

1. I shall show where Christ is, viz. in Heaven. He was contented for our
sakes to be born of a Woman, to lie in a Manager, to be tempted in a
Wilderness, to die upon a Cross, and to be buried in a Sepulcher. But thanks be
to God, he that was born ever lives, and he that died and was buried, was
raised from the dead, and ascended into heaven, Heb. 1.3.
and is sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; Chap. 2.9.
crowned with glory and honor; Chap. 7.26. Ephesians. 5.10. Chap. 1.20, 21.
Made higher than the Heavens. He is ascended up far above all Heavens; Far
above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every name that
is named, not only in this world, but that which is to come. Phil. 2.9.
God has highly exalted and given him a Name which is above every name. 1 Pet.
3.22.
He is gone into Heaven, and is at the right hand of God, Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him.

It cannot be denied, but the Air and the Clouds are called by the name of
heaven; and consequently, when Christ was in them, he might be said to have
been in Heaven. But certain it is, that the expressions mentioned before rise
higher, and imply, that Christ is ascended into the higher Heavens, even into
that place where God does more particularly presentiate himself. Our Lord
passed through those lower heavens as we read, Heb. 4.14. (...).
We have a great High Priest that is passed through the heavens, (as those
words may be rendered, which we render, passed into the Heavens) Jesus the Son
Son of God.

For that Jesus entered into the higher Heavens is evident, not only from what
has been observed before, but from what the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews tells us farther: Heb. 9.24.
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true, but into Heaven it self. The Holy of Holies in the
Tabernacle was the Type of the highest Heavens, whither Jesus is now gone once
for all, as the High Priest alone was wont to go into the most holy place once
a year.

But as our Lord is thus exalted, so we are also farther assured of his
Dominion and Power: He having a Name given him above every name, Phil. 2.10, 11.
That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth. And that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. He is not a
Titular King, that is without Authority and Power; that cannot help his
Servants, or punish his Enemies; The Father has given him authority to execute
Joh. 5.27.
judgment, because he is the Son of man. Mat. 16.27.
And the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his Angels, and
then he shall reward every man according to his works.

It appears then from what has been said, that Christ is in Heaven, yea, in
the Highest Heavens; and not only so, but he is also Lord over all, the great
King and Governor of his Church, able to reward and to punish, to help and
succor those that belong to him. And this is a fair step to that which
follows, and that is,

2. To show you how far Christ is there concerned on our behalf. For, since he
wants not Authority and Power; if he be also concerned for us, that is, if he
bear us good will, and in his Exaltation concerns himself for his Disciples and
his Followers, it must needs be a very comfortable Doctrine to all those
Disciples of his that are in want and trouble here below. But especially it
must be very much to the comfort of all those pious souls that suffer
persecution in this world for his sake.

1. In general, that Christ is concerned for us, now he is in heaven, is plain
from the words of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he tells that
Christ entered into heaven it self, Heb. 9.24. Ver. 7.
now to appear in the presence of God for us. For as the High Priest, when on
the day of Expiation he went into the Holy of Holies, was concerned for the
whole Congregation, as well as for himself; so Christ when he entered into
Heaven, went thither concerned for us. It is to be considered, that our blessed
Lord had taken upon him our flesh, and our infirmities, and was made like unto
one of us: He carried with him this nature into Heaven, and therewithal a sense
of our wants, and of our infirmities. Heb. 2.15, 16, 17.
For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels but he took on him the Seed
of Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
Brethren: That he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. It is not to be imagined, that Christ, who took our nature upon
him, and consequently understood the infirmities and frailties of our mortal
state, should forget us here below, now he himself is exalted in the Heavens.
For as nothing but his mercy and pity toward us could at first invite him down
among us, so it is not to be believed, that after so much love and
condescension, so long a trial of the infirmities of our condition, he should
be now unconcerned for us that are below. The same divine Author assures us
otherwise; Seeing then, Heb. 4.14, 15, 16.
says he, that we have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession: For we have not an High
Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities: But was in
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come
boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need.

2. More particularly, still Christ offers up our Prayers unto God, and we are
now assured that God hears us upon his account who laid down his life a
Sacrifice for us. It is to be remembered, that the High Priest on the day of
Expiation, Lev. 16.12, 13.
when he entered into the Holy of Holies, was obliged not only to sprinkle the
blood of the Sacrifice there, but also to offer up Incense too. Agreeably
hereunto, our blessed Savior, who is entered into the holy place made without
hands, offers up our Prayers to God; And we have good assurance of our
acceptance when we consider the merit of his death, and the satisfaction which
he had made with his blood.

That the Incense which the High Priest offered up was a Symbol of the Prayers
of the Saints cannot be denied by him that considers what the holy Scripture
teaches us elsewhere. For we find that Prayers are likened to, and called
Incense, it being a thing very usual in the holy Scriptures to call the thing
signified by the name of the sign which represents it. Let my prayer, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 141.2.
be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the
Evening Sacrifice. Elsewhere, Incense is called the Prayers of the Saints:
Hence it was, Rev. 5.8.
that when the Priest went into the Temple to offer Incense, Chap. 8.3. Luke
1.10.
the whole multitude of the People were praying without at the time of Incense.
To this purpose we are told, that it was the custom when the Priest entered into
the holy place to offer Incense, to give notice of the precise time of his
going in by the ringing of a Bell, v. D. Lightfoots Hor. Hebr. On Luke 1.10.
that so the People might thereupon silently betake themselves to their
Prayers. And it is thought that the words ( Rev. 8.1, 3.) have a particular
respect to that matter.

3. Consequently, upon what has been last said, we do receive from Christ's
Intercession grace to help in time of need; Heb. 4.16.
And as our sorrows and our needs are very various, as well as very great,
which send us to the Throne of Grace, so it is very evident (from what has
been said) that our supports and our supplies are derived to us from the
Intercession of the Son of God. Acts 5.31.
Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, for to
give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins.

But that there may be no manner of doubt remaining of the truth of what has
been said before, I shall from the Scriptures show you the assurances which
they give us of this truth, from whence it will evidently appear, that Christ,
now he is in Heaven, is our Patron and our Advocate there.

I shall begin with those words of St. John, My little Children, 1 John 2.1, 2.
these things write I unto you that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the
Propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the
whole world.

Can any thing be more plain, or more comfortable than these words are? Nothing
so much dejects the good man as his sins and his infirmities: These things
indeed sink him low, and fill him with great fears. And certain it is, that no
man can say he has no sin, Chap. 1.8, 9.
but he that deceives himself. But is the good man left without a remedy? No
certainly. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. It is true indeed, we ought
not to sin out of the hopes of pardon; and if we do so, our condition is very
sad indeed: But so it is, that the best man may be surprised and overtaken; and
if he be, here is comfort for him in these words. Behold here an Advocate with
the Father; and we shall not want an Accuser when we have done amiss, for
besides the Devil (who is the Accuser of the Brethren) our great Enemy, Rev.
12.10.
our own Conscience will quickly do that. We shall need an Advocate to plead
our Cause with God, and to undertake for us. And blessed be God we are provided
for: We have an Advocate with the Father; We do not want an Intercessor with
God. But we might fear still if our Advocate were himself guilty; we could have
little comfort from his Intercession for us who is himself obnoxious. But it
follows, Jesus Christ the righteous: A most powerful and innocent person
undertakes for us. But yet for all this, guilt makes men fearful and
suspicious, and they fear they shall not obtain pardon, though their Advocate
be innocent and powerful, unless he have something more to plead in the behalf
of them that are accused. And therefore it follows, He is the propitiation for
our sins. Our Advocate cannot only plead his own Innocence, as he is Jesus
Christ the righteous, but he can plead his Merit too, he having by his death
made expiation for our sins; Romans 5.25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. Our
Advocate has paid a price for our ransom, and this price was accepted of God;
and the blood that Jesus shed does now plead for us. If after all this the
dejected sinner fear that the blood which Christ shed was not shed for him,
this needless fear is removed by the words which follow: And not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world.

Let us next consider the words of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where he tells us, that Christ entered into Heaven it self to appear in the
presence of God for us. Heb. 9.24.
Just as the High Priest entered with the blood of the Sacrifice into the Holy
of Holies, which he offered up there for himself, Ver. 7.
and for the errors of the People. There it was that the High Priest made
Atonement for all the Congregation of Israel. Lev. 16.17.
Our blessed Lord has shed his blood, and now appears before God for us.
Neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in
once into the holy place, Heb. 9.12.
having obtained eternal redemption for us. Heb. 10.12.
Again, This man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down
at the right hand of God. It is observed (by a very learned man) that these two
expressions, viz. To appear in the presence of God for us: And To offer himself
up to God, (both which are said of Christ, Heb. 9.) do signify one and the
same thing diversely considered. The latter expression implies, the beginning;
the former, the continuation of one and the same thing. Our Savior commends us
to God, and this is meant, when it is said, that he appears in the presence of
God for us; but he began to do this when, after he had shed his blood, he
offered himself to God in heaven; Heb. 9.25.
As the High Priest, after the Sacrifice was slain, carried the blood into the
Holy of Holies, and there appeared with it before God. So that this appearing
of Christ for us, and his offering himself to God imports his Intercession for
us, and does imply the merits of his blood, and the Atonement which our Lord
has made for us. And this speaks great comfort to us. Heb. 9.13, 14.
For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling
the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself, without spot
to God purge your Conscience from dead work^ to serve the living God?

The Author of this Epistle tell us, Heb. 7.24, 25.
that Christ has an unchangeable Priesthood: He is not like one o^ the Priests
of Aaron, who died and left one of his Brethren to succeed him: Our Lord lives
for ever. Wherefore he is able also to sa^^ them to the uttermost, that come
unt^ God by him, seeing he ever lives t^ make Intercession for them. Which
words assure us at once of Christ power to save us, and of his inclination and
readiness to do it. For as he is able to save to the uttermost all that come
unto God by him; so he is also prone to do it, and concerns himself about it;
he ever lives to make intercession for them. To make intercession is to plead
in the behalf of another, that he may be relieved, or released. It is opposed
to accusing or condemning: Who is he that condemns? Romans 8.34.
It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

To what has been said let me add the words of our Savior: Whatsoever you
shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Joh. 16.23
Here is great encouragement to us to pray to God: We may now approach unto God
with very great assurance of success, having such a Mediator and Intercessor.
But our Savior goes on; Ver. 24.
Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name, i. e. ye have not as yet made a
trial how powerful a name mine is: But for for the future he directs and
encourages them. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. And
presently afterward he gives them great assurance that their Prayers shall now
be heard upon his account. Joh. 16.26, 27.
At that day ye shall ask in my name, and I say not unto you, that I will pray
the Father for you. For the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved
me, and have believed that I came out from God.

III. I proceed now to show you, how what has been said tends toward our
support and comfort under the troubles of this life. And that it does several
ways.

1. The exaltation of Christ to the right hand of God is much for our comfort,
as it gives us great hope that we shall also be received into heaven. Our
nature is advanced, and this gives us hope that we shall also in due time be
received into the same happy place. For as Christ's Resurrection is made an
Argument which infers ours, so our Lords being exalted into heaven speaks the
great hopes that we have of coming thither. And this Consideration does
mightily tend to comfort us under the sorrows of this life. Joh. 14.4.
Let not your heart be troubled, says our Lord. But then what follows tends
greatly to support them: I go to prepare a place for you: And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self; that
where I am, there ye may be also. Thanks be to God, a door of hope is now
opened by the Exaltation of our Savior, Heb. 6.19, 20.
Which hope we have as an anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the Vail. Whither the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus made an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedec. None,
under the Law of Moses, Heb. 9.7, 8.
might enter into the Holy of Holies, but the High Priest only, and that but
once a year, and not without blood; The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the
way into the Holiest of all was not yet made manifest while as the first
Tabernacle was yet standing. There was a vail or partition between the Holy of
Holies and the other part of the Temple: And when our Savior suffered death,
this Vail of the Temple was rent in twain after a most miraculous manner: For
though indeed there be mention made of an Earthquake at the same time, yet that
the Vail was not rent by the Earthquake appears from hence, that the Text says,
it was rent from the top to the bottom, Mat. 27.51.
not from the bottom to the top, as it would have been if it been the effect of
an Earthquake. Now it is no hard matter to explain the meaning of this: The
Holy of Holies, was a Type of Heaven. The rest of the Temple and Tabernacle, of
the rest of the world. There was a Vail that shut up the way to Heaven, but
when our Lord suffered, he opened the way that was shut up before; and a while
after he went himself within the Vail, and took our nature with him; and by
doing so, and sending us the Holy Spirit, thence he has given us assurance,
that where he is we shall likewise be. He has taken a pledge, I mean our
flesh, which he has carried into heaven as a Pledge that we shall enter
thither; Pignus totius Summae. Tert. de res. Carn. 2 These. 4.17, 18.
and given us the earnest of his Holy Spirit in token that we belong to him,
and that we shall ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with
these words.

2. What has been said tends to our comfort, as it gives us assurance of a
Divine Assistance at hand for our succor and support, and for the enabling us
to do, as well as suffer, the whole will of God. We have not the least cause to
doubt either of the Power, or readiness and Proneness of our Lord to help us,
and support us under all our conflicts, and especially then when we are
persecuted for righteousness sake. Our Savior is not a mere Spectator, he does
not only see us fight, but he helps us to overcome. Whatever it is that
troubles us, we are not left without a Prince and a Savior, and one that is
able to save to the uttermost. And this must needs tend very greatly to the
quieting of our minds under all the troubles and sorrows that we meet withal.

3. This tends very much to our support and comfort as it encourages our
Prayers, and assures us that we shall succeed when we make our addresses to
God, and implore his Divine aid and assistance. We have a merciful High Priest,
that was made like unto us, and has about him a sense of our infirmities: Heb.
4.16.
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.
Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of
Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us through the
Vail, that is to say, his Flesh, and having an High Priest over the House of
God: Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.

CHAP. VIII.
ANother great comfort and support which the Christian is provided with under
the sorrows of this life, is that of the Holy Scripture.

The Psalmist expresses the great comfort he received from the Law of God in
his affliction; Psalm. 119.92.
Unless thy Law had been my delights, I should then have perished in my
affliction. He does elsewhere express his great esteem for, and the great
delight he had in the Law of God; The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, Ver.
72.
than thousands of Gold and Silver. He elsewhere tells us, that the Statutes of
the Lord are right, Psalm. 19.8.
rejoicing the heart; the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the
eyes. and speaking presently afterward of the Judgments of the Lord, he says
of them; Ver. 10.
More to be desired are they than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold; sweeter also
than honey and the honey Comb. And now it is no wonder that we find him
professing in these words; Psalm. 119.127, 128.
I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea, above fine Gold: I esteem all thy
Precepts, concerning all things, to be right. After this he adds, Rivers of
waters run down mine eyes, Ver. 136.
because they keep not thy Law. Thus was the devout Psalmist affected toward
the Law of God. This was his comfort, and his joy, his riches, and his greatest
treasure; Here was his heart fixed, and this was his great delight.

And yet in the Psalmists time there was but little of the holy Scripture
committed to writing in proportion to what we enjoy. The Canon of the Old
Testament was far from being finished, much less was there any thing extant of
the New. We have the advantage by much, who have not only all the parts of the
Old Testament, but also an account of our Saviors Doctrine, and the Writings
of the holy Apostles. Now the words of the Psalmist will well become every one
of us; Psalm. 119.103.
How sweet are thy words unto my taste? Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth. If
a part of it were so sweet, what is the whole? And if the Law which came by
Moses were so great a treasure, and a comfort to the afflicted, what are then
the words of grace and truth, which we have by Jesus Christ?

The Book of Psalms has always been allowed to be a divine Composure of very
sovereign use to the afflicted, and the sorrowful pious and dejected men have
been unspeakably comforted from thence. As when the evil Spirit was upon Saul,
1 Samuel 16.23.
when David took his Harp and played, that evil Spirit departed from him: So
has it often been, that when men have been dejected and bowed down by an evil
Spirit likewise, yet they have often been refreshed by this divine and sweet
Singer of Israel. The Book of Psalms is stored with sovereign Cordials for the
dejected and drooping spirit of the pious man. But I had rather you should hear
one of the Ancients speak of the great usefulness of this Book of Psalms. Basil
in Psalm. 1.
If (says he) a man be greatly transported with fury, by the melody of a Psalm
he is rendered tame. A Psalm (says he) is the calm of Souls, the Arbiter of
peace, who lays the tumultuous and swelling thoughts. It softens the fierce,
and curbs the lascivious. It conciliates friendship, unites those that were in
difference, and reconciles those that were at enmity, -- A Psalm puts the
Devils to flight, and brings to us the assistance of Angels. It is a Weapon
against our fears of the night, and a rest from the labors of the day. To
Children it is a safeguard, to the Adult an ornament, and a comfort to old men.
The most agreeable Ornament of Women. It renders the Wilderness inhabited, and
the Concourse of people sober. It is an institution to those who begin, an
increase of the Proficients, and the stay of them that are perfect, and the
voice of the Church. This gives a gaiety to Festivals, and produces a godly
sorrow. A Psalm brings a tear from an heart of stone; it is the work of Angels,
the Conversation of heaven, the spiritual Incense. He goes on, and tells us,
what an excellent Storehouse this Book of Psalms is, from whence we may learn
the Majesty of fortitude, the exactness of righteousness, the venerableness of
Temperance, the perfection of Prudence, the manner of Repentance, the measures
of Patience. Thus does he speak of the Book of Psalms. And if one Book be thus
useful, what are all of them? And if this Book be so much to our Comfort, how
many and great then are the Comforts of the Scripture?

I shall now show you how the holy Scriptures make for our comfort and support
under the afflictions and sorrows of this present life. And this they do,

1. As they lay before us the several supports which have been named before,
namely, the Promise of eternal life, the Doctrine of Gods particular care and
Providence, the assurance of the aid of the Holy Spirit, the examples of the
sufferings of Christ and holy men, and the Intercession of the Son of God.
These things the holy Scriptures plainly teach, and by doing so they tend very
much to our comfort in the midst of all our tribulations. And as these
Doctrines are not to be found among the Writings of any of the Heathen
Philosophers, so it is certain, they do contain the greatest ground of comfort
under our worldly losses and sorrows: And therefore the holy Scripture tends
more to our comfort than any Writing or Institution whatsoever. It cannot be
denied, but that many of the Heathens have written excellent things, and
particularly have employed their pains in writing consolatory discourses for
the sake of the afflicted. But there are none of them that do suggest those
powerful Arguments which the Gospel does contain. Here are comforts to be found
which they knew nothing of, and such comforts also as are very effectual for
the gaining the end for which they are brought. We are (blessed be God) better
provided for, under all the evils which happen to us, than the Heathens were.
And though we be liable to the same evils which they were obnoxious unto, yet
in this our condition is much better than theirs that we can bear them better
than they could. We shall in vain search into the Writings of Plato, or
Epictetus, or any other of the Writings of the Heathen for supports under our
sorrows; The holy Scripture is the Divine Storehouse where they are to be found.

2. The holy Scriptures make for our support under our sorrows as they do
direct us to apply to our selves the helps and assistances which I have named
before. They do not only contain great helps, but they teach us how to use
them, and use very powerful Arguments with us to this purpose. They do not only
prescribe the most powerful Cordials, but they direct us also in the use of
them; and not only so, but they do also by very moving Arguments awaken our
care and our diligence. And indeed, without this application all the helps and
assistances avail us no more than the richest Cordials do the sick man which he
keeps locked up in his Closet, but does not taste.

The hope of Eternal life is very powerful to enable us to endure with patience
the evils of this short life: This is the great comfort under our present
sorrows, that the blessed time is drawing on upon us when all tears shall for
ever be wiped from our eyes. But then it is to be considered, that the holy
Scripture does not barely lay before us the promise of eternal life: It is not
a bare Map of of that blessed Country which we expect hereafter; it is a great
deal more than that. For besides that the holy Scripture describes that blessed
Land, it also shows us the way which leads to it, calls upon us to set our
hearts upon it, and very powerfully calls off our affections and desires from
the things of this lower world, which would entangle us, and keep us from
minding the things which are above. And to that purpose we are warned that the
love of this world is inconsistent with the love of God, and our pursuit of
heavenly things. And therefore we are vehemently exhorted to cleanse and
purify our hearts, to follow after holiness, that we may see God, and be fit
for that blessed immortality which is brought to light through the Gospel.

The particular care and Providence of God is another very powerful Argument to
quiet and ease our minds under all events o^ things. This Doctrine the holy
Scripture does not only teach, bu^ directs us to the right use and application
of it to our selves, and very frequently calls upon us to make the right use of
it. Henc^ it is that we are so frequently exhorted to be careful for nothing,
t^ trust in God; to cast our care, and our burden upon him; To acknowledge him
in all our ways. And w^^ are also frequently called off from all
self-confidence, or trust in any Creature whatsoever. We are warned not to
trust to our own Wisdom^ our Riches, our Allies, and Worldly assistances. And
the holy Scripture does upon all occasions expose the Vanity of those men wh^
trust in any thing but God, and it represents upon all occasions how
inconsiderable the best of the Creatures are.

Again, The Promise of the Holy Spirit is another great support to us, and a
strong consolation under the sorrows and difficulties of this mortal life. Now
the holy Scripture does not only contain such a Promise, but also puts us upon
that course in which we shall not fail to receive the comforts and assistances
of this divine Spirit. We are assured that God will give his holy Spirit to
them that ask him, and the holy Scripture, which gives us this assurance, does
also with great vehemence put us upon begging of God this heavenly assistance.
It puts us upon asking, upon seeking and knocking, upon all Prayer, and
Supplication: It also puts us upon purity of heart, that we may be disposed to
receive this Holy Spirit, and warns us that we do not by our lusts and foolish
practices grieve, or quench this holy Spirit of God. And now if we be persuaded
to follow this advice we shall not fail of help and of comfort, and of peace
and joy that passes understanding: We shall be able to bear up under the
greatest sorrows and pressures of this lower world. Psalm. 23.4.
Yea, though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death we shall fear no
evil. But then it becomes us at all times to implore this Spirit of God, and to
pray with the Psalmist. Psalm. 50.10, 11, 12.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me: Cast me
not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Restore unto
me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit.

The example of Christ and holy men who have suffered for the truth are not
barely laid before us in the Scripture, but we are also directed in our
afflictions to keep our eye upon these great examples; and if we do that, we
shall be greatly encouraged to persevere in our Christian course, and tread in
the steps of those glorious examples. The Disciple is not above his Master, and
we shall find it no hard thing to suffer, if we consider whose Servants we are.
If they did such things to the green tree, why should we think much that men
should do so also to the dry? Hence it is that the Holy Scripture puts us upon
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of the Faith which we profess, and
upon considering the Examples of the Prophets who have spoken in the name of
the Lord, and have been very exemplary for suffering, and affliction, and for
patience.

Again, The intercession of the Son of God is a most comfortable Doctrine of
the Scripture: But it does not only teach us this, but directs us also to the
use of it. For the holy Scripture does now send us to God by Jesus Christ, and
puts us upon going to the throne of grace with a becoming boldness, and
assurance that we shall now be accepted through him who died for us, and ever
lives to make Intercession for those who come unto God by him.

III. The holy Scriptures tend very much to our comfort under all our sorrows,
as they are the instrument of conveyance of the greatest blessings to us. They
are Gods act and deed, and on Gods part a great assurance to us of those
blessings which are only able to make us happy, and are able to make us so in
spite of all the miseries that can befall us in this present life. The
Scriptures are not only to be considered as a Map and draught of our
Inheritance which we hope for, but as a Testament and declared Will, which give
us a right and title to, and consequently a full assurance that we shall indeed
enjoy those things which we find presented to us there. They do not only lay
them before us, but they are by these divine Writings made over to us. We are
by our blessed Savior no more Servants, but Sons; Gal. 4.7.
and if we be Sons, we are also Heirs of God through Christ. But then the holy
Scriptures are the Deeds and Conveyances of this Estate. And as they are so,
they tend greatly to our comfort and support under the afflictions of this
life, and in the Midst of them we may now justly esteem our selves happy, as
having so full an assurance of a future inheritance. Our Deeds and Writings for
our worldly Estate we value greatly, because they show our Title and our Right,
and therefore we preserve them with great care, and please our selves that they
are good, and well attested.

It is no little blessing, and ought to be no small comfort to us that we have
the holy Scriptures, which are a declaration of Gods favor and good will
toward us. It was the great Privilege of the Jews that God had given them his
Law. He showed his word unto Jacob, Psalm. 147.19, 20.
his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He had not dealt so with any
Nation, and for his Judgments they have not known them. The Apostle reckons it
a Privilege which the Jew enjoyed above the rest of the world, that they had
Gods Law among them. Romans 3.1, 2.
What advantage then has the Jew? Or what profit is there of Circumcision?
Much every way; chiefly because that unto them were committed the Oracles of
God. This one thing did very much exalt the Jewish People above their
Neighbors: And their Law gave them their Title to their Country, and was the
Instrument of Conveyance of their Inheritance to them. And hence we find their
Law is sometime called their Inheritance; Dent. 33.4.
Moses commanded us a Law, even the Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob.
Indeed, their Law was their Charter, and Instrument that contained their Title
which they had to their Possessions: And the Land which they possessed was a
Type of Heaven, Heb. 10.1.
and their Law and their Service was a shadow of good things to come.

But thanks be to God the case is well mended with us now. We have the
substance clearly revealed, of which they had the shadow and the Type. Our
blessed Savior has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel;
And the New Testament makes over to us our right and title to that blessed
inheritance which our Lord has purchased for us.

We had forfeited Gods favor, and needed an Atonement: The Law of Moses
prescribed certain Sacrifices indeed for expiation, and the procurement of the
favor of God; but it is very certain that those Sacrifices could not make the
comers thereunto perfect. Heb. 10.1.
But then it pleased God to send his only Son to die for our sins, and now he
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ; 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 21.
and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation: To wit, that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them. -- For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him.

The Kingdom of Heaven is now opened to all Believers, and none are now
excluded from the hopes of that blessed state who do not shut themselves out by
their unbelief, and impenitence, and contempt of the Laws of Christ. For God so
loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.16, 17.
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. This is the comfortable Doctrine of the holy
Scripture, and hence it is that we have now great consolation. For there can be
nothing so much for our comfort as the assurance which we have of Gods favor,
which is better for us than life it self.

But then to put us out of all doubt for ever, this truth is confirmed to us,
as well as taught by the holy Scriptures. For our blessed Savior wrought many
Miracles to confirm to us the Doctrine which he taught, and by that means has
given us the utmost assurance that this comfortable Doctrine is a divine truth.
To this purpose he cured the sick, dispossessed the daemoniacks, raised the
dead, restored the blind, commanded the Sea and the Wind, and rose from the
dead the third day. Many, and various, and supernatural are the works he did,
and which are written in the Gospels: And many more he did which are not
written. Joh. 20.31.
But these are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son
of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name. God has set
his Seal to the divine truths which the Gospel does contain; And has
effectually taken from us all cause of doubt and suspicion.

IV. The holy Scriptures tend very much to our comfort under our troubles, as
they do contain many precious Promises which tend this way; God has been
pleased in these Writings to make many promises for the comfort of the
afflicted and oppressed, of them that fear him, and trust in him, and suffer
for his names sake. And nothing of what God has said shall fall to the ground:
If we continue to trust in God, and to do good, we shall find great comfort
from the holy Scriptures in our greatest sorrows. Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee:
Which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the Sons of men!
Happy is that man that puts himself under the Divine Protection. Psalm. 32.10.
Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: But he that trusts in the Lord, mercy
shall compass him about. No man does so much consult his own safety as He does
that does entirely trust in God, and commit himself and his affairs unto him.
Psalm. 125.1.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but
abides for ever.

I deny not but such a man may fall into straits and difficulties, but then he
is not forsaken, but can have a recourse to him that is at hand, and able to
save him. Psalm. 14.2, 3, 4, 5.
When my Spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my path: -- I
looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me;
refuge failed me, no man cared for my Soul. I cried unto thee, O Lord, I said,
Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the Land of the Living. The good man may
be bereft of his worldly comforts and supports, but then when he is most of all
so, God is present with him. Nay, we are then more peculiarly the care of God,
when we are abandoned by the Creature. The afflicted man is particularly the
charge of Heaven, and does immediately belong to the divine care and
Providence. The devout Psalmist makes his affliction his argument to move God
to have regard to him. Psa. 142.6.
Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low. Again, Psalm. 70.5.
But I am poor and needy; and then he goes on, Make have unto me, O God. The
Prayers of the afflicted righteous find a ready way to God; they pierce the
Heavens, and are sure to obtain a blessing. The righteous cry, Psalm. 37.18, 18.
and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles. The Lord
is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a
contrite Spirit.

There is great comfort in the holy Scripture for every man that is sincerely
good, and does desire to be better. And whatever his sorrow and affliction be,
he is not left comfortless. If he be burdened with his sins, harassed out by
the cares and toiles of a vexatious world, and very uneasy under the load
which lies upon him, yet is not this distressed and miserable Sinner left
without hope and comfort: Our Lord speaks to such as these are, saying, Mat.
11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart,
and ye shall find rest unto your Souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light. How comfortable a Scripture is this to the dejected Sinner? That has in
vain sought his happiness from the things of this life; that has toiled a
great while to no purpose, and is now under fears of Gods wrath breaking in
upon him as a just punshment of a trifling and a vicious life? These are most
powerful words, and if men would consider them duly, would appear to have a
mighty force upon the minds of men. Can any thing be more welcome than rest to
them that labor and are heavy laden? Is any rest to be compared to the rest
which is given to our Souls? can any thing be more desirable for them that have
served cruel Lords, than that they should now submit to one that is meek and
lowly in heart? Can any thing be more inviting, after a great bondage and
slavery, than a yoke that is easy, and a burden that is light? We are called
upon to accept our own happiness; Courted to embrace all that bliss which we in
vain look for from the World, and from our Sins. Our Lord, and our interest bid
us come. Our Lord, who laid down his life for us, and who has highly deserved
of us, he invites us, and assures us of rest and peace, and that his yoke is
easy, and his burden light.

And as the Scriptures do invite and encourage Sinners to enter themselves
under our Lord Jesus, and to become his sincere Followers and Disciples; as
they do invite us to the profession and practice of the Laws of God, so they do
greatly encourage us by the excellent promises which they contain, to continue
in that profession. The comforts of Religion are unspeakably great, and no man
is provided for as the Religious is under all events of things. Do we suffer
for the sake of the Truth? For our comfort it is written, Mat. 5.1^.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: For theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Are we reproached and reviled, nicknamed, and flouted
at? For our comfort it is written, 1 Pet. 4.14.
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of
glory and of God rests upon you. Again, Mat. 5.11, 12.
Blessed are you when men shall revile you, etc. Rejoice and be exceeding glad;
for great is your reward in heaven. Are we rifled and spoiled of our Goods? For
our comfort it is written; Mar. 9.29, 30.
There is no man that has left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake, and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundredfold in this time -- and in the world to come, life
everlasting. Are we threatened with death? To our unspeakable comfort it is
written, Mat. 10.39.
He that loses his life for my sake shall find it. Jam. 1.12.
Again, Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he
shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him. Rev. 14.13.
Again, And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord (and surely they that die for him cannot then be
excluded from this blessing) from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, Psalm. 116.15.
and their works do follow them. And, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of the Saints.

And if the Scripture afford us so great comfort under persecutions, and
against the fear of death, it does not fail to do it under our other troubles,
and lighter afflictions. We need not fear the want of what is needful when we
have that Promise, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. We shall not need distract our
selves about what we shall eat and drink, and wherewith we shall be clothed,
when it is said by truth it self, Mat. 6.33.
that all these things shall be added unto us. We have no cause to disquiet our
selves with the thoughts of what we shall do, when we come to a great trial,
and appear before our potent Enemies. Our Lord has said, Take no thought how
or what ye shall speak; Mat. 10.19.
for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. And we are
elsewhere assured of grace to help in the time of need. Heb. 4.16.


The Holy Scriptures afford comfort under every affliction. The Widows and the
Fatherless are assured, that a Father of the Fatherless, Psalm. 68.5.
and a Judge of the Widows is God in his holy habitation. They that are
oppressed, here find comfort; Psalm. 9.9.
The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of
trouble. Here the poor are refreshed: There is no want to them that fear him:
Psalm. 34.9, 10.
The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger: But they that seek the Lord shall
not want any good thing. The sick receive their comforts also from the holy
Scriptures; Psalm. 41.3.
hence they are furnished with suitable Meditations, with pious Ejaculations
and Prayers.

We are farther assured, that all things work together for good to them that
love God. Romans 8.28.
And how comfortable a consideration is this to those that meet with such
variety of things as do entertain us in this present world? For now we have but
one Care about us, and that is to see that we do indeed above all things love
God: If we do this, we may discharge our other Cares, and for ever send away
our fears and jealousies: There will be nothing can do us any hurt; nay, more
than that, nothing can possibly befall us but it will do us good, and advance us
fairly toward our great End and Happiness. If our hearts be inflamed with the
love of God, this world will make but vain attempts upon us: Whatever storm or
shock may happen to us, they will be but like those Winds that leave the Trees
which they shake the more firmly settled and rooted. If it be thus with us, we
are safe, and shall not need to fear the greatest evils that can befall us in
this present life. Poverty, and Sickness, Pain, and Oppression, and the other
miseries of life will leave us better than they found us. They will serve to
rid us of our remaining folly and wantonness; To call us off from the Creature
to the Creator; They will but take from us our dross and filth, and render us
more prepared and fitted for our Masters use. Nay, Death it self (which we
commonly think the greatest evil) will do us a friendly office when it shall
take us from this Valley of tears, and shadow of death, and translate us to
those joys and pleasures that are at Gods right hand for evermore. For death it
self is a great blessing to a good man: And if it be at any time otherwise, it
is our sin that has rendered death a formidable evil. Death is indeed a great
Tyrant, but it is so to them only that are unfit and unwilling to die, who are
therefore haled to it against their wills. But then for those that are fit and
willing to die, death is a faithful Servant, that does but carry them whither
they greatly desire to go.

CHAP. IX.
IT remains now that we consider what has been said before, and make use of
the helps which God has been pleased to provide us; and that we rather choose
to suffer than to sin: It is no great matter what we lose, if we do not wrong
our Consciences, and displease our God. Take courage then, and dare to be good,
whatever it cost thee, and thou will soon find, that greater is he that is with
thee, than he that is against thee. Suppose thou suffer death it self, and that
a violent and a shameful one, yet will thou not want a present assistance, and
a sufficient support even in that case. Our Religion were a very mean
Institution if it would not bear a man up against the fears of death. I shall,
to what has been said above, add some things to your farther consideration, to
encourage you to give up your life rather than to deny your Religion, and wrong
your Consciences. And,

I. That it cannot be supposed that death can hurt a man. If death have any
evil belonging to it, it is owing to our own folly. It is our sin only that
gives it a sting. It is impossible it should hurt him that is sincerely good.
Socrates told the Athenians, that they would rather hurt themselves than him by
taking away his life; and that for his Accusers, he did not believe they could
do him hurt, he not thinking it reasonable to believe it in the power of evil
men to hurt the good. It is indeed in their power to kill, it is not in their
power to hurt them that are good. That death can do us no hurt that has had a
good life gone before it. The worst of men desire to die the death of the
righteous. Of all men those that are good have least cause to fear dying: For
they have placed their happiness beyond this world: And death is to them
unwelcom that live at ease here.

II. That it is very certain that many men have overcome the fear of death from
a mean and low Principle, compared with that of the Christian, who suffers for
righteousness sake. Death, I grant, strikes a dread upon Mankind. It is that
which we commonly startle at: It comes to take us apieces, to remove us from
our Friends and Familiars that for some time we have conversed with. And hence
it is, that men generally fear death, and decline it what they can. But yet we
know that many have overcom this fear of death, some of them from a mean, and
others from an evil Principle. Death is formidable, and a good man is not quite
rid of all the fear of death; yet there are many considerations that make death
seem desirable. Revenge triumphs over it, Love makes light of it, Honor is
ambitious of it, fear of disgrace chooses it, Sorrow runs after it, it, Fear
prevents it. A weak and foolish Passion, a trifling and a faulty Principle
reconciles men to death: Some have thrown away their lives, others have given
them up, many have parted with them upon trifling accounts, and sometimes upon
evil ones. They have been contented to part with their lives from an evil
Principle, or from a trifling one.

How many have proved Martyrs to their Lusts? How many to gratify their Lust
and their Revenge have brought upon themselves a lingering or a sudden death?
How many have fallen Sacrifices to their Luxury and Intemperance, their Pride
and Lust? Pudeat semper tantum in vobis posse turpes causas and nil posse
pulcherrimas. Petrarch.
And is it not a great shame that we should stick to do that from a good
Principle which others do from a faulty one? Is it not a shame that the Lusts
of men should prevail more than the Laws of Christ? And that men should make
themselves miserable at that expense which they refuse to be at in order to
their happiness?

There have been those who have died for a silly Woman, for a point of Honor,
for their Fame, and for their Country. These things have prevailed with them to
endure torments, and devote themselves to destruction. So much have these
things prevailed with them, Tanti vitream? Quanti veram Margaritam? Tertul. ad
Martyr.
that their lives were not precious in their own eyes. It is a great reproach
to us, if we refuse to suffer that for the sake of Christ and his Gospel which
others have suffered for the sake of this World. The Heathen could not but take
notice of this speaking of death: Senec. Ep. 4.
See thou not (says he) upon what frivolous accounts it is contemned? One
hangs himself at the door of his Mistress: Another throws himself headlong from
the house top to avoid a churlish and unquiet Master, Another stabs himself
that he may prevent his return home. Do thou not think that virtue might have
done that which an excess of fear has done? Shall a foolish Lust and an
impotent Passion have more force than the sense of our duly and the well
grounded hopes of eternal happiness? We read in our Books of some that have
sacrificed their lives to their Fame, or thrown them away in compliance with
the foolish customs of their Country, or from a Principle of Superstition; M.
Anton. l. 5. se. 14.
It is a very astonishing thing (says one of the Heathens) that Ignorance and
Ostentation should be more powerful than Wisdom.

We have a story in the Acts of our Church, of a man in Queen Mary's days who,
when he was put in mind to suffer for that truth which he had for some time
professed, replied, that he could not burn. Nor did he burn for his Religion;
But in the days of Queen Elizabeth this man's house was on fire, and then to
save his Goods he adventures into his house, and he and his Goods were burnt in
the same flames. He that would not burn to save his Soul, ventures into the
fire to preserve his Goods. And, then he lost his Goods and his Life, and (it
is to be feared) his Soul also.

III. The good man does not want very considerations to persuade him to quit
this present life for the sake of a better. He is well assured that by thus
losing his life he shall save it; That he shall be assisted in his conflict,
and rewarded when he has finished his course. He is not left without a
Comforter, and he is assured of a plentiful Reward. He knows in whom he has
believed, and can commit the keeping of his Soul unto God as unto a faithful
Creator. 1 Pet. 4.19.
He does but put off his flesh, and knows that he shall be clothed with life
and immortality. He does but part with an earthly Tabernacle for a building not
made with hands. And by his constant sufferings he glorifies God, spreads his
truth, confirms his Servants, and makes way for a greater glory to himself.

Do not then fear to follow your Lord, and all those blessed Souls that have
led the way. When your Lord commands, make no demur, but follow him cheerfully,
though it be to the place of skulls. It is not worth your while to preserve
your life with the loss of your innocence. Gods favor is more than life, and
that will stand us in stead when this life shall be no more. It is a madness to
forfeit our eternal hopes that we may live here a little longer; especially
when our life will be but a plague and burden to us, when we have purchased it
with the loss of our innocence. We shall find the horrors of a guilty mind
more painful than the flames, and much more lasting also. Alas! we do but run
our selves into eternal horrors to avoid a short affliction: There is a Worm
that dies not, and a Fire that goes not our.

If we suffer for righteousness sake happy are we: We shall not want the
supports of the Spirit, the Ministry of Angels, the powerlul Intercession of
the Son of God, the peace and quiet of our own minds, and shall in a little
time be received into unspeakable Joy. In the mean time it is but little we
lose, a short life, a strait and uncertain one. That which was always
burdensome, full of care, and uneasy through hope and fear of what was to come.
We lose our life indeed: But alas! What is that? It is but a vapor, and a
dream: That which we could not long have kept. A disease, a Tile from an house,
a fall from a Horse, a thrust of an Enemy, the smallest matter might have taken
it away the next moment. We lose our life: But we lose it honorably, and so we
cannot properly be said to lose it. We die for Christ, that died for us; For
the sake of him who thought nothing too much for us: For the best person that
ever appeared in humane nature, and one that has deserved the best of us. We
die: But it is for our greatest Friend, for our Lord and King: For him that is
at Gods right hand, and gone thither to prepare a place for us. We die: But it
is that we may live for ever, and we do but exchange our mortal life for glory
and immortality.

On the other hand, suppose we should draw back, and, to save our lives, wrong
our Consciences; What shall we gain by this? We shall lives a while longer,
enjoy our Preferments and our outward Comforts: But alas! Whither shall we
cause our shame to go? When we have outlived our Innocence, prostituted our
Conscience, and made ship wrack of our Faith, what good will our life do us? It
only keeps our bodies from putrefaction, and respits a little our eternal
misery; our joy and our strength is gone, when we have denied the Faith; and
now we are justly detested by God and good men, and are but a burden and terror
to our selves. And as we are uneasy to our selves now, so when death
approaches us (for we shall not long stave it off) then our unspeakable misery
begins. Then death will be more terrible to us than ever it was before, and yet
we must submit our necks whether we are willing or not.

as they ought. Such men as these are in a strait, like that of the Israelites,
who were placed between the persecuting Egyptians and the Red Sea, and will be
tempted rather to return into Egypt than adventure themselves upon the violent
flood of waters. Now in answer to this Objection, I shall desire them that make
it to consider the following particulars:

I. That by declining to suffer in this case they do but render their Salvation
the more hazardous and doubtful, so far are they from securing themselves and
their main concern. For they run into a known sin, and consequently hazard
their Salvation, for which they pretend at the same time to be sollicitous.
There is no doubt but such a man may flee from the Persecution if he can, but
it can never be safe for him to renounce his Religion, and deny his Savior
before men. We allow sick people, when their case is doubtful, some things
which we do not advise them to, but no man in his wits will let them drink
Poison, or take in any thing that commonly destroys the life of a man. Our
Religion does not allow us to do evil that good may come. And a certain sin
cannot tend to the securing, but does always and directly tend to the
destruction of our Souls. It is certain, what ever pretense we make, we have no
regard as we ought to have for our Souls, when we willingly commit a sin
against God; For by committing a known sin, we do but run into that evil which
we pretend we fear and would decline.

2. And therefore I add, that we ought to suffer, and commit our selves unto
God, notwithstanding the doubt and fear we are under. For this is certainly our
duty, and no matter of question, and therefore we ought not to demur. Our duty
is plain, and our doubt arises not from what we are to do, but from the effects
of what we have done. We cannot give a better testimony of our sincere
repentance for what has been done amiss than by giving our selves up to the
will of God. Whereas by declining to suffer, and choosing to sin we withdraw
our selves from Gods protection, and proclaim our selves not only sinners, but
Impenitents also. And it is a sign that we are not much concerned for our
former sins when we dare add to their number so great and heinous an one.
Whereas on the other hand, when we give up our lives to God, notwithstanding
our fears and doubts of our future state, we give the greatest demonstration of
our sincere repentance for our sins past, and take a direct course to obtain
our pardon and remission. In this case to give up our lives is the greatest
expression of a sincere repentance, and of a steadfast faith in God. It is a
great wisdom in us in this case to choose to fall into the hands of that God
whose mercies are above all his works. And we can never consult better for
ourselves, than by doing our duty, whatever pain or loss it do expose us to.

3. That among the Ancient Writers of the Church we have a very favorable
opinion relating to this matter: And it was this, Aug. de Civitat. Dei l. 13.
c. 7.
that Martyrdom was a kind of Baptism, by which remission of sins was obtained,
and which did supersede the indispensable necessity of that Sacrament, serving
in the room and stead of it. This St. Id. de Eccles.
Austin reckons among the opinions of the Church. I shall not examine the
grounds and foundations of this opinion; but this I shall say, that as it was a
general opinion among the Ancients (who notwithstanding maintained the
necessity of an holy life) so it does, as it is laid down by the Father
abovenamed, deserve at least a favorable regard; especially since he grounds
it upon that promise of our Savior, Mat. 10.32.
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in heaven.

4. It is very advisable, that he that has done amiss should by all the ways
possible testify the sincerity of his Repentance. If his sins have been
against his Neighbor, he ought to be reconciled, and to make restitution as
far as he is able: And whatever his sin has been, he ought to confess it, and
to shame himself for it, and to give all the possible proofs of a through, and
hearty, and particular repentance, as far as his time and ability will reach,
and he must to this purpose call in Gods help, and implore his grace and mercy
in Christ Jesus: And then if afterward he give his body to be burnt, as a
farther token of his Contrition, he will not lose his reward. There is a fond
opinion among the Jewish Writers, that the death of a Criminal expiates for his
Crimes. But yet one of their wises Writers tells us, Maimon. H. Teshub. c. 1.
that neither the Sacrifice which the sinner brought, nor the death which was
inflicted on him did make expiation for him, unless he did repent.

5. They that now make this Objection ought to make the right Use of it. That
is, they ought forthwith to set upon an holy life, upon crucifying their lusts,
and killing their sins, that so they may not be afraid of death in what form
soever it shall present it self. They ought to provide for sufferings, and
especially for death, before it makes its approach unto them.

CHAP. X.
I Shall now proceed to show what preparations we ought to make against
Sufferings, and how we are to demean our selves under them.

We ought to consider beforehand, that we may meet with great trials and
exercises in our way to to heaven. And it very well becomes us to provide
against the worst of things. And this is very reasonable, because if we should
not be called out to suffer for our Religion, yet we shall be sure to die, and
it is our duty, as well as our interest, to provide for death. And therefore
what I have to offer cannot be unseasonable, because it will serve to prepare
us for our other sufferings, and for the stroke of death, though we should not
be persecuted for righteousness sake. And it is a foolish thing not to prepare
for death in the time of our prosperity and our health. I shall therefore
recommend to you some particulars which will be of great Use to us to prepare
us for our bearing all sort of afflictions, and particularly tend to deliver us
from the fear of violence and death it self. And to that purpose,

1. Make it your care to bear witness to the Truth, by your lives; and this
will be a great preparation against all evils, and even against death it self.
In this sense we may all be Martyrs though we do not shed our blood: For we may
bear witness to the Truth by our life as well as by our death. And the doing it
by a good life is the best preparative to the other Martyrdom of blood. 1 Pet.
2.15.
We may by welldoing, as well as by suffering well, put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. If there be no Tyrant, Cyprian. de dupliei Martyria.
(says one of the Ancients) no Tormentor, no Plunderer, yet there will be
Concupiscence giving us daily matter of Martyrdom. Besides, the evils of this
mortal life, that are common to the good and bad, will afford us the Crown of
Martyrdom if we bear them with alacrity and thanksgiving. -- Who dares deny
(says he) Abraham, and Isaac, and Job to be Martyrs? What Racks did ever
torment the body more than natural affection tortured the mind of that
Patriarch, when he, in compliance with Gods Command, was ready to offer up his
Son, his only and beloved Son, in whom was the hope of Posterity? What was
wanting to the making Isaac a Martyr, who without murmuring suffered himself to
be bound, and laid upon the wood? Whose Martyrdom may we compare with the
things which Job suffered? The same Author does well observe, that in that
Catalogue of Saints and holy men, ( Heb. 11.) though there were but few of them
died a violent death, yet to let us see that we might be Martyrs by an
exemplary life, it is said of them, (...).
that by faith they obtained a good report. To which I add, Heb. 11.2.
that they are all called Martyrs or Witnesses afterward. Chapter 12.1. (...).
We shall have fair occasion to show our Courage, our Patience, our
Resignation, and our Faith, though we do not suffer upon a Wheel, or at a
Stake. And he that bears all his other troubles well, is in a great preparation
to suffer death also. Whereas those men that are impatient and peevish under
every little sorrow and cross, have much to do before they will be fit to
endure the severest torments. If then we would be able to endure a violent
death for the sake of our Savior, let us set upon the practice of the hardest
of his Precepts. Let us cut off our right hands, and pluck out our right Eyes,
part with our most beloved lusts, and crucify the desires of the flesh. Let us
mortify our inordinate Anger, destroy all wrath and bitterness, all our
covetous desires and sensualities. Here is a great and difficult task before
us; if we do this, death will not much astonish us: We shall not be greatly
afraid of death when we see our sins and lusts dead before us: Those lusts,
which made death a formidable evil to us. No man is so fearless of death as
that man that is crucified to the world, and has mortified his inordinate
desire of worldly things. If in the whole course of our life we give up our
selves to the Laws of Christ, if we exercise our selves to patience, and
self-denial, to meekness and long-suffering, to Temperance and Chastity, to
contempt of the world, and an heavenly mind, we shall find it a very easy task
when we shall be required to resign up our mortal life for the sake of our Lord
Jesus. He that obeys Christ in all his holy and strictest Precepts, will be in
great readiness and preparation of mind to lay down his life for him. He that
dares kill his Lusts, and crucify the old man, will not think much to resign
this mortal life that he may be clothed with Immortality. When one bid
Socrates prepare for his trial; He asked him, whether he thought he had not
done that all his lifetime: But then again he asked Socrates, (...). Arrian.
Epict. l. 2. c. 2.
what preparation he had made? He told him, that he had done what was in his
power to do. He asked him, How? Socrates told him, he had never done an unjust
action publicly or privately. If we would prepare for sufferings, and for
death, let us do it by a good life, 1 Pet. 4.19.
and commit the keeping of our souls to God in well-doing.

2. Entertain your selves with the thoughts of troubles, and the frequent
thoughts of death, before they come nigh you. It is of great moment that we be
not suprized by the evils which we meet withal. It is a great astonishment to
us to meet with evils which we thought not of before: He is a very miserable
man indeed who promised himself pleasure, and meets with sorrow, and so is he
that meets with some misery that he never expected: It is a great piece of
wisdom to suppose the worst which may happen. Death does greatly astonish the
man that thought of living long and pleasantly, of going to such a City, and
buying, and selling and getting gain. 1 Pet. 4.12.
The Apostle would not have them, to whom he writes, look upon the fiery trial
as some strange thing. If we would bear our troubles, let us expect them, that
when they come we may not be surprised. When we have often thought of them
before, we shall in great measure despise them; whereas if we be surprised, we
shall be astonished with a small evil. Much of our misery arises from our
inconsideration. Men that go to Sea ought not to promise themselves a Calm, and
a good wind: They ought to suppose they may meet with Tempests and contrary
Winds. Why should we suppose our selves exempt from the common condition of
mankind? We are born to troubles, and must certainly die, and may die a violent
death: This we ought to think of frequently. If we bury our friend: We knew he
was mortal before, and we never expected immortality from a mortal Creature.
You lose your goods perhaps; But you should have considered that those external
things were subject to this loss; That they were things which Moth might
corrupt, or Thieves might steal. It will not become a wise man in these cases
to say, that he did not think that such things could have happened to him. For
whatever has happened to another, may also happen to me. And I may as well
admire that what is brittle, should break, or what is combustible, should burn,
as that what is mortal should die, or what is without me should be taken from
me.

We should prevent much of our trouble if we would but expect it before hand,
and look for it. And to think very often and seriously of death, would deliver
us in great measure from the fears and terrors of it. Familiarity, even in
this sense, breeds contempt. The Fox in the Fable was greatly afraid when he
first saw a Lion, but less afraid the second time, and after that was so far
from fear that he came near him, and conversed with him. The frequent thoughts
of death will rid us of much of our fears of it. And it must needs be so,
because they tend very much to prepare and dispose us for it: For these
thoughts are apt to awaken in us a care to live well, and that is a mean to
deliver us from our slavish fears. It was wisely said by the Son of Syrach,
Ecclus. 7.36.
Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss. The due consideration of our death is one of those things which an
Ancient Jew tells us will keep men from transgression. Pirke Avoth. c. 3. m. 1.
To think of death is a great instrument of Virtue and true Wisdom. It will
help to slake our lusts, bridle our desires of wealth and honor, and stop our
course of sinning. It will serve to quicken our devotions, to wean us from this
life, and to excite us to well-doing. It is of great moment toward our
resisting temptations, which now gain upon us, and the putting us upon the
careful spending the several portions of our time. Epictet. Enchir. c. 28.
Let death be always before thine eyes (says the Heathen) and thou will not
mind any low or mean thing, nor greatly desire any thing.

III. Use your selves to labor, to a severe course of life. Do not indulge
your appetite and your sloth, but give up your selves to great diligence and
industry. He that would endure the greatest pain and torment must harden and
prepare himself by degrees, and inure himself to bear the Yoke betimes. A soft
and sensual life will render us very unfit for a fiery trial. And he that knows
not how to deny his licentious appetite what it at any time craves, will be
very unfit to be a Martyr. It will well become us to keep under our bodies, and
to withdraw from them some of those Supplies which it craves, that we may be
the better prepared to endure greater hardships. Let us learn to contemn
sensual pleasures, and to deprive our selves of some of our liberties, that we
may the more patiently bear the being totally deprived. Let us strip our selves
of some of our conveniences of life, and we shall the more patiently bear the
being stripped of all the rest. Miles supervacuo labor lassatur, ut sufficere
necessario possit. Sen. Ep. 18.
They that run in Races were wont to exercise before. And the Soldier is
trained and used to labor and weariness before he comes to the battle; They
did this that they might be able to overcome when they were put to the trial:
They that indulge themselves in a delicate and soft life will be very unfit for
great severities. Woe be to them that are at ease in Zion. We shall be afraid
of dying if we give up our selves to a sensual life. Sensual pleasures do much
indispose us for the business of this, as well as for the bliss of a future
life. Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares. Death and sufferings will be a great surprise and terror to all
them that have lived at ease. Oh death, Ecclus. 41.1.
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions?

IV. Make it now your constant care to resign up your Will to the Will of God.
Let this be your daily exercise as it is your Prayer. By this means you will be
wonted to that Lesson which makes way for a patient suffering, even death it
self, whenever it shall please God to call us to it. You will be very unfit to
resign your selves up to death it self, if you have not formerly made it your
great care to bring your own Wills to a compliance with the Will of God. We are
never safe till it is thus with us, and when ever we are arrived to this, we
are secure, and sufficiently prepared for all events of things. Nothing now
will be able to make us miserable, because nothing can possibly befall us
against our wills. For as nothing can make us happy but God, so nothing can
make us miserable but our own Will; and that does never hurt us but when it
runs Counter to the Will of God. This is the way to peace and rest, to part
with our own Will, and to suffer it to be guided and governed by the Divine. If
it be thus with us, we shall be quiet and still under every Calamity, safe
under every stroke, and fitted for what ever may happen to us. Thus it was with
our Savior; He prayed, that if it were possible the Cup might pass, but then
he adds, Not my will, but thy will be done. There is great danger in neglecting
our duty in this matter, and he will be very ready to deny his Lord, who has
not thoroughly learned this Lesson. Whatever happens to us, now let us resign
our selves to Gods Will. Is my dearest Friend, or Child dead! Is our health
impaired! Is our Estate wasted! Let us say always, Let the will of the Lord be
done. By these steps we shall perfectly learn this Lesson, and practice it then
when God shall send for us by death into another World.

V. Do all the good which you can. This tends to the making our death more
easy unto us: For our account is lessened hereby, and consequently death it
self is the less to be feared. Besides that, acts of mercy have a promise of
mercy belonging to them. They that show mercy shall receive it. It is enough
that they are sure of their reward.; This takes away much of the terror of
death it self. And the merciful man is well dealt with if he be supported under
the Agonies of death. This is better for him than to be delivered from it.
Psalm. 41.3.
And we know there is a particular promise of support to the merciful man, even
then when he is threatened with death. On the other hand, he that shows no mercy
must not expect to find it. He that hides his Talent in a Napkin is unprepared
to meet his Lord: He will have a very sad account, not only that squanders
away, but he that hides his Lords Money.

VI. Frequently and diligently examine your selves. Call your selves to a
strict and severe account often. This will be a great preparation for any evils
which may happen to us, and against death it self. We shall never be safe if we
do not take this course. For this examination is in order to the knowing our
state to Godward, and to our repentance, and consequently our pardon. We must
confess our sins, and in order to that we must know them: For our Confession,
the more general it is, the more dangerous; the more particular, the more safe.
For though we hope for pardon upon a general repentance where we cannot find
out all our secret sins, yet this does not give us hope of pardon upon a
general repentance, where upon search we may be more particular. From whence it
may easily appear how much a strict and diligent examination of our selves
tends to our comfort and our peace, and how much it does dispose and prepare us
for sufferings, and for death it self. We are at ease and at liberty when our
accounts are cleared and settled; Whereas it is a burden to every honest mind to
think that his affairs are entangled and perplexed, and that he is not able to
adjust his accounts. Let any man but seriously consider how much he offends
every day, either in doing what he should not, or not doing what he should; In
omitting his duty, or in doing it slightly, and he will soon find he has work
to do at the close of every day before he betake himself to rest. And then sure
he will be very unfit for death, if he have the follies and errors of a whole
life, or a great part of it, to unravel, and to account for. Such a man must
needs be full of fears and jealousies that all is not right, who has not been
very careful to try whether it be so or not. It were well that this
self-examination were the work of every day. For as we might find enough to
employ our selves in, without troubling our selves with the faults of our
Neighbors, so I am sure, we could not take a better course to secure our own
souls. And it was required that a man should examine himself before he received
the Communion, 1 Cor. 11.28.
at that time when Christians communicated very frequently, if not every day.
And though we excuse our selves too easily from frequent communicating, yet
they that do that cannot deny, but that it is their duty to be prepared for it,
and consequently, to examine themselves also.

VII. Set your house in order. My meaning is, that we would do that duty which
we owe to one another, in order to our more comfortable passage hence: And
there are many things that fall under this head which every wise and good man
would do before he goes hence. Such are, the making our Wills, and settling our
worldly Estate; making restitution, where we have done wrong; being reconciled
where there has been a grudge or difference; disburdening our Consciences
where they are oppressed; seeking satisfaction where we are in doubt, and
clearing our accounts with others where they are entangled. These things, and
such like, have a tendency toward the comfort and ease of our minds; and when
they are done, we are left at greater liberty and freedom cheerfully to bear
whatever evil God thinks fit to exercise us with.

VIII. Be very much in Religious Exercises, and in the Service of God: Such as
reading and hearing, meditating of heavenly things, and receiving the
Sacrament, and frequent Abstractions from the hurries and the amusements of
this lower world.

But especially, let us give our selves much to Prayer; Let us with all
humility and fervor, with all attention and watchfulness, with prostrate souls
and broken hearts implore the aid and assistance of God and of his Holy Spirit,
that we may continue faithful unto death that we may receive the Crown of
righteousness. Prayer is very seasonable at such a time as this, Jam. 5.13.
and it is recommended to us from the Example as well as from the Precept of
our blessed Savior; Luke 21.36 22.44.
of whom it is said, that being in an Agony he prayed more earnestly.

I shall now show you how we are to demean and behave our selves under our
sufferings. And before I do that I shall premise the following particulars:

First, That we ought not to run after sufferings, and to bring them upon our
selves. We are not obliged to throw away our lives, but to stay till God calls
for them at our hand. Our Religion allows us the wisdom of Serpents, though it
strictly require the innocence of Doves. It is lawful in some cases to flee and
decline our sufferings, and in many Cases it is fit and expedient that we
should do so. Mat. 10.23.
By this means we may reserve our selves for farther service, and avoid the
temptation. But if our flight betray our Religion, and endanger our Brethren
that are under our charge, we ought to stand to it, and rather part with our
lives. Our lives are then to be given up, when we gain a greater end; but they
are so long to be preserved, as we may keep them without prejudice to our
Conscience, and the Salvation of our Brother.

Secondly, That we are to take great heed that we do not suffer as evil doers.
1 Pet 4.15.
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as
a busie-body in other men's matters. It is the cause, not the suffering which
makes the Martyr. We are happy if we suffer for righteousness sake. Rebellion
and Treason against our Prince cannot make men Saints and Martyrs. These men
are evil doers whatever ever tokens of fortitude they seem to show.

I now proceed to show how we ought to demean our selves under our sufferings:
And that you may take in the following particulars, which concern us as we
stand related to God, to our Neighbor, and to our selves. And,

I. As to God, whose hand we must look at, we must suffer without murmuring and
repining: We must entirely resign up our selves unto God; and imitate our
blessed Savior, when he said, Not my will, but thy will be done. Our Lord went
like a Sheep to the slaughter, he opened not his mouth. It becomes us to refer
all to Gods wisdom and disposal, not to choose the kind and form of our
sufferings, but to leave all that to him, and depend entirely upon him. It is
the Lord, (we ought to say) let him do what is good in his own eyes.

II. As to our Neighbor, and especially those who are the instruments of our
sufferings, we are to show the greatest meekness and charity. In this our
Savior was a great pattern; 1 Pet. 2.22, 23.
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: Who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously. It becomes us to imitate this glorious example;
us it becomes who are vile sinners, and have deserved our sufferings from Gods
hand, though we suffer in a righteous Cause. Father forgive them (says our
dying Lord) for they know not what they do. Our Lord did not threaten his
enemies: No, he pitied them, and he prayed for them. And so must we do also if
we would suffer as Christians. We must forgive our Enemies, pity them as we do
people that are blind, or delirant: Their folly, and their rage and madness
call for our compassions, and our hearty Prayers for their precious and
immortal souls. De dupl. Martyr.
Thus St. Cyprian describes the manner of Christians sufferings: We see not
(says he) that placid, and meek, and sublime temper of mind, joined with
humility, unless it be in the Martyrs of Christ. They do not look upon the
Executioner with fierce eyes, they do not threaten the Tyrant: They are more
grieved for their blindness, than for their own afflictions; Even Christ cries
in them, Father forgive them, etc. They look at nothing but heaven, where their
hope is laid up, etc.

III. As to our selves that we undergo our sufferings undauntedly, and with
constancy, that we do not any thing unbecoming our Christian Profession; It is
not to be imagined but that the Christian has as quick a sense of pain as any
other man; he is not stupid, and unconcerned; all that is required is this,
that he hold out with courage and Christian Fortitude, and be not betrayed by
his fear. It is not necessary that he should be rid of all fear: It is enough
that it do not prevail upon him so far as to cause him to distrust God, or deny
the Truth. It is not every one that can triumph in Flames, and show tokens of
joy upon Racks and Wheels: It is not every Martyr that can express great
exultation of mind. 2 Cor. 7.5.
Some fear is very consistent with the greatest Sanctity: He is not to be
deprived of the glory of Martyrdom, that continues constant under his
sufferings, though he went to them with fear and suspicion of himself.

THE General CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction, and design of the following Discourse. The
necessity of believing the particular Care and Providence of God. The Evils
which befall good men are reconcilable with the Providence of God. A more
particular consideration of the Persons to whom these Evils befall; of the Evils
themselves; of their usefulness, and the supports which good men are furnished
with. Page 1. CHAP. II. That it is very reasonable that in obedience to
Christ's Law we should suffer even death it self. A more particular
consideration of the Lawgiver; the Equitableness of the Law it self, as also
of the ground and reason of it. p. 31. CHAP. III. The first great support under
our sufferings is the hope of eternal life. A more particular consideration of
the greatness of the reward, the clearness of its revelation, and its fitness
to work upon us. p. 63. CHAP. IV. The consideration of Gods particular care and
Providence another great support under our afflictions. A more particular
consideration of the assurance which the Gospel gives us of Gods special
Providence; How much this tends to our support; The Application. p. 79. CHAP.
V. The Assistance of the Holy Spirit another support. A more particular
consideration of the sufficiency of this Divine assistance; The great assurance
we have of receiving this heavenly aid; The condition on our part for the
obtaining this Assistance. p. 97. CHAP. VI. Of the Example of Christ, and holy
men who have suffered the greatest evils. That we are obliged to place their
example before our eyes; A short account of their sufferings; The usefulness of
these examples to us. p. 124. CHAP. VII. The support we receive from the
Intercession of the Son of God. That Christ is now in heaven; That he is there
concerned on our behalf. How this tends toward our support under the
afflictions and sufferings of this life. p. 140. CHAP. VIII. Of the Comfort of
the Scriptures. A more particular consideration how the Scriptures tend to our
comfort under our sufferings. p. 165. CHAP. IX. An Exhortation to use these
helps, and not to be dismayed at death it self for righteousness sake. The
reasonableness of this Exhortation farther considered. Advice to those who are
afraid to suffer death because they have not lived as they ought. p. 195. CHAP.
X. Of preparing for sufferings, and for death. A more particular consideration
of what we are to do toward the fitting our selves for what ever evils may
happen, especially for death, and the severest persecution for righteousness
sake. How we are to demean our selves under our sufferings. p. 212.
THE END.

