A DISCOVERY OF SOME Troublesome Thoughts WHEREWITH Many Godly precious Souls
are burdened, and extremely pressed: that like a Canker eats out all their
Comforts, and keeps their Souls under continual fears and Distractions.

Together with a Compound of some Scripture and experimental Cordials, for the
refreshing of those who are sick of such a disease; and through the blessing of
God, may prove medicinal, to the Cure of some, and the Comforting of others.

By Daniel King, Preacher of the Word.

Isa. 54.11,12,13. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with
Saphirs. And I will make thy windows of Agats, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and
all thy borders of pleasant stones. And all thy children shall be taught of the
LORD, and great shall be the peace of thy children.

London Printed, and are to be sold near the Temple in Fleet Street. 1651.

To all poor souls, who are troubled and tossed in Spirit; Especially Zions
members that are in such a Condition.
PRecious Saints, and faithful souls; The Lord by his providence bringing me
to London, and having occasion to continue there a time, I was solicited by
some dear to me, to set pen to Paper upon another subject, which I was not
willing to do at that present. But yet I thought it my duty to employ my self
in the service of Christ and his people any way as might tend to the Glory of
the one, and the benefit of the other. In diverse parts of the City, and
Suburbs thereof, came news to me of some whose hearts were exceedingly shaken
with doubts, and scruples, and fears, concerning the condition of their Souls:
some of which are in Communion with the Churches of Christ nicknamed
Anabaptists: some hearing among them, confessing the truth, and acknowledging
the way of worship practiced by them to be of God, desirous to be one with
them; But only that scruples concerning their own condition, wanting the
assurance of their Justification, and reconciliation to God, keeps them off:
Whose condition, diverse brethren Question not but to be good, and their souls
dear to God; only they could not see it themselves. Just like the Disciples
here, Christ was at hand, and they thought it was some other apparition: And so
through mistake were exceedingly troubled. And therefore I set upon this piece
of work, being moved thereto, from three or four considerable reasons. 1.
Because he that is in affliction ought to be comforted of his neighbor. Job
6.14. Prove. 18.14.
And what Affliction like Affliction of spirit? And who is my neighbor but he
that shows mercy to me? And truly I cannot but pity, and tender those who are
of the body of Christ, in respect of Union with, and in him; And yet because of
Affliction of Spirit, dare not manifest their right to Communion. It is an
Argument of a dead member, not to be sensible of the pain of others that
suffer. Weep with them that weep, says the Apostle. And it is some comfort to
a sad discouraged soul, when God gives his people a heart to condole their
Condition: Lam. 1.12.
When they are not forgotten of the Saints. 2. Because after I had mentioned my
Intention in this thing, to those that moved me to the other task: themselves
and others were well satisfied, and desirous that I should hasten in the work
as fast as I could; whereupon I perceived I had a Call to it by them. 3.
Because I saw I was bound to it as my duty, laid upon me by God himself;
according to the Ability given me, to draw it forth this way, as well as
otherwise. Seeing God says, Isa. 40.1.2. Comfort ye, Comfort ye my people,
says your God; Speak to the heart of Jerusalem; tell her, her Iniquity it
pardoned, etc. Showing that Jerusalem questioned her pardon, or was ignorant of
it; And that the servants of God, which he had enabled for the work, should
declare it to her, and speak to her heart that was troubled, that she might be
settled. And says the Apostle, Comfort the feeble minded. 2 These 5.14.
And many other Scriptures to this purpose. 4. To be a Testimonial to Brethren
and friends from whom I am absent, that I have not spent my time idly, about
vain pleasures, though I have not been with them, but was willing to set
forward the work of God in one kind or other, that might be Useful.


And now to you poor troubled Souls, whose hearts are heavy, and whose souls
bleed with sorrows, and are full of fears, who languish under terrors: I know
the objections, and scruples of your hearts are numerous, and of various
shapes, now appearing in one shape, then in another: Think not that I can speak
to every thought or doubt that may trouble you: I have only spoken to such as
seem to me (and that by some experience of my own also) to be the groundwork
or Foundation of most of your fears and shakings. And (indeed) for the present,
neither time nor convenient opportunity would give me leave to add any more. I
beseech you deal plainly with your hearts; Read this Treatise, it may be you
may light of somewhat that may refresh your spirits. Take heed of believing
Satan, or your own hearts, but believe the Lord speaking in the Scripture the
Words of God. Do not (dear friends) refuse to be comforted, when God tenders
Comforts to you: The more your hearts are lifted up with spiritual Joy, the
more cheerfully you will walk with God. Look up to God for a blessing when you
read; It may be he may open your Understandings to understand the Scriptures,
and the dealings of God with his People, and to know them for your selves. Luke
24.
Despair not, though you have been dead in your hearts (not like Lazarus in
body, two days, or four days, but many days) but remember Christ will have
the glory in raising you Up. And I beseech you, when God has lifted up your
heads (or rather hearts) remember me, who am often (to the grief of my heart)
troubled with captivating rebelling flesh; Romans 7.
showing it self present when I would and should do good: Entreat that God that
is the God of all consolation, and comforts you, to Quicken me, and carry me
through in his work. 2 Cor. 1.


But to those who pretend troublesome times, because they would seem Saints:
that like Dissembling beggars, make themselves sores where none are, to
maintain their Irregular life: That delight in sin, and evil courses, and would
have Gods Countenance shine upon them, and assurance of Salvation be given to
them, that they might with the more freedom and boldness run on in the way of
wickedness: would have the Wages, but cannot endure the work: Desire the end,
but care not for the way or means that tends to that end: cry Hosanna to Christ
with their mouths, but crucify him in heart and life: Christ is lovely to
them as a Priest, to save them; but tell them of his Kingdom to be set up
within them, and without them, in heart and life, and then he seems a Tyrant.
Let me tell thee, whosoever thou art, that art of this temper, I have said
nothing to thee, nor for thee in this Treatise: This comfortable Cordial that
I have endeavored to compound for the comfort of Souls really sick, shall
become thy poison, if thou offer to meddle with it. Taste not one sip of it I
charge thee; and if thou do, I am guiltless of thy blood, having given thee a
fair warning. I have written it for the use of those whose hearts God has
touched, and are sick of love for him who is altogether Lovely: Not for such as
turn the grace of God into wantonness. So I commit it to the blessing of God,
and the approbation of the Churches of Christ; As namely the Churches of Christ
in London meeting usually at the glasse-house in Broad street, The Church in
Coventry, The Church in Warwick, The Church at Hook-Norton in Oxfordshire; And
the Church meeting near Martin-Hinmarsh in Gloucestershire, or any others to
whom I am near related.
and such in them, as are most experienced in the dealings of God with troubled
souls; And desire to continue, as by the grace of God I am,

A servant to Christ, and the meanest of his Saints, DANIEL KING.
From the Lime-kiln at Pickle-Hering in Southwark this 7th. of the 11th.
Month.
A Discovery of some troublesome thoughts, wherewith many Godly Precious Souls
are burdened and extremely pressed.
Together with a Compound of Scripture and experimental Cordials, for the
refreshing of those who are sick of such a Disease, etc.
Luke 24.38. And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts?


THe words contain a reproof or reprehension of the Disciples of Christ, by
Christ himself; laid down by way of Interrogation: Why are ye troubled, and why
do thoughts arise in your hearts? Like that of Mar. 4.40. Why are ye so
fearful? and Matthew. 21.25. Why then do you not believe on him? and according
to that, Isa. 40.27. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my way is
hid from the Lord; and my Judgment is passed over from my God?

Division.
The words consist of two parts. 1. The thing for which Christ reproves them,
though in a loving sweet manner I confess for being so troubled. 2. The ground
of this their trouble, Thoughts arising in their hearts.


And it appears it was a reproof of them, because he labors to take them off
from this distemper, in the next words; Behold my hands, and my feet, that it
is I my self: for they were troubled through a mistake, thinking they had seen
a spirit, and not Christ: And therefore he did not app^ove of it, but reproves
it.

Consider further, 1. Who it was that speaks here; Christ himself. 2. To whom
he spoke; To his Disciples, believers. 3. At what time; And that was when he
himself came in among them, and was present with them, and saluted them with
peace. Verse. 36.


Meaning of the words.
For the meaning of the words, I will be brief.

1. Troubled.
Trouble. This word is set out to us diversely in Scripture. 1. Sometimes it
signifies poverty. 1 Chronicles. 22.14. In my trouble (or poverty) says David, I
have prepared for the house of the Lord. This is spoken Metonymically, the
cause for the effect. 2. It signifies to be shortened. Job 21.4. Why should
not my Spirit be troubled? The Hebrew reading is, shortened, When a man is
straightened, and cannot be so enlarged as he would be: Its a phrase taken from
one that is overburthened, and is so pressed down that he cannot look up, nor
go forward, but falls short of what he would reach or attain to; And so is
filled with perplexities and fears. 3. It imports weariness, or to be tired
under a burden. Nehem. 9.32. O our God, let not all the trouble seem little
before thee; the Hebrew reading is, Weariness. It means so to be burdened as
not to be able to stand up under it; Ps. 38.6. I am troubled (Hebr. Wryed) I am
bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day. So that it is to be writhen or
wryed aside, and bowed down under some Burden, into a mourning condition. The
word is sometimes joined with anguish, showing the vexation of the heart. Job
15.24. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; sometimes with sorrow. Psalm.
116.3. I found trouble and sorrow. Now all these are ingredients into these
thoughts; and it is as if Christ should have said, why are ye so poor that ye
have no confidence, nor no Joy in your hearts? Why are so distempered, and
wearied, and burdened in your selves? Why are ye so straightened, and so full
of anguish and sorrow, that ye cannot stretch out your hearts to believe, and
quiet your souls in God through Christ?


Again, consider where the seat of this trouble was; in the heart, or spirit;
It was not upon the Body, nor state, nor name; but upon the Soul.

Consider again, whence this trouble arose; from thoughts. Some Translations
read it doubtings; It signifies distracting thoughts, turbulent thoughts, or
debatings and Reasonings, whereby the heart is discouraged, and begins to sink
under its burden; and is tired with musings, and tossings up and down, through
fear and doubt: like that Mat. 6.25. Take no thought for your life; that is,
distrustful thought, to be of doubtful mind, or to hang in careful suspense;
Luke.
Such thoughts Christ endeavors to Arm them against. Mar. 13.11. And such
thoughts David speaks of, Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within
me, thy comforts delight my Soul; Thoughts arising from a mixture of unbelief;
so this place shows; they believed not that it was Christ, and thereupon
thoughts arose. Contrary to that Matt. 21.21. If you have faith, and doubt not;
But these were like Peter's thoughts about the vision, Act. 10.17. When he knew
not what to pitch upon, nor how to have his heart satisfied; But sticks in
doubts, and fears, and scruples, and cannot get our. And such kind of thoughts
trouble the heart exceedingly, Dan. 5.6. Then the Kings countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him; so verse 10. O King, let not thy
thoughts trouble thee. So Mary, Luke 1.29. It is said, She was troubled at the
Angels saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.
It stuck in her mind, and troubled her for the present.

Arise in your hearts.

It is a metaphor taken from the rising of clouds, or mists, whereby the
shining face of the Sun is obscured from the Earth: So by the rising of these
thoughts, and doubts, the sweet presence of Christ, that was among them, now
was obscured, and not so pleasant to them.

Sometimes me thinks, The Interrogation carries the face of an Admiration; Why
are YE troubled? YE, And why do thoughts arise in YOUR hearts? What you my
Disciples, that are believers! John 14.1. Ye believe in God; You that have been
so intimate with Christ, that have had so much experience of Christ! did not I
tell you that after three days I should rise again? have not you formerly had
sweet Communion with me? strange! Why are ye troubled? But I take it to be a
gentle reproof.

Again consider, whence those thoughts arose; from themselves, not from Christ;
from a principle of their own hearts, for it was in their hearts that they
rose, and from their hearts: Christ said, peace be unto you; but they arose
from their own suppositions, and mistakes, as appears from verse. 37. They
were terrified, and affrighted, and supposed they had seen a spirit.

The words show also the certainty of these believers or Disciples trouble of
mind, by the Ingemination of the Question; Why are ye troubled, and why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? he does not say are ye troubled? and do thoughts
arise? but why is it so? Implying a certainty.

I hope the words are cleared up; I come now to the observations.

Doctrinall observations.
And first from the Interrogation

Why are ye troubled? etc. Whence observe a truth implicitly infolded in the
words; that is this,

That the Saints of God, the Disciples of Christ, even in Gospel times, are
subject to trouble of mind, and distemper of spirit.

2. Why are ye troubled, and why? etc. Christ asks them the reason of it,
showing it was not from him.

Whence observe again,

That it is not from Christ, but principally from a believer himself, and his
own heart, that he is so much troubled as he is.

3. From the ground of their trouble, Thoughts, or doubtings that arose in
their hearts, I observe again,

There is corruption enough in the heart of every believer (if it did but show
it self) to trouble him, and mightily distemper him. Romans 7. Paul tells us
sin dwelled in him, and when he would do good evil was present, and the Law in
his members rebelled against the Law of his mind; and now see how it troubled
him, verse. 24. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Many wonder that believers should be troubled in Gospel times; Why
so? Are believers free from the stirring and moving of corruption? and so long
as unbelief opposes faith, and the flesh lusts against the spirit, is it any
wonder to see them troubled?

4. From the Ingemination, or doubling of the Question, Why, and why?

I note,

That it behooves a Christian in trouble of spirit, to observe the ground
whence it rises.

5. Why are ye troubled? Why see verse. 37. It was a mistake; for they had cause
to have rejoiced; because they were not acquainted with the manner of Christ's
appearance at that time, they utterly mistake and make contrary constructions
of his appearance.

Whence I note,

That many times, the Saints and people of God, are mightily troubled, and
perplexed in their hearts, and spirits, when they have cause to rejoice, and be
comforted.

6. From the general; That Christ reproves them for it, and labors to help
them against it, as appears ver. 38.39.40. And he said unto them, why are ye
troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my
feet, that it is I my self: handle me and see me; for a Spirit has not flesh
and bones, as ye see me to have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them
his hands, and his feet.

I observe again,

That Christ would not have his people tire themselves, and burden themselves
with lying under discouraging thoughts, to trouble and affright their own
hearts with doubtings and discouragements.

Or thus.

Christ would not have his people lie under discouragement of heart. He
reproves it here, and helps them against it. John 14.1. Says Christ to his
Disciples, Let not your heart be troubled; there was cause enough a man would
think. Christ ^elleth them he must suffer, and they should all be scattered
from him, and Peter should deny him that night; It was like to be a sad time;
yet says he, Let not your heart be troubled: neither let it be afraid, verse.
27. So Mar, 13.7. Be ye not troubled, when you shall hear of this and this. So
also the Scripture is clear Isa. 56.3. Neither let the Son of ihe stranger,
that has joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, the Lord has utterly
separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry
tree. Let them not say so, says God; as if he should say; Let them not say so,
says God, as if I had cast them off, or had no mercy for them. So in the 42.
and 43. Psalms, Why art thou cast down, Oh my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? See how the Spirit of God guides him to debate the
business, why there was such a hurry in his heart. Christ would not have his
people do so. Hebr. 12.5. He would not have them forget that exhortation that
speaks unto them as to children, My son despise not thou the correction of
the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him.

I shall a little follow and clear up this point, for the encouragement of
drouping souls, whose hearts languish under terrors.

Reasons.
And I shall show reasons for the confirmation of it, and they are of two sorts;
That he would not have them discouraged.
1. Reasons to show that he would not have them discouraged. 2. Why he would not.


First, That he would not; 1. It appears from the frequency of the promise;
you can hard ly read any part of the word, but you light thick and threefold
upon the promises. Now if God would have had his people to lie languishing
under sorrows, and perplexing themselves with thoughts, sinking under
discouragements, he would never have left such store of promises upon record
for them as he has done. Consider what a promise there is John 14.18. I will
not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. Methinks this should bear up the
heart; God will not leave you Orphans (for so the word is) in a destitute, sad,
helpless condition, as usually Orphans are; and Isa. 51.12. I, even I am he
that comfort you; who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man that
shall die? etc. Mark, I am he, and who art thou? As if he should say who art
thou, that thy heart should sink under such promises? when (not another but) I
am he that is thy comforter. I beseech you poor souls, do but consider how God
does inculcate, and urge his promises to his people to cheer them up, Isa.
41.9,10. Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee
from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, thou art my servant, I have
chosen thee, and not cast thee away; here is sweet encouragements. But mark
now, Fear thou not for I am with thee; be not dismayed; for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness. O but may some say, I am a poor worm, have nothing
that is lovely, nor desirable in me, an unworthy wretch. Why see verse. 14.
Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help thee says the
Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel. And says Peter. 2. Pet. 1.4.
There is given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you
should be partakers of the Divine Nature. Now the Divine Nature is not subject
to these vexations and troubles; Therefore from the frequency of the promises,
and the end of them, we may well conclude God would not have his people lie
under discouragments. 2. Because he has given them of his Spirit, to cry Abba
Father. Now if he give them the spirit of adoption, it argues clearly he would
not have them discouraged, Joh. 14.16. I will pray the father (says Christ)
and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
even the spirit, etc. Romans 8.16. The spirit witnesses with our spirits, that
we are the sons of God. Now if he give his spirit to this end to comfort the
Saints, and witness their adoption, then it must needs follow he would not have
them discouraged. 3. Because he calls for, and requires that the ministry of
consolation be performed, Isa. 40.1.2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says
your God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem: tell her, her iniquity is
pardoned, and her warfare is accomplished. See what a strict charge here is to
comfort the people of God. Yea, and God challenges the false prophets for not
performing this ministry; but acting contrary to it; Ezekiel. 13.22. Because with
lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I not made sad;
therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divination, etc. And Cap. 34
16.17.18. When the prophets neglected tending and tendering the sheep, see what
the Lord says; I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that
which was sick; but I will destroy the fat and the strong; and I will feed them
with judgment. Now then if God take such care that they may be comforted, and
undertake for them, then he would not have them discouraged. 4. Because God the
Father has givtn Commission to Christ, to take special care of them, that they
be not overborn: And Christ has undertaken it. A bruised reed shall he not
break, and smoking flax will he not quench, he will bring forth Judgment into
victory. Isa. 42 3.
This is the glory of Christ's Kingdom, that he shall support the weak; and this
Christ gives in charge to Peter, if he love him, to feed his Lambs. John 21.
And the Apostle gives special charge to the Churches, to comfort one another;
1 Thessalonians. 4.18. Wherefore comfort one another with these words. And 5.14. I
beseech you brethren, support the weak, comfort the feeble-minded; Therefore he
would not have them lie under discouragements.


2. Reasons why God would not have his people troubled.
The 2. sort of Reasons are why he would not, etc. 1. Because he is very
pitiful, and tender: A good body would have no body hurt, no not so much as a
prick with a pin, nor a fillip with the finger: a quiet meek spirit is so
tender. So is God of his people, Jam. 5.11. The Lord is very pitiful: consider
the end the Lord makes, that he is very pitiful: he delights in mercy; Mic.
7. And not in oppressing thy soul. Lam. 3.33. He does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve the children of men. He took it ill, that his people should father
and fasten their discouragements upon him; Isa. 40.27. Why say thou, O
Jacob, and speak, O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is
passed over from my God? Why do say so Israel? there is no cause at all; he
is so far from slighting thee, that he gives power to the faint, and to them
that have no might he increases strength: therefore he would not have them
sink into Anxiety and sadness. 2. It appears to be so, From the excellency of
holy rejoicing, and the acceptableness of it to God;God delights more in this
then in all services whatsoever; for all other works of the spirit flow into
this; And therefore he that was to bring his sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 26.34. among
other things which he professed, this was one, I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning; Mal. 2.12.13.14. And this have ye done again, covering the Altar of
the Lord with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he
regards not the offering any more, nor receives it with good will at your
hands, Psalm. 100.2. Serve the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with
singing; and Psalm. 2.10. Rejoice with trembling, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice. Rejoice evermore, etc. Now if God be so well
pleased with holy rejoicing, then he would not have his people lie under
sorrows, wounding their hearts and breaking of them to pieces under terrors. 3.
Because discouragements drive from God, and are contrary to Communion which God
delights in; therefore Christ knocks at the door, and calls for opening;
Rev. 3. Cant. 5.2. Psalm. 14.8.9. and says he would sup with the Soul; And his
father and he would make their abode there. John 14.
A man will never go to his judge, and executioner, one that will cut his
throat, till he be persuaded of favor. Terrors drive Cain into the land of
Nod, from the presence of God. Therefore says the Lord, I drew them with the
cords of Love. In Gods presence is fullness of Joy: therefore the more
oppressing sorrow, the further from Gods presence. Discouragement made Peter
cry out, Luke 5.3.9.10. Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful man: for he was
astonished, and afraid, as appears by Christ's encouraging of him. 4. Because
this deadens the actings of all the works of the spirit in the heart; God has
not the glory of his spirit in this way: a sad sullen discouraged spirit
deadens all; 2 Cor. 7.10. The sorrow of the world works death. It kills the
spirit, not the body, but death of duty; it makes a man he cannot come off with
any dexterity of duty, death of care, clearing of your selves, indignation,
fear, vehement desire, zeal, revenge: it deadens these. Nay it makes a man
utterly unfit for some services of God, as spiritual rejoicing: This causes
crying, not singing: and rejoicing and singing is a piece of Gods service. Isa.
65.14. My servants shall sing for joy of heart. Sorrow made Hemah unfit for the
service of God. 1 Samuel 1.7. And Solomon says Prove. 12.25. Heaviness in the
heart of man makes it stoop, but a good word makes it glad. The heart is down
when it is heavy, and not so fit for spiritual services. 5. Because by this
discouraged troubled frame of spirit, thou art made unfit for Gods
consolations; to receive them, or rejoice in him, it is distastefull to thee;
As he that takes away a garment in cold woather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so
is he that sings songs to a heavy heart. Prove. 25.20. It will not be born.
Therefore mark, when God sends Moses with a message of mercy to Israel, and he
delivered it according to Gods Command, yet they harkned not to him; what was
the matter? Why, for anguish of spirit, and sore bondage. That unfitted them
for the believing the message of God, and receiving mercy. And the Psalmist in
his overwhelmings of spirit, Psalm. 77. says, My soul refused to be comforted.
6. Because Christ took their troubles upon him, and bare them, Therefore was
his soul troubled, Joh. 12.27. and 13.21. Surely he took our infirmities, and
carried our sorrows, says the Prophet Isa. 53. Therefore he would have us to
rejoice; yea, he would have his joy remain in his Disciples, John, 15.11. Now
then, if God be so tender and pitiful; If holy rejoicing be so acceptable to
him; If trouble of spirit drives from God (I mean discouragement) and be
contrary to communion; If it deadens the actings of the works of the spirit; If
it makes the soul unfit for Gods consolations; If Christ have born our sorrows
of purpose to ease us; Then it must needs follow that Christ would not have his
people discouraged: But all these are true; Therefore the other.


Be afflicted, mourn and weep: And Christ says, Blessed are ye that mourn:
Therefore this cannot be so.

I answer, that in James, is his council to those that had adulterated
themselves with the world, as appears by the former part of the Chapter; and
this mourning is nothing but repentance, Godly sorrow, which Paul was glad was
in the Corinthians. But the sorrow we speak of, is doubting discouraging
sorrow: of which James speaks not. And that of Christ, is a mourning in regard
of afflictions and persecutions of the Gospel which they were to suffer for
Christ's sake, or Godly sorrow: and therefore declares them blessed: Not to
mourn with a distrustful distracting mourning. So that it makes nothing against
the point, that Christ would not have his people lie under discouragements.



I Answer, Yea but they be: which appears by these considerations. 1. Because
sometimes they want that measure of comfort, and joy, that they should have,
and might have. Col. 2.2. That their hearts might be comforted. This was the
end of Paul's conflict. and John. 16.24. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your
joy may be full. This shows that their hearrs wanted comfort, and their joy was
not full. Therefore their hearts are troubled in Gospel times. 2. Because the
Apostle took order that the people of God and Saints might be comforted:
Sometimes by sending men of purpose to them to comfort them: which need not
have been, in case they had not wanted comfort. Ephesians. 6.22. Paul declares
that he sent Tychicus of purpose to them, among other things, To comfort their
hearts. And the same man counsels the Corinthians, 2 Corin. 13.11. to be of
good comfort. And he sent Tychicus to the Collossians, to comfort their hearts.
Col. 4.8. And he sent Timothy to the Thessalonians to comfort them concerning
their faith. 1 These. 3.2. And exhorts them, Chap. 4.18. to comfort one
another, and. 5.14. comfort the feeble minded. Sometimes by praying that they
might be comforted. 1 These. 2.17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ, and God even our
Father -- comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and work.
This labor and prayers might have been spared, if saints wanted no comfort in
Gospel times.


Uses of the point.
Now I come to Application.

1. Of Information.
Is it so, That Christ would not have his people lie under discouragements? Then
it informs us, that we may boldly say and conclude, that God is willing
Christians should abound with the consolations of God: It is the will of God
you should have peace, look up, rejoice, and have consolation: what I the
Saints make a question whether it be not Gods will they should lie under
sorrow, and when terrors upon themselves, and not take comfort of the good word
of God, when it is Gods mind they should believe, and be cheerful, and rejoice
in God, and not lie dejected, but look up with Spiritual triumph in the Lord.
But we cannot be persuaded of this lesson: and hence we think we can never
afflict our selves enough, and rake into our hearts, and study how to keep our
selves from the consolations of God. Take heed of this: for this does not
please God, that men should thus discourage themselves, and be turned out of
their right spiritual joy. Lam. 3.31. The Lord will not cast off for ever. But
though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude
of his mercies; for he does not afflict willingly, nor greive the children of
men. To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth, To turn aside the
right of a man before the face of the most high, To subvert a man in his cause,
the Lord approves not. verse. 32.33.34.35.36. All this is brought to this very
scope, to show it does not delight the Lord thou should be oppressed, and
afflicted: but rather rejoice, and take comfort: the Lord approves not of thy
subverting thy self in thy cause, no more then of another subverting three.

It is against God that we should afflict our selves.
Let me tell thee, It is utterly against God, that we should afflict our selves,
and languish under terrors, and affright our selves with the apprehensions of
wrath: All the reasons make it clear, that God would have his people joyful and
cheerful. Nehemiah. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is our strength. So that this is
against God in diverse respects. 1. It is against the nature of God, which is
filled up with Ingredients of goodness: it is eight to one. Exodus 34.6.7. I
will make all my goodness pass before thee, says the Lord; And he proclaimed,
The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant
in goodness and truth: keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
trangression and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty, etc. So that
this argues, that Gods nature in his dispensation toward us, is mildness,
goodness, sweetness. However equal in himself, yet toward us he has magnified
his word above all his Name. Psalm. 138.2. Now his word declares his
attributes, especially his attributes of grace. 2. It is against his offices;
look into the order of the three persons, and they all flow into this, let
poor-souls be comforted: Here is the Father the fountain set open; The sons
merit, that poor souls debt be paid: The Spirits distribution for the
supplying, comforting of poor souls: All their offices are exercised for the
effecting and carrying on of grace. 3. It is against Gods Covenant. For God
undertakes our part of the Covenant for us where we are short. Isa. 48.17. I am
the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, and leads thee in the way
that thou shall go. Jerem. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Hebr. 8. I will write
my law in their hearts, and put it in their inward parts: And I WILL be to them
a God, and they shall be to me a people: And they shall all know me from the
least of them to the greatest: for I WILL be merciful to your transgressions,
and your sins and iniquities I will remember no more. 4. It is against Gods
glory: take things rightly: He has pronounced the glory of his justice against
the unbelieving world already. John. 3.18. He that believes not is condemned
already. And has reserved the glory of his grace for his elect people; he
cannot have the glory of his grace from Reprobates: It is the glory of his
grace to save poor humbled sinners: I came not to call the righteous but
sinners to Repentance. For righteous men, grace cannot act upon them: It is no
grace to give a righteous man his wages. Again, to take a rebellious Sinner
into grace, and let him remain rebellious, is not grace: for Gods countenance
cannot look upon iniquity to approve of it. Hab. 1.
But grace is to show mercy to sinners; That is, poor, humble, repenting,
beleiving sinners, such as stoop for mercy; Now here it is grace; So that God
must either glorify his grace in poor humbled sinners, or have no glory of his
grace. Therefore it is against God. 5. It is against the work of God, his work
of creation in thee, and for thee. Isa. 65. But be you glad and rejoice for
ever in that which I create: for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her
people a joy. Man; God never gave thee a new heart, that thou should always
let it lie bleeding with distracting thoughts and discouragements, but to
rejoice. I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.


2. Use of reproof of those that discourage themselves.
The 2. Use is of Reproof.

And it is of those that discourage themselves, by harboring and entertaining
discouraging heartbreaking thoughts, as Christ disciples here; why do thoughts
arise in your hearts? And herein I shall endeavor to propound cases that are
troubles and discouragements to the hearts of many; And to answer to them, both
by way of reproof, and discovery of the mistakes which are the ground of such
troubles, and also to lay down some grounds of encouragement for troubled
souls; So that this use will be both of reproof, of instruction, and
encouragement.

And herein I shall mention some of those thoughts that do distract and
distemper the people of God; for it is impossible to speak to them all
particularly, they are so various, according to the various manner of Satan's
working, and laying his snares and engines to entangle poor souls; This tree of
discouraging complaints, has multitudes of branches and appearances, which
would be an endless work to go about to cut and prune them off one by one;
Therefore I shall speak to the root of them, and endeavor to cut of those
spurs that spreading into, and fastening upon a poor soul, feed all the branches
of this bitter tree, that makes the soul cry out there is death in the pot.

The first discouraging thought.
The first discouraging thought that troubles a godly soul.

Oh (says the soul) I am none of Christ's, none of Gods, I have no interest in
him; am not in covenant with him; cannot call him mine as others can do; I
cannot find the witness in me, testifying to my heart as others have done; God
seals not to my spirit as he has done to others; I pray for it, and long for
it, but cannot come by it; Therefore how can my heart choose but be troubled,
and thoughts arise in it?

To this case let me speak a word or two; Who told thee that thou wast none of
Gods? did God ever say so in his word, or did the spirit of God ever witness
such a thing to thee? No, thou can not say so; The Spirit of God witnesses
Adoption, and not destruction. And if Satan, or thy own heart tell thee so,
they are both deceitful.

And therefore,

A necessary observation.
First know, that to know ye are Gods children, or interested in him, is not the
first round in the Ladder of Christianity: The Prodigals course was not first
to know whether his father would receive him, and entertain him as a Son, or a
servant; but he resolves to go, and confess his sin and unworthiness, and cast
himself upon his fathers mercy. The Apostles in planting Churches, first
preached faith in Christ simply: But to believers, they pressed them on to
further assurance. 2 Pet. 1. verse. 10. Strive to make your calling and election
sure. A direction.
Therefore this do. If you know not your selves to be Gods, go and present your
selves as objects of the grace of Christ: 2 Cor. 1.
For all the promises are in Christ, as spokes fitted in the wheel; Therefore
says the Apostle, Romans 8.32. If God have given us Christ, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? I say, present your selves before God
as objects to be wrought upon; that God would make you sensible of sin, and
give you a longing desire after Christ. Romans 8.
For God has his spirit of bondage to rough-hew you, as well as his Spirit of
Adoption to pollish you. Now when God has thus fitted thee, go offer thy self
to Christ, and the promise, with Assurance: But what assurance? Not of thy
person, as if thou were already Gods; for it may be thou have not yet the Seal;
but assurance of the promise made to thy condition. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness; for they shall be filled. So that
if thou can not present thy self before God as a Son, present thy self before
the promise of God as a lost man: And so presenting thy self before God, with
relation to the truth and sweetness of the Promise, it may be, thou shall find
Faith flow out of thy heart to embrace the promise: for when the heart is
emptied, it is best fitted to receive free grace: for first God gives the Faith
of the promise, and then the good of the promise must be received by the faith
of the promise; I mean, it redounds to a man by virtue of that.

To the point then.

You say you are none of Gods.

To be Gods and know it.
I answ. The best state is for a man or Woman to be Gods, and know it.

2. The best next is to be Gods though he do not know it.

1. I say, The best state or Condition is for a man to be Gods, and know it
that he is so: Though not to know it does not cut up the mil-post, and
overthrow all; though it may indeed take off the sails: I mean, though it may
put a man to a stand, or make him go heavily; yet it does not prove his
condition to be desperate.

A man is Gods two ways.
A man is Gods two ways: By Election, and Calling. 1. By Election.
1. By Election. So a man may be a sheep not gathered; John 10.16. Other sheep I
have, which are not of this fold: them MVST I bring. So that they are not yet
brought, and yet sheep, which Christ must bring. Therefore ye cannot make this
conclusion, that ye are none of Gods by Election. 2. By Calling. 1. Cor. 1.1.
But, Secondly A man is Gods by Calling; And so he is a Saint: For we are Saints
by Calling. Now the purpose of Gods electing, is the calling of a man, and the
Evidencing of his Calling. And therefore our Calling is effectual and
powerful, because it is a calling accotding to Gods purpose, Romans 8.28. And
the purpose of God in Election, is evidenced to us by Calling; the first
dawning and evidence of this love of God to us, is this calling us to Christ. 2
Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. So that the
way of Evidence is from the second to the first. Now it is best for a man to
know himself Gods both ways: For though this assurance does nor make a man to
be a man in Christ; yet it makes him to be a lively man in Christ; for he is
made a man in Christ simply by believing, or taking Christ at the hands of God.


A double witness.
Now we are evidenced to be Gods both ways; by a double witness, that gives
evidence: The evidence of our Spirit, and the evidence of Gods Spirit. Romans
8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Sons
of God. Now this Calling is evidenced two ways. Regeneration.
1. By regeneration, or being born of God. Secondly by Adoption; whereby being
strangers, we are made Sons, by our incorporation into Christ. For both these
see John 1.12.13. As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
Sons of God: even to those that believe on his name. Sons of God, who are
those? Those that are born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God. Now observe, that the Sons of God by faith in
Christ, are Sons of God by the birth of the Spirit. Therefore see whether your
faith reach this, or no: They were born not of blood, nor by the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. For prove one, and prove the other.
Adoption.
Yet know, that Regeneration and Adoption are two distinct things: The one is
the act of God toward us; The other is the work of the Spirit in us. But the
Spirit of sanctification, and the Spirit of Adoption, are both one, but they
are two distinct acts: The Spirit of Sanctification works in us a new life;
The Spirit of Adoption may rather be called the evidence. So that prove one,
and prove the other. Prove that a man breathes, and by that you prove he
lives; yet there may be a more proper proof, as if he feel or see, etc. So
that this is it that I would say, That the witness of our spirit may properly
be said to attest our Sanctification, And the witness of Gods Spirit our
Adoption: And by both, our spirit and Gods Spirit, we are witnessed to be the
Sons of God.


How our Spirits witness our new birth.
But observe, that the witness of our spirits that witnesses our new birth, and
Sanctification, witnesses it by Water and Blood, 1. John 5.6.8. This is he
that came by water and Blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water only, but by
water and Blood; And it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the spirit
is truth. And there are three that bear witness on earth, the Spirit, and
water, and blood, and these three agree in one. And it is by virtue of these
two, that our spirits do attest and witness that we are the Sons of God. For
blood, and water, all the Scripture over are said to purge and cleanse, as in
all the Legal Types: yet God gives to them an office of witnessing. Properly
they purge; But they Witness by their work of purging: This BLOOD, the blood of
Christ, purges away the guilt of Sin, as it binds a man over to hell and
damnation; This Water, the Sanctifying Spirit of Christ, purges away the love
of Sin as it has Dominion. Ezekiel. 36.25.26.27.
Of both these the conscience of a regenerate man comes to be sensible in
himself: The sense of Blood purging by pacifying of his conscience, that he
cannot but look upon God with a conscience full of tranquillity: And the water
purging by Sanctifyng him, to make him walk with God, out of the power of sin.
Now the witness of a man's spirit witnesses that he is translated out of the
guilt of sin, and power of sin, and then he is born again.





And then if you consider the respect, or aim, or end the new creature moves
to; That is, In God, for God, and to God, that he may be glorified. Romans 11.
ult. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things; All things that
are of him, through him, tend to him. Consider all these together, that they be
in you, the power of Moving, how you are moved, By Faith and Love: And the end
you aim at, to glorify God: And it makes a good Testimony and witness, that ye
are the Sons of God.

The witness of Gods Spirit.
Now for the Testimony of Gods Spirit, the Spirit of Adoption, If we shall speak
distinctly of it from our spirits; for the spirit, and water, and blood are
distinct, though they agree in one. 1 John 5.8. Now if you consider them
distinct, I conceive then, the Spirit of God witnesses by an immediate
impression upon the Soul, representing to the soul and conscience, making you
understand and know that you are the Sons of God, and heirs of God and Christ:
Which Spirit of testimony is gotten by faith in Christ, by viewing, eying, and
surveying Christ. For because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, whereby you cry Abba, Father. Gal. 4.6. Whose office
is to attest ye are Christ's. So that here the office of faith is to look upon
Christ, and eye Christ, that so we may receive the seal: For a man must be a
believer, else he cannot be a son; but being a believer and so a Son, then
comes the Spirit and witnesses the same.

Object. But this witness you speak of now, this immeditate testimony may
deceive also; It may be some false fire cast in by the Devil, as well as the
other.

Answ. The witness of the Spirit of God, as it is the Spirit of God, will
always clear it self by this; That in the witness it gives to a soul, it
always advances God and Christ in the eye of the Soul; and it always ripens
and nourishes sanctifying graces in the soul, and makes them go glib, like oil
to the wheels: It makes our Faith, Love, Patience, Humility, Hope,
Self-denial, Joy, etc. whereby we walk with God, as green and flourishing, as
flowers in the spring, or as corn fields after a sweet shower.

Note.
Bastard-illusions of the Devil do always tend to bastardends, and do always
bring forth bastard-effects: such as lift up a man with pride, or boulster them
up to maintain error either in Life or Doctrine. But this knowledge of a man's
self to be Gods, reaches forth to God, and acts his spiritual habits
sweetly, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know (says Paul) that if this earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands eternal in the heavens, we know it, says he; And what effect had this
upon their Spirits? Why see, verse. 9. Wherefore we labor that whether present
or absent, we may be accepted of him. This is far from that opinion, that a
man's knowing himself to be Gods, works security; no, this makes a man's heart
obey God as a Son. And be sure the Devil in his counterfeit workings and
witnessings, will never draw the soul to God, to aim at him, but still to
center in himself, or to turn aside to error or sin. And this is to fight
against himself, and overthrow his own Kingdom, which he will never do.

A caveat.
But now take heed of thinking your selves to be Gods when you are not; for
there is the danger, to conceit your selves to be Gods when you are not.

Now ye may go long in this by reason of some counterfeit workings; by reason
of some Convictions, or joy, or common receiving of Christ, ye may take your
selves to be Gods when you are not. But here you may bewray your selves if you
will but search. For 1. you may perform duties merely to maintain your signs:
for a man may keep a course in a form of godliness to maintain his reputation
with himself, to maintain his signs; that the heart shall not easily tax them
to be rotten, When a man has not his end to enjoy, and walk with God, and so
to be Gods. 2. He may bewray himself by his desires after the fruits of the
Spirit; they may be earnest, and if these desires were not in him he could not
maintain his signs. To desire graces as they are beneficial to me, and not for
the service of them, that I may come near to God, and seek them for him, rather
then for my self, this is deceitful. I fear the reason why God gives not
assurance to many a man that seeks long, and earnestly, is, because a man seeks
for himself, and not for God; Like the Be, that goes into the field to seek
honey to eat, but brings it not into the Masters hive.


A man may be Gods, and not discern it.
Secondly, A man may be Gods, and not discern it: for these are distinct. Ephesians.
1.13. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
of promise. Mark, after ye believed, ye were sealed. 1 John 5.13. These things
have I written to you that believe on the Name of the Son of God, that ye may
know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son
of God. Mark the speech here; I have written unto you that do believe -- that
ye may believe. What Is this? Why, you that believe with a faith of Adherence,
that ye may come to assurance (which yet ye want) that ye may KNOW that ye have
eternal life. Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts, whereby ye cry Abba Father. First ye are Sons, and
afterward cry Abba Father, by the Spirit. The being of a man in Christ, goes
before his knowing he is so in order of nature; for a thing must be, before I
can know it; else I know a lie. A Child must be the child of such a man before
he knows he is so: So it is in our spiritual relation. Therefore ye cannot
conclude ye are none of Gods, because you want assurance for the present: for
ye may be Gods and know it not.

Object. But some may say, This is to preach liberty, for every man may say so.

Answ. I answer, not so; For this which is in such a child of God as does not
know it by clear evidence, yet it is working, and differs him from all others
in the world. The seed of God has a twofold work in such a one. 1. It makes
him an obedient man. Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his servants; that walks in darkness, and has no light?
Mark, A child of God, though he be in the dark, yet he fears the Lord, and
obeys. That though he knows not himself to be Gods, yet he would walk with God
in every duty; though he have chains and fetters oftentimes to hinder him; yet
in every duty there is a principle and tie of obedience, yea, and such as is
mixed with Love. For he sees God lovely, and that draws his affections to him,
and makes him willing to serve him, though he be not sure of him. 2. Though
such a soul do not discern it self to be Gods, yet it is acccompanied with
earnest longings, and earnest seekings of the manifestation of his face to him:
So that though he cannot yet make sure his Calling and Election; yet he gives
all diligence to make it sure, as Peter speaks: 2 Pet. 1.
and that because he would be more useful to God. Herein a true Christian
differs from all the idle and neuter professors in the world.


Why a man may be Gods, and not know it.
Now a man may be Gods, and not know it, for these causes. 1. Because he is in
forming and fashioning for God; for Gods Spirit that dwells in man, makes
ready the house before he manifests his abode there: So that now he may be
under Gods hand in forming him, and yet not know his interest in him for the
present. 2. This not knowing may be in a man formed, regenerated; by reason he
may be, 1. Of a cavilling spirit, and see such infirmities in himself as he
thinks are not accompanied with the Spirit of grace. And secondly by mistaking;
when the poor soul looks upon sins of intrusion, as sins of admission, and
dominion. Or thirdly, because he wants that perfection that he would or should
have; And by looking upon some places of Scripture he sees he wants that which
the Scripture calls him to; Now in his apprehension he is not a son of God, but
this cannot conclude him so.




Secondly.

The second troublesome thought.
Another thought or doubt that rises in the heart, which troubles the poor
soul, as the text speaks, is, That Christ has left him, cast him off, will not
show him any more mercy, nor come again to him: indeed it has felt Christ
sweet, and comfortable; those were happy days; But now (alas) Christ is gone,
and he fears he will never come again. And this was in the disciples in some
measure; as appears by the plaster to the sore, administered by the
Soul-Physitian. It is I, says Christ. And in another place, Let not your heart
be troubled, John. 14.1. And verse. 3. I will come again and take you to my
self, that where I am, there ye may be also. And verse. 18. I will not leave you
comfortless: How will that appear? Why, I will come to you So John. 16.4.5.6.
He shows that the thought of his absence filled their hearts with sorrow. The
hiding of Gods face troubles the poor soul extremely. Job 34.29. If he give
peace, who then can make trouble? but if he hide himself, who then can behold
him? etc. Psalm. 30.6. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. So says
David, Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? how long will thou hide thy face from me? how long shall I take counsel in my soul, having
sorrow in my heart daily? The apprehension that God has hidden his face, fills
the soul with consultations and distempers; for those that do afflict
themselves, oftentimes harp upon this string, they are forlorn, and forsaken;
like the Stranger, Isa. 56.3. The Lord has utterly separated me from his
people. And like the Eunuch, I am a dry tree. Why so? why the spirit is so
dead, and so unwildy in holy duties, so loose, and base, he can bring his heart
to nothing; Sure God has left him: I am a dry tree, says the Eunuch, no sap
of grace, all comfort is gone; And thus the poor soul cries out.

To speak to this case, first I will reprove this. And secondly confute it.

This case spoken to, 1. By way of reproof.
1. Let me reprove it. 1. Why should thou be more cruel to thy self then God
is, challenge thy self when God does not? Zach. 4.10. Who has despised the day
of small things? God does not. Because thou art weak, to conclude thou have
nothing, this argues but a heady, peevish spirit. Psalm. 31.22. I said in my
haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes: Nevertheless, thou heardest the
voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee. This conclusion was his
headiness and haste you see. 2. Consider, thou have enough to do to nourish thy
heart against just sorrow and fear: Thou needst not nourish unnecessary fears.
Christ says, Sufficient to the day is the sorrow of it; thou had not need
add more. Man. 6.
Do thou think conscience of sin is not matter enough, but thou must add want
of comfort to it? take heed. 3. Check thy self, as the Prophet, Psalm. 42. Why
art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? For by
entertaining these discouragements, thou laist a block against thy own mercy,
and where will thou have cure? God will not work peace, but by the co-working
and accepting of thy own conscience: Therefore herein thou art cruel, like the
Ostrich, and worse then the Sea calf. 4. Take heed: Thou may sink thy spirits
so low, that thou may lose thy self in sorrow. Extreme passion takes away
sense, that is certain: And as a man may be drowned, buried, lost in pleasure,
so in sorrow. Isa. 38.15. I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of
my soul. See how Hezekiah was lost in discouragement; take heed that you do not
unfit your selves for spiritual joy, when God shall send it.


2. By way of confutation.
Secondly Let me confute thee.

Thou say I am cast off, I have no grace of God, no hope of mercy: and here
thy soul is tossed, and clouds over-shadow, that rise thick one after another.
Thou mistakest thy self.

1. Consider the indissolvible nature of the love of God; man, thou can not
break it. Hos. 2.19.20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea, I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and
thou shall know the Lord. And mark, the Lord says, not in THY loving kindness;
But MY loving kindness, etc. While God has any of these, he cannot break. So
Romans 4.16. The promise is sure to all the seed. So that we cannot shake our
selves out of the state of salvation, because the business is acted in God, and
built, and stablished in him. 2. Consider, that as Gods grace is mutual, so
Gods judgments are mutual: If ever he choose thee, he gives thee a heart to
choose him: And if he loath thee, he leaves thee to a heart to loath him. Zach.
11.8. My soul loathed them, (says God) and their soul also abhorred me. So
that if thou have not cast God off, and say that man shall not rule over me;
If thou continue with God in duty, he has not yet cast thee off; For he that
God casts off, frets and fumes against the Commandment, whereas the Soul that
is humbled, admires the Commandment, but comes short of it, as Paul, Romans 7.
The Commandment is holy, and just, and good; though he came short in walking up
to it. 3. Consider, God takes on by casting off; why then do thou say thou
art cast off? Gods death is a way to life; I mean, that God gives thee over to
death on this fashion. Can thou say, I am cast off from God? why this very
complaint shows thou art taken on. For desertion is a part of Gods
discipline. Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge
their iniquity, and seek my face. God casts off, that they may cleave to him.
1. Sam. 14.14. God respects not any person; yet does he devise means that his
banished be not expelled from him. The woman sent by Joab to David to speak to
him about the bringing Absalom back, she pleads it from Gods manner of dealing
with his banished; which is first to banish a poor soul, and then devise means
to bring them back again to him. So that if this be Gods discipline, and Christ
give thee up to languish under terrors and fears, and so to hold thee under
holiness; Then thou concludest wrong, that therefore God will cast thee off. 4.
Consider, affliction of spirit may rise from other causes, and not because I am
cast off of God. And God has gracious ends in hiding himself from a soul, and
not the deserting, or utter forsaking of a soul. In what respect a man may say
he has no grace.
1. Thou may say thou have no grace in comparison of other men, because thou
have the same means, and have not so much grace, (as thou conceivest) must thou
therefore say thou have no grace? What if they have more need of it? It may be
they may be of a more perverse spirit, more proud, stubborn, or selfish, more
apt to run aside from God; And so have need of more; Nay, it may be they have
more temptations in the way of their callings, or more oppositions from carnal
friends, or enemies then thou have. 2. Thou may say thou have no grace in
regard of sutableness to the means thou have had; as Hebr. 5,12. For whereas
for the time you ought to have been teachers, ye have need that one teach you
again which be the first principles of the Oracles of God: And are become such
as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. When thou complainest I have had
a great deal of means, and am not grown under it suitable to the means I have
had; This is a good trouble; for herein is thy spirit poor; And spiritual
poverty never casts thee off from God. 3 Thou may complain thou have no grace
in respect of thy desires and purpose of heart: Thou have over bidden thy self
man, and that troubles thee. I did hope to have gotten further in Gods ways by
this time then I have done; To have over-mastered such a lust; To have had more
self-denial; To have glorified God better in my place; I can get my heart to
nothing: I had hoped I should have been better content with crosses, and born
affliction with more patience then I do. Now thus to be afflicted, is
acceptable to God. Suppose a weak sickly child should sit weeping in the
chimney corner, and being asked what aild it? it should answer, why I had hoped
by this time to have done my father better service, and to have been more
useful to him: He is tender of me, and I can do nothing in requital of his love
again: Now the father of this child seeing its affection, takes it as kindly as
if it did perform what it desires. So it is with God; 2. Cor. 8.12. If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and not
according to what he has not. So that now for this we must not judge our
selves cast off of God: God would not have us lie for his glory. Romans 3.7.8.
nor our salvation; much less for damnation.

Again, consider what ends the Lord has in keeping close his countenance, and
hiding his face sometimes from a soul that is dear to him. Gods ends in hiding
his face from a soul.
1. To bring such a soul to self examination, to look narrowly into their own
hearts, and to search out some corruption which it may be they do not see for
the present. And it is a great benefit to have discovery made of those traitors
that lie lurking within, that a man sees not; And this God usually brings the
soul to by hiding his countenance. Psalm. 77. When the spirit of the Psalmist
was overwhelmed, and the thought of God troubled him, and his soul refused to
be comforted, Ard he cried unto God, and still his sore ran in the night, and
ceased not, and his eyes were held waking, and he was so troubled tha he could
not speak; as ver. 1.2.3.4. Now says he in the 6. verse. I commune with mine
own heart, and my spirit made diligent SEARCH. Now he falls a Searching what
the matter was; And inquires, will the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be
favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? and does his promise fail
for evermore? has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his
tender mercies? Selah. Mark here, upon serious search he durst not tax God, nor
his mercy, nor promise: But mark, he finds it out now where it was, ver. 10.
And I said, This is my infirmity. By this means he finds out some weakness in
the soul, which before he saw not. So that this was beneficial to him; for God
would have no sin harbor and lurk in the souls of his Saints. 2. By this means
the Lord brings a man or woman to the confession of sin: And we are all proud
by nature, and are loath to come to acknowledge our sins: Now the Scripture
says, He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. And if we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us of all unrighteousness. Now
God in mercy to a soul (when he sees they are willing to connive and wink at
some beloved sin which they would favor, and are ready to say as David, deal
gently with the young man Absalom; or as Naaman, The Lord be merciful to thy
servant concerning this thing;) withdraws his face, to show them his dislike
against every sin, and to bring them to a free and willing confession of it. So
it was with David, Psalm. 32.3.4.5. While I kept silence (that is from
acknowledging my sin) my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long;
for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture was turned into the
drought of summer. Selah. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid: I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. So Hosea. 5.15. I will go and return
to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face. Till then
(says God) I will hide my face. 3. God sometimes hides his face that his
people might see that they are nothing in and of themselves: But that all their
sufficiency is of God: That they may see their own emptiness, that they can do
nothing, bear nothing, manage nothing to Gods glory without a special
assistance from God; That they may learn to deny themselves, and live upon him
alone. Isa. 57.17. I hid me, and was wroth: (says the Lord) and he went on
frowardly in the way of his heart. When God hides himself, then the frowardness
of the heart appears. So hereby the servants of God are kept humble, from self
glorying or boasting. 4. Sometimes the Lord by the hiding of his countenance,
tries the graces of his spirit in his servants, that it may appear to them
that they are sound right works. As sometimes he tries their faith by this
means, Isa. 50.10.11. Is there any among you that fears the Lord, that
obeys the voice of his servants, that walks in darkness, and has no light?
Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. To try if they
will hold and hang upon him, and follow him, though he frown upon them, as the
woman of Canaan did, That he may say to them at last, as he did to her, great
is thy faith. And this will be a sweet satisfaction to them, when they come to
see that though they saw not Gods face, yet they found his grace to enable them
to wait upon him in dark times. It is a precious thing to have faith tried. 1
Pet. 1.7. and this way God tries it. Again, hereby God tries the sincerity of
your love to him. As, Cant. 5.6.7.8 When Christ had withdrawn himself from his
spouse, she falls sick of love; it works; she could not be quiet, nor satisfied
without him; her affection runs out after him, though she wanted the discovery
of him, and this affection of hers puts her upon a constant seeking of him: as
Cant. 3.1.2. By night upon my bed I sought him whom my soul loved; I sought
him, but I found him not. I will rise now and go about the city -- and seek him
whom my soul loves; etc. It tries their sincerity, whether they will stick
close to his work, though they see no reward; as that place Isa. 50.10.11.
Whether they will fear the Lord, and obey him, though he hide himself. 5.
Sometimes the Lord does it, to bring thee to the sight of thy Negligence,
deadness, dullness, Security, Sencelesness, that you are apt to slip into: And
to make thee see thy unkind dealing with him; that putst him off with idle
excuses for self ends, when he would have manifested himself. So Cant. 5. When
Christ had withdrawn himself, then she comes to remember how unkind she was to
let him call, and beg for admittance, and wait till his head was filled with
the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night. She could make excuses when
he was so near her: I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have
washed my feet, how shall I defile them? But when he was gone, then she
remembers her slothfulness with sorrow; and then she confesses her
Negligence, my soul failed when he spoke: verse. 6. As if she had said, My heart
smote me: I knew it was he, yet this sleepy spirit of mine overcame me, and now
I must smart for it. 6. That the Soul might prize him the more when he
manifests himself again to the soul, that there might be the sweeter embraces
between him and the soul; As it is with a perverse child, the mother sometimes
is fain to hide her self from it, and call for the Bugbear to take it, that it
may be quiet and more esteem of the mother when it has her again. The child
cries out as if she were quite gone: but she stands nearer it then it is aware
of; she intends not to forsake it. So the people of God in their dark times
greatly mistake, to say God has utterly forsaken them, Isa. 49.13.14. Sion
said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Here is the
poor Discouraged souls conclusion: But what says the Answer of God to it? Can
a woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion upon the
son of her womb? Yea they may: yet will not I forget thee says the Lord. When
we look upon the countenance of God, as we do upon the Sun shining every day as
a common thing, then he clouds himself from us, that we may learn to set an
higher rate upon it; and that there may be more endeared imbracings when we
meet with the Lord again. Cant 3.4. After she had sought for her beloved, and
mist of him, at last says she, I found him Whom my soul loves; and how was
she affected then? Oh says she, I held him, and would not let him go, etc.
Then she Clings to him with more delight and affection then ever. So the bowels
of the Lord (as I may so speak) do more yearn upon a poor soul after his
withdrawings then ever, as Isa. 54.6,7,8. The Lord has called thee, as a woman
forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused,
says thy God. This is a sad time; But now mark how he makes up for this, For a
SMALL moment have I forsaken thee, But with GREAT MERCYES I will gather thee.
In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. 7. The Lord
hides himself sometimes from a poor soul for the regulating of the prayers and
desires of his people: Many times we are begging and crying for things of
lesser consequence, and our minds are much upon the serving of self; Now God
would have us to seek him, and his face and countenance as the chiefest thing:
Therefore sometimes withdrawes that he may draw up our prayers higher, and put
our affections into better order then they were. Hos. 5.15. I will go, and
return to my place till they -- seek my face: In their affliction they will
seek me early. Now it is Gods command to seek his Face evermore. Psalm. 105.4.
8. That his Excellency, Sweetness, Beauty, Loveliness, might be set forth by
those that want the manifestations of his countenance, unto others that take
notice of their distempered sad condition, that they may be moved also to seek
after his discoveries. God is pleased by this means sometimes to sweeten
himself to others that stand by, and behold the agony poor souls are in for
want of his love manifested to them: And to stir up their Spirits to look after
him, He is pleased to help such distressed men to preach him forth sweetly for
the winning of others to him. This you may see at large Cant. 5. The spouse
after she was raised from her drousiness, and sees Christ was gone, she is
extremely troubled; Sick of love, as verse. 8. Whereupon the daughters of
Jerusalem inquire, what is thy beloved more then another beloved, O thou
fairest among women? What is thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou
do so charge us? What is, He a Nonesuch? may not another serve thy turn as
well as he? What is in him more then is in another? See now, what glorious
apprehensions she had of him now in his absence; And how she preaches him unto
them to the affecting of their hearts; verse. 10. etc. My beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand; his head is as the most fine gold, etc.
And so she goes on in a glorious commendation of him to the end of the Chapter;
And verse. ult. says she, He is altogether lovely, or all delights; This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. See now, how this
takes upon their Spirits, Chap. 6.1. Whether is thy beloved gone, O thou
fairest among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him
with thee. Mark how his hiding himself from his spouse, conduces to the
calling of other poor souls to the seeking after Christ: When they see them
mourning, and grieving, and complaining, and cannot rest without him, thinks
the poor soul there is some excellency in him that we see not; we will
certainly go along to seek him with these poor souls; he is worth seeking
after: And so it sets them a flame after him also.


The third thought is, when the Soul complains it has none of the Spirit.
Thirdly.

The third Thought that rises in the heart, to trouble the soul, and perplex
it, is this: I have none of the Spirit of God. Now Christ commands John 4. To
worship God in the spirit. And Gal. 5.16. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh; and Jude 20. Praying in the holy ghost. But how
should I do this, that have not the Spirit? feel him not working, nor
quickening, nor comforting me: my heart is so dead, and loose, and weary in
duty, never carried up to heaven; how can I but be troubled? When you are
carried with a fiery Chariot into heaven, then you think you have the spirit:
But when a man moves in a lower Region, he thinks he has it not.

I shall speak to this 1. Generally. 2. More Particularly.

General observations to this case.
Generally thus. 1. That it is a very good thing to have the Spirit, or to miss
it. As in hearing the word, in prayer, conference, Meditation, etc. Either to
feel a man has it, or to feel he wants it. And the worst of these is better
then to rest in a duty shaped out of your own Brain, consisting in an empty
sound of expressions and words. For ye must take heed ye do not content your
selves with shadows and phrases, without the Spirit; For God does not know the
meaning of such duties. Romans 8. 2. Consider, the spirit has a manifold work in
the hearts of the children of God. Now a man cannot reason from the want of
such a fruit of the Spirit, as joy, or peace, etc. that therefore he has not
the Spirit. Ye cannot reason thus, A man does not Laugh, Therefore he does not
Live. Weeping is a sign of life as well as laughter. So it is in this Case; The
sense of sin may argue the Spirit of God to be in you, as well as the feeling
of Joy. Zach. 12 10. I will pour upon them the SPIRIT of grace, and the Spirit
of supplications; And they shall look upon me whom they have peirced, and shall
MOVRN for him, as one mourns for his only Son: And be in BITTERNESS, etc. The
Spirit, is a Spirit of variety, 1 Cor. 12. Giving to one this gift, to another
that gift: to one Humility, Poverty of spirit, Self denial, Godly sorrow: to
another Zeal, and Courage, and Joy etc. And so it is oftentimes in the same
man, sometimes it is tuning his godly sorrow, sometimes his joy, sometimes his
fear, etc. And this is one ground of the variety of conditions the Saints are
in, as David, sometimes ye find him singing on the uppermost branch of the
tree, and sometimes hanging his wing in the bottom of the hedge; Sometimes
calling upon himself to praise the Lord seven times a day: Psalm. 119.164.
And sometimes crying out that he was cast out of Gods sight. Psalm. 31.22.
So Job sometimes professing, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him; Job.
13.15.
And sometimes changing his note; If I had called and he had answered me, yet I
would not believe that he had hearkened to my voice. Job. 9.16.
The Church spoken of in the Lamentations, Sometimes lamenting, my strength and
my HOPE is perished from the Lord; Lam. 3.18.22.
and sometimes again confessing I have HOPE, Paul had the spirit as well in his
buffetings, as in his rejoycings. And David, when he prayed restore to me the
joy of thy salvation, as when he felt it. Psalm. 51.
The Spirit led Christ to be tempted, as well as supported him, and brought him
back into Galilee: Luke 4.1. etc. A man may have the spirit in the Fight, as
well as in the Triumph. He has the spirit that sows to the spirit in Tears,
as well as he that reaps in joy. Psalm. 126.5.6.
Therefore you may be mistaken in saying you have not the spirit, seeing it
works so variously. 3. This spirit may exercise it self in thee in duties one
way, though it be not felt but another way: as in prayer, sometimes tuning thy
love, sometimes thy hatred, sometimes thy humility, sometimes thy joy.
Therefore do not wrong the spirit of God and say it is from home, because you
feel not joy. Do not say it is idle; for it may be working in another room,
tuning another grace. If a man should always touch one key, he should never
play various tunes. Now our hearts are Gods Harps. Rev. 14.2. and 15.2. And
therefore if God should not tune them variously, there would be no melody. And
if the spirit be not setting up a candle in thee, it may be scouring of a
candle-stick: I mean, If it be not filling thy heart with joy, it may be
preparing thy heart for joy. 4. There may be workings of the spirit in the
heart, and yet ye may not perceive it is the working of the spirit. As in a
piece of blunt money, that ye can see no mark upon, you will say, by the
bigness it should be such a piece, six pence, or a nine-pence, but I can see
nothing upon it. So there may be workings of the spirit that are not seen for
the present: and yet afterward, when the spirit works another way, then thou
may perceive that this was of the spirit. Luke 24.
The disciples that went to Emmaus, knew not Christ while he was opening the
Scriptures to them, which was the likeliest time; yet they knew him in breaking
bread: And then they could call to mind the burning of their hearts by the
way. Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked to us by the way, and
opened to us the Scriptures? ver. 32.
just as it is in our businesses in the world, many secret providence, which a
man does not see to be a providence, till after by some other issue he calls it
to mind, and sees it a providence: So God has his glory at last. As Zaccheus
climbing up into the figtree, what could a man pick out of it? till afterward
that Christ tells him he must abide at his house: then it appeared to be a
providence. So in the Disciples being so importunate with Christ to stay, when
he made as if he would have gone further, they saw nothing in it for the
present: but afterward when Christ was discovered to them, then they saw it was
of God. These were works of the spirit, as the event did show: But they saw
them not for the present. till the further work of the spirit did manifest
them: Then they saw all these to have been of the spirit. So if a man have a
work in his heart, that he can make little of: I would counsel that man to
follow on, to see what will come of it afterward: for it may be after some
other work of the spirit he shall perceive it, though for the present he see it
not.


Particulars how to discern the spirit in duties.
Now for particular discerning of the spirit in duty. 1. Do thou find thy
heart fashioned, or in fashioning, to a personal love of Christ, a personal
union with Christ himself? The Spirit of God is the Factor for Christ, the
Spokesman between Christ and the heart, to treat the marriage. So that herein
the Spirit presents Christ as all fair, the chiefest among ten thousand as Can.
5. His love, and reign, and Kingdom is presented to thee in a glorious show.
Now with this, do thou find thy heart in fashioning to a desire of Union to
consent to marry with such a Husband? I say to a personal love, not of his
benefits, but him first, and then to all his benefits? To take him as God gives
him, Romans 8.32. If God have given us his son, how shall he not also with him
freely give us all things? When he is such an object, that thou can leave
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Liberty, Life, and all for his sake. At first
there may be self-love; but in time, every spiritual man will rise to a
personal love of Christ himself, and not only his benefits.

2. Does thy heart and the word, thy heart and thy petitions go together, and
comply: so that thou art taken, and much affected with the sweetness of Christ?
And some sentence of Scripture or prayer that carries thee out of thy self,
when thy heart complies with it suddenly, and strangely: I mean, art thou
wonderfully ravished, and carried out of thy self desires and ends, to God and
for God? It argues the spirit. 3. Are there any graces set a work evengelically
in thy heart; Love, Humility, Sincerity, or the like? That is, If thy Faith or
love be set a work by the love of God to thee: Does the fresh presentings of
the love of Christ to thee in thy duties, freshen thy love to him, and thy
graces in thy heart? This is an Argument of the Spirit; When our hearts give
Echo to Gods voice. Psalm. 27.8. When thou saidest seek ye my face: My heart
answered, Thy face Lord will I seek. This was the Spirit of God that thus sets
the heart a work to Answer to Gods voice. 4. Are your hearts moved from the
feeling of the experience of the love of Christ, to give your selves to Christ
again in duty? This is the Spirit of God. For the heart cannot be carried
directly to Christ for Christ, but by the Spirit of Christ. 2 Cor. 12.9.10. And
he said, my grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in
weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine infirmities, that
the power of Christ might rest upon me. Therefore I take pleasure in
Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for
Christ's sake: See here is doing or undergoing any thing for Christ. And mark
from what ground, even from experience; for when I am weak, then am I strong.
5. Observe the manner of the combat, which the heart has against the world, or
the flesh, or any beloved sin. There may be a Combat in wicked men, between
sin, and shame; Between conscience, and fear of Hell; between desire, and fear:
Therefore mark, when sin draws thee, with what weapons thou fightest against
sin. Is it the love of God that makes thee thou will not sin? Do thou say I
will not because I love God? is thy heart drawn to God Evangelically? Here is
the Spirit lusting against the flesh: not conscience against sin. The manner of
the fight, shows whose the fight is: For the Spirit of God causes a man to set
the love of God, and the promise of God, as the only Arrow against sin. Here it
is evidenced to be the Spirit. 6. A man may know the Spirit by the discovery of
sin: for the Spirit may evidence it self in an humble discovery of sin, as well
as joy, in working the heart to self loathing. It discovers spiritual sins, bye
and base aims and ends; secret, and by respects, when a man looks asquint from
God; secret and by turnings of the heart, that never came into the eye of the
world. I say, the discovery of sin is an excellent work of the Spirit. Ezekiel.
36.31. I will pour upon them my Spirit, (says the Lord) And what then? Then
shall ye remember your ways and your doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and your abominations.
To discover sins so far as they are a detestation to the heart; so far as they
are a bar to the reigning of Christ.


The fourth troublesome thought is a man's questioning the truth of his
conversion.
The fourth thought that rises in the heart, and troubles it, is this, whether
his translation into the state of grace be in truth or no? whether he has the
sound work of regeneration or no? For (says the heart) there are many
semblances and shadows of grace; True faith, and false; True love, and false;
like on another: false Samuels, ni Samuels mantle. And if a man seriously weigh
himself, his good against his bad; His sanctification, against his corruptions;
His obedience against his rebellions, and blemishes; his faith, with his
distrust; and his new work, with the old man remaining. If he weigh this, he
sticks, and cannot tell which is the heavier in the balance: But as
presumption and pride makes a man think the best of himself; so many times when
a Godly man is humbled (especially when a grain of Melancholy is mixed with it)
it makes him think the worst of himself; And hereupon a Godly man many-times
questions himself, and thinks alls naught with him; And so he questions whether
his grace be grace or no; And now his heart is troubled, and doubts and
discouragements rise in it.

Grounds of this thought
Now the ground of these discouragements in this kind are such things as these.
1. He says, He cannot say nor see, That he was brought in to God at the first
by any remarkable work of Humiliation, or by any such conversion as will
witness to it self by any hand of God as some others have been: Therefore he
begins to Question his graces. 2. He finds some peculiar sins and corruptions,
that has hung upon him long, and has haunted him a long time; whither they be
omissions, looseness of heart, etc. that has haunted him a long time: And hence
he is troubled, and Questions his conversion. 3. He has Discovered new sins
and corruptions which before he did not observe, after a long time in the state
of grace; And finds new ones which he did not know of: And he knows not but
there may be more behind. And so fear arises. 4. He finds his heart many times
loose in spiritual duties, the thoughts thereof roaring and ranging this way
and that way, when his heart should be kept to God: By-thoughts come thick upon
him as motes in the Sun, and he is as sure to be haunted with them, as to find
his shadow in the Sun. And hence he is troubled. 5. He does not find that
growth in the Inward marrow of Religion that should be in him answerable to his
time and means of knowledge. For though he grant he has grown in Knowledge,
and some external parts and gifts, as utterance, and the gifts of Prayer, and
Prophecy etc. yet he finds not that he is grown in Spirit, and inward
acquaintance with Christ. 6 He finds the exercise of his graces, Faith, Love,
Patience, etc. failing sometimes when he has most need of them: And that the
Disposition of his heart in the cause of God sometimes fails, comes short of
that activity that should be in it: And the exercises of his graces in putting
forth, are many-times stained. 7. He cannot attain to something that he sees in
other men, that peradventure were after him in Christ, and are inferior in
gifts: yet he cannot attain to that life of Grace he sees in them, nor to that
Humility, nor Love, nor desire, nor resoluteness for truth, nor self-denial,
nor Heavenly-mindedness; And hence he fears his condition. 8. He finds he
enjoyes God least many times when he sets himself the best about it, and goes
about to fit his Soul to entertain Christ, as in fasting, etc. 9. He has hurt
the Cause of God, when God has brought him upon the stage to have done
something for God: perhaps to have suffered for God; And upon this, questions
the truth of his grace. 10. He has oftentimes relapsed it into the same sin
which formerly he has pursued with particular sorrow and grief; And prayed and
resolved against it; and this troubles him. 11. He has grieved the Spirit, and
neglected Christ for trifles, for small matters, things of the world, vain
pleasures, etc. 12. Lastly, He has found his heart apt to take liberty, and to
be loose, when Occasion and opportunity has suited to him: when he might be
secret from the eye of man, close, and has had an opportunity to enjoy his
self-pleasure, he has found his heart loose. And from such like grounds as
these, he is many-times cast into reasonings, and Questioning the truth of his
state, whether his conversion were ever right, and so he is troubled.


How to setle a man oppressed with this thought.
Now for the settling of a man's state that is thus encumbered; And to cut of all
Questions and disputes, which the heart of man may breed: What if there may be
a shorter course taken for the settling of a man's heart, then to stand weighing
of a man's Graces and corruptions together? for though the least piece of money
has some distinct stamp upon it, that a man may know it from a Counter; And
every grace in a man's soul has some mark of truth upon it; Yet I say, what if
there be another course, that a Christian may take, when his own heart raises
storms in this manner, to take another course to clear it from such Rocks and
Shelvs?

And that is,

General propositions tending to the peace of such a soul.
In these Cases, And in all these Cases, to go immediately to Christ by faith;
And to cast your selves upon him; yea to cast away your selves upon him, not so
much as questioning what shall become of you; but to go out immediately to him.
Yea, I say, though your hearts be full of deceit and Hypocrisy; yet I would go
out for all this, and intrude upon Christ (as I may say) by an impudent kind of
believing: and say thus;

Lord, If my graces give me no comfort, Christ shall; And say thus, God has
laid in Sion for a Foundation a Stone, a tried stone, a precious Corner stone,
a sure Foundation. Isa. 28.16. And he that believes on him, shall not be
confounded. 1 Pet. 2.6.

Now there must be a course taken to keep the heart from wrangling: For some
may say, what is this to believe in a Stone?

That is, to be in, and to be by faith built upon Christ; And by faith to lie
fast in the fast lieing of this Stone: And in the fast levelling and laying of
this stone, would I lie fast. Friends, If your Graces yield you but a little
comfort; then presently fly to Christ's person, and personal offices: I would
have you fly from your sins to Christ, and I would have you fly from your
graces to Christ too; For he is the Boat to receive you both from damning sins,
and imperfect graces; for the Alsufficiency of Christ needs not thy graces to
make it perfect, as if he could not save thee without the perfection of thy
graces. Thus doing, thou shall honor Christ above, and sweeten him more then
thy own graces: And if at any time thy heart wrangle thee out of thy graces,
yet let it never wrangle thee out of Christ. If thy graces be a quagmire, that
thou shake upon them, then Christ is a Stone lies firm. A man may trust too
much upon his graces, but he cannot trust too much upon Christ. A man may take
too much hold upon the Mil sails, (for a man may take so fast hold he may be
turned about) but not upon the mil-post. Learn the use of Faith, which is of
singular use to carry thee out of thy sanctified self, to live out of thy self,
to build out of thy self, to carry thee by faith and hope out of thy self to
Christ. Gal. 2.20. The life that I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of
the Son of God; who loved me, and gave himself for me. See how Paul lives here,
not by any thing but faith in Christ. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless
I live (says he) yet not I: Lest any should think he lived upon his graces and
sanctification, He adds, But Christ lives in me; Now lest any should dream
that there is no other Christ then the creature has within in graces,
qualifications, etc. he explains himself, And the life that I live in the
flesh, I live by the FAITH of the Son of God. And truly, If a man's heart will
not be settled this way, it will scarce be settled any way.

Four considerable things.
Now for the use of faith in this case, there are four things considerable. 1.
Whenever thou art thus puzzled, labor to lay Christ in the other end of the
balance, against all objections that thy heart can make: This is the shortest
cut that a man can make, to plead Christ; yet not the outward name, which is
like a charm to charm Serpents: But a faithful opposing of Christ his merit,
his Love, his Faith, his Obedience, to all that can be said. And if all
objections that thy heart can make, be all true, if they be thousands; thou
need not be afraid of thy Indictment: For the laying of Christ against them
in the Balance will still all. As a man having a Declaration against him, or
an Indictment declared by some Lawyer, or cunning Sophister; Alas, How is this
man put to it, to make his Answer with shifts and evasions? But if he have a
Pardon in his bosom, he would confess guilty, without fear: for here is the
Broad seal. Here is that that puts a man out of doubt. So here, If conscience
object all thy new and old sins, that thou have done from time to time, and
thou go any other way to make good thy matter; to thy conscience, and not to
Christ: thou shall be put to shifts, with a great deal of fear, to make thy
answer to thy Conscience: But now lay Christ in the balance, do but plead him,
and there is a full acquittance. And if conscience object old and new sins, now
by faith lay Christ against these; and no more. If a man be upon a rock, the
waves that beat against it, break themselves, but drown not him: Because he is
upon a rock. So when a man goes to Christ, and hangs upon him by a pure faith;
these objections break themselves to pieces upon him: A little water it may be,
may dash in his face, but he need not fear drowning. For the settling of thy
self in such a case as this, by faith set thy self before God in the confidence
of the love of Christ, and of the obedience, righteousness, and mediatorship of
Christ alone; set thy self before God in the consideration of Christ only. If a
subject dares not come before the king, to contest with the king concerning his
loyalty; yet if the pardon be proclaimed, then he dares come, because of the
proclamation. So do thou; If thou dare not come before God in respect of thy
sins, yet come because Christ is proclaimed. And now you put the case to
another issue; for now you do not put your selves upon trial; but you put God
upon trial whether he be true and faithful or no, according to the word of
promise which he has delivered in the Book of God: and so in stead of putting
thy self upon trial, thou put God upon trial whether he will keep his word
or no. And it is a work of faith, for a man to stand before God in the Love
which he bears to Christ, and in the acceptance wherewith God accepts Christ,
and in the wel-pleasedness wherewith he is well pleased with Christ. I stand
not now before God in the way wherewith he is well-pleased with me, but in the
acceptance which God bears to his son. John 17.26. And I have declared to them
thy Name, and will declare it, that the Love wherewith thou have loved me may
be in them; and I in them; that is, That thy very Love to me, may redound, and
be efficatious upon them. Here Is a matter that puts a man out of quarrels, and
Objections. 3. If so be you see an imperfection and ebb in your graces; then
by faith, put into Christ's hand the managing of your graces: for as the custody
and keeping of those graces which we have do belong to Christ; so does the
welding of them by Christ make them vigorous: He can make a little grace, a
little faith do great things; make a mustard seed cast a Mountain into the Sea.
Dependence and resolution by faith on Christ, is that which makes a man strong;
when Christ holds the plough, then there is no balk made. Peter had Faith when
he denied his Master, but he had it in his own hands, and it faints but not
fails; Christ's prayer and looks did stir it up again. Habitual grace is in a
man; But assisting grace helps a man to act and do. I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me. Phil. 4. and 2 Cor 4.1. As we have received mercy
we faint not. These assistings are called Grace with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And
Hebr. 4. ult. Grace to help in time of need. This is that which bears you up;
for when habitual grace is without assistings, it soon fails: as you may see
in Adam. 4. Look up to Christ alone to bear the iniquity of your holy things;
for he is our High Priest that is to bear them. To him therefore fly, for we
are complete in him. Col. 2.10.
And if the work of Sanctification in us be imperfect, the blood of Christ is
absolutely perfect: and they are coupled together. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according
to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit,
unto obedience, and Sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, etc.


So much for the General. Now I come to answer the particular objections
briefly.

The first Ground of this fear.
1. Thou fear thy state, and questionest thy conversion, Because thou had
not so extraordinary a work at thy first Humiliation; not such a breaking by
the Law as some others have had: But by intermixing fits, and a soft way:
Therefore thou fear.

I answer. Its good indeed for every man to make proof of his state, whether he
have Christ or no: 2 Cor. 13.5.
But yet we must not prescribe God a way, in what order and Method he shall
bring us in. The manner and violence of Humiliation is not essential to the
bringing a man into the state of grace: nor it is no matter whether God open
the door with an oiled Key, or break it to pieces, so he open it. For the end
of Humiliation is, the ingrafting of Christ, and saving grace into the Soul.
And its no matter how the plough go, so the corn growing on the Land be as
good. And no matter for the manner of Humiliation; look to the End, look to the
Issue, look to the fruit of it. If God have not broken thy heart with the
Beetle of Humiliation, but thawed it more gently; thank God for it. God made
two Mediators, Heb. 12.
Moses a typical Mediator to fear and quake exceedingly: and Christ the true
Mediator to sweat drops of blood and be in a pitiful agony. Luke 22.44.
And therefore if God gives thee the sight of sin, in the Sweetness of a
Father, in the sweetness of a Savior, more then in the wrath of a Judge; And
if thy tears have flown more from sorrow of Love, then from sorrow of fear; If
he have given thee a new birth, in gentler pangs; it may be as true. Only take
heed to one thing, that is, that the sweetness of Christ in his dealings, make
Christ as sweet to thee as thy sour sins would have done it. Peradventure, if
thou had had some remarkable note of Humiliation of Soul, thou might have
rested in some such work, and have grown secure afterward: and the want of such
a thing perhaps may make thee more watchful afterward; whatsoever course God
did take to bring thee to Christ, make the best use of it, and it is the best
for thee.

Scripture proofs that Christ's converts differently.
But some may say, will the Scripture show that Christ brings in men to himself
after different manners and measures?

I answer, Yea, It is clear by Scripture: And for it, Consider these things.
The word of God (which is the ordinary means of Romans 10.14.
man's conversion) is compared to rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall drop as
the dew, my speech shall distill as the rain: as the small rain upon the tender
herbs, and as the showers upon the grass. So Heb 67.8. For the earth which
drinks in the rain that comes upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for
them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God: But that which bears
thorns and briars, etc. Now Rain comes sometimes by sudden dashes; sometimes
more mildly like dew; sometimes great drops, and sometimes small: sometimes
falls violently, and is quickly over; and sometimes more moderately and holds
longer. And if the ground be thoroughly soak't its no matter: it may as well be
by a mist, Genesis 2. as by great showers. So the heart may as well be mollified
and softened by the Lords blessing in gentle drops distilled upon it as by a
violent storm. Our Savior in Mark 4.26.27. seems to speak of somes conversion
and growth in an insensible way; the words are these, So is the kingdom of God,
as if a man should cast seed into the ground (Seed, that is, The word of God.
verse. 14. Into the Ground; that is into the man, or heart, as the parable
before clears it.) And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed
should spring up he knows not how. Mark, here is effectual workings; the
seed takes place, yet in such an insensible mild way, he that sowes it knows
not how: which could not be, if all that are converted to God, were brought
over by such violent storms as some are.

We read of Paul stricken down by strong hand, Acts 9. But where do we read of
any such conversion that Timothy had? 2 Timothy 3.15. says Paul, From a child
thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to
salvation, etc. Luke 19.
Christ called in Zacheus at once, come down at once, for to day I must abide
at thy house; Luke 15.
But the prodigal, was fain to be starved out by degrees. Some may be in such a
case as they may be mightily presst at, and wounded in the heart; others may
have the word dropped in more gently, by gentle instructions, as the Eunuch
Act. 8. We read not of any such heartbreaking, Rock-renting tempest that he
had, and yet faith truly wrought.

To conclude, I conceive, all that the Lord brings in, he does it by the
blowing of his spirit. John. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes nor whether it
goes: So is EVERY one that is born of the Spirit. But whether it be a wind to
break the Roks, or a still wind; whether a high wind, or low gentle puffs,
that is in Gods choice: whether a North wind, or South-winde, as Cant. 4. ult.
Awake thou North wind, and come thou South; blow upon my garden, that the
Spices thereof may flow out. Mark it, thou can not say thy Spices flow not
out, because the North wind blows not: The South may make them flow out as
well.

The second ground of fear.
2. Thou say, Thou have some peculiar sin^s that hang upon thee, and have
hanted thee a long time, omission of duty, Pride, Lust, Passion, etc.

I Answer, thou can not conclude thou have no grace therefore, nor thy state
naught because of this; Gods servants have had corruptions hung long upon them,
yet true converts; The Prophet Jonah had passion hung long upon him; And Hebr.
12.1. There is mention made of the sin that does so easily beset us What
means the weights that hang on, and the sin so easily besetting us, but that
it continues long? what means the continuance of the combat between the flesh
and the Spirit, but that corruption hangs long? See how Paul exhorts the
Collossians Chap. 3.5.6.7.8. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the
Earth, Fornication, Vncleaness, Inordinate affection, Evil concupiscence, and
Covetousness which is Idolatry. For which things sake the wrath of God comes
upon the Children of disobedience. In the which ye also walked sometime, when
ye lived in them, Mark, They had walked in these, and now did not live in them,
and yet they hung upon them still, were not quite dead; for he exhorts to
mortify them: And ver. 8. And now also ye, put off all these, Anger, Wrath,
Malice, Blasphemy, Filthy communication out of your mouth; Lie not one to
another, etc. These Collossians were Saints. Coll. 1.2. Yet these things were
not wholly put off. And Christ says to his Disciples, Are ye also yet without
understanding? Matt. 15.16. Importing ignorance hung long; and Joh. 14. Have I
been so long time with you, and yet thou have not thou known me Philip? Jonah
was so selfish that he rebelled, and fled to Tarshish. And yet after God had
broken him in hell, how did his selfish passion hang on him again? John.
4.1.2.3.9
But note this, though thy corruptions hang long, and be as pricks in thy side,
pierce thee and pain thee, yet a sincere heart labors to make profit of his
corruptions and infirmities.

What Is that? 1. These occasion his godly sorrow; as Paul Romans 7.24. complaining
of the evil that was present when he would do good, and the law in his members
rebelling, and of sin dwelling in him, and leading him Captive, cries out ver.
24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! See how low thoughts he had of himself because of this. 2. By these
Christ is sweetened to a sincere heart; and by them Christ is kept within the
veiw of the soul, to keep the heart near to Christ. Romans 7.25. I thank God
through Jesus Christ. So then with my mind I serve the Law of God, but with my
flesh the Law of sin. Mark here, how precious and sweet Christ is made to the
soul by the consideration of these corruptions. 3. Here is some comfort, though
they stick long, if God maintain the combat within thee. The flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the flesh: So that ye cannot
do the things that ye would; ye cannot, says the Apostle. Gal. 5.17.
If God keep them from reigning, there is some comfort. Romans 7.25. With my MIND
I serve the Law of God, but with my flesh the Law of sin. His mind was upon
the Law of God. There is force in sin as in a Tyrant; But the law of sin
commanding obedience, that is not in a man in whom Christ is: And while the
fight is maintained, thou may be said to conquer, though thou be
conquered: He that is born of God sins not. 1 John. 3.9.
For sin has not his will, but commits a rape upon him. Thus while thy
infirmities are caused by the Lord to work good in thy soul, they may be
counted a wholesome poison. But take heed of sinning for this end: that's
wickedness. Romans 6.1.
And all these infirmities cannot be said to break Covenant with God, while
they do not force the heart to yield to them. And though they be troublesome to
thee: yet God has said Hebr. 10. He will remember them no more.


The third ground of this fear.
3. Thou say, thou have discovered new sins which thou never saw before,
yea after a long time in the state of grace; and thou know not but there may
be more behind undiscovered: And so thy state may be bad.

I Answer, It may be so, that thou have discovered new sins that thou saw
not before; but let me tell thee, the sight and knowledge of sin is good,
though sin be not. For it may be a sign that knowledge and light increases in
thee, and that softness of heart increases in thee; It is not an argument that
sin increases, but that light and softeness of heart increases: For if thou
see more sins then formerly thou saw, thou discoverest but what thou
would know. And that does not argue thy state is naught, no more then it did
Jobs, Job. 13.23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgression, and my sin. This proved not his state naught. For its good for a
man to discover one after another, that he may deal with them singly as it
were. And it is good to see them single; I, though it be after a long while, if
it be but to keep a man out of love with his own heart: and it may be occasion
of new humblings.

But was it ever so with the Saints of God?

Job after a long while in the state of grace, Job. 3. So Jeremiah; Chap.
20.14. Cursed be the day wherein I was born. etc. Cursed be the man who brought
tidings to my Father, saying a man child is born unto thee, etc. yea and
resisting God in his work, in resolution at least, ver. 9. I said I will not
make mention of him, nor speak in his name, etc. And ambition was discovered in
the Disciples of Christ, after they had been long with him, in a familiar way.
Matt. 18.1. They strove which should be the greatest, a corruption that we see
not breaking out before. And Peter had self showing it self in him in
dissuading Christ from his sufferings, and his denying his Master; a new sin,
that he fell not into before. And his dissimulation for which Paul reproves him
to his face, Gal. 2. yea, and Barnabas, that son of consolation, fell into that
dissimulation, that I never read was charged upon him before. When Jonah said I
do well to be angry to death; was not this new with him? did you ever read he
did so before? So David's Adultery, and plotting Vriahs death. Who would have
thought such corruptions should have ever started up in Jeremiah as we read of
in Chap. 20. of his prophesy?

It does not follow, that because new sins show themselves, therefore your
standing in the state of grace is not right.

A mistake cleared.
For, 1. It appears the saints are in danger of falling into new sins by all
those Scriptures and examples mentioned before, and also by all those Caveats
laid down in Scripture wherein they are bidden Take heed, beware, etc. 2. The
Saints have a subtle Adversary, that will not cease to lay baits in their way
with all the willines that may be: And they may be overcome before they be
aware as it were. Gal. 6.1. If a man be OVERTAKEN with a fault, etc. And if new
sins discover themselves, then there is new occasion to go to Christ; make that
use of them, 1 John 2.1,2. These things write I unto you little children, that
you sin not; but if any man sin, we have an Advocate, Jesus Christ the
righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc.


4th. ground of fear.
4. He finds his heart many times loose in spiritual duties; his thoughts
roving and ranging abroad, when they should be kept close to God; by thoughts
hanting him, and coming thick upon him, etc. Therefore sure he was never right.

I Answ. So it has been with many of the Saints of God, that find themselves
in a state of grace. Keep thy heart with all diligence: what need such an
Exhortation, if the heart were not ready to be roving? Romans 7. Says Paul, I
find THEN a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. THEN:
when? Why when I would do good, then. Heb. 12. Ye have forgotten the
exhortation, etc? where were their thoughts then, when they for gat it? And so
we are oftentimes commanded to remember; showing that thoughts are very apt to
be roving. The Apostle says Col. 3.1,2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things that are above, etc. Set your affections on things above, not on things
below. Which shows the heart, and mind, and thoughts, and affections had need
be called together, they will be straggling, Rev. 3.3. Remember how thou have
received and heard, and hold fast, and Repent.

And truly, God may suffer this to be, to take off your trust from your duties,
and graces, and hearts, that you may plant your trust in God alone through
Christ: And to show you the difference between the Spirits managing of your
graces, and your own managing of them: that so you may plant your faith in
Christ alone. And therefore, if you find your hearts deceitful and loose, do
not conclude presently that you have no work of grace in your hearts: for those
loose by-thoughts may rise from some other causes.

Causes.
As, 1. For want of consideration what a Majesty the presence is that thou art
in; for if we did seriously consider that we are in the presence of the King of
Kings, the All-seeing God, that searches the heart and tries the reyns, it
would make us more serious: A man would be afraid of playing with a Feather
while he is speaking to the King. 2. It may be thy affections are very cold and
chill when thou comost to duty, and for want of Love being inflamed, thy
thoughts rove; for be sure if thou take Christ as thy treasure, thy heart will
be upon him. Mat. 6.
Love will make you mind the thing loved; as David, Oh how do I love thy law!
It is my meditation all the day. Mat. 6. Psalm 119.
3. For want of watchfulness and vigilance; we are too apt to let the world and
creatures take up our thoughts at other times: and then when we come to duty,
and would keep them in, we cannot. For our hearts are like unruly children, if
they use to have Liberty, they will look for it. When the heart has got a
custom of looseness, it is hard to keep it in. 4. For want of Considering the
Excellency of Christ above all things: For if thou did taste and see the
Excellency of him, it would gather up thy spirits to him alone: Thou would
like Paul forgo the things that are behind, and press forward to the things
that are before; Phil. 3.7.8. etc.
And then thy thoughts would not so much rove after them.


The fifth ground of fear.
Fifth Objection. A man complains, he does not find that growth in the Inward
marrow of Religion which should be answerable to his time and means of
knowledge; Though he be grown in gifts, yet he cannot find that he is grown in
inward acquaintance and familiarity with Christ. And hence he questions the
truth of his conversion.

Trials of growth.
I answer. Thou may herein be deceived; and therefore view over thy heart and
life, and try thy growth a little. 1. By thy rooting; Have thou taken root into
Christ? A tree that spreads and lives at root, we say grows, though it appears
not to man to grow: And because thou art worse in thy own sight, will thou say
thou growest not? Why man, Trees and corn grow downward, and die, or seemdead,
before they grow upward. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened
except it die, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15.
It may be God intends thy Humility, and Self-denial, that thou may be kept
low in thy own sight; And Self-denial is the best sign of growth spiritually:
And when the duties you perform do not so much please the soul, as the Love of
God in the duty, it argues growth. 2. Men try their growth by their reaching to
some mark set, as to the top of some bed, or beam, or pin in a wall, etc. So
art thou more Heavenly minded, can reach nearer God in prayer, and duty? is
thy affection more enlarged toward him, though thou find not him manifesting
himself to thee as thou desire? thou art grown. 3. Men try their growth by
their Ability to lift a weight, or bear a burden. So if thou Can not see that
thou art any higher in affection; yet if thou Can suffer more, have more
Patience, and contentedness, art able to bear more, with more constancy, and
less fear etc. thou art grown. 4. By their skill; Though one may not be grown
in height, yet he may be grown in wisdom, and manliness. So, have thou more
skill to use the spiritual weapons, able to find out Satan's designs, able to
confute an error, and give thy soul satisfaction in a truth, then heretofore?
Surely it is growth.


But if this satisfy thee not, make use of some means in which the Lord may
make thee grow.

Means of growth.
They are such as these. 1. Cast off all manner of sin and corruption; Mortify
the deeds of the body by the Spirit. Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live. If the body be sick or diseased, it cannot grow especially if it be
in a waste. Why such a disease is sin: Therefore get sin purged out by the
Blood of Christ and faith in him; otherwise it will poison the soul, and then
it cannot grow, as Job 20.14. Speaking of a man hiding, and favoring his sins,
says he, His meat in his bowels is turned: it is the gall of Asps within him.
This corrupts that which should nourish him; And therefore get this out. 2. Eat
thy meat; And eat wholesome meat: Feed upon Christ and sound doctrine, wholesome
truths: Alas, if a child eat not at all, or eat nothing but trash, Coals,
Ashes, Earth, etc. how should he grow? So if thou feed upon vanities, and not
upon the wholesome food of the word, how can thou grow? Psalm. 1.1.2.3. Blessed
is the man that has not walked in the council of the ungodly, nor stood in
the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the scorners. But his delight is in
the LAW of the LORD, and in that Law does he MEDITATE day and night. That he
takes down, and disgests. Now mark how he grows, And he shall be like a tree
planted by the Rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season,
whose leaf shall not wither; and whatsoever he does shall prosper. So 1 Pet.
2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the WORD, that ye may grow
THEREBY. 3. Get as much experience of Christ as thou can: learn to taste
Christ in his Merits, and Offices, and Spirit. Labor so to grow into Christ,
that thou may not trust to swellings in stead of growth; I mean to outward
gifts. 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Ephesians. 4.15. Grow up into him in all things which is the head, even
Christ. Col. 2.18.19. And not holding the HEAD, says he; but mark the former
verse. Let no man begui^ you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen,
vainly pufft up with his fleshly mind; And now mark, And not holding the head,
from which all the Body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God. So that if thou would
grow, thou must suck of the sap of life from Christ. And because thou feelst
not what thou would feel in Christ, thou can not conclude thou art not
grown. The Apostle Ephesians. 3. prays for the Saints there, that they might have
a greater measure of Excellency, and spiritual perfections; That ye being
rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is
the length, and breadth, and depth, and height And to know the Love of Christ
that passes knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God. 4.
Be often praying to God to make thee grow, and look up to him for help, as
Paul, 1 These. 3.12. The Lord make you to increase, and abound in Love, etc. So
the Disciples, Luke 17.5. Lord increase our Faith. 5. Get a place in the House
of God; a station in the true Church: Christian Society, and fellowship of the
Saints, is a great help to growth; There thou shall hear of Christ, and have*
the excellencies of the Spirit dispensed to thee, Ps. 92.13,14 Those that be
planted in the HOUSE of the LORD, shall FLOVRISH in the Courts of our God; They
shall still bring forth fruit in their old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing. So Heb. 10.23,24,25. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith
without wavering: for he is faithful that has promised. And let us consider
one another to provoke to love and good works. But how shall this be done? See,
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is:
But exhort one another, and so much the more as you see the day approaching. In
our Fathers house there is bread enough and to spare: Luke 15.
there is all varieties to be had that may be for thy growth. Thou must be
joynted into the building, if thou would grow, Ephesians. 2.21. In whom all the
building fitly framed TOGETHER, grows into an holy Temple in the Lord. Col.
3.19. All the body by JOINTS and BANDS, having nourishment ministered, and KNIT
TOGETHER, increases with the increase of God. The sixth ground of fear.
6. Thou have found the exercise of thy Graces failing sometimes, when thou have
had most need of them; and the disposition of thy heart in the Cause of God
sometimes failing, coming short of that activity that should be in it, or the
exercise of thy graces in putting forth stained; Therefore thy condition is not
right say thou.


Does that follow think thou? Did not the Disciples Faith fail them when
they had need of it, when they were tossed upon the Sea? Where Is your Faith?
says Christ; they had need of it then, I think you will easily grant me that:
And they had not the exercise of it, and therefore Mark reads it, How is it
that ye have no Faith? Mar. 4.40. Luke 8.25.
Yea and Peter when he denied Christ, had he been steadfast in the faith, he had
not denied, but resisted Satan. And Peter's Christian boldness and courage
failed him too, at that time. Did not Moses faith fail him, when God says, ye
believed me not? Number. 20.
And for Love failing, If ye loved me (says Christ) ye would rejoice, Ioh. 14.
So Jobs Christian wisdom faild him in his affliction, in Challenging God as he
did to dispute with him, and in justifying himself too far: Therefore God
reproves him in the close of the Book. And so in the text, why are ye
troubled? Their apprehensions failed them concerning Christ. But now, This does
not therefore follow that they were stark dead, and breath gone, and they out
of the state of grace because of this.

Why Christians graces fail them sometimes when they have need of them.
But then, what should be the Cause that Christians faith and other graces
should be at so low an ebb, when they stand in need of them?

I Answer. 1. Because Christ alone will be seen in the business to be all in
all: That we may see that he does the whole work in us, and for us. Col. 3 11.
Isa. 26 12.
As at his death, all must forsake him and fly, and Peter deny him, that he may
alone do all, without being beholden to man for any thing. So in casting out
that Devil our of the man's Son, spoken of Mar. 9. The Disciples unbelief
disabled them from casting him out, that the power of Christ alone might be
seen in doing it. 2. That the people of God might be humbled out of themselves,
and out of the pride of their own undertakings, when they see how weak they
are, and their graces failing them; And that God is all in the thing; as Job.
42. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye sees
thee: Wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. 3. Because many
times they stand too much upon their own strength; and live not clearly upon
Jesus Christ, as they ought to do; and so they miscarry. And that their
confidence might be regulated. Therefore Peter fell, that he might see the
misplacing of his trust. So, 2 Cor. 1. We had the sentence of death in our
selves, That we should learn not to trust in our selves, but in God which
raises the dead. And in another place, Phil. 4.
I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. That we might learn
to live above our graces, to have grace and all from Christ. 4. That so thou
might learn to deny thy self, in thy Sanctified self, as well as in carnal
self; in thy very graces, and not rest upon them: That so thou may account
all thy Righteousnesses as filthy Rags: Isa. 64.
And be for ever kept from boasting. Romans 3.27.



The seventh ground of fear.
7. Thou complainest, thou can not attain to something that thou see in
other men, that peradventure were in Christ after thee, and are inferior in
gifts: Not to that humility, etc. Therefore thou fear thy state, that thou
art not truly converted, and have no grace.

I Answer. That does not follow, that therefore thou have no grace. Did not
Elihu pass the three Ancients spoken of in Job in understanding and wisdom?
Job 42.7,8.
And yet I conceive they had grace; For God calls for their sacrifices, which he
would not have done, had they been wicked men: For the Sacrifice of the wicked
is an abomination to the Lord, Pro. 15.8. And did not Paul pass all the other
Apostles in labor, and sufferings, and Revelations too? 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor.
12. 2 Cor. 11.
and they were in Christ before him. And Mary went beyond Christ's Disciples in
affection to Christ; for she could willingly spend the box of ointment on
Christ; but his Disciples murmured at it: yea, not only Judas, but the rest
also, as appears Mat. 26.6,7,8,9,10. etc. And did not Mary believe the
Resurrection sooner then they? and yet they were longer time with Christ then
she. Again consider God dispenceth his gifts differently according to his own
pleasure, 1 Cor. 12. To one a word of knowledge, to another the word of
wisdom, to another Prophecy, etc. Now because thou have not attained to the
gift or measure of gift or enjoyment that others have, will thou say thou have
no grace?

The eighth ground of fear
8. Thou complainest thou enjoyest God least many times when thou set thy
self the best about it, and go about to fit thy soul to entertain Christ, or
get down corruption; as in fasting, etc.

I Answ. It may be so: and yet thou may be one that have grace too: sometimes
God delays to come in to his people, and puts off for diverse ends known to
himself, Hab. 1.2. O Lord (says he) how long shall I cry, and thou will not
hear? yea, cry out of violence, and thou will not save? and yet this man was
Gods. So Job cries out in the same words, Job 19.7. Behold I cry out of wrong,
but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment. So David also,
Psalm. 69.3. I am weary of my crying, my heart is dried: my eyes fail while I
wait for my God. And Job 23.8,9. Behold I go forward, but he is not there; and
backward, but I cannot perceive him: on the left hand where he works, but I
cannot behold him: he hides him self on the right hand, that I cannot see him.
Here ye see, he sets himself about it, but could not find the Lord: He looked
behind him, before him, on both hands, but to no purpose. And so the Church,
Cant. 3.1 2. By night on my bed I sought him whom my sold loves, I sought
him, but I found him not, etc. She Is industrious, but finds him alone.

Causes why God keeps off.
What should be the reason (may some say) that the Lord should keep aloof off,
when a man sets himself so seriously about it, I mean to find him? 1. Because
God would have the creature know that he is free in working: He is not tied to
come to preparations or qualifications of the creature: but to his own
preparations. The preparations of the heart, and the answer of the tougue is
from the Lord, says Solomon. Prove. 16.1. 2. He would let his people know that
he will be waited on, to come in when he pleases: yet the creature must do his
duty. Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore. Psalm. 105.5.
Paul prayed thrice before he had an Answer of grace. 2 Cor. 12. 3. Many times
the people of God have too much self ends in their duties, and the Lord would
have them to see it. Zach. 7.5. Did you fast unto me, even unto me? says the
Lord. And did you not eat for your selves, and drink for your selves? It may be
self-love may drive a man to it, to obtain some blessing that he wants, rather
then to enjoy God himself: And God would show him this error, and take him off
from it. 4. That they may see their former Slothfulness, and Negligence. Cant.
5. When Christ had waited and called for admittance, and could not have it, he
withdraws, to let his Spouse see how he did distaste her Sloth and Neglect and
Excuses. 5. That he might be the sweeter to thee when he comes in again, and
that thou might stick the closer to him, when thou have found him again. 6.
To try thy Faith, and Patience, and Constancy whether thou will persevere in
following him, and wait upon him, as the woman of Canaan did; though thou have
repulse after repulse, and little hopes in reason: yet to try if thy faith can
conquer reason; And that thy faith may be seen with the greater luster when it
is tried. For God by delaying and putting off, discovers to you the temper of
your Spirits, whether you will willingly wait the Lords leisure; or whether you
will fret and fume, and wait no longer. As we do sometimes by beggars, put them
off or give them no answer; and if they be indeed in great wants, and of meek
spirits, they will lament and weep, and be thankful for a little when it comes:
But your stout sturdy beggars, when they are not answered, they will fall a
reviling and cursing, and give high words; so that by delaying you may see
their spirits. So does the Lord by this means show you your spirits, and temper
of heart.


The ninth ground of fear.
9. He complains he has hurt the cause of God, when God has brought him upon
the stage to have done something for God: perhaps to have suffered. And so his
Soul is wounded, and he fears his condition.

And did not Peter do so? Did not he fly off when all had forsaken Christ, and
break his word and resolution, and shamefully deny his Master contrary to his
former profession? So Moses, and Aaron, Number. 20.12. Because ye believed me not,
to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel (says God) Therefore ye
shall not bring this congregation into the Land, etc. These men hurt the cause
of God, and failed when they should have stuck to it; and yet all real converts.

The 10. ground of fear.
10. You cry out, you have oftentimes relaps't into the same sins which formerly
you have pursued with particular sorrow, and grief: and prayed, and resolved
against them; and that makes you question the truth of your state.

This is indeed a sad condition; But this does not prove thy state naught; for
it has been the case of the servants of God sometimes. Therefore ye have this
confession, Our backslidings are many; so that you see it was oftentimes, again
and again. The Prophet Jonah relapsed into passion, and discontent with God. He
was discontent with the work God set him about, therefore he flies to
Tarshish; Jonah. 1.2.3. And sorrows for it, and confesses Chap. 2.8. They
that trust upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercies; yet see Chap. 3.1.
When God had showed mercy to Niniveh, how discontent he was with the Lord
again. It displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. And when the
Lord (that might have confounded him) reasons sweetly, and mildly with him, to
take him off from his passion; as appears, Chap. 3.3.4. and provides for him
what he wants; yet upon a small occasion again, the taking away of a gourd, or
shrub (and the Lord had a gracious end in it too, the convincing of him of his
folly in being so waspish) he breaks out again into the same passion or worse,
as if he had never seen the evil of i^, or been humbled for it. Chap. 4.8.9. I
am greatly angry, Or I do well to be angry even unto death, says he. See how
often he relapsed into this sin; and Peter denies Christ not only once, but
again, and again. And perhaps the prodigal sets out unto us a Christian
relapst, for he was a son before, and with his Father, and then went away from
him, and spent all: And yet he was not quite undone, but returned again.
And this comes to pass sometimes. 1. To let you see your own weakness, that you
can do nothing of your selves: cannot withstand, nor resist, nor overcome; that
ye may be taken off of all false confidences, and rest upon God, and God alone
for help; That ye may resist steadfast in the faith. 2. For the advancement of
the praise and honor of the wisdom, skill, and goodness of God, the Physician
of our souls, that can and does cure when the disease is more dangerous, when
thou art relaps't, and it grows worse and worse, as in curing the woman that
had the bloody Issue, that was worse and worse notwithstanding all the means
she used, till she came to Christ. 3. This advances his Mercy the more, that
he does not quite forsake thee, when thou have done what thou can to drive
him away; as Micha. 7.18.19 Who is a God like unto thee that pardons Iniquity,
that passes by the trangression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. Oh but I have relaps't, and
driven him away (says the poor soul) But mark now ver. 19. He will turn again,
he will have compassion on us: he will subdue our Iniquities, and thou will
cast all our sins into the depths of the Sea. And the prodigal saw the
compassion of his Father the greater in receiving him again after he had run
away from him.


The eleventh ground of fear.
11. He has grieved the Spirit, and neglected Christ for trifles, small matters
of the world; etc.

And did net Jonah do so? For a little credit to run away from God, and for a
little ease to be so angry as he was, were not these trifles? And this was
Martha's fault, to neglect hearing Christ for these outward things, being
cumbred about businesses. And this was Aarons and Miriams sin, in murmuring
against Moses, because of their estimation; a poor business. And Aarons sin in
making the golden Calf, a trifling Idol: to grieve the Spirit of God both in
himself, and others.

Causes of this.
And let me tell you, there may be other causes of this distemper, and not
because thou art not truly converted. 1. Because security may seiz upon the
spirit sometimes; desire to be at rest and ease. Cant. 5. I have put off my
coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
Now she neglects Christ, and yet his Spouse. 2. Because the things of the world
are such bewitching, alluring things, and the Devil is ready to present them to
thee in the gloriousest show as may be, as he did to Christ: Therefore Christ
for the present is neglected. 3. For want of a clear and more full
manifestation of the Excellency of Jesus Christ. As Paul before he had a clear
manifestation of Christ, he trifled about legal privileges and duties; but
afterward he counts them loss for Christ. Phil. 3.7.8.


The last ground of fear.
12. Thou complainest, Thou have found thy heart apt to take Liberty, and to be
loose when occasion and opportunity has suited to thee, when thou might be
secret from the eye of man, close in private. Therefore thou concludest thy
state is not right, and thou art troubled.

This some of the servants of God have found; As David, when he saw Bathsheba
washing her self, how loose was his heart on a sudden in inordinate lust after
her? And says he Ps. 19. Cleanse me from my secret Sins; such as never come
into the sight of men. And because of this (I conceive) there are such Caveats
to shun the very baits and occasions to sin. As a man inclined to whoredom and
lust; see the advertisment, Prove. 5.7. etc. Hear me now, O ye children: And
depart not from the words of my mouth. Remove thy way far from her (that is the
whorish woman) and come not nigh the door of her house; Lest thou give thine
honor unto others, etc. and so he goes on to verse. 14. To show the danger of
occasions to that sin. So Prove. 23. Concerning Drunkenness. verse. 31. Look not
thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives his color in the Cup, when
it moves it self aright. Why? Why thou may be caught with it, thy heart
being loose. And says he, At the last it bites like a Serpent, and stings like
an Adder. Our Savior knew how apt the hearts of his Disciples were to be
loose; Therefore says he, Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life: And
take heed and beware of covetousness: And take heed of the leaven of the
Pharisees which is hypocrisy. And says Solomon, keep thy heart with all
diligence. Now what need all these Caveats, if the hearts of Christians were
not apt to run aside, and be loose? And this comes to pass oftentimes. 1. Not
for want of Grace (because the man has no grace) but for want of watchfulness,
and diligent observance to give the heart to God, and to walk in his ways.
Prove. 23.26. -- 33. My Son (says he) give me thine heart, and let thine eyes
observe my ways. And then he shows (if it be otherwise,) the Danger of
whoredom and drunkenness: And says verse. 33. Thine eyes shall behold strange
women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. 2. Because the Devil is a
cunning diligent Adversary, to lay his baits to deceive at every turn. 1 Pet.
5.8. Be sober, be vigilant; for your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion goes
about continually seeking whom he may devour. So that now I would have you to
remember that Gods thoughts are not your thoughts; nor Gods ways your ways:
If God had as low thoughts of poor Christians as they have of themselves many
times, there were good Reason they should be troubled: But says he, As high as
the Heavens are above the earth, so high are my thoughts above your thoughts,
and my ways above your ways; Isa. 55.
and howsoever you may cry out as Zion Isa. 49.14: The Lord has forsaken me,
and my Lord has forgotten me, yet consider what the Lord says, I know the
thoughts I have toward you, thoughts of peace, and not of evil. The Lord make
his poor troubled people know them, and then their hearts will settle.


FINIS.
In regard I was absent When my former Book was Printed, there are many faults
escaped in Printing, and no notes of correction Printed; And for some weighty
reasons moving me thereto I desire here to note the chief of them that alter my
sense of things, which in the Sense they go in, I shall not own.

The Title of the Book is A Way to Sion sought out and found for believers to
walk in. etc.

Page 62. lin. 22. for resolved, r. relieved, p. 97. l. 16. f. all r. of, p.
115. l. 34, f. all Christ, r. after this, p. 120. l. 32. f. glorified, r.
gloried, p. 125. l. 1. after only, add Then this ministering must be meant of
Deacons only. p. 128. l. 17. f. Original r. Organic. p. ib. l 35. blot out but
only, and instead thereof r. And. p. 176. l. 28. f. dead, r. weak. There are
many other faults, but being more easily espied by the ingenuous Reader, I here
let them pass without giving notice of them.


