POEMS, ELEGIES, PARADOXES, And SONETS.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the Anchor in the
lower-walk in the New Exchange. 1664.

THE PUBLISHERS TO THE AUTHOR.
Sir,
IT is the common fashion to make some address to the Readers, but we are bold
to direct ours to you, who will look on this publication with Anger which
others must welcome into the world with Joy.

The Lord Verulam comparing ingenious Authors to those who had Orchards ill
neighboured, advised them to publish their own labors, lest others might steal
the fruit: Had you followed his example, or liked the advice, we had not thus
trespassed against your consent, or been forced to an Apology, which cannot but
^mply a fault committed. The best we can say for our selves is, that if we have
injured you it is merely in your own defense, preventing the present attempts
of others, who to their theft would (by their false copies of these Poems) have
added violence, and some way have wounded your reputation.

Having been long engaged on better contemplations, you may perhaps look down
on these Iuvenilia (most of them the issues of your youthful Muse) with some
disdain; and yet the Courteous Reader may tell you with thanks, that they are,
not to be despised, being far from Abortive, nor to be disowned, because they
are both Modest and Legitimate. And thus if we have offered you a view of your
yonnger face, our hope is yo^ will behold it with an unwrinkled brow, though we
have presented the Mirror against your will

We confess our design has been set forward by friends that honor you, who
le^t the ill publishing might disfigure these things from whence you never
expected addition to your credit (sundry times endeavored and by them
defeated) furnished us with some papers which they thought Authentic; we may
not turn their favor into an accusation, and therefore give no intimation of
their names, but wholly take the blame of this hasty and immethodical
impression upon our selves, being persons at a distance, who are fitter to bear
it then those who are nearer related. In hope of your pardon we remain.

Your most devoted servants, Rich: Marriot. Hen: Herringman.


POEMS.
SONNET.
The Double Rock.
SInce thou have viewed some Gorgon, and art grown
A solid stone:
To bring again to softness thy hard heart
Is past my art.
Ice may relent to water in a thaw;
But stone made flesh Loves Chemistry never saw.
Therefore by thinking on thy hardness, I
Will petrify;
And so within our double Quarryes Womb,
Dig our Loves Tomb.
Thus strangely will our difference agree;
And, with our selves, amaze the world, to see
How both Revenge and Sympathy consent
To make two Rocks each others Monument.
The Vow-Breaker.
When first the Magic of thine ey,
Usurpt upon my liberty,
Triumphing, in my hearts spoil, thou
Did lock up thine in such a vow;
When I prove false, may the bright day
Be governed by the Moons ^pale ray!
(As I too well remember) This
Thou said, and seald'st it with a kiss.
O Heavens! and could so soon that Ty
Relent in slack Apostasy?
Could all thy Oaths, and morgag'd trust,
Vanish* like letters formed in dust
Which the next wind scatters. Take heed,
Take heed Revolter; know this deed
Has wronged the world, which will fare worse
By thy Example then thy Curse.
Hide that false Brow in mists. Thy shame
Never see light more, but the dim flame
Of funeral Lamps. Thus sit and moan,
And learn to keep thy guilt at home.
Give it no vent; for if again
Thy Love or Vows betray more men,
At length (I fear) thy perjured breath
Will blow out day, and waken Death.
Upon a Table Book presented to a Lady.
When your fair hand receives this little book
You must not there for prose or verses look.
Those empty regions which within you see,
May by your self planted and peopled be:
And though we scarce allow your sex to prove
Writers (unless the Argument be Love);
Yet without crime or envy you have room
Here, both the Scribe and Author to become.
To the same Lady upon Mrs Burtons M^lancholy.
IF in this Glass of Humors you do find
The Passions or diseases of your mind,
Here without pain, you safely may endure,
Though not to suffer, yet to read your cure.
But if you nothing meet you can apply,
Then ere you need, you have a remedy.
And I do wish you never may have cause
To be adjudg'd by these fantastic Laws;
But that this books example may be known,
By others Melancholy, not your own.
The Farewell.
Splendidis longum valedico nugis
FArewell fond Love, under whose childish whip,
I have served out a weary Prentiship;
Thou that have made me thy scorned property,
To dote on Rocks, but yielding Loves to fly:
Go bane of my dear quiet and content,
Now practice on some other Patient.
Farewell false Hope that fanned my warm desire
Till it had raised a wild unruly fire,
Which nor sighs cool, nor tears extinguish can,
Although my eyes out-flow'd the Ocean:
Forth of my thoughts for ever, Thing of Air,
Begun in error, finished in despair.
Farewell vain World, upon whose restless stage
Twixt Love and Hope I have foold out my age;
Henceforth ere sue to thee for my redress,
I Will woo the wind, or court the wilderness;
And buried from the days discovery,
Study a slow yet certain way to die.
My woeful Monument shall be a Cell,
The murmur of the purling brook my knell;
My lasting Epitaph the Rock shall groan:
Thus when sad Lovers ask the weeping stone,
What wretched thing does in that Center lie?
The hollow Echo will reply, 'twas I.
A Black-moor Maid wooing a fair Boy: sent to the Author by Mr. Hen. Rainolds.
STay lovely Boy, why fly'st thou me
That languish in these flames for thee?
I Am black it is true: why so is Night,
And Love does in dark Shades delight.
The whole World, do but close thine eye,
Will seem to thee as black as I;
Or op't, and see what a black shade
Is by thine own fair body made,
That follows thee where e're thou go;
(O who allowed would not do so?)
Let me for ever dwell so nigh,
And thou shall need no other shade than I.
Mr. Hen. Rainolds.
The Boys answer to the Blackmoor.
BLack Maid, complain not that I fly,
When Fate commands Antipathy:
Prodigious might that union prove,
Where Night and Day together move,
And the conjunction of our lips
Not kisses make, but an Eclipse;
In which the mixed black and white
Portends more terror than delight.
Yet if my shadow thou will be,
Enjoy thy dearest wish: But see
Thou take my shadows property,
That hastes away when I come nigh:
Else stay till death has blinded me,
And then I will bequeath my self to thee.
To a Friend upon Overbury's wife given to her.
I Know no fitter subject for your view
Then this, a meditation ripe for you,
As you for it. Which when you read you will see
What kind of wife your self will one day be:
Which happy day be near you, and may this
Remain with you as earnest of my wish;
When you so far love any, that you dare
Venture your whole affection on his care,
May he for whom you change your Virgin-life
Prove good to you, and perfect as this Wife.
Upon the same.
Madam, who understands you well would swear,
That you the Life, and this your Copy were.
To A. R. upon the same.
NOt that I would instruct or tutor you
What is a Wifes behest, or Husbands due,
Give I this Widdow-Wife. Your early date
Of knowledge makes such Precepts slow and late.
This book is but your glass, where you shall see
What your self are, what other Wives should be.
An Epitaph on Niobe turned to Stone.
THis Pile thou see built out of Flesh, not Stone,
Contains no shroud within, nor mouldring bone:
This bloodless Trunk is destitute of Tomb
Which may the Soul-fled Mansion enwombe.
This seeming Sepulcher (to tell the troth)
Is neither Tomb nor Body, and yet both.
Upon a Braid of Hair in a Heart sent by Mrs. E. H.
IN this small Character is sent
My Loves eternal Monument.
Whilst we shall live, know, this chained Heart
Is our affections counter-part.
And if we never meet, think I
Bequeathed it as my Legacy.
SONNET.
TEll me no more how fair she is,
I have no mind to hear
The story of that distant bliss
I never shall come near:
By sad experience I have found
That her perfection is my wound.
And tell me not how fond I am
To tempt a daring Fate,
From whence no triumph ever came,
But to repent too late:
There is some hope ere long I may
In silence d^te my self away.
I ask no pity (Love) from thee,
Nor will thy justice blame,
So that thou will not envy me
The glory of my flame:
Which crowns my heart when ere it dies,
In that it falls her sacrifice.
SONNET.
Were thy heart soft as thou art fair,
Thou were a wonder past compare:
But frozen Love and fierce disdain
By their extremes thy graces stain.
Cold coyness quenches the still fires
Which glow in Lovers warm desires;
And scorn, like the quick Lightnings blaze,
Darts death against affections gaze.
O Heavens, what prodigy is this
When Love in Beauty buried is!
Or that dead pity thus should be
Tomb'd in a living cruelty.
SONNET.
GO thou that vainly do mine eyes invite
To taste the softer comforts of the night,
And bid'st me cool the fever of my brain,
In those sweet balmy dewes which slumber pain;
Enjoy thine own peace in untroubled sleep,
Whilst my sad thoughts eternal vigils keep.
O could thou for a time change breasts with me,
Thou in that broken Glass should plainly see,
A heart which wastes in the slow smothring fire
Blown by despair, and fed by false desire,
Can only reap such sleeps as Seamen have,
When fierce winds rock them on the foaming wave.
SONNET.
To Patience.
DOwn stormy passions, down; no more
Let your rude waves invade the shore
Where blushing reason sits and hides
Her from the fu^y of your tides.
Fit only it is where you bear sway
That Fools or Franticks do obey;
Since judgment, if it not resists,
Will lose it self in your blind mists.
Fall easy Patience, fall like rest
Whose soft spells charm a troubled breast:
And where those Rebels you espy,
O in your silken cordage tie
Their malice up! so shall I raise
Altars to thank your power, and praise
The sovereign virtue of your Balm,
Which cures a Tempest by a Calm.
Silence.
A SONNET.
PEace my hearts blab, be ever dumb,
Sorrows speak loud without a tongue:
And my perplexed thoughts forbear
To breath your selves in any ear:
It Is scarce a true or manly grief
Which gaddes abroad to find rel^ef.
Was ever stomach that lackt meat
Nourisht by what another eat?
Can I bestow it, or will woe
Forsake me when I bid it go?
Then I Will believe a wounded breast
May heal by shrift, and purchase rest.
But if imparting it I do
Not ease my self, but trouble two,
It Is better I alone possess
My treasure of unhappiness:
Engrossing that which is my own
No longer then it is unknown.
If silence be a kind of death,
He kindles grief who gives it breath;
But let it raked in embers lie,
On thine own hearth 'twill quickly dye;
And spite of fate, that very womb
Which carries it, shall prove its tomb.
Loves Harvest.
FOnd Lunatic forbear, why do thou sue
For thy affections pay e're it is due?
Loves fruits are legal use; and therefore may
Be only taken on the marriage day.
Who for this interest too early call,
By that exaction lose the Principal.
Then gather not those immature delights,
Until their riper Autumn thee invites.
He that abortive Corn cuts off his ground,
No Husband but a Ravisher is found:
So those that reap their love before they wed,
Do in effect but Cuckold their own Bed.
The Forlorn Hope.
HOw long vain Hope do thou my joys suspend?
Say! must my expectation know no end!
Thou wast more kind unto the wandering Greek
Who did ten years his Wife and Country seek:
Ten lazy Winters in my glass are run,
Yet my thoughts travail seems but new begun.
Smooth Quick-sand which the easy World beguiles,
Thou shall not bury me in thy false smiles.
They that in hunting shadows pleasure take
May benefit of thy illusion make.
Since thou have banished me from my content
I here pronounce thy final banishment.
Farewell thou dream of nothing! thou mere voice*
Get thee to fools that can feed fat with noise:
Bid wretches marked for death look for reprieve,
Or men broke on the wheel persuade to live.
Henceforth my comfort and best Hope shall be,
By scorning Hope, nere to rely on thee.
The Retreat.
PUrsue no more (my thoughts!) that false unkind,
You may as soon imprison the North Wind;
Or catch the Lightning as it leaps; or reach
The leading billow first ran down the breach;
Or undertake the ^lying clouds to track
In the same path they yesterday did rack.
Then, like a Torch turned downward, let the same
Desire which nourisht it, put out your flame.
Lo thus I do d^vorce thee from my breast,
False to thy vow, and traitor to my rest!
Henceforth thy tears shall be (though thou repent)
Like pardons after execution sent.
Nor shall thou ever my loves story read,
But as some Epitaph of what is dead.
So may my hope on future blessings dwell,
As it is my firm resolve and last farewell.
SONNET.
TEll me you stars that our affections move,
Why made ye me that cruel one to love?
Why burns my heart her scorned sacrifice,
Whose breast is hard as Crystal, cold as Ice?
God of Desire! if all thy Votaries
Thou thus repay, succession will grow wise;
No sighs for incense at thy Shrine shall smoke,
Thy Rites will be despised, thy Altars broke.
O! or give her my flame to melt that snow
Which yet unthaw'd does on her bosom grow;
Or make me ice, and with her crystal chains
Bind up all love within my frozen veins:
SONNET.
I Prithee turn that face away
Whose splendor but benights my day.
Sad eyes like mine, and wounded hearts
Shun the bright rays which beauty da^ts.
Unwelcome is the Sun that pries
Into those shades where sorrow lies.
Go shine on happy things. To me
That blessing is a misery:
Whom thy fierce Sun not warmes, but burns,
Like that the ^ooty Indian turns.
I Will serve the night, and there confined
Wish thee less fair, or else more kind.
SONNET.
DRy those fair, those crystal eyes
Which like growing fountains rise
To drown their banks. Griefs ^ullen brooks
Would better flow in furrowed looks*
Thy lovely face was never meant
To be the shore of discontent.
Then clear those watrish stars again
Which else portend a lasting rain;
Lest the clouds which settle there
Prolong my Winter all the Year:
And the example others make
In love with sorrow for thy sake.
SONNET.
When I entreat, either thou will not hear,
Or else my suit arriving at thy ^ar
Cools and dies there. A strange ext^emitie
To freeze in the Sun, and in the shade to fry.
Whilst all my blasted hopes decline so soon,
It Is Evening with me, though at high Noon.
For pity to thy self, if not to me
Think time will ravish, what I lose, from the^.
If my scorcht heart wither through thy delay,
Thy beauty withers too. And swift decay
Arrests thy Youth. So thou whilst I am slighted
Wilt be too soon with age or sorrow nighted.
To a Lady who sent me a copy of verses at my going to bed.
LAdy your art or wit could nere devise
To shame me more then in this nights surprise.
Why I am quite unready, and my eye
Now winking like my candle, does deny
To guide my hand, if it had ought to write;
Nor can I make my drowsy sense indite
Which by your verses music (as a spell
Sent from the Sybellean Oracle)
Is charmed and bound in wonder and delight,
Faster then all the leaden chains of night.
What pity is it then you should so ill
Employ the bounty of your flowing quill,
As to expend on him your bedward thought,
Who can acknowledge that large love in naught
But this lean wish; that fate soon send you those
Who may requite your rhimes with midnight prose*
Mean time, may all delights and pleasing Theme*
Like Masquers revell in your Maiden dreams,
Whilst dull to write, and to do more unmee^,
I, as the night invites me, fall asleep.
The Pink.
FAir one, you did on me bestow
Comparisons too sweet to ow;
And but I found them sent from you
I durst not think they could be true.
But it is your uncontrolled power
Goddess-like to produce a flower,
And by your breath, without more ^eed,
Make that a Pink which was a Weed.
Because I would be loath to miss
So sweet a Metamorphosis,
Upon what stalk soere I grow
Disdain not you sometimes to blow
And che^ish by your Virgin eye
What in your frown would droop and die:
So shall my thankful leaf repay
Persumed wishes every day:
And over your fortune breathe a spell
Which may his obligation tell,
Who though he naught but she can give
Must ever your (Sweet) creature live.
To his Friends of Christ-Church upon the mislike of the Marriage of the Arts
acted at Woodstock.
BUt is it true, the Court mislik't the Play,
That Christ-Church and the Arts have lost the day;
That Ignoramus should so far excel,
Their Hobbyhorse from ours has born the Bell?
T^oth you are justly served, that would present
Ought unto them, but shallow merriment;
Or to your Marriage-table did admit
Guests that are stronger far in smell then wit.
Had some quaint Bawdry larded every Sc^ne,
Some fawning Sycophant, or courted queen;
Had there appeared some sharp cross-garter'd man
Whom their loud laugh might nickname Puritan,
Cased up in factious breeches and small ruff,
That hates the surplis, and defies the cuffe:
Then sure they would have given applause to crown
That which their ignorance did now cry down.
Let me advise, when next you do bestow
Your pains on men that do but little know,
You do no Chorus nor a Comment lack,
Which may expound and construe every Act:
That it be short and ^light; for if 't be good
It Is long, and neither liked nor understood.
Know it is Court fashion still to discommend
All that which they want brain to comprehend.
The Surrender.
MY once dear Love; hapless that I no more
Must call thee so: the rich affections store
That fed our hopes, lies now exhaust and spent,
Like sums of treasure unto Bankrupts lent.
We that did nothing study but the way
To love each other, with which thoughts the day
Rose with delight to us, and with them set,
Must learn the hateful Art how to forget.
We that did nothing wish that Heaven could give
Beyond our selves, nor did desire to live
Beyond that wish, all these now* cancel must
As if not writ in faith, but words and dust.
Yet witness those clear vows which Lovers make,
Witness the chaste desires that never brake
Into unruly heats; witness that breast
Which in thy bosom anchored his whole rest,
It Is no default in us, I dare acquit
Thy Maiden faith, thy purpose fair and white
As thy pure self. Cross Planets did envy
Us to each other, and Heaven did untie
Faster then vows could bind. O that the Stars,
When Lovers meet, should stand opposed in wars!
Since then some higher Destinies command,
Let us not strive nor labor to withstand
What is past help. The longest date of grief
Can never yield a hope of our relief;
And though we waste our selves in moist laments,
Tears may drown us but not our discontents.
Fold back our arms, take home our fruitless loves,
That must new fortunes try, like Turtle Doves
Dislodged from their haunts. We must in tears
Unwind a love knit up in many years.
In this last kiss I here surrender thee
Back to thy self, so thou again art free.
Thou in another, sad as that, resend
The truest heart that Lover ere did lend.
Now turn from each. So fare our severed hearts
As the divorc't soul from her body parts.
The Legacy.
MY dearest Love! when thou and I must part,
And th'icy hand of death shall seize that heart
Which is all thine; within some spacious will
I Will leave no blanks for Legacies to fill:
It Is my ambition to die one of those
Who but himself has nothing to dispose.
And since that is already thine, what need,
I to re-give it by some newer deed*
Yet take it once again. Free circumstance
Does often the value of mean things advance:
Who thus repeats what he bequeathed before,
Proclaims his bounty rich^r then his store.
But let me not upon my love bestow
What is not worth the giving. I do ow
Somewhat to dust: my bodies pampered care
Hungry corruption and the wo^m will share.
That mouldring relick which in earth must lie
Would prove a gift of horror to thine eye.
With this cast ragge of my mortality
Let all my faults and errors buried be.
And as my ^ear-cloth rots, so may kind fate
Those worst acts of my life incinerate.
He shall in story fill a glorious room
Whose ashes and whose sins sleep in one Tomb.
If now to my cold hearse thou deign to bring
Some melting sighs as thy last offering,
My peaceful exequies are crowned. Nor shall
I ask more honor at my Funeral.
Thou will more richly balm me with thy tears
Then all the Nard fragrant Arabia bears.
And as the Paphian Queen by her gri^fs shower
Brought up her dead Loves Spirit in a flower:
So by those precious drops rained from thine ^ies,
Out of my dust, O may some ^ertue rise!
And like thy better Genius thee attend,
Till thou in my dark Period shall end.
Lastly, my constant truth let me commend
To him thou choo^est next to be thy friend.
For (witness all things good) I would not have
Thy Youth and Beauty married to my grave,
'Twould show thou did repent the style of wife
Should thou relap^e into a single life.
They with preposterous grief the world delude
Who mourn for their lost Mates in solitude;
Since Widdowhood more strongly does enforce
The much lamented lot of their divorce.
Themselves then of their losses guilty are
Who may, yet will not suffer a repair.
Those were Barbarian wives that did invent
Weeping to death at th'Husband^ Monument
But in more civil Rites She does approve
Her first, who ventures on a second Love*
For else it may be thought, if She refrain,
She sped so ill She durst not try again.
Up then my Love, and choose some worthier one
Who may supply my room when I am gone;
So will the stock of our affection thrive
No less in death, then were I still alive.
And in my urne I shall rejoice, that I
Am both Testatour thus and Legacy.
The short Wooing.
LIke an Oblation set before a Shrine,
Fair One! I offer up this heart of mine.
Whether the Saint accept my Gift or no,
I Will neither fear not doubt before I know.
For he whose faint distrust prevents reply,
Does his own suits denial prophecy.
Your will the sentence is; Who free as Fate
Can bid my love proceed, or else retreat.
And from short views that ve^di^^t is decreed
Which seldom does one audience exceed.
Love asks no dull probation, but like light
Conveyes his nimble influence at first sight.
I need not therefore importune or press;
This were t'extort unwilling happiness:
And much against affection might I sin:
To tire and weary what I seek to win.
Towns which by lingering siege enforced be
Often make both sides repent the victory.
Be Mistress of your self: and let me thrive
Or suffer by your own prerogative.
Yet stay, since you are Judge, who in one breath
Bear uncontrolled power of Life and Death,
Remember (Sweet) pity does best become
Those lips which must pronounce a Suitors doom.
If I find that, my spark of chaste desire
Shall kindle into Hymen's holy fire:
Else like sad flowers will these verses prove,
To stick the Coffin of rejected Love.
St. Valentines day.
NOw that each fe^ther'd Chorister does sing
The glad approches of the welcome Spring:
Now Phoebus darts forth his more early beam,
And dips it later in the cur^ed stream,
I should to custom prove a retrograde
Did I still dote upon my sullen shade.
Often have the seasons finished and begun;
Days into Months, those into years have run,
Since my cross Stars and inauspicious fate
Doomed me to linger here without my Mate:
Whose loss ere since befrosting my desire,
Left me an Altar without Gift or Fire.
I therefore could have wished for your own sake
That Fortune had designed a nobler stake
For you to draw, then one whose fading day
Like to a dedicated Taper lay
Within a Tomb, and long burnt out in vain,
Since nothing there saw better by the flame.
Yet since you like your Chance, I must not try
To mar it through my incapacity.
I here make title to it, and proclaim
How much you honor me to wen^ my name;
Who can no form of gratitude devise,
But offer up my self your sacrifice.
Ha^l then my worthy Lot! and may each Morn
Successive springs of joy to you be born:
May your content never wane, until my heart
Grown Bankrupt, wants good wishes to impart.
Henceforth I need not make the dust my Shrine,
Nor search the Grave for my lost Valentine.
To his unconstant Friend.
BUt say thou very woman, why to me
This fit of weakness and inconstancy?
What forfeit have I made of word or vow,
That I am racked on thy displeasure now?
If I have done a fault I do not shame
To cite it from thy lips, give it a name:
I ask the banes, stand forth, and tell me why
We should not in our wonted loves comply?
Did thy cloyed appetite urge thee to try
If any other man could love as I?
I see friends are like clothes, lad up whilst new,
But after wearing cast, though nere so true.
Or did thy fierce ambition long to make
Some Lover turn a martyr for thy sake?
Thinking thy beauty had deserved no name
Unless some one do perish in that flame:
Upon whose loving dust this sentence lies,
Here Is one was murdered by his Mistress eyes.
Or was it because my love to thee was such,
I could not choose but blab it? swear how much
I was thy slave, and doting let thee know,
I better could my self then thee forgo.
Hearken ye men that ere shall love like me,
I Will give you counsel gratis: if you be
Possessed of what you like, let your fair friend
Lodge in your bosom, but no secrets send
To seek their lodging in a female breast;
For so much is abated of your rest.
The Steed that comes to understand his strength
Grows wild, and casts his manager at length:
And that tame Lover who unlocks his heart
Unto his Mistress, teaches her an art
To plague himself; shows her the secret way
How She may tyrannize another day.
And now my fair unkindness, thus to thee;
Mark how wise Passion and I agree:
Hear and be sorry for it. I will not die
To expiate thy crime of levitie:
I walk (not cross-arm'd neither) eat, and live,
Yea live to pity thy neglect, not grieve
That thou art from thy faith and promise gone,
Nor envy him who by my loss has won.
Thou shall perceive thy changing Moon-like fit^
Have not infected me, or turned my wits
To Lunacie. I do not mean to weep
When I should eat, o^ sigh when I should sleep;
I will not fall upon my pointed quill,
Bleed ink and Poems, or invention spill
To contrive Ballads, or weave Elegies
For Nurses wearing when the infant cries.
Nor like th'enamour'd Tristrams of the time,
Despair in prose, and hang my self in rhyme.
Nor thither run upon my verses feet,
Where I shall none but fools or madmen meet,
Who midst the silent shades, and Myrtle walks,
Pule and do penance for their Mistress faults.
I Am none of those poetic malcontents
Born to make paper dear with my laments:
Or wild Orlando that will rail and vex,
And for thy sake fall out with all the ^ex.
No, I will love again, and seek a prize
That shall redeem me from thy poor despise.
I Will court my fortune now in such a shape
That will no faint die, nor starved color take.
Thus launch I off with triumph from thy shore,
To which my last farewell; for never more
Will I touch there. I put to Sea again
Blown with the churlish wind of thy disdain.
Nor will I stop this course till I have found
A Coast that yields safe harbor, and firm ground.
Smile ye Love-(...); winged with desir^ I fly,
To make my wishes full discovery:
Nor doubt I but for one that proves like you,
I shall find ^en as fair, and yet more true.
Madam Gabrina, Or the Ill-favourd Choice.
Con mala Muger el remedio
Mucha Tierra por el medio.

I Have often wondered why thou did elect
Thy Mistress of a stuff none could affect,
That wore his eyes in the right place. A thing
Made up, when Natures powers lay slumbering.
One, where all pregnant imperfections met
To make her sexes scandal: Teeth of jet,
Hair died in Orpment, from whose fretful hew
Canidia her highest Witch-crafts drew.
A lip most thin and pale, but such a mouth
Which like the Poles is stretched North and South.
A face so colored, and of such a form,
As might defiance bid unto a storm:
And the complexion of her sallow hide
Like a wrack't body washed up by the Tide:
Eyes small: a nose so to her vizard glew'd
As if 'twould take a Planets altitude.
Last for her breath, it is somewhat like the smell
That does in Ember weeks on Fish street dwell;
Or as a man should fasting scent the Rose
Which in the savoury Bear-garden grows.
If a Fox cures the Paralyticall,
Had'^t thou ^en Palsies, she would out-stink them all.
But I have found thy plot: sure thou did try
To put thy self past hope of jealousy:
And whilst unlearned fools the senses please,
Thou cu^'st thy appetite by a disease;
As many use to kill an itch withal,
Quicksilver or some biting Mineral.
Dote upon handsome things each common man
With little study and less labor can;
But to make love to a Deformity,
Only commends thy great ability,
Who from hard-favour'd objects draw'st content,
As Estriches from iron nutriment.
Well take her, and like mounted George, in bed
Boldly atchieve thy Dragons Maidenhead:
Where (though scarce sleep) thou may rest confident
None dares beguile thee of thy punishment:
The sin were not more foul he should commit,
Then is that She with whom he acted it.
Yet take this comfort: when old age shall raze,
Or sickness ruin many a good face,
Thy choice cannot impair; no cunning curse
Can mend that night-peece, that is, make her worse.
The Defense.
Piensan los Enamorados
Que tienen los otros, los oios quebranta dos.

Why slightest thou what I approve?
Thou art no Peer to try my love,
Nor can discern where her form lies,
Unless thou saw her with my eyes.
Say she were foul and blacker than
The Night, or Sunburned African,
If liked by me, it is I alone
Can make a beauty where was none;
For rated in my fancy, she
Is so as she appears to me.
But it is not feature, or a face,
That does my free election grace,
Nor is my liking only led
By a well temperd white and red;
Could I enamou^'d grow on those,
The Lilly and the blushing Rose
United in one stalk might be
As dear unto my thoughts as she,
But I look farther, and do find
A richer beauty in her mind;
Where something is so lasting fair,
As time or age cannot impair.
Had thou a perspective so clear,
Thou could behold my object there;
When thou her virtues should espy,
Theyl'd force thee to confess that I
Had cause to like her, and learn thence
To love by judgment not by sense.
To One demanding why Wine sparkles.
SO Diamonds sparkle, and thy Mistress eyes;
When it is not Fire but light in either flies.
Beauty not thawed by lustful flames will show
Like a fair mountain of unmelted snow:
Nor can the tasted vine more danger bring
Then water taken from the crystal Spring,
Whose end is to refresh and cool that heat
Which unallayd becomes foul vices seat:
Unless thy boiling veins, mad with desire
Of drink, convert the liquor into fire.
For then thou quaf^'st down fevers, thy full bowls
Carouse the burning draughts of Portia's coals.
If it do leap and sparkle in the cup,
Twill sink thy cares, and help invention up.
There never yet was Muse or Poet known
Not dipped or drenched in this Helicon.
But Tom! take heed thou use it with such care
As Witches deal with their Familiar.
For if thy virtues circle not confine
And guard thee from the Furies raised by wine,
It Is ten to one this dancing spirit may
A Devil prove to bear thy wits away;
And make thy glowing nose a Map of Hell
Where Bacchus purple fumes like Meteors dwell.
Now think not these sage moralls thee invite
To prove Carthusian or strict Rechabite;
Let fools be mad, wise people may be free,
Though not to license turn their liberty.
He that drinks wine for health, not for excess,
Nor drownes his temper in a drunkenness,
Shall feel no more the grapes unruly fate,
Then if he took some chilling Opiate.
By occasion of the Young Prince his happy birth.
AT this glad Triumph, when most Poets use
Their quill, I did not bridle up my Muse
For sloth or less devotion. I am one
That can well keep my Holy Days at home;
That can the blessings of my King and State
Better in prayer then poems gratulate;
And in their fortunes bear a loyal part,
Though I no bone-fires light but in my heart.
Truth is, when I received the first report
Of a new Star risen and seen at Court;
Though I felt joy enough to give a tongue
Unto a mute, yet duty struck me dumb:
And thus surpised by rumor, at first sight
I held it some allegiance not to write.
For howere Children, unto those that look
Their pedigree in God's, not the Church book,
Fair pledges are of that eternity
Which Christians possess not till they die;
Yet they appear viewed in that perspective
Through which we look on men long since alive,
Like succors in a Camp, sent to make good
Their place that last upon the watches stood.
So that in age, or fate, each following birth
Does set the Parent so much nearer earth:
And by this Grammar we our heirs may call
The smiling Preface to our funeral.
This sadded my soft sense, to think that he
Who now makes Laws, should by a bold decree
Be summoned hence to make another room,
And change his Royal Palace for a tomb.
For none ere truly loved the present light,
But grieved to see it rivall'd by the night:
And if it be sin to wish that light extinct,
Sorrow may make it treason but to think it.
I know each malcontent or giddy man,
In his religion with the Persian,
Adores the rising Sun; and his false view
Best likes not what is best, but what is new.
O that we could these gangrenes so prevent
(For our own blessing and their punishment)
That all such might, who for wild changes thirst,
Racked on a hopeless expectation, burst,
To see us fetter time, and by his stay
To a consistence fix the flying day;
And in a Solstice by our prayers made,
Rescue our Sun from death or envies shade.
But here we dally with fate, and in this
Stern Destiny mocks and controules our wish;
Informing us, if fathers should remain
For ever ^^te, children were born in vain;
And we in vain were Christians, should we
In this world dream of perpetuity.
Decay is natures Calendar; nor can
It hurt the King to think he i^ a (...)
Nor grieve, but comfort him, to hear us say
That his own children must his Scepter sway.
Why slack ^ then to contribute a vote
Large as the Kingdoms joy, f^ee as my thought?
Long live the Prince, and in that title bear
The world long witness that the King is here:
May he grow up till all that good he reach
Which we can wish, or his Great Father teach:
Let him shine long a mark to Land and May^,
Like* that bright Spark placed nearest to Charles Wayn,
And like him lead successions golden Teame,
Which may possess the British Diadem.
But in the mean space, let his Royal Sire,
Who warmes our hopes with true Prom^thean fire,
So long his course in time and glory run,
Till he estate his virtue on his son.
So in his Fathers days this happy One
Shall crowned be, yet not usurp the Throne;
And Charles reign still, since thus himself will be
Heir to himself through all Posterity.
Upon the Kings happy return from Scotland.
SO breaks the day when the returning Sun
Has newly through his Winter Tropic run,
As You (Great Sir!) in this regress come forth
From the remoter Climate of the North.
To tell You now what cares, what fears we past,
What Clouds of sorrow did the land ore-cast,
Were lost, but unto such as have been there
Where the absented Sun benights the year:
Or have those Countries traveld which nere feel
The warmth and virtue of his flaming wheel.
How happy yet were we! that when you went,
You left within your Kingdoms firmament
A Partner-L^ght, whose luster may despise
The nightly glimmering Tapers of the skies,
Your peerless Queen; and at each hand a Star
Whose hopeful beams from You enkindled are.
Though (to say truth) the light which they could bring
Served but to lengthen out our evening.
Heavens greater lamps illumine it; each spark
Adds only this, to make the sky less dark.
Nay She who is the glory of her sex
Did sadly droop for lack of Your reflex:
Often did She her fair brow in loneness shroud,
And dimly shone, like Venus in a cloud.
Now are those gloomy mists dried up by You,
As the Worlds eye scatters the Evening dew:
And You bring home that blessing to the land
Which absence made us rightly understand.
Here may You henceforth stay! there need no charms
To hold You, but the circle of her arms,
Whose fruitful love yields You a rich increase,
Seals of Your joy, and of the kingdoms peace.
O may those precious pledges fix You here,
And You grow old within that crystal Sphere!
Pardon this bold detention. Else our love
Will merely an officious trouble prove.
Each busy minute tells us as it flies,
That there are better objects for your eyes.
To them let us leave you, whilst we go pray,
Ra^s^ng this triumph to a Holy Day.
And may that soul the Churches blessing want;
May his content be short, his comforts scant,
Whose Bosom-Altar does no incense burn,
In thankful sacrifice for your return.
To the Queen at Oxford.
GReat Lady! That thus quite against our use,
We speak your welcome by an English Muse,
And in a vulgar tongue our zeales contrive,
Is to confess your large prerogative,
Who have the powerful freedom to dispense
With our strict Rules, or Customs difference.
It Is sit when such a Star deigns to appear
And shine within the Academick Sp^eare,
That every College graced by your resort,
Should only speak the language of your Court;
As if Apollo's learned Quire, but You
No other Queen of the Ascendent knew.
Let those that list invoke the Delphian name,
To light their verse, and quench their doting flame;
In Helicon it were High Treason now,
Did any to a feigned Minerva bow;
When You are present, whose chaft virtues stain
The vaunted glories of her Maiden brain.
I would not flatter. May that diet feed
Deformed and vicious souls: they only need
Such physic, who grown sick of their decays,
Are only cured with surfers of false praise;
Like those, who fallen from Youth or Beauties grace,
Lay colors on which more belly the face.
Be You still what You are; a glorious Theme
For Truth to crown. So when that Diadem
Which circles Your fair brow drops off, and time
Shall lift You to that pitch our prayers climb;
Posterity will pla^ a nobler wreath,
To crown Your fame and memory in death.
This is sad truth and plain, which I might fear
Would scarce prove welcome to a Princes ear;
And hardly may you think that Writer wise
Who preaches there where he should poetize;
Yet where so rich a bank of goodness is,
Triumphs and Feasts admit such thoughts as this;
Nor will your virtue from her Client turn,
Although he bring his tribute in an urn.
Enough of this: who knows not when to end
Needs must by ^edious diligence offend.
It Is not a Poets office to advance
The precious value of allegiance.
And least of all the rest do I affect
To word my duty in this dialect.
My service lies a better way, whose tone
Is spirited by full devotion.
Thus whilst I mention You, Your Royal Mate*
And Those which your blessed line perpetuate,
I shall such votes of happiness rehearse,
Whose softest accents will out-tongue my verse.
A salutation of his Majesty's Ship the Sovereign.
MOve on thou floating Trophee built to fame!
And bid her trump spread thy Majestic name;
That the blew Tritons, and those petty Gods
Which sport themselves upon the dancing floods,
May bow as to their N^ptune, when they feel
The awful pressure of thy potent keel.
Great wonder of the time! whose form unites,
In one aspect two warring opposites,
Delight and horror; and in them portends
Differing events both to thy foes and friends^
To these thy radiant b^ow, Peaces bright Sh^ine,
Does like that golden Constellation shine,
Which guides the Sea man with auspicious beams,
Safe and unshipwrackt through the troubled streams.
But, as a blazing Meteor, to those
It does ostents of blood and death disclose.
For thy rich Decks lighten like Heavens fires,
To usher forth the thunder of thy Tires.
O never may cross wind, or swelling wave
Conspire to make the treacherous sands thy grave:
Nor envious rocks in their white foamy laugh
Rejoice to wear thy losses Epitaph.
But may the smoothest, most successful gales
Distend thy sheet, and wing thy flying sails:
That all designs which must on thee embark,
May be securely placed as in the Ark.
May thou, where ere thy streamers shall display,
Enforce the bold disputers to obey:
That they whose pens are sharper then their swords,
May yield in fact what they denied in words.
Thus when the amazed world our Seas shall see
Shut from Usurpers, to their own Lord free,
Thou may returning from the conquered Main,
With thine own Triumphs be crowned Sovereign.
AN EPITAPH On his most honored Friend Richard Earl of Dorset.
LEt no profane ignoble foot tread near
This hallowed piece of earth, Dorset lies here*
A small sad relic of a noble spirit,
Free as the air, and ample as his merit;
Whose least perfection was large, and great
Enough to make a common man complete.
A soul re^in'd and culled from many men,
That reconciled the sword unto the pen,
Using both well. No proud forgetting Lord,
But mindful of mean names and of his word.
One that did love for honor, not for ends,
And had the noblest way of making friends
By loving first. One that did know the Court,
Yet understood it better by report
Then practice, for he nothing took from thence
But the kings favor for his recompense.
One for religion, or his countries good
That valued not his Fortune nor his blood.
One high in fair opinion, rich in praise;
And full of all we could have wished, but days.
He that is warned of this, and shall forbear
To vent a sigh for him, or lend a tear;
May he live long and scorned, unpiti'd fall,
And want a mourner at his funeral.
The Exequy.
ACcept thou Shrine of my dead Saint,
Instead of Dirges this complaint;
And for sweet flowers to crown thy hearse,
Receive a strew of weeping verse
From thy grieved friend, whom thou might see
Quite melted into tears for thee.
Dear loss! since thy untimely fate
My task has been to meditate
On thee, on thee: thou art the book,
The library whereon I look
Though almost blind. For thee (loved clay)
I languish out not live the day,
Using no other exercise
But what I practice with mine eyes:
By which wet glasses I find out
How lazily time creeps about
To one that mourns: this, only this
My exercise and business is:
So I compute the weary hours
With sighs dissolved into showers.
Nor wonder if my time go thus
Backward and most preposterous;
Thou have benighted me, thy set
This Eve of blackness did bege^,
Who was it my day, (though overcast
Before thou had thy Noontide past)
And I remember must in tears,
Thou scarce had seen so many years
As Day tells hours. By thy clear Sun
My love and fortune first did run;
But thou will never more appear
Folded within my Hemisphear,
Since both thy light and motion
Like a fled Star is fallen and gone,
And twixt me and my souls dear wish
The earth now interposed is,
Which such a strange eclipse does make
As never was read in Almanake.
I could allow thee for a time
To darken me and my fad Clime,
Were it a month, a year, or ten,
I would thy exile live till then;
And all that space my mirth adjourn,
So thou would promise to return;
And putting off thy ashy shroud
At length disperse this sorrows cloud.
But woe is me! the longest da^e
Too narrow is to calculate
These empty hopes: never shall I
Be so much blessed as to descry
A glimpse of thee, till that day come
Which shall the ^arth to cinders doom,
And a fierce Fever must calcine
The body of this world like thine,
(My Little World!) that fit of fire
Once off, our bodies shall aspire
To our souls bliss: then we shall rise,
And view our selves with cleerer eyes
In that calm Region, where no night
Can hide us from each others sight.
Mean time, thou have her earth: much good
May my harm do thee. Since it stood
With Heavens will I might not call
Her longer mine, I give thee all
My short-lived right and interest
In her, whom living I loved best*
With a most free and bounteous grief,
I give thee what I could not keep.
Be kind to her, and prithee look
Thou write into thy Doomsday book
Each parcel of this Rarity
Which in thy Casket shrin'd does ly:
See that thou make thy reckoning straight,
And yield her back again by weight;
For thou must audit on thy trust
Each grain and atome of this du^t,
As thou will answer Him that lent,
Not gave thee my dear Monument.
So close the ground, and 'bout her shade
Black curtains draw, my Bride is laid.
Sleep on my Love in thy cold bed
Never to be disquieted!
My last good night! Thou will not wake
Till I thy fate shall overtake:
Till age, or grief, or sickness must
Marry my body to that dust
It so much loves; and fill the room
My heart keeps empty in thy Tomb.
Stay for me there; I will not fail
To meet thee in that hallow Vale.
And think not much of my delay;
I am already on the way,
And follow thee with all the speed:
Desire can make, or sorrows breed.
Each minute is a short degree,
And every hour a step toward thee.
A^ night when I betake to rest,
Next morn I rise nearer my Went
Of life, almost by eight hours sail,
Then when sleep breathed his drowsy gale.
Thus from the Sun my Bottom stears,
And my days Compass downward bears:
Nor labor I to stem the tide
Through which to Thee I swiftly glide.
It Is true, with shame and grief I yield,
Thou like the Vann first took'st the field,
And gotten have the victory
In thus adventuring to die
Before me, whose more years might crave
A just precedence in the grave.
But hark! My Pulse like a soft Drum
Beats my approach, tells Thee I come;
And slow howere my marches be,
I shall at last sit down by Thee.
The thought of this bids me go on,
And wait my dissolution
With hope and comfort. Dear (forgive
The crime) I am content to live
Divided, with but half a heart,
Till we shall meet and never part.
The Anniverse.
AN ELEGY.
SO soon grown old! have thou been six years dead?
Poor earth, once by my Love inhabited!
And must I live to calculate the time
To which thy blooming youth could never climb,
But fell in the ascent! yet have not I
Studi'd enough thy losses history.
How happy were mankind if Death's strict laws
Consumed our lamentations like the cause!
Or that our grief turning to dust might end
With the dissolved body of a friend!
But sacred Heaven! O how just thou art
In stamping deaths impression on that heart
Which through thy favors would grow insolent,
Were it not physick't by sharp discontent.
If then it stand resolved in thy decree
That still I must doomed to a Desert be
Sprung out of my lone thoughts, which know no path
But what my own misfortune beaten has:
If thou will bind me living to a coarse,
And I must slowly waste; I then of force
Stoop to thy great appointment, and obey
That will which naught avail me to gainsay.
For whilst in sorrows Maze I wander on,
I do but follow life's vocation.
Sure we were made to grieve: at our first birth
With cries we took possession of the earth;
And though the lucky man reputed be
Fortunes adopted son, yet only he
Is Natures true born child, who sums his years
(Like me) with no Arithmetic but tears.
On two Children dying of one Disease, and buried in one Grave.
BRought forth in sorrow, and bred up in care,
Two tender Children here entombed are:
One Place, one Sire, one Womb their being gave,
They had one mortal sickness, and one grave.
And though they cannot number many years
In their Account, yet with their Patents tears
This comfort mingles; Though their days were few
They scarcely sin, but never sorrow knew:
So that they well might boast, they carried hence
What riper ages lose, their innocence.
You pretty losses, that revive the fate
Which in your mother death did antedate,
O let my high-swol'n grief distill on you
The saddest drops of a Parentall dew:
You ask no other dower then what my eyes
Lay out on your untimely exequies:
When once I have discharged that mournful skore,
Heaven has decreed you never shall cost me more,
Since you release and quit my borrowed trust,
By taking this inheritance of dust.
A Letter.
I Never was dressed in Forms; nor can I bend
My pen to flatter any, nor commend,
Unless desert or honor do present
Unto my verse a worthy argument.
You are my friend, and in that word to me
Stand blazoned in your noblest Heraldry;
That style presents you full, and does relate
The bounty of your love, and my own fate,
Both which conspired to make me yours. A choice
Which needs must in the giddy peoples voice,
That only judge the outside, and like apes
Play with our names, and comment on our shapes,
Appear too light: but it lies you upon
To justify the disproportion.
Truth be my record, I durst not presume
To seek to you, 'twas you that did assume
Me to your bosom. Wherein you subdued
One that can serve you, though never could intrude
Upon great titles; nor knows how t'invade
Acquaintance: Like such as are only paid
With great men's smiles; if that the passant Lord
Let fall a forced salute, or but afford
The Nod Regardant. It was test enough
For me, you never did find such servile stuff
Couch't in my temper; I can freely say,
I do not love you in that common way
For which Great Ones are loved in this false time*
I have no wish to gain, nor will to climb;
I cannot pawn my freedom, nor outlive
My liberty for all that you can give.
And sure you may retain good cheap such friends,
Who not your fortune make, but you, their ends.
I speak not this to vaunt in my own story,
All these additions are unto your glory;
Who counter to the world, use to elect,
Not to take up on trust what you affect.
Indeed it is seldom seen that such as you
Adopt a friend, or for acquaintance sue;
Yet you did this vouchsafe, you did descend
Below your self to raise an humble friend,
And ^ix him in your love: where I will stand
The constant subject of your free command.
Had I no ayerie thoughts sure you would teach
Me higher then my own dull sphere to reach:
And by reflex instruct me to appear
Something (though course and plain) fit for your wear.
Know, best of friends, however wild report
May justly say I am unapt to sort
With your opinion or society,
(Which truth would shame me did I it deny)
There Is something in me says, I dare make good,
When honor calls me, all I want in blood.
Put off your Giant titles, then I can
Stand in your judgments blank an equal man.
Though Hills advanced are above the Plain,
They are but higher earth, nor must disdain
Alliance with the Vale: we see a spade
Can level them, and make a Mount a Glade.
Howere we differ in the Heralds book,
He that mankindes extraction shall look
In Natures Rolls, must grant we all agree,
In our best parts, immortal pedigree:
You must by that perspective only view
My service, else 'twill nere show worthy you.
You see I court you bluntly like a friend
Not like a Mistress; my Muse is not penned
For smooth and oily flights: And I ^ndent
To use more honesty then complement.
But I have done; in lieu of all you give
Receive his thankful tribute who must live
Your vowed observer, and devotes a heart
Which will in death seal the bold counterpart.
An Acknowledgment.
MY best of friends! what needs a chain to tie
One by your merit bound a Votarie?
Think you I have some plot upon my peace,
I would this bondage change for a release?
Since 'twas my fate your prisoner to be,
Heaven knows I nothing fear but liberty.
Yet you do well that study to prevent,
After so rich a stock of favor spent
On one so worthless, left my memory
Should let so dear an obligation die
Without Record. This made my precious Friend
Her Token, as an Antidote to send
Against forgetful poisons. That as they
Who Vespers late, and early Mat^ins say
Upon their Beads, so on this linked skore
In golden numbers I might reckon o^e
Your virtues and my debt, which does surmount
The trivial laws of Popular account:
For that within this emblematick knot
Your beauteous mind, and my own fate is wrote.
The sparkling constellation which combines
The Lock, is your dear self, whose worth outshines
Most of your sex: so solid and so clear
You like a perfect Diamond appear;
Casting from your example fuller light
Then those dim sparks which glaze the brow of night,
And gladding all your friends, as does the ray
Of that East-starre which wakes the cheerful day.
But the black Map of death and discontent
Behind that Adamantine firmament,
That luckless figure which like Calvary
Stands strewn and coppy'd out in skuls, is I*
Whose life your absence clouds, and makes my tim^
Move blindfold in the dark ecliptic line.
Then wonder not if my removed Sun
So low within the Western Tropic run;
My eyes no day in this Horizon see,
Since where You are not all is night to one.
Lastly, the anchor which enfastned lies
Upon a pair of deaths, sadly applies
That Monument of Rest which harbor must
Our Ship-wrackt fortunes in a road of dust.
So then how late soere my joyless life
Be tired out in this affections strife:
Though my tempestuous fancy like the sky
Travail with storms, and through my watery eye
Sorrows high-going waves spring many a leak;
Though sighs blow loud til my hearts cordagebrea^
Though Faith, and all my wishes prove untrue,
Yet Death shall fix and anchor Me with You.
It Is some poor comfort that this mortal scope
Will Period, though never Crown my Hope.
The Acquittance.
NOt knowing who should my Acquittance take,
I know as little what discharge to mak^.
The favor is so great, that it out-goes
All forms of thankfulness I can propose.
Those grateful levies which my pen would raise,
Are stricken dumb, or buried in amaz^.
Therefore, as once in Athens there was shown
An Altar built unto the God unknown,
My ignorant devotions must by guess
This blind return of gratitude address,
Till You vouchsafe to show me where and how
I may to this revealed Goddess bow.
The Forfeiture.
MY Dearest, To let you or the world know
What Debt of service I do truly ow
To your unpattern'd self, were to require
A language only formed in the desire
Of him that writes. It is the common fate,
Of greatest duties to evaporate
In silent meaning, as we often see
Fires by their too much fuel smothered be:
Small Obligations may find vent and speak,
When greater the unable debtor break,
And such are mine to you, whose favors store,
Has made me poorer then I was before;
For I want words and language to declare
How strict my Bond or large your bounties are.
Since nothing in my desperate fortune found,
Can payment make, nor yet the sum compound*
You must lose all, or else of force accept
The body of a Bankrupt for your debt.
Then Love, your Bond to Execution sue,
And take my self, as forfeited to you.
The Departure.
AN ELEGY.
Were I to leave no more then a good friend,
Or but to hear the summons to my end,
(Which I have longed for) I could then with ease
Attire my grief in words, and so appease
That passion in my bosom, which outgrowes
The language of strict verse or largest prose.
But here I am quite lost; writing to you
All that I pen or think, is forced and new.
My faculties run cross, and prove as weak
T'indite this melancholy task, as speak:
Indeed all words are vain ^ vell might I spare
This rendering of my tortured thoughts in air,
Or sighing paper. My infectious grief
Strikes inward, and affords me no relief.
But still a deeper wound, to lose a sight
More loved then health, and dearer then the light.
But all of us were not at the same time
Brought forth, nor are we billited in one clime.
Nature has pitched mankind at several rates,
Making our places diverse as our fates.
Unto that universal law I bow,
Though with unwilling knee; and do allow
Her cruel justice, which disposed us so
That we must counter to our wishes go.
'Twas part of man's first curse, which ordered w^ll
We should not always with our likings dwell.
It Is only the Triumphant Church where we
Shall in unsever'd Neighborhood agree.
Go then best soul, and where You must appear
Restore the Day to that dull Hemisphear.
Nere may the hapless Night You leave behind
Darken the comforts of Your purer mind.
May all the blessings Wi^^es can invent
Enrich your days, and crown them with content,
And though You travel down into the West,
May Your life's Sun stand fixed in the East,
Far from the weeping set; nor may my car
Take in that killing whisper, You once were.
Thus kiss I your fair hands, taking my leave
As Prisoners at the Bar their doom receive.
All joys go with You: let sweet peace attend
You on the way, and wait Your journeys end.
But let Your discontents, and sowrer fate
Remain with me, born off in my Retrait.
Might all your crosses in that sheet of lead
Which folds my heavy heart lie buried:
It Is the last service I would do You, and the best
My wishes ever meant, or tongue professed.
Once more I take my leave. And once for all,
Our parting shows so like a funeral,
It strikes my soul, which has most right to be
Chief Mourner at this sad solemnity.
And think not, Dearest, 'cause this parting knell
Is rung in verses, that at Your farewell
I only mourn in Poetry and Ink:
No, my Pens melancholy Plommets sink
So low, they dive where the hid affections sit,
Blotting that Paper where my mirth was writ.
Believed that sorrow truest is which lies
Deep in the breast, not floating in the eyes:
And he with saddest circumstance does part,
Who seals his farewell with a bleeding heart.
PARADOX.
That it is best for a Young Maid to marry an Old Man.
FAir one, why cannot you an old man love?
He may as useful, and more constant prove.
Experience shows you that maturer years
Are a security against those fears
Youth will expose you to; whose wild desire
As it is hot, so it is as rash as fire.
Mark how the blaze extinct in ashes lies,
Leaving no brand nor embers when it dies
Which might the flame renew: thus soon consumes
Youths wandering hea^, and vanishes in fumes.
When ages riper love unapt to stray
Though loose and giddy change of objects, may
In your warm bosom like a cynder lie,
(...) and kindled by your sparkling eye.
It Is not (...), there are extremes in both
Which may the fancy move to like or loath:
(...) of the two you better shall endure
To marry with the Cramp then Calenture.
Who would in wisdom choose the Torrid Zone
Therein to settle a Plantation?
Merchants can tell you, those hot Climes were made
But at the longest for a three years trade:
And though the Indies cast the sweeter smell,
Yet health and plenty do more Northward dwell*
For where the raging Sunbeams burn the earth,
Her scorched mantle withers into dearth;
Yet when that drought becomes the Harvests cur^e,
Snow does the tender Corn most kindly nurse:
Why now then woo you not some snowy head
To take you in mere pity to his bed?
I doubt the harder task were to persuade
Him to love you: for if what I have said
In Virgins as in Vegetals holds true,
He Will prove the better Nurse to cherish you.
Some men we know renowned for wisdom grown
By old records and antique Medalls shown;
Why ought not women then be held most wise
Who can produce living antiquities?
Besides if care of that main happiness
Your sex triumphs in, does your thoughts possess,
I mean your beauty from decay to keep;
No wash nor mask is like an old man's sleep.
Young wives need never to be Sunburned fear,
Who their old husbands for Umbrellaes wear:
How russet looks an Orchard on the hill
To one that is watered by some neighboring Drill?
Are not the floated Meadows ever seen
To flouri^h soonest, and hold longest green?
You may be sure no moist'ning lacks that Bride,
Who lies with Winter thawing by her side.
She should be fruitful too as fields that join
Unto the melting waste of Appenine.
Whilst the cold morning-drops bedew the Rose,
It does nor leaf, nor smell, nor color lose;
Then doubt no^ Sweet! Age has supplies of wet
To keep You like that flowr in water set.
Dripping Catarrhs and Fontinells are things
Will make You th^nk You grew betwixt two Springs.
And should You not think so, You scarce allow
The force or Merit of Your Marriage-Vow;
Where Maids a new Creed learn, and must from thence
Believe against their own or others sense.
Else Love will nothing differ from neglect,
Which turns not to a virtue each defect.
I le say no more but this; you women make
Your Childrens reckoning by the Almanake.
I like it well, so you contented are,
To choose their Fathers by that Calendar.
Turn then old Erra Pater, and there see
According to life's posture and degree,
What age or what complexion is most fit
To make an English Maid happy by it;
And You shall find, if You will choose a man,
Set justly for Your own Meridian,
Though You perhaps let One and Twenty woo,
Your elevation is for Fifty Two.
PARADOX.
That Fruition destroys Love.
LOve is our Reasons Paradox, which still
Against the judgment does maintain the Will:
And governs by such arbitrary laws,
It only makes the Act our Likings cause:
We have no brave revenge, but to forgo
Our full desires, and starve the Tyrant so.
They whom the rising blood tempts not to taste,
Preserve a stock of Love can never waste;
When easy people who their wish enjoy,
Like Prodigalls at once their wealth destroy.
Adam till now had stayed in Paradise
Had his desires been bounded by his eyes.
When he did more then look, that made the offense,
And forfeited his state of innocence.
Fruition therefore is the bane t'undoe
Both our affection and the subject too.
It Is Love into worse language to translate,
And make it into Lust degenerate:
It Is to De-throne, and thrust it from the heart,
To seat it grossly in the sensual part.
Seek for the Star that is shot upon the ground,
And naught but a dim gelly there is found.
Thus foul and dark our female stars appear,
If fallen or loosned once from Virtues Sphere.
Glowworms shine only looked on, and let ly,
But handled crawl into deformity:
So beauty is no longer fair and bright,
Then whilst unstained by the appetite;
And then it withers like a blasted flower
Some poisonous worm or spider has crept ore.
Pigmaleon's dotage on the carved stone,
Shows Amorists their strong illusion.
Whilst he to gaze and court it was content,
He served as Priest at beauties Monument:
But when by looser fires t'embraces led,
It proved a cold hard Statue in his bed.
Irregular affects, like mad men's dreams
Presented by false lights and broken beams,
So long content us, as no near address
Shows the weak sense our painted happiness.
But when those pleasing shadows us forsake,
Or of the substance we a trial make,
Like him, deluded by the fancies mock,
We shipwreck against an Alabaster rock.
What though thy Mistress far from Marble be?
Her softness will transform and harden thee.
Lust is a Snake, and Guilt the Gorgons head,
Which Conscience turns to Stone, and Joys to Lead.
Turtles themselves will blush, if put to name
The Act, whereby they quench their amorous flame.
Who then that is wise or virtuous, would not fear
To catch at pleasures which forbidden were,
When those which we count lawful, cannot be
Required without some loss of modesty?
Even in the Marriage Bed, where soft delights
Are customary and authorized Rites;
What are those tributes to the wanton sense,
But toleration of Incontinence?
For properly you cannot call that Love
Which does not from the Soul, but Humor move.
Thus they who worshiped Pan or Is^s Shrine,
By the fair Front judged all within Divine:
Though entering, found 'twas but a Goat or Cow
To which before their ignorance did bow.
Such Temples and such Goddesses are these
Which foolish Lovers and admirers please:
Who if they chance within the Shrine to pri^,
Find that a beast they thought a Deity.
Nor makes it only our opinion less
Of what we liked before, and now possess;
But robbs the Fuel, and corrupts the Spice
Which sweetens and inflames Loves sacrifice*
After Fruition once, what is Desire
But ashes kept warm by a dying fire?
This is (if any) the Philosophers Stone,
Which still miscarries at Projection.
For when the Heat ad Octo intermits,
It poorly takes us like Third Ague fits;
Or must on Embers as dull Druggs infuse,
Which we for Medicine not for Pleasure use.
Since Lovers joys then leave so sick a taste,
And soon as relished by the Sense are past;
They are but Riddles sure, lost if possessed,
And therefore only in Reversion best.
For bate them Expectation and Delay,
You take the most delightful Scenes away.
These two such rule within the fancy keep,
As banquets apprehended in our sleep;
After which pleasing trance next morn we wake
Empty and angry at the nights mistake.
Give me long Dreams and Visions of content,
Rather then pleasures in a minute spent.
And since I know before, the shedding Rose
In that same instant does her sweetness lose,
Upon the Virgin-stock still let her dwell
For me, to feast my longings with her smell.
Those are but counterfeits of joy at best,
Which languish soon as brought unto the test.
Nor can I hold it worth his pains who tries
To Inn that Harvest which by reaping dies.
Resolve me now what spirit has delight,
If by full feed you kill the appetite?
That stomach healthy'st is, that nere was cloyed,
Why not that Love the best then, nere enjoyed?
Since nat'rally the blood, when tamed or sated,
Will cool so fast it leaves the object hated.
Pleasures like wonders quickly lose their price
When Reason or Experience makes us wise.
To close my argument then. I dare say
(And without Paradox) as well we may
Enjoy our Love and yet preserve Desire,
As warm our hands by putting out the fire.
The Change
Il sabio mude conseio: Il loco persevera.
WE loved as friends now twenty years and more:
Is It time or reason think you to give over?
When though two prentiships set Jacob free,
I have not held my Rachel dear at three.
Yet will I not your levitie accuse;
Continuance sometimes is the worse abuse.
In judgment I might rather hold it strange,
If like the fleeting world, you did not change:
Be it your wisdom therefore to retract,
When perseverance often is follies act.
In pity I can think, that what you do
Has Justice in it, and some Religion too;
For of all virtues Moral or Divine,
We know but Love none must in Heaven shine:
Well did you the presumption then foresee
Of counterfeiting immortality:
Since had you kept our loves too long alive,
We might invade Heavens prerogative;
Or in our progress, like the Jews, comprise
The Legend of an earthly Paradise.
Live happy and more prosperous in the next,
You have discharged your old friend by the Text.
Farewell fair Shadow of a female faith,
And let this be our friendships Epitaph:
Affection shares the frailty of our fate,
When (like our selves) it is old and out of date:
It Is just all humane Loves their period have,
When friends are frail and dropping to the grave!
To my Sister Anne King, who chid me in verse for being angry.
DEar Nan, I would not have thy counsel lost,
Though I last night had twice so much been crossed;
Well is a Passion to the Market brought,
When such a treasure of advice is bought
With so much dross. And could thou me assure,
Each vice of mine should meet with such a cure,
I would sin often, and on my guilty brow
Wear every misperfection that I ow,
Open and visible; I should not hide
But bring my faults abroad: to hear thee chide
In such a Note, and with a Quill so sage,
It Passion tunes, and calm^s a Tempests rage.
Well I am charmed, and promise to redress
What, without shrift, my follies do confess
Against my self: wherefore let me entreat,
When I fly out in that distempered heat
Which frets me into fasts, thou will reprove
That froward spleen in Poetry and Love:
So though I lose my reason in such fits,
Thou Wilt rhyme me back again into my wits.
AN ELEGY
Upon the immature loss of the most virtuous Lady Anne Rich.
I Envy not thy mortal triumphs, Death,
(Thou enemy to Virtue as to Breath)
Nor do I wonder much, nor yet complain
The weekly numbers by thy arrow flain.
The whole world is thy Factory, and we
Like traffic driven and retail'd by Thee:
And where the springs of life fill up so fast,
Some of the waters needs must run to waste.
It is confessed, yet must our griefs dispute
That which thine own conclusion does refute
Ere we begin. Hearken! for if thy ear
Be to thy throat proportioned, thou can hear.
Is there no order in the work of Fate?
Nor rule, but blindly to antici^pate
Our growing seasons? or think thou it is just,
To sprinkle our fresh blossoms with thy dust,
Till by abortive funerals, thou bring
That to an Autumn Nature meant a Spring?
Is It not enough for thee that withered age
Lies the unpiti'd subject of thy rage;
But like an ugly Amorist, thy crest
Must be with spoils of Youth and Beauty dressed?
In other Camps, those which fare down to day
March first to morrow, and they longest stay
Who last came to the service: But in thine,
Only confusion stands for discipline.
We fall in such promiscuous heaps, none can
Put any difference 'twixt thy Rear or Van;
Since often the youngest lead thy Files. For this
The grieved world here thy accuser is,
And I a Plaintiff, amongst those many ones
Who wet this Ladies Urn with zealous moanes;
As if her ashes quickening into years
Might be again embodied by our tears
But all in vain; the moisture we bestow
Shall make as soon her curled Marble grow,
As render heat, or motion to that blood,
Which through her veins branch't like an azure flood,
Whose now still Current in the grave is lost,
Locked up, and fettered by eternal frost.
Desist from hence, doting Astrology!
To search for hidden wonders in the sky;
Or from the concourse of malignant stars
Foretell diseases general as our wars:
What barren droughts, forerunners of lean dear^*
Threaten to starve the plenty of the earth:
What horrid forms of darkness must affright
The sickly world, hastening to that long night
Where it must end. If there no Portents (...),
No black eclipses for the Calendar,
Our times sad Annals will remembered be
Ith'loss of bright Northumberland and Thee:
Two Stars of Court, who in one fatal year
By most untimely set dropped from their Sphere.
She in the winter took her flight, and soon
As her perfections: reached the point of Noon,
Wrapped in a cloud, contracted her wished stay
Unto the measure of a short-lived day.
But Thou in Summer, like an early Rose
By Deaths cold hand nipp'd as Thou did disclose,
Took'st a long day to run that narrow stage,
Which in two gasping minutes summed thy age.
And, as the fading Rose, when the leaves shed
Lies in its native sweetness buried,
Thou in thy virtues bedded and inherst
Sleep'st with those odours thy pure fame dispersed.
Where till that Rising Morn thou must remain,
In which thy withered flowers shall spring again.
And greater beauties thy wak't body vest
Then were at thy departure here possessed.
So with full eyes we close thy vault. Content
(With what thy loss bequeaths us) to lament,
And make that use of thy grieved funeral,
As of a Chryst^ll broken in the fall;
Whose pitti'd fractures gathered up, and set,
May smaller Mirrours for Thy Sex beget;
There let them view themselves, until they see
The end of all their glories shown in Thee.
Whilst in the truth of this sad tribute, I
Thus strive to Canonize thy Memory.
AN ELEGY
Upon Mrs. Kirk unfortunately drowned in Thames.
FOr all the Ship-wracks, and the liquid graves
Lost men have gained within the furrowed waves,
The Sea has fined and for our wrongs paid use,
When its wrought foam a Venus did produce.
But what repair will thou unhappy Thames
Afford our loss? thy dull unactive streams
Can no new beauty raise, nor yet restore
Her who by thee was ravished from our shore:
Whose death has stained the glory of thy flood,
And mixed the guilty Channel with her blood.
O Neptune! was thy favor only writ
In that loose Element where thou do sit?
That after all this time thou should repent
Thy fairest blessing to the Continent?
Say, what could urge this Fate? is Thetis dead,
Or Amphitrite from thy wet arms fled?
Was It thou so poor in Nymphs, that thy moist love
Must be maintained with pensions from above?
If none of these, but that whilst thou did sleep
Upon thy sandy pillow in the deep,
This mischief stole upon us: may our grief
Waken thy just revenge on that sly thief,
Who in thy fluid Empire without leave,
And unsuspected, durst her life bereave.
Henceforth invert thy order, and provide
In gentlest floods a Pilot for our guide.
Let rugged Seas be loved, but the Brooks smile
Shunned like the courtship of a Crocodile;
And where the Current does most smoothly pass,
Think for her sake that stream deaths Looking-glass,
To show us our destruction is most near,
When pleasure has begot least sense of fear.
Else break thy forked Scepter against some Rock,
If thou endure a flattering calm to mock
Thy far-fam'd power, and violate that law
Which keeps the angry Ocean in aw.
Thy Trident will grow useless, which does still
Wild tempests, if thou let tame rivers kill.
Mean time we ow thee nothing. Our first debt
Lies cancelled in thy watery Cabinet.
We have for Her thou sent'st us from the Main,
Returned a Venus back to thee again.
AN ELEGY
Upon the death of Mr. Edward Holt.
Whether thy Fathers, or diseases rage,
More mortal p^ov'd to thy unhappy age,
Our sorrow needs not question; since the first
Is known for length and sharpness much the worst.
Thy Fever yet was kind; which the ninth day
For thy misfortunes made an easy way.
When the other barbarous and Hectic fit,
In nineteen winters did not intermit.
I therefore vainly now not ask thee why
Thou did so soon in thy Youths midway die:
But in my sense the greater wonder make
Thy long oppressed heart no sooner brake,
Of force must the neglected blossom fall
When the tough root becomes unnatural,
And to his branches does that sap deny,
Which them with life and verdure should supply.
For Parents shame, let it forgotten be,
And may the sad example die with thee.
It is not now thy grieved friends intent
To render thee dull Pities argument.
Thou have a bolder title unto fame,
And at Edgehill thou did make good the claim;
When in thy Royal Masters Cause and War
Thy ventured life brought off a noble skarre.
Nor did thy faithful services desist
Till death untimely struck thee from the List.
Though in that prouder vault then, which does tomb
Thy ancestors, thy body find not room,
Thine own deserts have purchased thee a place,
Which more renowned is then all thy race;
For in this earth thou do enn^bled ly
With marks of Valor and of Loyalty.
To my dead friend Ben: Johnson.
I See that wreath which does the wearer arm
Against the quick strokes of thunder, is no charm
To keep off deaths pale dart. For, Johnson then
Thou had been numbered still with living men.
Times sith had feared thy Laurel to invade,
Nor thee this subject of our sorrow made.
Amongst those many votaries who come
To offer up their Garlands at thy Tomb;
Whilst some more lofty pens in their bright verse
(Like glorious Tapers flaming on thy hearse)
Shall light the dull and thankless world to see,
How great a maim it suffers wanting thee;
Let not thy learned shadow scorn, that I
Pay meaner Rites unto thy memory;
And since I naught can add, but in desire
Restore some sparks which leapt from thine own fire.
What ends soever others quills invite,
I can p^otest, it was no itch to write,
Nor any vain ambition to be read,
But merely Love and Justice to the dead
Which raised my fameless Muse; and caused her bring
These drops, as tribute thrown into that spring,
To whose most rich and fruitful head we ow
The purest streams of language which can flow.
For it is but truth, thou taught'st the ruder age
To speak by Grammar, and reform'dst the Stage:
Thy Comic Sock induced such purged sense,
A Lucrece might have heard without offense.
Amongst those soaring wits that did dilate
Our English, and advance it to the rate
And value it now holds, thy self was one
Helped lift it up to such proportion.
That thus refined and roab'd, it shall not spare
With the full Greek or Latin to compare.
For what tongue ever durst, but ours, translate
Great Tully's Eloquence, or Homers State?
Both which in their unblemisht luster shine,
From Chapmans pen, and from thy Catiline.
All I would ask for thee, in recompense
Of thy successful toil and times expense,
Is only this poor Boon: that those who can
Perhaps read French, or talk Italian,
Or do the lofty Spaniard affect;
To show their skill in Foreign Dialect,
Prove not themselves so unnaturally wise,
They therefore should their Mother Tongue despise.
(As if her Poets both for style and wit
Not equaled, or not passed their hest that writ)
Until by studying Johnson they have known
The height and strength and plenty of their own.
Thus in what low earth or neglected room
Soere thou sleep'st, thy book shall be thy tomb.
Thou will go down a happy Coarse, bestrew'd
With thine own Flowers; and feel thy self renewed,
Whilst thy immortal never-with'ring Bays
Shall yearly flourish in thy Readers praise.
And when more spreading Titles are forgot,
Or spite of all their Lead and Sear-cloth rot,
Thou wrapped and Shrin'd in thine own sheets, wilt ly
A Relick famed by all Posterity.
AN ELEGY
Upon Prince Henry's death.
KEep station Nature, and rest Heaven sure
On thy supporters shoulders, lest past cure,
Thou dashed in ru^ne fall by a griefs weight
Will make thy basis shrink, and lay thy height
Low as the Center Hark! and feel it read
Through the astonished Kingdom, Henry's dead.
It is enough; who seeks to aggravate
One strain beyond this, prove more sharp his fate
Then sad our doom* The world dares not survive
To parallel this woes superlative.
O killing Rhetoric of Death! two words
Breathe stronger terrors then Plague, Fire, or Swords
Ere conquered. This were Epitaph and Verse
Worthy to be pre^ixt in Natures hearse,
Or Earths sad dissolution; whose fall
Will be less grievous though more general:
For all the woe ruin ere buried,
Sounds in these fatal accents, Henry's dead.
Cease then unable Poetry, thy phrase
Is weak and dull to strike us with amaze
Worthy thy vaster subject. Let none dare
To copy this sad hap, but with despair
Hanging at his quills point. For not a stream
Of Ink can write much less improve this Theme.
Invention highest wrought by grief or wit
Must sink with him, and on his Tombstone split.
Who, like the dying Sun, tells us the light
And glory of our Day set in his Night.
AN ELEGY
Upon S. W. R.
I Will not weep, for 'twere as great a sin
To shed a tear for thee, as to have bin*
An Actor in thy death. Thy life and age
Was but a various Scene on fortunes Stage,
With whom thou tugg'st and strov'st even out of breath
In thy long toil: nere mastered till thy death;
And then despite of trains and cruel wit,
Thou did at once subdue malice and it.
I dare not then so blast thy memory
As say I do lament or pity thee.
Were I to choose a subject to bestow
My pity on, he should be one as low
In spirit as desert. That durst not die
But rather were content by slavery
To purchase life: or I would pity those
Thy most industrious and friendly foes:
Who when they thought to makethee scandals story
Lent thee a swifter flight to Heaven and glory.
That thought by cutting off some withered days,
(Which thou could spare them) to eclipse thy praise;
Yet gave it brighter foil, made thy aged fame
Appear more white and fair, then foul their shame:
And did promote an Execution
Which (but for them) Nature and Age had done.
Such worthless things as these were only born
To live on Pities alms (too mean for scorn.)
Thou dy'dst an envious wonder, whose high fate
The world must still admire, scarce imitate.
AN ELEGY
Upon the L. Bishop of London John King.
SAd Relick of a blessed Soul! whose trust
We sealed up in this religious dust.
O do not thy low Exequies suspect
As the cheap arguments of our neglect.
'Twas a commanded duty that thy grave
As little pride as thou thy self should have.
Therefore thy covering is an humble stone,
And but a word Resurgam.
for thy inscription.
When those that in the same earth neighbor thee,
Have each his Chronicle and Pedigree:
They have their waving pennons and their flagges,
(Of Matches and Alliance formal bragges.)
When thou (although from Ancestors thou came
Old as the Heptarchy, great as thy Name)
Sleep'st there inshrin'd in thy admired parts,
And have no Heraldry but thy deserts.
Yet let not Them their prouder Marbles boast,
For They rest with less honor, though more cost.
Go, search the world, and with your Mattox wound
The groaning bosom of the patient ground:
Dig from the hidden veins of her dark womb
All that is rare and precious for a tomb:
Yet when much treasure, and more time is spent
You must grant Hi^ the nobler Monument.
Whose Faith stands ore Him for a Hearse, and has
The Resurrection for His Epitaph.
Upon the death of my ever desired friend Doctor Done Dean of Paul's.
TO have lived eminent in a degreee
Beyond our lofty'st flights, that is like thee;
Or to have had too much merit is not safe;
For such excesses find no Epitaph.
At common graves we have Poetic eyes
Can melt themselves in easy Elegies;
Each quill can drop his tributary verse,
And pin it with the Hatchments, to the Hearse:
But at thine, Poem or inscription
(Rich Soul of wit and language:) we have none;
Indeed a silence does that Tomb besit
Where is no Herald left to blazon it.
Widdow'd invention justly does forbear
To come abroad knowing thou art not here,
Late her great Patron; whose prerogative
Maintained and clothed her so, as none alive
Must now presume to keep her at thy rate,
Though he the Indies for her dowre estate;
Or else that awful fire, which once did burn
In thy clear brain, now fallen into thy Urn.
Lives there to fright rude Empericks from thenc^;
Which might profane thee by their ignorance:
Who ever writes of thee, and in a style
Unworthy such a Theme, does but revile
Thy precious dust, and wake a learned spirit
Which may revenge his rapes upon thy merit.
For all a low-pitcht fancy can devise,
Will prove at best but hallowed injuries.
Thou, like the dying Swan, did lately sing
Thy mournful Dirge in audience of the King;
When pale looks, and faint accents of thy breath,
Presented so to life that piece of death,
That it was feared and prophesi'd by all
Thou thither came to preach thy Funeral.
O! had thou in an Elegiack knell
Rung out unto the world thine own farewell;
And in thy high victorious numbers beat
The solemn measure of thy grieved retreat:
Thou might the Poets service now have mist,
As well as then thou did prevent the Priest:
And never to the world beholden be,
So much as for an Epitaph for thee.
I do not like the office. Nor is it fit
Thou, who did lend our age such sums of wit,
Should now reborrow from her Bankrupt Mine
That Ore to bury thee, which once was thine.
Rather still leave us in thy debt; and know
(Exalted Soul!) More glory it is to ow
Unto thy Hearse what we can never pay,
Then with embased coin those Rites defray.
Commit we then Thee to Thy Self: nor blame
Our drooping loves, which thus to thine own fame
Leave Thee Executour: since but thy own
No pen could do Thee Justice, nor Bays crown
Thy vast desert; save that we nothing can
Depute to be thy ashes Guardian.
So Jewellers no Art or Metal trust
To form the Diamond, but the Diamonds dust.
AN ELEGY
Upon the most victorious King of Sweden Gustavus Adolphus.
LIke a cold fatal sweat which ushers death
My thoughts hang on me, and my laboring breath
Stopped up with sighs, my fancy big with woes,
Feels two twinn'd mountains struggle in her throws,
Of boundless sorrow one, ^other of sin;
For less let no one rate it to begin
Where honor ends. In Great Gustavus flame
That style burnt out, and wasted to a name,
Does barely live with us. As when the stuff
That fed it ^ailes, the Taper turns to snuff.
With this poor snuff, this ayerie shadow, we
Of Fame and Honor must contented be;
Since from the vain grasp of our wishes fled
Their glorious substance is, now He is dead.
Speak it again, and louder, louder yet;
Else whilst we hear the sound we shall forget
What it delivers. Let hoarse rumor cry
Till she so many echoes multiply,
Those may like numerous witnesses confute
Our unbelieving souls, that would dispute
And doubt this truth for ever. This one way
Is left our incredulity to sway;
To waken our deaf sense, and make our ears
As open and dilated as our fears;
That we may feel the blow, and feeling grieve,
At what we would not feign, but must believe.
And in that horrid faith behold the world
From her proud height of expectation hurled,
Stooping with him, as if she strove to have
No lower Center now then Swedens grave.
O could not all thy purchased victories
Like to thy Fame thy Flesh immortalize?
Were not thy virtue nor thy valor charms
To guard thy body from those outward harms
Which could not reach thy soul? could not thy spirit
Lend somewhat which thy frailty might inherit
From thy diviner part, that Death nor Hate
Nor envy's bullets ere could penetrate?
Could not thy early Trophies in stern fight
Torn from the Dane, the Pole, the Moscovite?
Which were thy triumphs seeds, as pledges sown,
That when thy honors harvest was ripe grown,
With full-summ'd wing thou Falcon-like would fly
And cuff the Eagle in the German sky:
Forcing his iron beak and feathers feel
They were not proof against thy victorious steel.
Could not all these protect thee? or prevail
To fright that Coward Death, who often grew pale
To look thee and thy battails in the face?
Alas they could not: Destiny gives place
To none; nor is it seen that Princes lives
Can saved be by their prerogatives.
No more was thine; who closed in thy cold lead,
Do from thy self a mournful lecture read
Of Man's short-dated glory: learn you Kings,
You are like him but penetrable things;
Though you from Demigods derive your birth,
You are at best but honorable earth:
And howere sifted from that cour^er bran
Which does compound and knead the common man,
Nothing's immortal or from earth refined
About you, but your Office and your Mind.
Here then break your false Glasses, which present
You greater then your Maker ever meant:
Make truth your Mirror now, since you find all
That flatter you confuted by his fall.
Yet since it was decreed thy life's bright Sun
Must be eclipsed ere thy fuil course was run,
Be proud thou did in thy black Obsequies
With greater glory set then others rise.
For in thy death, as life, thou heldest one
Most just and regular proportion.
Look how the Circles drawn by Compass meet
Indivisibly joined head to feet,
And by continued points which them unite
Grow at once Circular and Infinite:
So did thy Fate and honor now contend
To match thy brave beginning with thy end.
Therefore thou had instead of Passing bells
The Drums and Cannons thunder for thy knells;
And in the Field thou did triumphing die,
Closing thy eyelids with a victory:
That so by thousands who there lost their breath
King-like thou might be waited on in death.
Lived Plutarch now, and would of Caesar tell,
He could make none but Thee his parallel;
Whose tide of glory swelling to the brim
Needs borrow no addition from Him.
When did great Julius in any Clime
Atchieve so much and in so small a time?
Or if he did, yet shall Thou in that land
Single for him and unexampled stand.
When ore the Germans first his Eagle towr'd
What saw the Legions which on them he poured?
But massy bodies, made their swords to try
Subjects not for his fight Magis triumphati ^^uam ^victi. Tacit. de nor. Ger.
, but slavery.
In that so vast expanded piece of ground
(Now Swedens Theater and Tomb) he found
Nothing worth Caesar's valor, or his fear,
No conquering Army, nor a Tilley there,
Whose strength nor wiles, nor practice in the war
Might the fierce Torrent of thy triumphs bar,
But that thy winged sword twice made him yield,
Both from his trenches beat, and from the field.
Besides the R^mane thought he had done much
Did he the bank of Rhenus only touch.
But though his march was bounded by the Rhine
Not Oder nor the Danube Thee confine;
And but thy frailty did thy fame prevent,
Thou had thy conquests strecht to such extent,
Thou might Vienna reach, and after span
From Mulda to the Baltic Ocean.
But death has spann'd thee: nor must we divine
What heir thou leave to finish thy design,
Or who shall thee succeed as Champion
For liberty and for religion.
Thy task is done; as in a Watch the spring
Wound to the height, relaxes with the string:
So thy steel nerves of conquest, from their steep
Ascent declined, lie slackt in thy last sleep.
Rest then triumphant soul! for ever rest!
And, like the Phoenix in her spicy nest,
Embalmed with thine own merit, upward fly,
Born in a cloud of perfume to the sky.
Whilst, as in deathless Urnes, each noble mind
Treasures thy ashes which are left behind.
And if perhaps no Cassiopeian spark
(Which in the North did thy first rising mark)
Shine ore thy Hearse: the breath of our just praise
Shall to the Firmament thy virtues raise;
Then fix, and kindle them into a Star,
Whose influence may crown thy glorious war.
-- O Fama ingens ingentior armis
Rex Gustave, quibus Coelo te laudibus aequem?
Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2. To my Noble and Judicious Friend Sir Henry Blount upon
his Voyage.
SIR, I must ever own my self to be
Possessed with humane curiosity
Of seeing all that might the sense invite
By those two baits of profit and delight:
And since I had the wit to understand
The terms of Native or of foreign land;
I have had strong and often desires to tread
Some of those voyages which I have read.
Yet still so fruitless have my wishes p^ov'd,
That from my Countries smoke I never moved:
Nor ever had the fortune (though designed)
To satisfy the wanderings of my mind.
Therefore at last I did with some content,
Beguile my self in time, which others spent;
Whose art to Provinces small lines allots,
And represents large Kingdoms but in spots.
Thus by Ortelius and Mercators aid
Through most of the discovered world I strai'd.
I could with ease double the Southern Cape,
And in my passage Affricks wonders take:
Then with a speed proportioned to the Scale
Northward again, as high as Zemla sail.
Often has the travel of my eye outrun
(Though I sat still) the journey of the Sun:
Yet made an end, ere his declining beams
Did nightly quench themselves in Thetis streams.
Often have I gone through Egypt in a day,
Not hindered by the droughts of Lybia;
In which, for lack of water tides of sand
By a dry deluge overflow the land.
There I the Pyramids and Cairo see,
Still famous for the wars of Tomombee,
And its own greatness; whose immured fence
Takes forty miles in the circumference.
Then without guide, or stronger Caravan
Which might secure the wild Arabian,
Back through the scorched Deserts pass, to seek
Once the worlds Lord, now the beslaved Greek,
Made by a Turkish yoke and fortunes hate
In language as in mind, degenerate.
And here all wrapped in pity and amaze
I stand, whilst I upon the Sultan gaze;
To think how he with pride and rapine fired
So vast a Territory has acquired;
And by what daring steps he did become
The Asian fear, and scourge of Christendom:
How he archiev'd, and kept, and by what arts
He did concenter those divided parts;
And how he holds that monstrous bulk in aw,
By settled rules of tyranny, not Law:
So Rivers large and rapid streams began,
Swelling from drops into an Ocean.
Sure who ere shall the just extraction bring
Of this Gigantick power from the spring;
Must there confess a higher Ordinance
Did it for terror to the earth advance.
For mark how amongst a lawless straggling crew
Made up of Arab, Saracen, and Jew,
The worlds disturber, faithless Mahomet
Did by Impostures an opinion get:
Over whom he first usurps as Prince, and than
As Prophet does obtrude his Alcoran.
Next, how fierce Ottoman his claim made good
From that unblest Religion, by blood;
Whilst he the Eastern Kingdoms did deface,
To make their ruin his proud Empires base.
Then like a Comet blazing in the skies,
How Death-portending Amurath did rise,
When he his horned Crescents did display
Upon the fatal Plains of Servia;
And farther still his sanguin tresses spread,
Till Croya Life and Conquests limited.
Lastly, how Mahomet thence styled the Great,
Made Constantines his own Imperial Seat;
After that he in one victorious bond
Two Empires graspt, of Greece and Trabezond.
This, and much more then this, I gladly read,
Where my relators it had storyed;
Besides that Peoples Manners and their Rites,
Their warlike discipline and ordered fights;
Their desperate valor, hardened by the sense
Of unavoided Fate and Providence:
Their habit, and their houses, who confer
Less cost on them then on their Sepulcher:
Their frequent washings, and the several Bath
Each Meschit to it self annexed has:
What honor they unto the Musty give,
What to the Sovereign under whom they live:
What quarter Christians have; how just and free
To inoffensive Travelers they be:
Though I confess, like stomachs fed with news,
I took them in for wonder, nor for use,
Till your experienced and authentic pen
Taught me to know the places and the men;
And made all those suspected truths become
Undoubted now, and clear as Axiom.
Sir, for this work more then my thanks is due;
I am at once informed and cured by you.
So that, were I assured I should live over
My periods of time run out before;
Nere needed my erratick wish transport
Me from my Native lists to that resort,
Where many at outlandish Marts unlade
Ingenuous manners, and do only trade
For vices and the language. By your eyes
I here have made my full discoveries;
And all your Countries so exactly seen,
As in the voyage I had sharer been.
By this you make me so; and the whole land
Your debtour: which can only understand
How much she owes you, when her sons shall try
The solid depths of your rare history,
Which looks above our gadders trivial reach,
The Common Place of travelers, who teach
But Table-talk; and seldomly aspire
Beyond the Countres Diet or Attire;
Whereas your piercing judgment does relate
The Policy and Manage of each State.
And since she must here without envy grant
That you have further journey'd the Levant
Then any noble spirit by her bred
Has in your way as yet adventured;
I cannot less in justice from her look,
Then that she henceforth Canonize your book
A Rule to all her travelers, and you
The brave example; from whose equal view
Each knowing Reader may himself direct,
How he may go abroad to some effect,
And not for form: what distance and what trust
In those remo^er parts observe he must:
How he with jealous people may converse,
Yet take no hurt himself by that commerce.
So when he shall embarked in dangers be,
Which wit and wary caution not foresee;
If he partake your valor and your brain,
He may perhaps come safely off again,
As you have done; though not so richly fraught
As this return has to our Staple brought.
I know your modesty shuns vulgar praise,
And I have none to bring: but only raise
This monument of Honor and of Love,
Which your long known deserts so far improve,
They leave me doubtful in what style to end,
Whether more your admirer or your friend.
To my honored Friend Mr. George Sandys.
IT is, Sir, a confessed intrusion here
That I before your labors do appear,
Which no loud Herald need, that may proclaim
Or seek acceptance, but the Authors fame.
Much less that should this happy work commend,
Whose subject is its license, and does send
It to the world to be received and read,
Far as the glorious beams of truth are spread.
Nor let it be imagined that I look
Only with Customs eye upon your book;
Or in this service that 'twas my intent
T'exclude your person from your argument:
I shall profess much of the love I ow,
Does from the root of our extraction grow;
To which though I can little contribute,
Yet with a natural joy I must impute
To our Tribes honor, what by you is done
Worthy the title of a Prelates son.
And scarcely have two brothers farther borne
A Fathers name, or with more value worn
Their own, then two of you; whose pens and feet
Have made the distant Points of Heaven to meet;
He by exact discoveries of the Sr. Edwin Sandys survay of religion in the West.
West,
Your self by painful travels in the East.
Some more like you might pow'rfully confute
Th'opposers of Priests marriage by the fruit.
And (since it is known for all their straight vowed life,
They like the sex in any style but wise)
Cause them to change their Cloister for that State
Which keeps men chaste by vows legitimate:
Nor shame to father their relations,
Or under Nephews names disguise their sons.
This Child of yours born without spurious blot,
And fairly Midwiv'd as it was begot,
Does so much of the Parents goodness wear,
You may be proud to own it for your Heir.
Whose choice acquits you from the common sin
Of such, who finish worse then they begin:
You mend upon your self, and your last strain
Does of your first the start in judgment gain;
Since what in curious travel was begun,
You here conclude in a devotion.
Where in delightful raptures we desc^y
As in a Map, Sions Chorography
Laid out in so direct and smooth a line,
Men need not go about through Palestine:
Who seek Christ here will the straight Rode prefer,
As nearer much then by the Sepulcher.
For not a limb grows here, but is a path;
Which in Gods City the blessed Center has:
And does so sweetly on each passion strike,
The most fantastic taste will somewhat like.
To the unquiet soul Ioh Ioh.
still from hence
Pleads in the example of his patience.
The mo^tify'd may hear the wise King preach, Eccl^siastes

When his repentance made him fit to teach.
Nor shall the singing Sisters be content
To chant at home the Act of Parliament, ^he Act of ^arliament ^or public
(...) on the ^^fth of No^emb. set to tune by ^. Dod a tradesman of London, at
the end of his Psalms, which stole ^om the Press Anno Domini 1620.

Turned out of reason into rhyme by one
Free of his trade, though not of Helicon,
Who did in his Poetic zeal contend
Others edition by a worse to mend.
Here are choice Hymns Hymns
and Carolls for the glad,
With melancholy Dirges for the sad: Lamentat.

And David (as he could his skill transfer) Psalms.

Speaks like himself by an interpreter.
Your Muse rekindled has the Prophets fire,
And tuned the strings of his neglected Lyre;
Making the Note and Ditty so agree,
They now become a perfect harmony.
I must confess, I have long wished to see
The Psalms reduced to this conformity:
Grieving the songs of Sion should be sung
In phrase not differing from a barbatous tongue.
As if, by custom warranted, we may
Sing that to God we would be loath to say.
Far be it from my purpose to upbraid
Their honest meaning, who first offer made
That book in Meeter to compile, which you
Have mended in the form, and built anew:
And it was well, considering the time,
Which hardly could distinguish verse and rhyme.
But now the language, like the Church, has won
More luster since the Reformation;
None can condemn the wish or labor spent
Good matter in good words to represent.
Yet in this jealous age some such there be,
So without cause afraid of novelty,
They would not (were it in their power to choose)
An old ill practice for a better lose.
Men who a rustic plainness so affect,
They think God served best by their neglect.
Holding the cause would be profaned by it,
Were they at charge of learning or of wit.
And therefore bluntly (what comes next) they bring
Course and unstudy'd stuffs for offering;
Which like the old Tabernacles covering are,
Made up of Badgers skins, and of Goats hair.
But these are Paradoxes they mu^t use
Their sloth and bolder ignorance t'excuse.
Who would not laugh at one will naked go,
'Cause in old hangings truth is pictured so?
Though plainness be reputed honors note,
They mantles use to beautify the coat;
So that a curious (unaffected) dress
Adds much unto the bodies comeliness:
And wheresoere the subjects best, the sense
Is bettered by the speakers eloquence.
But, Sir, to you I shall no trophee raise
From other men's detraction or dispraise:
That Jewel never had inherent worth,
Which asked such foils as these to set it forth.
If any quarrel your attempt or style,
Forgive them; their own folly they revile.
Since, against themselves, their factious envy shall
Allow this work of yours Canonical.
Nor may you fear the Poets common ^ot,
Read, and commended, and then quite forgot:
The brazen Mines and Marble Rocks shall wast,
When your foundation will unshaken last.
It Is fames best pay, that you your labors see
By their immortal subject crowned be.
For nere was writer in oblivion hid
Who firm'd his name on such a Pyramid.
The Woes of Esaias.
VVOe to the worldly men whose covetous
Ambition labors to join house to house,
Lay field to field, till their enclosures edge
The Plain, girdling a country with one hedge:
That leave no place unbought, no piece of earth
Which they will not ingross, making a dearth
Of all inhabitants, until they stand
Unneighbour'd as unblest within their land.
This sin cries in Gods ear, who has decreed
The ground they sow shall not return the seed.
They that unpeopled countries to create
Themselves sole Lords, made many desolate
To build up their own house, shall find at last
Ruin and fearful desolation cast
Upon themselves. Their Mansion shall become
A Desert, and their Palace prove a tomb.
Their vines shall barren be, their land yield tares;
Their house shall have no dwellers, they no heirs.
Woe unto those that with the morning Sun
Rise to drink wine, and sit till he have run
His weary course; not ceasing until night
Have quenched their understanding with the light:
Whose raging thirst, like fire, will not be tam'^,
The more they pour the more they are inflamed.
Woe unto them that only mighty are
To wage with wine; in which unhappy war
They who the glory of the day have won,
Must yield them foiled and vanquished by the tu^.
Men that live thus, as if they lived in jest,
Fooling their time with Music and a feast;
That did exile all sounds from their soft ear
But of the harp, must this sad discord hear
Composed in threats. The feet which measures tread
Shall in captivity be fettered:
Famine shall scourge them for their vast excess;
And Hell revenge their monstrous drunkenness;
Which has enlarged it self to swallow such,
Whose throats nere knew enough, though still too much
Woe unto those that countenance a sin,
Siding with vice that it may credit win.
By their unhallowed vote: that do benight
The truth with error, putting dark for light,
And light for dark; that call an evil good,
And would by vice have virtue understood:
That with their frown can sour an honest cause,
Or sweeten any bad by their applause.
That justify the wicked for reward;
And void of moral goodness or regard,
Plot with detraction to traduce the fame
Of him whose merit has enrolled his name
Among the just. Therefore Gods vengeful ire
Glows on his people, and becomes a fire
Whose greedy and exalted flame shall burn,
Till they like straw or chafe to nothing turn.
Because they have rebelled against the right,
To God and Law perversely opposite,
As Plants which Sun nor showers did ever bless,
So shall their root convert to rottenness;
And their successions bud, in which they trust,
Shall (like Gomorrahs fruit) moulder to dust.
Woe unto those that drunk with self-conceit,
Value their own designs at such a rate
Which humane wisdom cannot reach; that sit
Enthroned, as sole Monopolists of wit:
That out-look reason, and suppose the eye
Of Nature blind to their discovery,
Whilst they a title make to understand
What ever secret's bosomed in the land.
But God shall imp their pride, and let them see
They are but fools in a sublime degree:
He shall bring down and humble those proud eyes,
In which false glasses only they looked wise:
That all the world may laugh, and learn by it,
There is no folly to pretended wi^.
Woe unto those that draw iniquity
With cords, and by a vain security
Lengthen the sinful trace, till their own chain
Of many links formed by laborious pain,
Do pull them into Hell; that as with lines
And Cart-ropes drag on their unwilling crimes:
Who, rather then they will commit no sin,
Tempt all occasions to let it in.
As if there were no God, who must exact
The strict account for ^'ry vicious fact;
Nor judgment after death. If any be,
Let him make speed (say they) that we may see.
Why is his work retarded by delay?
Why does himself thus linger on the way?
If there be any judge, or future doom,
Let It and Him with speed together come.
Unhappy men, that challenge and defy
The coming of that dreadful Majesty!
Better by much for you, he did reverse
His purposed sentence on the Universe;
Or that the creeping minutes might adjourn
Those flames in which you with the earth must burn;
That times revolting hand could lag the year,
And so put back his day which is too near.
Behold his sign's advanced like colors fly,
To tell the world that his approach is nigh;
And in a furious march, he is coming on
Swift as the raging inundation,
To scowre the sinful world; against which is bent
Artillery that never can be spent:
Bows strung with vengeance, and flame-feather'd dar^s
Headed with death, to wound transgressing hearts
His Chariot wheels wrapped in the whirlewinds gyre'
His horses hoov'd with flint, and shod with fire:
In which amaze where ere they fix their eye,
Or on the melting earth, or up on high
To seek Heavens shrunk lights, nothing shall appear
But night and horror in their Hemisphere:
Nor shall the affrighted sense more objects know
Then darkened skies above, and Hell below.
An Essay on Death and a Prison.
A Prison is in all things like a grave,
Where we no better privileges have
Then dead men, nor so good. The soul once fled
Lives freer now, then when she was cloystered
In walls of flesh; and though she organs want
To act her swift designs, yet all will grant
Her faculties more clear, now separate,
Then if the same conjunction, which of late
Did marry her to earth, had stood in force,
Incapable of death, or of divorce:
But an imprisoned mind, though living, dies,
And at one time feels two captivities;
A narrow dungeon which her body holds,
But narrower body which her self enfolds.
Whilst I in prison ly, nothing is free,
Nothing enlarged but thought and misery;
Though every chink be stopped, the doors close barred,
Despite of walls and locks, through every ward
These have their issues forth; may take the air,
Though not for health, but only to compare
How wretched those men are who freedom want,
By such as never suffered a restraint.
In which unquiet travel could I find
Ought that might settle my distempered mind,
Or of some comfort make discovery
It were a voyage well employed: but I,
Like our raw travelers that cross the seas
To fetch home fashions or some worse disease,
Instead of quiet a new torture bring
Home t'afflict me, malice and murmuring.
What is it I envy not? no dog nor fly
But my desires prefer, and wish were I;
For they are free, or if they were like me,
They had no sense to know calamity.
But in the grave no sparks of envy live,
No hot comparisons that causes give
Of quarrel, or that our affections move
Any condition, save their own, to love.
There are no objects there but shade^s and night,
And yet that darkness better then the light.
There lives a silent harmony, no jar
Or discord can that swee^ soft consort mar.
The graves deaf ear is closed against all noise
Save that which rocks must hear, the angels voice:
Whose trump shall wake the world, and raise up men
Who in earths bosom slept, bedridden till then.
What man then would, who on deaths pillow slumbers,
Be re-inspir'd with life, though golden numbers
Of bliss were poured into his breast; though he
Were sure in change to gain a Monarchy?
A Monarchs glorious state compared with his,
Less safe, less free, less firm, less quiet is.
For nere was any Prince advanced so high
That he was out of reach of misery:
Never did story yet a law report
To banish fate or sorrow from his Court;
Where ere he moves by land, or through the Main,
These go along sworn members of his train.
But he whom the kind earth has entertained,
Has in her womb a sanctuary gained,
Whose charter and protection arm him so,
That he is priviledg'd from future woe.
The Coffin's a safe harbor, where he rides
Land-bound, below cross winds, or churlish tides.
For grief, sprung up with life, was man's half-brother
Fed by the taste, brought forth by sin, the mother.
And since the first seduction of the wife,
God did decree to grief a lease for life;
Which Patent in full force continue must,
Till man that disobeyed revert to dust.
So that life's sorrows ratified by God
Cannot expire, or find their period,
Until the soul and body disunite,
And by two different ways from each take flight,
But they dissolved once our woes disband,
The Assurance cancelled by one fatal hand;
Soon as the passing bell proclaims me dead,
My sorrows sink with me, lie buried
In the same heap of dust, the self-same Urn
Does them and me alike to nothing turn.
If then of these I might election make
Whether I would refuse, and whether take,
Rather then like a sullen Anchorite
I would live cased in stone, and learn to write
A Prisoners story, which might steal some tears
From the sad eyes of him that reads or hears;
Give me a peaceful death, and let me meet
My freedom sealed up in my winding sheet.
Death is the pledge of rest, and with one bayl
Two Prisons quits, the Body and the Jayl.
The Labyrinth.
LIfe is a crooked Labyrinth, and we
Are daily lost in that Obliquity.
It Is a perplexed circle, in whose round
Nothing but sorrows and new sins abound.
How is the faint impression of each good
Drowned in the vicious Channel of our blood?
Whose Ebbes and tides by their vicissitude
Both our great Maker and our selves delude.
O wherefore is the most discerning eye
U^^pt to make its own discovery?
Why is the clearest and best judging mind
In her own ills prevention dark and blind?
Dull to advise, to act precipitate,
We scarce think what to do but when too late.
Or if we think, that fluid thought, like seed
Rots there to propagate some fouler deed.
Still we repent and sin, sin and repent;
We thaw and freeze, we harden and relent.
Those fires which cooled to day the morrows heat
Rekindles. Thus frail nature does repeat
What she unlearnt, and still by learning on
Perfects her lesson of confusion.
Sick soul! what cure shall I for thee devise,
Whose leprous state corrupts all remedies?
What medicine or what cordial can be got
For thee, who poyson'st thy best antidot?
Repentance is thy bane, since thou by it
Only reviv'st the fault thou did commit.
Nor griev'st thou for the past, but art in pain
For fear thou may not act it over again.
So that thy tears, like water spilt on lime,
Serve not to quench, but to advance the crime.
My blessed Savior! unto thee I fly
For help against this homebred tyranny.
Thou can true sorrows in my soul imprint,
And draw contrition from a breast of flint.
Thou can reverse this labyrinth of sin
My wild affects and actions wander in.
O guide my faith! and by thy graces clew
Teach me to hunt that kingdom at the view
Where true joys reign, which like their day shall last;
Those never clouded, nor that overcast.
Being waked out of my sleep by a snuff of Candle which offended me, I thus
thought.
PErhaps 'twas but conceit. Erroneous sense!
Thou art thine own distemper and offense.
Imagine then, that sick unwholsom steam
Was thy corruption breathed into a dream.
Nor is it strange, when we in charnells dwe^^,
That all our thoughts of earth and frailty smell.
Man is a Candle, whose unhappy light
Burns in the day, and smothers in the night.
And as you see the dying taper waste,
By such degrees does he to darkness haste.
Here is the difference: When our bodies lamps
Blinded by age, or choakt with mortal damps,
Now faint and dim and s^ckly 'gin to wink,
And in their hollow sockets lowly sink;
When all our vital fires ceasing to burn,
Leave naught but snuff and ashes in our Urn:
God will restore those fallen lights again,
And kindle them to an Eternal flame.
Sic Vita.
LIke to the falling of a Star;
Or as the flights of Eagles are;
Or like the fresh springs gaudy hew;
Or silver drops of morning dew;
Or like a wind that chafes the-flood;
Or bubbles which on water stood;
Even such is man, whose borrowed light
Is straight called in, and paid to night.
The wind blows out; the Bubble dies;
The Spring entombed in Autumn lies;
The Dew dries up; the Star is shot;
The Flight is past; and Man forgot.
My Midnight Meditation.
ILL busi'd man! why should thou take such care
To lengthen out thy life's short Calendar?
When every spectacle thou lookst upon
Presents and acts thy execution.
Each drooping season and each flower does cry,
Fool! as I fade and wither, thou must die.
The beating of thy pulse (when thou art well)
Is just the tolling of thy Passing Bell:
Night is thy Hearse, whose sable Canopie
Covers alike dec^ased day and thee.
And all those weeping dewes which nightly fall,
Are but the tears shed for thy funeral.
A Penitential Hymn.
HEarken O God unto a Wretches cries
Who low dejected at thy footstool lies.
Let not the clamor of my heinous sin
Drown my requests, which strive to enter in
At those bright gates, which always open stand
To such as beg remission at thy hand.
Too well I know, if thou in rigor deal
I can nor pardon ask, nor yet appeal:
To my hoarse voice, heaven will no audience grant,
But deaf as brass, and hard as adamant
Beat back my words; therefore I bring to thee
A gracious Advocate to plead for me.
What though my leprous soul no Jordan can
Recure, nor floods of the lav'd Ocean
Make clean? yet from my Saviors bleeding side
Two large and medicinable rivers glide.
Lord, wash me where those streams of life abound,
And new Bethesdaes flow from every wound.
If I this precious Lather may obtain,
I shall not then despair for any stain;
I need no Gileads balm, nor oil, nor shall
I for the purifying Hyssop call:
My spots will vanish in His purple flood,
And Crimson there turn white, though washed with blood,
See Lord! with broken heart and bended knee,
How I address my humble suit to Thee;
O give that suit admittance to thy ears
Which floats to thee not in my words but tears:
And let my sinful soul this mercy crave
Before I fall into the silent grave.
AN ELEGY
Occasioned by sickness.
Well did the Prophet ask, Lord what is man?
Implying by the question none can
But God resolve the doubt, much less define
What Elements this child of dust combine.
Man is a stranger to himself, and knows
Nothing so naturally as his woes.
He loves to travel countries, and confer
The sides of Heavens vast Diameter:
Delights to sit in Nile or Boetis lap,
Before he has sailed over his own Map;
By which means he returns, his travel spent,
Less knowing of himself then when he went.
Who knowledge hunt kept under foreign locks,
May bring home wit to hold a Paradox,
Yet be fools still. Therefore might I advise,
I would inform the soul before the eyes:
Make man into his proper Optics look,
And so become the student and the book
With his conception, his first leaf, begin;
What is he there but complicated sin?
When ripe^ time, and the approaching birth
Ranks him among the creatures of the earth,
His wailing mother sends him forth to greet
The light, wrapped in a bloody winding sheet;
As if he came into the world to crave
No place to dwell in, but bespeak a grave.
Thus like a red and tempest-boading morn
His dawning is: for being newly born
He hayles the ensuing storm with shrieks and cries,
And fines for his admission with wet eyes:
How should that Plant whose leaf is bathed in tea^s
Bear but a bitter fruit in elder years?
Just such is this, and his maturer age
Teems with event more sad then the presage.
For view him higher, when his childhoods span
Is raised up to Youths Meridian;
When he goes proudly laden with the fruit
Which health, or strength, or beauty contribute;
Yet as the mounted Canon batters down
The Towers and goodly structures of a town:
So one short sickness will his force defeat,
And his frail Cittadell to rubbish beat.
How does a dropsy melt him to a flood,
Making each vein run water more then blood?
A Chollick wracks him like a Northern gust,
And raging fevers crumble him to dust.
In which unhappy state he is made worse
By his diseases then his makers curse.
God said in toil and sweat he should earn bread,
And without labor not be nourished:
Here, though like ropes of falling dew, his sweat
Hangs on his laboring brow, he cannot eat.
Thus are his sins scourged in opposed themes,
And luxuries revenged by their extremes.
He who in health could never be content
With Rarities fetched from each Element,
Is now much more afflicted to delight
His tasteless Palate, and lost appetite.
Besides though God ordained, that with the light
Man should begin his work, yet he made night
For his repose, in which the weary sense
Repaires it self by rests soft recompense.
But now his watchful nights, and troubled days
Confused heaps of fear and fancy raise.
His chamber seems a loose and trembling mine;
His Pillow quilted with a Porcupine:
Pa^^ makes his downy Couch sharp thorns appear,
And every feather prick him like a spear.
Thus when all forms of death about him keep,
He copies death in any form but sleep.
Poor walking-clay! have thou a mind to know
To what unblest beginnings thou do ow
Thy wretched self* fall sick a while, and than
Thou will conceive the pedigree of Man.
Learn shall thou from thine own Anatomy,
That earth his mother, worms his sisters be.
That he is a short-lived vapor upward wrought*
And by corruption unto nothing brought.
A stagg'ring Meteor by cross Planets beat,
Which often ^ecles and falls before his set:
A tree which withers faster then it grows;
A torch puff't out by ev'^y wind that blows;
A web of forty weeks spun forth in pain,
And in a moment ravell'd out again.
This is the Model of frail man: Then say
That his duration's only for a day:
And in that day more fits of changes pass,
Then Atoms run in the turned Hower-glass.
So that th'incessant cares which life invade
Might for strong truth their heresy persuade,
Who did maintain that humane souls are sent
Into the body for their punishment:
At least with that Greek Sage still make us cry,
Non nasci, aut quam citissime mori.
Not to be born, or being born to die.
But Faith steers up to a more glorious scope,
Which sweetens our sharp passage; and firm hope
Anchors our torn Barks on a blessed shore,
Beyond the Dead sea we here ferry over.
To this, Death is our Pilot, and disease
The Agent which solicites our release.
Though crosses then pour on my restless head,
Or lingering sickness nail me to my bed:
Let this my Thoughts eternal comfort be,
That my closed eyes a better light shall see.
And when by fortunes or by natures stroke
My bodies earthen Pitcher must be broke,
My Soul, like Gid^ons lamp, from her cracked urn
Shall Deaths black night to endless luster turn.
The Dirge.
What is th'Existence of Man's life?
But open war, or slumber'd strife.
Where sickness to his sense presents
The combat of the Elements:
And never feels a perfect Peace
Till deaths cold hand signs his release.
It is a storm where the hot blood
Out-vies in rage the boiling flood;
And each loud Passion of the mind
Is like a furious gust of wind,
Which beats his Bark with many a Wave
Till he casts Anchor in the Grave.
It is a flower which buds and grows,
And withers as the leaves disclose;
Whose spring and fall faint seasons keep,
Like fits of waking before sleep:
Then shrinks into that fatal mold
Where its first being was enrolled.
It is a dream, whose seeming truth
Is moraliz'd in age and youth:
Where all the comforts he can share
As wandering as his fa^cies a^e;
Till in a mist of dark decay
The dreamer vanis^ qui^e away.
It is a Dial, which points out
The Sunset a^ it moves about:
And shadows out in lines of night
The subtle stages of times flight,
Till all obscuring earth has laid
The body in perpetual shade.
It is a weary interlude
Which does short joys, long woes include.
The World the Stage, the Prologue tears,
The Acts vain hope, and varied fears:
The Scene shuts up with loss of breath,
And leaves (...) Epilogue but Death.
AN ELEGY
Occasioned by the loss of the most incomparable Lady Stanhope, daughter to
the Earl of Northumberland.
Lightened by that dim Torch our sorrow bears
We sadly trace thy Coffin with our tears;
And though the Ceremonious Rites are past
Since thy fair body into earth was east;
Though all thy Ha^chments into rags are torn,
Thy Funeral Robes and Ornaments outworn;
We still thy mourners without Show or Art,
With solemn Blacks hung round about our heart,
Thus constantly the Obsequie^ renew
Which to thy precious ^^mory are due.
Yet think not that we rudely would invade
The dark recess of thine untroubled shade,
Or give disturbance to that happy peace
Which thou enjoy'st at full since thy release;
Much less in fullen murmurs do complain
Of His decree who too^ thee back again,
And did e're Fame had spread thy virtues light,
Eclipse and fold thee up in endless night.
This like an act of envy not of grief
Might doubt thy bliss, and shake our own belief,
Whose studi'd wishes no proportion bear
With joys which crown thee now in glories sphere.
Know then blessed Soul! we for our selves not thee
Seal our woes dictate by this Elegy:
Wherein our tears united in one stream
Shall to succeeding times convey this theme,
Worth all men's pity who discern how rare
Such early growths of fame and goodness are.
Of these part must thy sexes loss bewail
Maimed in her noblest Patterns through thy fail;
For 'twould require a double term of life
To match thee as a daughter or a wife:
Both which Northumberlands dear loss improve
And make his sorrow equal to his love.
The rest fall for our selves, who cast behind
Cannot yet reach the Peace which thou do find;
But slowly follow thee in that dull stage
Which most untimely poasted hence thy age.
Thus like religious Pilgrims who design
A short salute to their beloved Shrine,
Most sad and humble Votaries we come
To offer up our sighs upon thy Tomb,
And wet thy Marble with our dropping eyes
Which till the spring which feedstheir current drie^
Resolve each falling night and rising day
This mournful homage at thy Grave to pay.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. The Pink never wrote by the Author of these Poems. Page 22. lin. 8.
for she read alr. Page 100. lin. 3. for Mattox read Mattocks.

AN ELEGY Upon my Best Friend L. K. C.
SHould we our Sorrows in this Method range,
Often as Misfortune does their Subjects change,
And to the several Losses which befall,
Pay different Rites at every Funeral;
^ike narrow Springs drained by dispersed Streams,
We must want Tears to wail such various Themes,
and prove defective in Deaths mournful Laws,
Not having Words proportioned to each Cause.
In your Dear loss my much afflicted Sense,
Discerns this Truth by sad experience,
Who never Looked my Verses should survive,
As wet Records, That you are not Alive;
And less desired to make that Promise due,
Which passed from Me in jest, when urged by You.
How close and slily does our Frailty work!
How undiscovered in the Body lurk!
That Those who this Day did salute you well,
Before the Next were frighted by your Knell.
O wherefore since we must in Order rise,
Should we not Fall in equal Obsequies?
But bear the A^s^ults of an uneven Fate,
Like Fevers which their Hour anticipate;
Had this R^le constant been, my long wished End
Might render you a Mourner for your Friend:
As He for yo^, wh^s^ most deplored s^rprise
Im^rints your Death on all my Faculties;
That hardly my (...) Phant'sie or D^sco^rse,
This final D^ty from the Pen enforce:
Such Influence has your Eclipsed Light,
It does my Reason like my Self benight.
Let me, with Luckless Gamesters, then think best
(After I have Set up and Lost my Rest,)
Grow'n desperate through mischance, to Venture last
My whole remaining Stock upon a Cast,
And ^linging from me my now Loathed Pen,
Resolve for your Sake never to Write again:
For whilst Successive days their Light renew,
I must no Subject hope to Equal you,
In whose Heroic Breast as in their Sphere,
All Graces of your Sex concentred were.
Thus take I my long Farewell of that Art,
Fit only glorious Actions to impart;
That Art wherewith our Crosses we beguile,
And make them in Harmonious numbers smile:
Since you are gone, This holds no further use,
Whose Virtue and Desert inspired my Muse.
O may She in your Ashes Buried be,
Whilst I my Self become the Elegy.
And as it is observed when Princes Dye,
In honor of that sad Solemnity,
The now unoffic'd Servants crack their Staves,
And throw them down into their Masters Graves:
So this last O^fice of my broken Verse,
I solemnly resign upon your Hearse;
And my Brains moisture, all that is unspent,
Shall melt to nothing at the Monument.
Thus in moist Weather when the Marble weeps,
You Will think it only his Tears reck'ni^g keeps,
Who does for ever to his Thoughts beq^eath
The Legacy of your lamented Death.
On the Earl of Essex.
ESsex twice made unhappy by a Wife,
Yet Married worse unto the Peoples strife:
He who by two Divorces did untie
His Bond of Wedlock and of Loyalty:
Who was by Easiness of Nature bred,
To lead that Tumult which first Him misled;
Yet had some glimmering Sparks of Virtue lent
To see (though late) his Error, and Repent:
Essex lies here, like an inverted Flame,
Hid in the Ruins of his House and Name;
And as He, frailties sad Example, lies,
Warns the Survivours in his Exequies.
He shows what wretched bubbles Great Men are,
Through their Ambition grown too Popular:
For they Built up, from weak Opinion, stand
On Bases false as Water, loose as Sand;
Essex in differing Successes tried
The fury and the falsehood of each Side;
Now with applauses Deisy'd, and then
Thrown down with spightfull infamy again:
Tells them, what Arts soever them support,
Their Life is merely Time and Fortunes sport,
And that no Bladders blown by Common breath,
Shall bear them up amidst the Waves of Death:
Tells them no Monstrous Birth, with Power endu'd
By that more Monstrous Beast the Multitude;
No State- Coloss (though Tall as that bestrid
The Rhodian Harbor where their Navy rid)
Can hold that ill-porportion'd Greatness still,
Beyond his Greater, most Resistless will,
Whose dreadful Sentence written on the Wall
Did sign the Temple Robbing Belshazar, Dan. 5.
Tyrants fall;
But Spite of their vast Privilege, which strives
TO exceed the Size of ten Prerogatives;
Spite of their Endless Parliament, or Grants,
(In Order to those Votes and Covenants,
When, without Sense of their black Perjury
They Swear with Essex they would Live and Dye)
With their Dead General ere long they must
Contracted be into a Span of Dust.
An Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle.
IN measures solemn as the groans that fall
From the hoarse Trumpet at some Funeral;
With trayling Elegy and mournful Verse
I wait upon two Pearless So^ldiers Hearse:
Though, I acknowledge must, my sorrows dress
Ill matched to the cause it should Express;
Nor can I, at my best Inventions cost,
Sum up the Treasure which in them we lost:
Had they with other Worthies of the Age,
Who late upon the Kingdoms bloody Stage,
For God, the King, and Laws, their Valor tried,
Through Wars stern chance in heat of Battle Died,
We then might save much of our griefs expense
Reputing it not duty, but offense.
They need no tears nor howling Exequy,
Who in a glorious undertaking Dye;
Since all that in the bed of honor fell
Live their own Monument and Chronicle.
But these, whom horrid danger did not reach,
The wide-mouthed Cannon, nor the wider Breach,
These, whom till cruel want and coward fate
Penned up like famished Lions in a Grate,
Were for their daring Sallies so much feared
The Assailants fled them like a frighted Heard;
Resolving now no more to fight, but lurk
Trench'd in their Line or eathed within a Work.
Where not like Soldiers they, but Watchmen, creep,
Armed for no other office but to sleep:
They, whose bold charge whole Armies did amaze,
Rendering them saint and heartless at the Gaze,
To see Resolve and Sir George Lisle at Newbury charged in his Shirt and Routed
them.
Naked Valor charms
Of higher Proof than all their massy Arms:
They whose bright swords ruffled the proudest Troop
(As fowl unto the towering Falcon stoop)
Yet no advantage made of their Success
Which to the conquered spoke them merciless;
(For they, when ever 'twas begged did safety give,
And often unasked bid the vanquished live;)
Even these, not more undaunted in the Field
Than mild and Gentle unto such as yield,
Were, after all the shocks of battails stood,
(Let me not name it) murdered in cold blood.
Such poor revenge did the enraged Greek
Against (till then) victorious Hector seek,
Triumphing o'r that Body bownd and dead
From whom in Life the Powers of Argos fled.
Yet might Achillis borrow some excuse
To color, though not warrant the abuse:
His dearest Patroclus.
Friend in the fierce combat foiled
Was by the Trojans hand of Life despoyl'd;
From whence unr^ly grief grown wild with rage
Beyond the bownds of Honor did engage.
But these, confirmed in their unmanly hate,
By Counsels cruel yet deliberate,
Did from the Stock of bleeding honor hew
Two of the noblest Branches ever grew;
And (which our grief and Pity must improve)
When brought within their reach with shows of Love:
For by a Treaty they entangled are,
And Rendering up to Mercy is the Snare;
Whence we have learned when ever their Saint-Ships Treat,
Then ends are mortal, and the means a Cheat;
In which the World may read their black intent,
Drawn out at large in this sad President.
Who (though fair promised) might no Mercy have,
But such as once the faithless Famagosta defended most Valiantly by Signior
Bragadino in the time of Selymus 2d. was upon Honorable terms surrendered to
Mustapha the Bashaw, who observing no Conditions, at his Tent Murdered the
Principal Commanders, invited thither under show of Love, and slayed Bragadine
Alive.
Bashaw gave,
When to his trust deluded Bragadine
Himse^f and Famogasta did resign.
Whose envied Valor thus to bonds betrayed
Was soon the mark of barbarous slaughter made:
So gallant Ships which rocks and storms had past,
Though with torn Sails and spending of their Mast,
When newly brought within the sight of Land,
Have been sucked up by some devouring Sand
You wretched Agents for a Kingdoms fall,
Who yet your selves the Modeled Army call;
Who carry on and fashion your Design
By Syllaes, Syllaes red proscriptions Line,
(Romes Comet once, as You are Ours) for shame
Henceforth no more usurp the Soldiers Name:
Let not that Title in fair Battails gained
Be by such abject things as You profaned;
For what have you achieved, the world may guess
You are those Men of Might which you profess.
Where ever durst You strike, if you met foes
Whose Valor did your odds in men oppose?
Turn over the Annalls of your vaunted Fights
Which made you late the Peoples Favorites;
Begin your course at Naseby, and from thence
Draw out Your Marches full circumference,
^ridgwater, Bristol, Dartmouth, with the rest
Of Your well-plotted renders in the West;
Then to the angry North Your compass bend
Until Your spent careere in Scotland end,
(This is the perfect Scale of our mishap
Which measures out your conquest by the Mapp)
And tell me he that can, What have you won,
Which long before Your progress was not done?
What Castle was besieged, what Port, what Town,
You were not sure to carry 'ere sat down?
There needed no Grenades, no Petard,
To force the passage, or disperse the Guard.
No, Your good Masters sent a Golden Ramm
To batter down the gates against You came.
Those blessed Reformers who procured the The Swedes hired Anno, 164. to invade
the King of Denmark, provided to assist his Nephew the King of England.
Swead
His armed Forces into Denmark lead,
Amongst them to kindle a sharp war for hire,
Who in mear pity meant to quench our fire,
Could where they pleased with the King's own coin,
Divert His Aids and Strengths at home purloyn.
Upon Sea Voyages I sometimes find
Men trade with Lapland Witches for a Wind,
And by those p^rchas'd Gales, quick as their thought,
To the desired Port are safely brought.
We need not here on skillfull Hopkins call
The States allowed Witch-finder General.
For (though Rebellion wants no Cad nor El^e,
But is a perfect Witchcra^t of it self)
We could with little help of art reveal
Those learned Magitians with whom You deal:
We all Your Juggles both for Time and Place
From Darby-house to Westmiaster can Trace,
The Circle where the factious Jangle meet
To Trample Law and Gospel under feet;
In which, like Bells Rung backward, they proclaim
The Kingdom by their Wildfire set on flame,
And, quite Perverting their First Rules, invent
What mischief may be done by Parliament:
We know Your holy Flamens, and can tell
What Spirits Vote within the Oracle;
Have found the spells and Incantations too,
By whose assistance You such Wonders do.
For diverse Years the credit of Your wars
Has been kept up by these Familiars,
Who that they may their providence express
Both find you Pay and purchase Your Success:
No wonder then You must the Garland wear,
Who never fought but with a Silver Spear.
We grant the Wars unhappy consequence
With all the numerous Plagues which grow from thence,
Murders and Rapes, threats of Disease and Dearth,
From You as for the proper Spring take birth:
You may for Laws enact the Public Wrongs,
With all fowl Violence to them belongs;
May bawl aloud the Peoples Right and Power
Till by Your Sword You both of them Devour,
(For this brave Liberty by You up-cry'd
Is to all others but Your-selves denied,)
May with seditious fires the Land embroyl,
And in pretense to quench them take the Spoil:
You may Religion to Your lust sabdue,
For these are actions only Worthy You:
Yet when your Projects, crowned with wished event,
Have made You Masters of the ill You meant,
You never must the Soldiers glory share,
Since all your Trophies Executions are:
Not thinking your Successes understood,
Unless Recorded and Scor'd up in Blood.
In which, to Gull the People, you pretend,
That See the Letter sent to Edward Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers pro tempore, from T. Fairfax, Dated August 29. 1648. at Hieth.
Military Justice was Your end;
As if we still were Blind, not knowing this
To all your other Virtues suited is;
Who only Act by your great Grandsires Law,
The B^tcher Cade, Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw,
Whose Principle was Murder, and their Sport
To cut off those they feared might do them hurt:
Nay, in your Actions we completed find,
What by those Levellers was but designed,
For now Committees, and your Armed supplies,
Cant^^ the Land in Wat-Tyler and his co^plices design was to take away the
King and chief Men, and to erect petty Tyrannies to themselves in every Shire.
And already one Littistar^ a Dyar had taken upon him in Norfolk the Name of
King of Commons, and Robert Westbor^. in Sastolk, Rich. 2. Anno 1381. Speed.
petty Tyrannies,
And for one King of Commons in each Shire,
Four hundred Commons rule as Tyrants here.
Had you not meant the Copies of each Deed,
Should their Originals in ill exceed,
You would not practice sure the Turkish Art,
To Ship your taken Prisoners for a Mart,
Least if with Freedom they at Home remain,
They should (which is your Terror) Fight again.
A thing long since by Zealous Rigby moved,
And by the Faction like himself approved;
Though you uncounsell'd can such Outrage try,
Scarce sampled from the basest Enemy.
Naseby of Old, and late St. A^ St. Fagans in Glamorganshire near Cardiff, The
Welsh unarmed were taken in very great Numbers, and Sold for twelve pence a
piece to certain Merchants, who bought them for Slaves to their Plantation.
Fagans Fare,
Of these inhumane Truckings witness are;
At which the Captived Welsh in Couples led,
Were Marketted, like Cattle, by the Head.
Let it no more in History be told,
That Turks their Christian Slaves for Aspers sold;
When we the Saints selling their Brethren see,
Who had a Call (they say) to set them free;
And are at last by Right of Conquest grown,
To claim our Land of Canaan for their own.
Though luckless Colchester in this out-vies,
^giers or Tunis shameful Merchandise;
Where the Starved Soldier (as the agreement was)
Might not be suffered to their Dwelling pass,
Till, led about by some insulting Band,
They first were showed in Triumph through the Land:
(...) which for lack of Diet, or of Strength
(...) any Fainted through the Marches length,
Void of the Breasts of Men, Grimes now a Captain, formerly a Tinker at St.
Albans, with his own hand Killed four of the Prisoners, being not able for
Faintaess to go on with the rest, of which number Lieutenant Woodward was o^e:
Lik^wise at Them, and at Whateley, some others were Killed.
this Murderous Crew
All those they could drive on no further, Slew;
What Bloody Riddle's this? They mercy give,
Yet those who should enjoy it, must not Live.
Indeed we cannot less from such expect,
Who for this Work of Ruin are Elect:
This Scum drawn from the worst, who never knew
The Fr^its which from Ingenuous Breeding grew;
But take such low Commanders on their Lists,
As did revolted Jeroboam Priests:
That it is our Fate, I fear, to be undone
Like Egypt once with Vermin overrun.
If in the Rabble some be more refined
By fair Extractions of their birth or mind,
Even these corrupted are by such allays,
That no Impression of their Virtue stays*
As Gold embased by some mingled Dross
Both in it is Worth and Nature s^ffers Loss.
Else had that Sense of Honor still Survived
Which Fairfax from his Ancestors derived,
He never had showed Himself, for hate or fear,
So much degen'r^us from renowned Ver^
(The Title and Alliance of whose Son
His Acts of Valor had in Holland won),
As to give up by his rash dooming Breath
This precious Pair of Lives to timeless death;
Whom no brave Enemy but would esteem,
And, though with hazard of his own, redeem*
For it is not vainly by the world f^rmis'd
This Blood to private Spleens was sacrifis'd.
Half of the guilt stands chardgd on Whaleys score,
By Lis^e affronted on his guards before;
For which his spite by other hands was shown,
Who never durst dispute it with his own.
^wice guilty coward! first by Vote, then Eye,
Spectator of the shameful Tragedy.
But Lucas elder cause of quarrel Knew,
From whence his Critical Misfortune grew*
Since he from Berkley Castle with such scorn
Bold Ra^sboro^gh's first Summons did return,
Telling him Lo^dly at the Parley's Beat,
With Rogues and Rebels He disdained to Treat;
Some from this hot contest the world persuade
His sleeping vengeance on that ground was laid:
If so, for ever blurred with Envies brand,
His Honor gained by Sea, was lost at Land:
Nor could he an impending Judgment shun
Who did to this with so much fervor run,
When late himself, to quit that Bloody stain,
Was, midst his Armed Guards, from Pomsret slain.
But all in vain we here expostulate
What took them hence, private or public hate:
Knowledge of acted VVoes small comforts add,
When no repair proportioned can be had:
And such are ours, which to the Kingdoms eyes
Sadly present ensuing miseries,
Foretelling in These Two some greater ill
From Those who now a Pattent have to Kill.
Two, whose dear loss leaves us no recompense,
Nor them atonement, which in weight or Sense
With These shall never into Balance come
Though all the Army fell their Hecatomb.
Here leave them then; and be it our last relief
To give their merit Value in our grief.
Whose blood however yet neglected must
Without revenge or Rites mingle with Dust;
Not any falling drop shall ever dry
Till to a Weeping Spring it multiply,
Bathed in whose tears their blasted Laurel shall
Grow green, and with fresh Garlands Crown their fall.
From this black region then of Death and Night
Great Spirits take your everlasting flight:
And as your Valors mounting fires combine,
May they a brighter Constellation shine
Than Gemini, or than the Brother-Starrs
Castor and Pollux fortunate to wars.
That all fair Soldiers by Your sparkling light
May find the way to Conquer when they Fight,
And by those Paterns which from you they take
Direct their course though Honors Zodiak:
But upon Traitors frown with dire Aspect,
Which may their perjuries and guilt reflect;
Unto the Curse of whose Nativity,
Prodigious as the Caput Algol be,
VVh^se pale and ghastly Tresses still portend
Their own despair or Hangman for their end,
And that succeeding ages may keep safe
Your Loved remembrance in some Epitaph,
Upon the rains of your glorious Youth
Inscribed be this Monumentall Truth:
Here ly the Valiant Lucas and brave Lysle,
With Amasa betrayed in Ioabs smile:
In whom revenge of Honor taking place
His great Corrivall's stabbed in the Embrace,
And as it was the Hebrew Captains stain
That he two Greater than himself had Slain, 1 Kings 2. 32. verse*

Shedding the Blood of War in time of Peace,
When Love pretended was, and Arms did cease,
May the fowl Murderers expect a fate
Like Ioabs, Blood with Blood to expiate:
Which quick as Lightning, and as Thunder sure,
Preventions wisest arts nor shun, nor cure.
O may it fall on their perfidious head!
That when, with Ioab to the Altar fled,
Themselves the Sword and reach of vengence ^lee
No Temple may their Sanctuary be.
Last, that nor frailty nor devouring time
May ever lose impressions of the Crime,
Let loyal Colch^s^^r (who too late tried
To Check, when highest wrought, the Rebels Pride,
Holding them long, and doubtful at the bay,
VVhilest we by looking on gave all away)
Be only Named: which like a Column bail^
Shall both enhearse this blood ^n-nobly spilt,
And live, till all her Towers in rubbish lie
The Mon^ments of their base Cruelty.
An Elegy upon the most Incomparable King Charles the First.
CAll for amazed thoughts, a wo^nded sen^^
And bleeding Hearts at, our Intelligence.
Call for that Trump of Death the Mandrak^^ (...)
Which kills the Hearer^: This besits alone
O^r Story which thro^gh times vast Calendar,
Must stand without Example or Repair.
What spouts of melting Clo^ds, what endl^ss Sp^ing^^
Powered in the Oceans lap for Offering^,
Shall feed the hungry Torrent of our grief
Too mighty for expression or belief?
Though all those moistures which the brain attracts
Ran from eyes like g^shing Cataracts,
Or our sad accents could out-tongue the Cries
Which did from mournful Hadad^^mmon ri^e,
Since that remembrance of Josiah slain
In our King's m^rther is revived again.
O pardon me that but from Holy Writ
Our loss allows no Parallel to it:
Nor call it bold presumption that I dare
Cha^ls with the best of Iadah's Kings compare:
The virtues of whose life did I prefer
The Text acquits me for no Flatterer.
For he like David perfect in his Trust,
Was never stayn'd like Him, with Blood or Lust.
One who with Solomon in Judgment tried,
Was quick to comprehend, Wise to decide,
(That even his Judges stood amazed to hear
A more tra^s^^ndent Mover in their Sphere)
Though more Religious: for when doting Love
A while made Solom^n Apostate prove,
Charles never endured the Truth which he professed,
To be unfixt by bosom interest.
Bold as Iehosapha^, yet forced to Fight,
And for his own, no unconcerned Right.
Should I recount His constant time of Prayer,
Each rising Morn and Evening Regular,
You Would say his practice preached, They ought not Ea,
Who by devotion first not earned their Meat:
Thus Hez^kiah He exceeds in Zeal,
Though not (like him) So facile to reveal
The Tr^asures of God^ Horse, or His own Heart,
To be supplanted by some (...) art.
And that he might in same with Ioash share
When he the ruined Temple did repair,
His c^st on Paul's late ragged Fabric spent
Must (if no other) be His Monument.
From this S^rvey the Kingdom may conclude
His Merits, and her L^sses Magnitude:
Nor think he flatters or blasphemes, who tells
That Charles exceeds Iudea's Parallels,
In whom all Ver^ues we concentred see
Which (...)
amongst the best of them divided be.
O weak built Glories! which those Tempests feel
To force you from your firm^st bases reel,
What from the strokes of Chance shall you secure,
When Rocks of Innocence are so unsure?
When the World's only mirror slaughtered lies,
Envies and Treasons bleeding sacrifize;
As if His stock of Goodness could become
No (...), but that of Ma^ty^dom.
See now ye cursed Mountebanks of State,
Who have Eight years for Reformations sat;
You who dire Alva's Counsels did transfer, Called the Council of Troubles.

To Act his Scenes on England's Theater;
You who did pawn your Selves in Public Faith
To slave the Kingdom by your Pride and Wrath;
Call the whole World to witness now, how just,
How well you are responsive to your trust,
How to your King the promise you perform,
With Fasts, and Sermons, and long Prayers sworn,
That you intended Peace and Truth to bring
To make your Charles Europes most Glorious King.
Did you for this Li^t up your Hands on high, The form of taking the Covenant,
June 1643.

To Kill the King, and pluck down Monarchy?
These are the Fruits by your wild Faction sown,
Which not Imputed are, but Born your own:
For though you wisely seem to wash your Hands,
The Guilt on every Vote and Order stands;
So that convinced, from all you did before,
Justice must lay the Murder at your Door.
Mark if the Body does not Bleed anew,
In any Circumstance approached by You,
From whose each motion we might plain desery
The black Oftents of this late Tragedy.
For when the King through Storms in Scotland bred,
To his Great Co^ncel for his shelter fled,
When in that meeting every Error gained
Redresses sooner granted, than Complained:
Not all th^se ^rank Conc^ssions or Amends
Did (...) the then too Powerful Faction's ends:
No Acts of Grace at present would Content,
Nor Promise of (...),
Till by a f^rmal ^^w the King had past
This Session should at Your pl^^sure last.
So having got the (...), and that 'twas ^nown
No power could diss^lve Yo^ b^t Your own,
Your grac^less Junto m^^e such use of this,
As once was pract^s'd by Semiram^s; (...) lib. ^.

Who str^ving by a subtle S^te to prove
The largeness of her H^^band Tr^st and Love,
Did from the much ab^sed King obtain
That for Three d^y^s She might sole Empress r^ign;
Before which time expired, the bloody VVi^e
D^priv'd her Lo^d both of his Crown and Life.
There needs no Comment when your deeds apply
The Demonstration of her Treachery.
Which to effect, by Absolon's foul w^le
You of the Peopl^s He^rt your Prince beguile;
Urging what Eases they might reap by it
Did you their Legistative Judges ^it.
How did you fawn upon, and Court the Ro^t,
VVho^e Clamor c^ry'd your whole Plot about?
How did you thank Seditious men that came
To bring Petitions which your selves did frame*
And lest they wanted Hands to set them on,
You lead the way by throwing the first stone.
For in that Libel after Midnight born,
Wherewith your Faction labored till the Morn,
That Famous Lie, you a Re^o^stra^ce name; Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom, Dec. 15. 1641.

Were not Reproaches your malic^o^s aim?
Was not the King's dishonor your intent,
By Slanders to traduce his Government?
All which your spightfull Cunning did contrive;
Men must rec^ive through your false Perspective*
In which the smallest Spots improved were,
And every Mote a Mo^ntain did appear*
Thus (...) by the ungratef^ll Senate found
His Life ass^ulted through his Honor's VVound.
And now to make Him hopeless to resist, Ord. Feb. 29.

You g^ide His Sword by Vote, which as you li^t
Must, Strike or Spare (for so you did enforce Voted March 15.

His Hand against His Reason to divorce
Brave Str^fford's Life, The Nivy seized Mar. 28. 1642.
) then wring it quite away
By your us^rping each Militia:
Then seize His Magazines, The London Tumults.
of which possessed
You turn the Weapons against their M^ster's Breast
This done, Jan. 10. 1641.
the unkennell'd crew of Lawless men
Led down by (...), Penni^g^o^, and Ven,
Did with confused noise the Court invade;
Then all Dissenters in Both Houses Bay'd.
At which the King amazed is forced to fly,
The whilst your Mouth's laid on mantain the Cry.
The Royal Game dislodged and under Chase,
Your hot Pursuit dogs Him from place to place:
Not S^ul with greater fury or disdain
Did flying David from Ieshimon's plain
Unto the barren Wilderness pursue,
Than Cours'd and Hunted is the King by you.
The Mountain Partridge or the Chased Roe
Might now for Emblemes of His Fortune go,
And since all other May-games of the Town
(Save those your selves should make) were Voted down,
The Clamorous Pulpit Hollaes in resort,
Inviting men to your King-catching Sport.
Where as the Foyl grows cold you mend the Scent
By crying Privilege of Parliament,
Whose fair Preten^ions the first sparkles are,
Which by your breath blown up inflame the War,
And Ireland (bleeding by design) the Stale
Wherewith for Men and Money you prevail.
Yet doubting that Imposture co^ld not last,
When all the Kingdoms Mines of Treasure waste,
You now tear down Religion's sacred Hedge
To carry on the Work by Sacrilege;
^eputing it Rebellions fittest Pay
^o take both God's and Caesar's dues away.
The tenor of which execrable Vote
^our over-active Zelots so promote,
that neither Tomb nor Temple could escape,
^^r Dead nor Living, your Licentious Rape.
^tatues and Grave-stones o'r men buried
^ob'd of their Brass, the At Basing-Chapel Sold Dec. 29. 1643.
Coffi^s of their Led;
^ot the Seventh Henry's gilt and curious Skr^en,
^or those which amongst our Rarities were seen,
The At Winchester.
Chests wherein the Saxon Monarchs lay,
^^t m^st be basely sold or thrown away.
May in succeeding times forgotten be
Those bold Examples of Impiety,
Which were the Ages wonder and discourse,
^o^ have Their greatest ills improved by worse.
No more be mentioned Dionysius Theft, Lactant. ^ l. 2. c. 4.

Who of their Gold the Heathen Shrines bereft;
For who with Yours His Robberies confer,
Must him repute a petty Pil^erer.
Nor Iulian's Julian.
Scoff, who when he viewed the State
O^ A^^ioch's Church, Praefectus Aegypti.
the Ornaments and Plate, Theodoret. l. 3. c. 11.

Cried, Meaner Vessels would serve turn, or None
Might well become the birth of Mary's Son:
Nor how that spightfull Atheist did in scorn ibid.

Piss on God's Table* which so o^t had born
The Hallowed Elements, his death present:
Nor he that ^ould it with his Excrement, G^nguin. l. 6.

Then turned the Cloth unto that act of shame,
Which without trembling Christians should not name*
Nor John of Leyd^n, who the pillaged Q^ires
Employed in Munster for his own attires;
His pranks by Hazle^^g exceeded be,
A wre^ch more wicked and as mad as he,
Who once in triumph led his S^mpter Mo^l The Carpet belonging to the Comm^^io^
Table of Winchester Cathedral, Dec. 18. 1642. Adrian Emp.

Proudly b^d^^ked with the Altar's spoil.
Nor at Bizantium's ^ack how Mahom^t
In St. Sophia's Church his Horses set.
Nor how Belshazzar at his dr^nken Feasts
Carows'd in holy Vessels to his Guests:
Nor he that did the Books and Anthems (...),
Which in the daily Stations used were.
These were poor Ess^yes of imperfect Crimes,
Fit for beginners in ^nlearned times,
Sized only for that dull Meridian
Which knew no J^suit nor Puritan,
(Before whose fa^^^ Birth were no such things
As Doctrines to Depose and Murder Kings.)
But since Your prudent care Enacted well,
That there should be no King in Israel,
England must write such Annals of Your reign
Which all Records of elder mischiefs st^in.
Churches unbuilt by order, others burned;
^hilst Paul's and Li^col^ are to Stables turned;
^^d at God's Table you might Horses see
(...) (those more Beasts) their Riders manger'd be,
^^me Kitchins and some Slaughter-houses made, At Winchcomb in Glocestersh^re.

(...)-boards and Cloths for Dressers laid:
^me turned to loathsome Goals, so by you brought
unto the Curse of Baal's House:, a Draught.
^he Common Prayers with the Bibles torn,
^he Co^ps in An^^ck Moorish Dances worn,
^^d sometimes, for the wearers greater mock,
^he Surplice is converted to a Frock.
^^me bringing Dogs the Sacrament revile,
^^me with Copronimus the (...) de^ile.
^ God! can Thou these prophanations like?
^ not, why is thy Thunder slow to strike
^he cursed Authors? who dare think that Thou
(...), when not punish them, their acts allow.
(...) which outrageous Crimes, though your pr^tence
should fasten on the Soldiers insolence,
^e must believe, that what by them was done
^^me licensed ^orth by your probation,
(...), as your selves with Athaliah's Brood
(...) strong contention for precedence stood, Whitehall, Windsor.

(...) robbed Two Royal Cha^els of their Plate, Feb. 3. 1643.

which Kings and Queens to God did dedicate;
Then by a Vote more sordid than the Stealth,
Melt down and Coin it for the Commonwealth;
That is, give't up to the devouring jaws
Of your great Idol Bell, new styled The Cause*
And though this Monster you did well devise
To seed by Plunder, Taxes, Loans, Excise;
(All which Provisions You the People tell
Sc^rce serve to diet Your Pa^tagru^l.)
We no Strewn Ashes need to trace the Cheat,
Who pl^inly see what Mouths the Messes eat.
Brave R^^ormation! and a through one too,
Which to enrich Your selves must All undo.
Pray tell us (those that can) What fruits have grown*
From all Your Seeds in Blood and Treasure sown?
What would you mend? when Your Projected State*
Does from the Best in Form degenerate?
Or why should You (of All) attempt the Cure,
Whose Facts not Gospel's Test nor Laws endure?
But like unwholesome Exhalations met
From Your Conjunction only Plagues beget,
And in Your Circle, as Imposthumes ^ill
Which by their venom the whole Body kill;
For never had You Power but to Destroy,
Nor Will, but where You Conquered to Enjoy*
This was your Master-prize, who did intend
To make both Church and Kingdom's prey Your End*
Against which the King (placed in the Gap) did strive
By His (till then unquestioned) Negative,
Which finding You lacked Reason to persuade,
Your Arguments are into Weapons made;
So to compel him by main force to yield,
You had a Formed Army in the Field E. of Essex Army, Aug. 1. 1642.

Before his Reared Standard could invite
Ten men upon his Righteous Cause to ^igh^:
Yet ere those raised Forces did advance, The Standard at Notingham, Aug. 25.
1642.

Your malice struck him dead by Ordinance,
When your Commissions the whole Kingdom swept
With Blood and Slaughter, Not the King Except.
Now hardened in Revolt, You next proceed
By Pacts to strenghten each Rebellious Deed,
New Oaths, and Vows, and Covenants advance, June 27. 1643.

All contradicting your Allegiance,
Whose Sacred knot you plainly did unty,
When you with Essex swore to Live and Dye. Declaration and Resolution of Parl.
Aug. 15. 1642.

These were your Calves in Bethel and in Dan,
Which Ieroboam's Treason stablish can,
Who by strange Pacts and Altars did seduce
The People to their Laws and King's abuse;
All which but serve like Shibboleth to try
Those who pronounced not your conspiracy;
That when your other Trains defective are,
Forced Oaths might bring Refusers to the Snare.
And lest those men your Co^nsels did pervert,
Might when your Fraud was seen the Cause desert,
A fierce Decree is through the Kingdom sent,
Which made it Death for any to Repent.
What strange Dilemmaes does Rebellion make?
It Is mortal to D^ny, (...) to Partake:
Some (...) who would not aid your Traitorous Act.
(...) are Hanged if they Retract. History of English and Scottish Presbytery,
p. 3^0

(...) who their Contracts have unsworn.
(...) Devils are in pieces torn.
(...) still the rageing Tempest higher gro^^*
(...) the Kings Resolvings throw^
(...) every where appears,
(...) multiply our fears*
Whilst blind Ambition by successes fed
(...) You beyond the bound of Subjects led,
Who tasting once the sweet of Regal Sway*
Resolving now no longer to obey*
For Presbiterian pride contests as high
As does the Popedom for Supremacy.
Needs must you with unskilful Phaeto^
Aspire to guide the Chariot of the Sun,
Though your ill-govern'd height with lightning be
Thrown headlong from his burning Ax^^-tree.
You will no more Petition or Debate, The 19 Propos.

But your desire in P^opositions state,
Which by such Rules and Ties the King confine,
They in effect are Summons to Resign.
Therefore your War is managed with such slight,
'Twas seen you more prevailed by Purse than Might;
And those you could not purchase to your will,
You Bribed with Sums of Money to sit still.
The King by this time hopeless here of Peace,
Or to procure His wasted Peoples ease,
Which He in frequent Messages had tried,
By you as often as Shamelesly denied;
VVearied by faithless Friends and restless Foes,
To certain hazard does His Life Expose:
When through your Quarters in a mean disguise
He to His Countrymen for succor flies, April 27. 1646.

Who met a brave occasion then to save
Their Native King from His untimely Grave: May 5. 1646.

Had he from them such fair Reception gained,
Wherewith even Achish David entertained.
But Faith to Him or Hospitable Laws
In your Con^ederate Union were no Clause,
Which back to you their Rendered Master sends
To tell how He was used among his Friends.
Far be it from my thoughts by this black Line
To measure all within that Warlike Clime;
The still admired Montross some Numbers lead
In his brave steps of Loyalty to tread.
I only Tax a furious Party there,
Who with our Native Pests Enleagued were.
Then 'twas you followed Him with Hue and Cry,
Made Midnight Searches in Each Liberty,
Voting it Death to all without Reprieve, This Order published by beat of Drum,
May 4. 1646.

Who should their Master Harbor or Relieve.
Even in pure pity of both Nations Fame,
I wish that Act in Story had no Name.
When all your mutual Stipulations are
Converted at Newcastle to a Fair,
Where (like His Lord) the King the Mart is made,
Bought with Your Money, and by Them Betrayed;
For both are Guilty, They that did Contract,
And You that did the fatal Bargain Act.
Which who by equal Reason shall peruse,
Must yet conclude, They had the best Excuse:
For doubtless They (Good men) had never Sold,
But that you tempted Them with English Gold;
And it is no wonder if with such a Sum
Our Brethrens frailty might be overcome.
What though hereafter it may prove their Lot
To be compared with Iscariot?
Yet will the World perceive which was most wise,
And who the Nobler Traitor by the Price;
For though it is true Both did Themselves undo,
They made the better Bargain of the Two,
Which all may reckon who can difference
Two hundred thousand Pounds from Thirty Pence.
However something is in Justice due,
Which may be spoken in defense of You;
For in your Masters Purchase you gave more,
Than all your Jewish Kindred paid before.
And had you wisely used what then you bought,
Your Act might be a Loyal Ransom thought,
To free from Bonds your Captive Sovereign,
Restoring Him to his lost Crown again.
But You had other Plots, your busy hate
Plied all advantage on His fallen State,
And showed Yo^ did not come to bring Him Bayl,
But to remove Him to a stricter Gaol,
To Holmby first, whence taken from His Bed,
He by an Army was in Triumph led;
Till on pretense of safety Cromwell's wile
Had juggl'd Him into the Fatal Isle,
Where Hammond for his Jailer is decreed,
And Murderous Rols as Lieger-Hangman fee'd,
Who in one fatal Knot Two Counsels tie,
He must by Poison or by Pistol Dye.
Here now denied all Comforts due to Life,
His Friends, His Children, and His Peerless Wife;
From Carisbrook He often but vainly sends,
And though first Wronged, seeks to make you Amends;
For this He (...), and by his r^stless Pen
Import^nes Your deaf E^rs to Treat again,
VV^ilst the (...) Faction scorning to go less,
Return th^s^ (...) Votes of Non Ad^ress, Jan. 3. 1647.

Which (...) were by the Armies thundering Jan. 9. 1647.

To (...) against the King.
Yet when (...) r^mov'd, and the clear Light
Drawn f^^m (...) Reasons, gave You sight
O^ (...) own (...), had not Their Intents
Re^ard^d been by s^m^ cr^ss Accidents; C^^chester Si^ge.

Which (...) a while with f^rtunate (...)
Ch^c^'d (...) div^r^^d Their swollen Ins^l^nce:
When the whole Kingdom f^r a Treaty cry'^,
(...)
Tha^ (...) Votes, Jun^ 30. 1648.
and God once m^r^
Your (...) Kingdom did restore? Tre^ty V^ted, July ^8. 1648.

Rem^mb^r how (...) Treat^r^ (...),
Not to (...) P^ac^, but to pro^ong D^b^te;
How Yo^ that precious time at first d^l^y'd,
And what ill ^se of Your advantage made,
As if from Your (...) H^nds God had decreed
Nothin^ (...) War and Mischi^f should succ^ed
F^r when by ^^sy Gra^^s the Kings Assent
Did your Desir^^ in greater things prevent,
When (...) yield ^^ster than You entreat,
And m^r^ th^n Mod^sty dares well repeat;
Yet not content with this, witho^t all sense
Or of His Hono^^ or His Conscien^e,
Still you pressed on, till you too late descried,
'Twas now less safe to stay than be denied.
For like a Flood broke loose the Armed Rout,
Then Shut Him clos^r up, And Shut You out,
Who by just Veng^ance are since Worried
By those Hand-wol^es Yo^ for His Ruin bred.
Thus like Two smoking Fireb^ands, You and They
Have in this Smother choked the Kingdom's Day:
And a^ you raised Them first, m^st shave the Guilt,
With all the Blood in those Distraction^ spilt.
For though with (...) Foxes backward turned,
(When he Philistia's fruitful Harv^st burned)
The f^ce of your Opinion, stands averse,
All yor Co^cl^sions b^t one Fire disperse;
And ^very Line which carries your Designs,
In the s^m^ Center of Conf^sion joins.
Though then the I^d^pendants end the Work,
It Is known they took the^r Platform from the Kirk;
Though Pil^te Br^dsh^w with his pack of Jews,
God'^ High Vice-g^r^nt at the Bar accuse;
They but r^viv'd the Evid^nce and Charge,
Your poys' no^s D^cl^rat^ons laid at large;
Though they Condemned or made his Life their Spoil,
Yo^ were the S^tters forced him to the Toil:
For you whose fatal hand the Warrant writ,
The Prisoner did for Execution fit;
And if their Ax invade the Regal Throat,
Remember you first Murdered Him by Vote.
Thus they receive your Tennis at the bound,
Take off that Head which you had first Un-crown'd;
Which shows the Texture of our M^schiefs Clew,
If Ravell'd to the Top, begins in You,
Who have for ever st^in'd the brave Intents
And Credit of our English P^^li^ments:
And in this One caused grea^^r ^lls, and more,
Than all of theirs did Good that went before.
Yet have You kept your word against Your will,
Your King is Great indeed and Glorious still,
And You have made Him so. We must impute
That Luster which His Sufferings contribute
To your preposterous Wisdoms, who have done
All your good Deeds by Contradiction:
For as to work His Peace you raised this Strif^,
And often Shot at Him to Save His Life;
As you took from Him to Increase His wealth,
And kept Him Prisoner to secure His Health;
So in revenge of your dissembled Spite,
In this last Wrong you did Him greatest Right,
And (cross to all You meant) by Plucking down
Li^ted Him up to His Eternal Crown.
With this Encircled in that radiant Sphere,
Where thy black Murderers must never appear;
Thou from th'enthroned Martyrs Blood-stained Line,
Do in thy Virtues bright Example shine.
And when thy Darted Beam from the moist Sky
Nightly salutes thy grieving Peoples Eye,
Thou like some Warning Light raised by our fears,
Shall both provoke and still supply our Tears,
Till the Great Prop^et waked from his long Sleep,
Again bids Sion for Josiah weep:
That all Successions by a firm Decree
May teach their Children to Lament for Thee.
Beyond these Mournful Rites there is no Art
Or Cost can Thee preserve. Thy better Part
Lives in despite of Death, and will endu^e
Kept safe in thy Unpattern'd Portraicture:
Which though in Paper drawn by thine own Hand,
Shall longer than Corinthian-Marble stand,
Or Iron Sculptures: There thy matchless Pen
Speaks Thee the Best of Kings as Best of Men:
Be this Thy Epitaph; for This alone
Deserves to carry Thy Inscription.
And it is but modest Truth: (so may I thrive
As not to pl^ase the Best of thine Alive,
Or flatter my Dead Master, here would I
Pay my last Duty in a Glorious Lie)
In that Admired Piece the World may read
Thy Virtues and Misfortunes Storied;
Which bear such curious Mixture, Men must doubt
Whether Thou Wiser were or more Devout.
There live Blessed Relick of a Saint-like mind,
With Honors endless, as Thy Peace, Enshrined;
Whilst we, divided by that Bloo^y Cloud,
Whose purple Mists Thy Murdered Body shroud,
Here stay behind at gaze: Apt for Thy sake
Unr^ly murm^rs now against Heaven to make,
Which binds us to Live well, yet gives no Fence
To Guard her dearest Sons from Violence.
But He whose Trump proclaims, Revenge is mine,
Bids us our Sorrow by our Hope confine,
And reconcile our Reason to our Faith,
Which in thy Ruin such Conclusions has;
It dares Conclude, God does not keep His Word
If Zimri dye in Peace that slew his Lord.
From my sad Retirement March 11. 1648.
CAROLUS STUART REX ANGLIAE SECURE COESUS VITA CESSIT TRICESSIMO IANUARII.

