THE MARROW OF ASTROLOGY IN two BOOKS. Wherein is contained the Natures of the
Signs and Planets, with their several Governing Angels, according to their
Respective Hierarchies. Also Philosophical Reasons for taking the Planets
Antiscions, and Part of Fortune, with the Method of Directions according to the
Egyptians and Chaldeans, with several other useful Examples. Also a new Table
of Houses, exactly calculated for the Latitude of London, with Tables of the
Mundane Aspects, and all that is requisite, for the Rectifying and Directing
Nativities; according to the true Intent and Meaning of Ptolomy: Wherein is
discovered the Errors of Argol, Regiomontanus, and most of our Modern Authors,
in several Examples, never before Done in English.

By Richard Kirby. AND John Bishop. Students in the Celestial Science.

LONDON: Printed by Joseph Streater, near Paul's-Wharf in Thames Street, for
the Authors, and are to be Sold by John Southby at the Harrow in Cornhil. 1687.

Friendly Reader;
THere are many material Erratas in the Introductory Part, which were
occasioned by the Authors absence from the Press, therefore you are desired to
correct them, before you make to far a Progress in the Book which you may do by
the following Table, but as for the Litteral Faults, he has silently passed
them by, des^ring you to amend them as you Trace over the Book.

ERRATA.

Page 2 Line 16. for Read, p. 3 l. 9 for Panets Planets. p. 3 l. 16 for 331445
r. 338445. p. 10 l. 31 for 6^ r. 24 p. 10 l. 32 for 24 r. 60. p. 10 l. 32 for 7
r. 23. p. 10. 35. for 53 r. 37. p. 43 l. 5 for atrihuted r. atributed. p. 27.
(...) dele on, p. 46, l. 2. for 1, 38. r. 4, 31. p. 46. l. 3, for 1, 4^ r. 6,
47. p. 57. l. 5. dele woe. p. 70. l. 16. for r.. p. 7^ l. 3. for Setting r.
Rising, p. 89. l. 4. for Soutt r. South 108. l. 29. for Ptolomp's r. Ptolomy s.
p. 113. l. 6. for N^tivrty r. Nativity. p. 113. l. 25. for Potlomy r. Ptolomy
120. l. 32. for Doctr r. Doestor.

Part the Second, page. 60. l. under Mr. Lilly's Nativ^ for 1 r. we, for 1 r.
we, for 1 r. we have, p. 80 l. 19 for 1 r. w^ for 1 r. we, l. 20. for 1 r. we,
l. 24 for 1 r. we, l. 27 for 1 r. w^ l. 29 for my r. our.

TO THE Most Eminently accomplished in all Ingenious Literature Elias Ashmole,
of the Middle Temple Esquire. Controller General of His Majesty's Duty of Excise,
etc.
Honored Sir.
I hope this Dedicatory Epistle of mine published without your Knowledge, will
beget no such Sinister Construction in you, but that the Fault shall be
admitted as a venial Transgression; and this Presumption, find easy Remission
at your most gentle Hands; I am now so well acquainted with your Pleasing
Native Disposition, that in things of this Nature, where you are not in
question, I Dare a little Offend: For its a fixed Natural Maxim ingraffted in
you, to love your Friends Sincerily, and rarely to take offense upon slight
failings; Pardon therefore this Boldness of mine, I have now a large Field to
walk in, and should I further proceed, I am assured I should move that sweet
disposed Temper of yours, which is not easily offended, I am silent, only Sr. I
hope you shall have no dishonor to Patronize the ensuing Work, wherein I lay
down the whole natural Grounds of Art, in a fit Method, never done before in
England, or by any that could ever speak the English Tongue; that thereby I may
undeceive those, who have been miss-led by the received, musty Opinion of
Argol, Regiomontanus, and others, and thus much from him, who wishes to you,
and your Honorable Consort all Happyness, and Life Eternal.

Richard Kirby.

To the Courteous READER
Gentle Reader, we have here adventured to present thee with a Piece Entitled,
The Marrow of Astrology, being the true Genethlical Part thereof, according to
the Egyptians and Chaldeans; wherein is discovered the Errors of
Regiomontanus, Argol, and others, as my Ingenious Friend Mr. John Bishop, has
well demonstrated in the second Part of this Piece, and was also assisting in
this, etc. Not doubting but that Men of Candid Sincerity will be ready, not
only to give a friendly welcome, but also to drive away those Immortal Enemies,
which continually beseige and assault every good Labor, and abuse the
ligitimate Sons of Art, whose steps they are not worthy to follow; I mean
Crittisism and Envy, the first is harbored in the Breasts of those, (who though
hard to please) are credibly supposed to be more Nice then Wise, the other a
restless Wretch, yet fearless enough to them which know it, only the worst is,
like a filthy Fly it seeks all over the body for a Sore, and where it cannot
find, it makes one; we wish to be as free as we can from the Reach of those
Readers, committing our poor Endeavors to the use of such, as are more worthy
of their mean Service; for we do not go about to Teach the learned Skill, but
to Instract the Ignorant, in what before they knew not, etc.

Take therefore in good Part what is thus intended toward thee, so shall our
Pains and Labor, not quite want their Recompense, nor thy self be branded with
that filthy Mark, of foul Ingratitude (which resembles nothing but a Fiend of
the Infernal Crew) for know this, we do not intend to send you into the Woods
to fetter Wolves, nor saw the Tigers Teeth, but we will lead you into a
fruitful Vineyard, where you shall have your fill of the sweetest Grapes, etc.

Astrology is no more, but a part or Member of Natural Philosophy, which
teaches, by the Motion of the Primum Mobile, Configurations and Influences of
the Signs, Stars, and Celestial Planets, to prognosticate, or predict, of the
natural Effects and Mutations to come in the Eelements, and these Inferior
Elementary Bodies; it is an Art of great Antiquity, and if we may give Creddit
to the Ancient Writings of Sage Authors, and of the most profound Philosophers,
who made it their Business wholly to Study God and Nature; it is even as
Ancient as Adam, etc.

Don't we know, when the Great Jehovah had finished that Great and Admirable
Stupendous Work of the Creation, he made Laws and Bands to every Part thereof,
and in his eternal providence has placed, against the usurpiug Blasphemy,
Misuse, and Stealth of the Wicked, and great Enemy, the Devil, four Mighty
Angelical Princes (who are as Watchmen and Overseers, over this terestial
Fabric, and the Sons of Men dwelling thereon) to the Intent, that he being put
out to the Earth, his envious will might be bridled, the determinations of our
heavenly God fulfiled, and his Creatures kept and preserved, within the Compass
and Measure of Order; he made the Sun to rule by day, and the Moon by night,
and all the Hosts of Heaven, he made for Signs, for Seasons, for Days, and for
Years, and in them did (briefly but fully) show an Epitomy of the choycest Part
of the Creation, and from which was learned Man by Divine Permission instructed
in the most sublime Knowledge, next to Salvation, that ever was taught; and
although the Ignorant Detractors, are subject to velify it; yet the more
profound Philosophers, as I said once before, who made it their business Wholly
to study God and Nature, were led by those Heavenly Beings, to the most occult
Secrets, yea a great deal more than our common Astrologers does know, or can
give any Reasons for; but only Study by Tradition, not at all regarding Reason
or Experience; let them alone in their common Road, and they have Arguments
enough, (though senseless ones,) to confound a Nation, if that could do any good?
but deny their senseless Arguments, and demand their Reasons, and you will lay
them as flat as the ground, and like Bats struck dead by Thunder, as I may
Instance in this one Proposition; suppose a Woman should have her Womb possessed
with three Children at one time, and it should please God our great Creator to
order it so, that they should all be born, or receive the Vital Air upon their
tender Bodies, within the space of an hour, I would fain know, whether there be
ever a one amongst our common Pretenders, can tell which of these Children will
dye first, when, and of what distemper; Now if there be any Truth in Art, as we
are sure there is, then all Ingenious Men will allow this to be rational, as we
often see, one Child lives, and two dies, two lives and one dies, and sometimes
they all live, and sometimes they all dye now this is quite out of the common
Astrologers way, neither can they give the least Reason for it in the World
(and why) because they trace over a wrong path, as we can easily prove in any
Nativity of theirs, and show demonstrable reasons for the same, that there is
not one in a hundred of them as to Art, but are like the Sodomites, which did
nothing but grope in the dark; or like the rude Multitude in Nineveh, which did
not know their Right Hands from their Left; and yet these Gentlemen, can Boast
with Hermes and Ptolomy; as their Leaders (nay some have the Impudence to
Condemn them, and all their Ways) when in Truth they understand nothing of
their sayings, but Cleave to the Customs of the World and forsake the Truth,
as shall be Demonstrated here after by several Examples (If we find this Kindly
Received and Friendly Entertained) and that according to the unerring Cannons
of this most Heavenly Science etc.

Perhaps some who pretends themselves to be Great Masters of Art, will be apt
to Clash and Write against these most Excellent Rules, which we have here laid
down for the good of Tyros; but we shall advise them to Rest in a secure
Harbor, and not to be like the unadvized and indescreet Mariner, who runs his
Ship against a Rock, and thereby not only Indangers the loss of his Vessel, but
hazzards also his own Life, and the Sailors too; therefore he that offers to
write against this Piece. Indevouring to vindicate what has been all Ready
wrote by any of our Modern Authors (who are like Vntempred Mortar, which is not
as yet fit for use) will Run into Error and Confusion. And so we leave you to
the Protection of him which made us all, for we must hasten (away) about our
Great Work, least Time in his Swift Pace mocketh us for our slowness, therefore
take Notice of this, that the fore-locks of Time, are the Deciders of many
Doubts, and Time is so swift of foot, that being once past he can never be
overtaken.

Aug. the 15th. 1686. From my House in King Street Soho, Alias St. Anns.
Richard Kirby Astrology and Physic.

You are desired in Page 76, Line 14, for Seminocturnal, to read Semidiurnal,
if it be not so already, as it is in some of the Impression.

ISAGOGE OR AN INTRODUCTION TO ASTROLOGY.
CHAP. I. Of the Characters of the seven Planets, twelve Signs, and Aspects,
with their several Names and manifold Divisions, etc.
YOU must Note, that there are seven Erraticks, or wandering Stars, by our
Ancient Predecessors called Planets, and are Charactered as follows.

Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol. Venus. Mercury. The Moon, Planets.
called Luna.
Secondly. There is also two Nodes or certain Points used by Astrologers, named
the Dragons Head and Tail, and are Charactered as follows, Dragons Head,
Dragons Tail; The Part of Fortune bears this Character,

Thirdly. Now as there are seven Planets, so there are twelve Signs, which are
the twelve Mansions or Houses of Heaven; and these twelve Signs take great
Power and Might of the seven Planets; and the seven Planets, take great Power
and Might of the twelve Signs; for the seven Planets be to the twelve Signs,
as the Body is to the Soul; for as the Body can do nothing without the Soul,
nor the Soul without the Body; no more may the Signs without one of these
Planets, etc.

Fourthly. The Characters of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, are as follows,
Signs.


Aries; Taurus; Gemini; Cancer; Leo; Virgo; Libra; Scorpio; Sagittary Capricorn
Aquarius; Pisces.
Fifthly. Through these twelve Signs do the seven Planets continually The
Time of the Planets Revolutions.
move, and are ever in one or other Degree of them: is the highest, who
finisheth his Course through the twelve Signs in thirty Years. Next under is,
who performs his Revolution in twelve Years. Next under is, who performs his
Perambulation in two Years. Next under is that Glorious Lamp of Heaven the,
from whom all the Stars receive their Light and Motion; he performs his
Revolution in 365 Days 5h. 49m. or there abouts. Next under the is Dame, who
traceth through the 12 Signs in 225 Days. Next under is that nimble Post, who
passes through the 12 Signs in 88 Days. And in the lowest Sphere of all moves
the who performs her Revolution in one Month; And thus the Panets are one
beneath the other; and the Wise Philosophers say, that from the Earth to the
Distance of the Planets from the Earth.
it is 15750 Miles, and from the to is 12812^, and from to is 12812^, and from
to is 23422 miles: From the to is 15725, and from to is 68719, and from to is
68719, and from to the Starry Firmament is 120485 Miles, and from the Firmament
to the Earth is 331445 Miles, being the Total Sum of all, etc.

The Aspects of the Planets are thus, and are in Number Ten.
COnjunction. Sextil. Simiquartil smq. Quintil Q. Aspects.
Quartil. Trine. (...) ^^q. Biquintil Bq. Oppositon. and Paralels Pa.

Of these are good the the Q., and Bq. the bad are, the smq., ssq. and; the
rest are indifferent, that is good with good, and bad with bad, as the and Pa.

A Table of Aspects.
A Table of Aspects, and how many Degrees makes each Aspect.
Degr. Signs. Degr. A Conjunction is 00 or 00 00 A Sextil is 60 or 02 00 smq. A
Simiquartil is 45 or 01 15 Q. A Quintil is 72 or 02 12 A Quartil is 90 or 03 00
A Trine is 120 or 04 00 ssq. A Sisquiquadrat is 135 or 04 15 Bq. A Biquintil is
144 or 04 24 An Opposition is 180 or 06 00

A Parallel has no certain Number either in Signs or Degrees, but may be more
or less, according as the Planet shall have Latitude, besides Parallels goes
under three Denominations, viz. Mundane; Parralels of Declination, and
Parallels by the Motion of the Primum Mobile, as shall be explained in their
proper Places, and that with Examples.

Aspects that are called Antiscians, we call Parallels, because says Ptolomy,
nothing else should be Parallel to Aspects, or Antiscians.
the Equator; wherefore those Parallels in the Primum Mobile are of equal
distance to the Equator, and if they are of one Denomination, they are called
Primary; but if of sundry Denominations, Secundary, etc. The North Commands,
and the South Obeys; a Parallel is of the same Strength with a Star of the
first Magnitude; and what Aspects are made in the Primum Mobile, the same are
made in the Horizon or World: Yet many are the likeness between the Parallels
in the world, and Parallels in the Primum Mobile, as may be found in place
where.

First. A is when two Planets are in one and the self same Of a Conjuction.
Degree and Minute of a Sign, both as to latitude as well as longitude, and he
that does not regard the one as well as the other, must needs Err; as their
reason and practice shall tell them: For if a Planet be in 10 degrees of
having no latitude, and another Planet be in the self same Sign and Degree,
having 3 dg. of South lattitude, and they be to be directed under the Pole 51
dg. according to the common way of direction, we shall find it will be 6 Years,
63 Days, before the Direction will come up, according to Naibods measure of
Time: That which is most practiced, though not the truest; which is a sufficient
demonstrable Reason to satisfy all the Ingenious Sons of Urania; that two
Planets cannot be said to be in a partil Conjunction, or Aspect, except their
Positions be to a Degree and Minute, both as to Latitude, and Longitude, as I
said before, etc.

Secondly. Although we mention a or Aspect, to consist of a just number of
Degrees and Minutes, yet they being very seldom so found, therefore they go
under two Denominations, viz. Partil, and Platick: now a Partil Conjunction or
Aspect, is when two Planets are exactly in so many Degrees, or so many dg. and
min. of a Sign; or so many dg. and min. from each other, both as to Latitude
and Longitude; as I said before as makes a perfect or Aspect, etc.

But the Platick admits of the Rays or Moity of the Orbs of each Planet, which
are so in Aspect of each other; and in this we ought to consider the Latitude;
for many times when we think the Aspect to be but platick, it may prove partil;
which is caused by the Planets great Latitude; and for want of this due
consideaation, many an able Artist Errs in his Judgment; which brings a great
Scandal upon the Art, and makes many People to have but a mean Opinion of the
same, by reason of such Grand Mistakes and Over-sights, etc.

The Orbs of the Planets are to be understood thus; and 9 degrees. and 7 degrees. the
15 degrees. and the Orbs of the Planets.
12 degr.

Thirdly. The Planets have allowed them every one two Signs Lords of Signs.
or Houses a piece, and excepted, they having but each of them One; has
allotted him the Signs and, to and, owns and, and the, and, and, and the, etc.

Fourthly. Of the Radiations of the Houses and Signs, which are in two small
Tables as follows, etc. Of the Rad. of the Hos. Of the Rad. of the Sig.
Radiations of the Houses and Signs.
Ho. Si. 1 3:11 4:10 5:9 7 2 4:12 5:11 6:10 8 3 1:5 6:12 7:11 9 4 2:6 1:7 8:12
10 5 3:7 2:8 9:1 11 6 4:8 3:9 10:2 12 H. sig

These Tables are so plain and easy, that they need no Explanation; yet least
some young Students should complain, and say they understand them not, they
being unacquainted with our Method, therefore I think it will be requisite to
unfold the meaning of them, which are as follows, etc.

Thus, on the top of each Table you have the Title, Example.
and in the next Line below, the Aspects, and in the first Column of the first
Table you have House at the top, and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and down to the bottom;
so in the last Collumn, House 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, and to the top; now if you
guide your eye from the number 1 in the first Collumn till you come under in
the second, you shall find 3, 11, which shows the 3d. and 11th. Houses to be in
to the 1st. and in the third Coll. under is 4, and 10, which denotes that the
1st. 4th. and 10th. are in. the 4th. Coll. shows the 1st. 5th. and 9th. to be
in. and the 5th. Coll. shows the 1st. and 7th. to be in, as the Lines and
Collumns themselves will express by their numbers and Characters; and so
throughout the whole Table entering either at top or bottom, with the number of
the House, the like is to be understood in the Signs, as may be seen by
Inspection, as thus, and are in, and in, and in, and and in, and so of the
Rest, etc.

Fifthly. Of the Antiscions of the Planets, and the way of takein Of Antiscians.
them, by the Tables of Declination, regard being had to the Latitude and
Declination of the Planet, as well as the Longitude; and he that takes them
otherwise, knows not what he does, except the Planet has no Latitude, then it
will fall out right according to their way, otherwise not; for many times a
Planet has so great Latitude, that there can be no Antiscion, because it falls
quite out of the Ecliptic Line; nay sometimes when a Planet has not that
great Latitude, it falls out of the Ecliptic Line, therefore can be no
Antiscion, as I shall instance in several Examples.

And as for the Contrantiscions, there is no such thing, Contrantiscians.
let who will say it, and the Reason is, because the Antiscion can cast no
contrary Shadow; the Antiscion being but a Shadow cast contrary it self, etc.

Examples follows.
Suppose a Planet to be posited in 10 Dg. of, he having Example.
no Latitude, and it were desired to know his Antiscion; in the Tables of
declination, enter the last collumn to the right hand, (having at the Bottom)
with 10 Dg. of Longitude, and in the Angle of meeting under 0 Dg. of Latiude,
you shall find 22 Dg. 2 m. which is the Planets Declination; against which in
the first Column to the left hand having a top, you will find 20 Dg. which is
the Planets Antiscion, as in the common way of taking it: But here observe, the
Planet has no Latitude, therefore upon necessity must happen so, but if the
Planet had but one Dg. of Latitude, either North or South, it would have made a
considerable alteration in the Antiscion.

Sixthly. How to take the Antiscion of a Planet with Latitude, a Example.
thing not used by the common Astrologers; and the reason is, because they
understand it not; therefore I shall desire them not to be high and Prodigal,
but mildly to receive Instructions; which they shall have in three or four
Examples which I think is sufficient for the slenderst Capacity in this World,
that pretends to the least knowledge in this Mistical Science; which Iam sure
few understands, tho many have the confidence to pretend to, and practice the
same, and so become common cheaters of the Town, and indeed the Country to;
Abusing the Art, and the honest Professors of the same; as I could instance
many, who impudently put out Bills, declaring their 20 Years Experience,
besides the strange things they have foretold; with their Calculations of
Nativities, and teaching the whole Art of Astrology; when it is certain they
understand no more in Starry Diatect, than some old Women do of Martial
Discipline.

Suppose to be in 22 dg. of, she having 5 dg. of North Lat. and it were
required to know where, and in what dg. of she sends her Antiscion.

I enter the Table of Declination, with her Longitude in the first Collumn to
the left hand, having at top, Example.
and in the Angle of meeting under 5 dg. of Lat. I find 3 dg. 58m. which Number
I look for in the second Collumn to the left hand, and I find it exact; and
next to it in the first Collumn is 10dg. against which, in the last Collumn of
all, having at the bottom, I find 20 dg. of, which is the Antiscion of; she
being in 22dg. of having 5dg. of North Lat. as the Tables themselves will show
by Inspection; and Note, if at any time you have any odd m. of Longitude or
Latitude, you must equate for them, as you do in taking a Planets Declination,
or Right Ascension, etc.

Take another Example for Practice; Suppose to be in 6 Degrees of, having 2 dg.
South Lat. and were required Example.
to know where, and in what dg. of he sends his Antiscion, I enter the Table of
Declination, in the last Collumn to the Right Hand, (having at the bottom) with
6 dg. of Longitude, and in the Angle of meeting under 2 dg. of Lat. I find 33
m. this 33m. I seek for in the second Collumn to the left hand, which I find
not, but I find 24, which Number is 9 too little, then I substract 24 from 48,
the Number above it, and the difference is 24; then I say by the Rule of
Proportion, if 60 give 24, what shall 9 give, viz. near 7, which must be
subtracted out of 29 dg. of as I find it in the first Coll. to the left hand;
so the Antiscion of will fall in 28 dg. 53m. of, etc.

But it happens (sometimes) that a planet can have no Antiscion; as I have said
else where, and it shall be proved in this following Example,

As thus, suppose were posited in 20 dg. of, having Example.
three dg. South Lat. with her Long. I enter the first Coll. to the left hand
(having at the top) and I guide my Eye along until Icome just against, or more
properly under 3 dg. of lat. and in the Angle of meeting, I find 26dg. 8m.
which Number I seek for, in the second Coll. to the left hand; but I find it
not, nor no number near it; which shows that sends no Antiscion to that Place;
because it falls out of the Ecliptic Line; except you neglect her lat. as many
half witted Fellows have done all along, and then it will fall in 10dg. of,
according to the common way of taking it; a great Error, O! what grand mistakes
do Men make for want of a due understanding.

Perhaps some will be pecking at me for these things; Note.
but such I will give to understand that I value them not. And thus much for
the true and exact way of taking Antiscions, for he that offers to take them
without observing, lat. long. and declination, must needs run into Error and
Confusion.

A Table of the Antiscions.
By this Table you may see that a Planet in sends his Antiscion to; as the
Tables of Declination themselves will Table.
direct, etc.

Seaventhly. The Ho. of are in to the ho. of the Luminaries:. 2 Houses are in,
2 Houses in, 2 Houses in, beholds Honses.
them not at all: Hence it appears is the greater infortune, and the greater
Fortune; is neither good nor bad, but like a Chip in Pottage, does neither good
nor hurt, but when he is with a Fortune, or Infortune, either by Body or
Aspect; so and are Infortunes; and Fortunes; the and indifferent, etc.

Eighthly. The Planets mean Motion: 2m. 1s. 4m. 59s. 31m. 27s. and have each
59m. 8s. and the 13d. 10m. 36s. this is what they move in 24. Hours; yet
Planets mean Motion.
sometimes they move faster, and sometimes slower; and sometimes it falls out,
that and stand stock still, and therefore are called Stationary, etc.

In the next place I shall treat of the (...) descriptions and significations
of the 12 Signs of the Z^k.

First of the Sign Aries.
Nature of
ARies is a Masculine, Diurnal, Equinoctial, Moveable, Cardinal, Easterly Sign,
of the fiery triplicity, hot and dry, in Nature chollorick, intemperate, and
violent; it is the day house of the Exaltation of the; and the triplicity of Sol
and, contains 13 fixed Stars, and is beastial.

gives of it self.
First this Sign describes a Person of a mean Stature, lean and spare dry Body,
but big bones long Visage, a swarthy Complexion hazle eyes, crooked nose, a
light or yellowish colored hair, some what Curling, little eyes and feet,
black eyebrows, broad thick shoulders, and well set; the first part of the
Sign gives the body more gross then the latter: This Sign incites a man to
choler, makes him witty and Ingenuous, quick of apprehension,

Places.
Secondly, places, it signifies where Sheep and all sorts of small cattle do
feed, or use to be; as private unfrequented places, sandy and hilly grounds,
places of Refuge for theives; Lands newly taken in or Plowed up; or where
bricks tiles, potters ware, charcoal or lime have been Burned. In houses, that
part thereof where small Beasts use to be kept, also covering, cieling,
plaistering Fireplace stove, furnace, or the like, generally the Stable; also
bake-houses, glass-houses, smiths shops, all places where fire is used, also
Iron is kept, or Weapons of War, and is Eastern.

Diseases.
Thirdly, Diseases, all pushes, whelks, and pimples, freckles, and sun-burning
in the Face, Polipus, or Nolimetangere, hare-lips, all Diseases in the Head, as
headache of all sorts, vertigo, frenzy, lithargy, forgetfulness, catalepsie,
appoplexy, dead palsy, coma, falling sickness, convulsions, cramps, madness,
melancholy, trembling, St. Anthony's Fire, blisters, burnings, scaldings,
blasts, megrims, toothache, baldness deafness, loss of Sight and Speech. It
gives a Color white, and red mixed therewith.

Color.
Fourthly, Kingdoms Countries, Cities, and Places under are, England, France,
Germany, Idumea, Silisia, the higher Polonia, Burgundy, Polonia the less,
Palestine, Basternia, India, Cities. Augusta, Concomia, Naples, Capua, Ferrara,
Kingdoms.
Florence, Verona, Lydani, Trajectum, Bergamo, Padua, Brunswick, Vtrecht,
Marcelles, Epidaure, Craconia, Caragosa, Wenjesa, his Angel is Muschidiel, etc.

Secondly of the Sign Taurus.
Nature of
TAurus is the second Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is an earthly, cold,
dry, melancholy, feminine, nocturnal, domestical, or bestial, fixed Sign, of
the earthy Triplicity; the night house of, the exaltation of the and both their
Triplicities; it contains 23 fixed Stars, and is Furious, because it represents
the Bull; herein rejoices, etc.

gives of its self.
First, It represents one of a short thick Stature, (that is strong and well
set) a broad Face and forehead, and of Nature as rugged as a Bull; thick arms,
great eyes, large and strong shoulders, wide and thick lips, gross hands,
rugged thick black hair, crisping or curling, a swarthy brown Complexion, bigg
buttocks, and short legs; one of few words, slow to anger, but if he be once
stired up, or put into passion, it will be a hard matter to reconcile him
again: A very laborious person it produces, and one of an earthy sordid
Occupation.

Places.
Secondly, Places. It signifies stables where Horses are, Cow-houses, and
houses where the Implements of Cattle are laid up, also the Husband Man's
working-geer; all out houses, Pastures, or feeding Grounds, and where bushes
and shrubs have been lately grubed up, and wherein Wheat and Corn is sowed, or
under some Bank-side, mud-wall, or little trees not far of; In Houses, under
ground, cellars, low rooms, earthen floores, wall sides, or holes in walls,
vaults, places where rubbish lies, and the like; it is a south-east Sign, etc.

Diseases.
Thirdly, Diseases, The kings evil, sore throats, quinsie, wens in the neck,
flux of rhume in the throat, and what disease soever falls into that part of
the body, the Sign gives a color red, and white mixed therewith, etc. Color.


Fourthly, Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, and Places, Polonia, the Great, the
North Part of Sweedland, Russia, Lorraigne, Campania, Holvetia Rhetia,
Franconia, Perthia, Kingdoms.
Persia, Ireland, Cyclades, Cyprus, Switzzarland: Towns of Asia the less,
Cities, Bononia, Sona, Mantua, Novograde, Parma, Panormus, Taurentum, Perufium,
Caput Histria, Brixi, Zurich, Lucerne, Naunts, Harbibolus, Carolstade,
Posnania, Liepfig, Gnesua, Tigure, Sicyly, etc. Its Angel is Asmodel.

Thirdly of the Sign Gemini.
Nature of
THis is the third Sign in Order in the Zodiac, it is an airyal, sanguine, hot,
moist diurnal, common double bodied, barren, and humane, western, masculine
Sign, the day house of, consisting of 18 fixed Sears, and is the Triplicity of
and, etc.

gives of it self.
First, It gives one of an upright, straight, and tall stature, of body, either
in man or woman; the complexion sanguine, not clear, but a little obscure and
dark, yet a good color, long arms, but many times the hands and feet very
fleshy, a dark hair, tending toward a black, the body strong and active; a
good piercing hazle eye, and wanton; one of perfect Sight, and of excellent
Understanding, judicious in worldly affairs, a fluent Tongue, and apt
discourse, yet of no great fidelity, large breasts, this Sign incites a man to
be witty, but deceitful, yet a lover of Arts and Sciences, and all manner of
Curiosities; etc.

Places.
Secondly, Places, It signifies all hanged or wainscoat rooms, the hall,
dineing room, chambers, shelves, chests, trunks, boxes, coffers, cabinets,
chests of drawers, writings, books, pictures, plaistering, walls of houses,
also eaves, places of store, all curious airyal places, In Houses. but out of
Houses, it denotes barns; store houses, play houses, stages for Actors, and all
sorts of Mountebanks, hills and mountains, graineries for corn, fine hilly
places, and corn fields. It is a west and by south Sign.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases; It signifies all which are incident to the Arms, and
hands, but as for the Shoulders, viz. that part which we carry burdens on; is
under, because it is the emblem of labor, therefore not under, as the common
received Opinion is, it denotes wind in the blood more than any other sign, and
this comes commonly by blood letting; it also signifies fractures dislocations,
laxations, and all such diseases that are hot and moist, gives a color white
and red mixed together, etc. Color.


Countries.
Fourthly. Kingdoms countries cities and people, are Brabant, Lumbardy,
Flanders, the west part of England, Armenia, Sardenia, the Dukedom of
Wortenburge, Hercania, Martiania, Cyrienia, Marmarica, Egypt the lower, Cities,
London, Lovaine, Bruges, Norimberg, Corduba in Spain, Hasford, Mentz, Bambery,
Ceseny, Viterbium, Turney, Vercellas, Rhegium, Lovine, Kitzing, Erford,
Villacum, Mogontia; its Angel is Ambriel, etc.

Fourthly of the sign Cancer.
Nature of
THis is the fourth Sign in order in the Zodiac, and is by nature cold and
moist, frutful, slow of voice, mute, phlegmatic, feminine, solsticial, movable,
cardinal, watery, nocturnal, northern, the house of the, exaltation of, and
triplicity of, and the; containing 9 fixed Stars, etc.

gieves of it self.
First Under this sign, are generally persons of low and small stature, the
upper parts more bigger than the lower, a round visage, a sickly pale white
complexion, the hair of a sad brown, little eyes, oval visage, some say, a low
whining voice, and one that is given to drinking and venery, it gives bad
teeth, but many Children; one unconstant and never fixed, etc.

Places.
Secondly. Places, it signifies the sea, great rivers, fountains, all navigable
waters, also brooks, springs, ponds, lakes, wells, cellars, marshy grounds,
ditches with rushes, sedges, sea banks, trenches, all water courses; in Houses;
pumps, pipes, cesterns, sinks, dranes, cellars, tubbs of water, and all watery
places, and is a Northern Sign, etc.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases; it signifies Imperfections all over, or in the breasts, and
stomach; also the paps, weak digestion, bad liver, cold stomach, cancers in the
breasts, and that inflammation, which Women commonly call agues in the breasts,
plurisies, want of appetite to victuals, want of digestion of what they eat,
dropsies, coughs, heat of the stomach, ptisick, salt flegms, imposthumations in
the stomach, and rotten coughs, also timpanies, gives a color green and
russet, etc. Color.


Countries.
Fourthly. Kingdoms, countries, cities and places, Scotland, Holland,
Zeeland, Prusia, Tunis, Algier, Constantinople, Venice, Millain, Genoa,
Burgundy, Granada, Numedia, Africa, Bithinia, Calc is, Carthage, Phrygia,
Cholcis; Cities, Amsterdam, Cadiz, Pisa, St. Lucus, Vincentia, Bern York in
England, St. Andrews in Scotland, Gorlick, Wittenburg, Magdeburg, Lubeck: Its
Angel is Muriel, etc.

Fisthly of the Sign, Leo.
Nature of
THis is the fifth Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is in Nature hot and dry,
fiery, cholorick, masculine, and diurnal, beastial, and barren; the second of
the fiery tryplicity, a commanding regal eastern Sign, and consists of 27 fixed
Stars, it is the only house of the, and there he keeps his court, being king
of the Stars, and is the triplicity of Sol and Jupiter, etc.

gives of its self.
First. Under this Regal Sign, are generally persons of a large full body,
great round head, bigg eyes starting out, tall of stature; a dark flaxen or
yellowish hair curling, of a ruddy high sanguine complexion, broad shoulders,
narrow sides, of a fair countenance, and of good courage, bigg voice, a
resolute spirit, an active body, and a person of a generous spirit, and well
spoken, not fearing his flesh, for he is of the nature of the sign as fierce as
a Lion, proud and high minds, scorning to stoop to any, yet he is sober, grave,
and wise, and seemingly, affable enough.

Places.
Secondly. Places, it signifies all woods, forests, deserts, groves, and
places where wild beasts frequent, all steep rocks, cragged Castles and Forts,
likewise all places inaccessable; Kings palaces, parks wildernesses, etc.

In Houses, all places where fire is kept, as chimnyes, furnaces, ovens,
stoves, kills, and such like places, and is a North-east Sign, etc.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases, Palpitation, and trembling, of the heart, violent burning
fevers, sore eyes, the yellow jaundice, faintings, and such diseases as comes
of adustion of blood; as the plague, pestilence, violent pains at the heart and
back, and all such distempers as afflict those parts; likewise, all sicknesses
in the ribs and sides, especially the right side; as the plurisie; gives a
color red and green, etc. Color.


Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, and Places under are, Gallia, Togata,
the Alps, Italy, Sicily, Apalia, Bohemia, Turkey, Aemelia, Sabina, Phenecia,
Chaldea, Orchinia, Apulia; Cities, Rome, Damascus, Syracusa, Ravenna, Cremona,
^lms, Confluant, Prague, Liniz, Crimifium, Bristol in England; Its Angel is
Verchel.

Sixthly of the Sign Virgo.
Nature of
THis is the sixth Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is by Nature cold and dry,
of the earthy Triplicity, melancholy, barren, feminine, nocturnal; and is the
House and Exaltation of, the Triplicity of and; consisting of 24 fixed Stars,
herein rejoices, and it is a South-west Sign, etc.

gives of it self.
First. This sign describes a person of slender body, mean height, but decently
well composed, a Rudy brown complexion, bigg Eyes, thick black hair, one of an
Ingenious but Subtle wit, and given to all manner of Learning, the visage
somewhat Round, the Voice small and shrill, all the members inclinable to
breavity, a witty discreet, judicious soul, well spoken, studious in history,
those persons under this Sign, are not very beautiful, yet well favored and
comely enough, if be in this sign and the in, the person is of great
understanding, but somewhat unstable, that is a little fickle minded, yet
covetous, cruel, and dispiteful, a lover of War, etc.

Places.
Secondly. Places it signifies, is corn fields, graineries, malt-houses, all
places where hay, barley, wheat, pease, and other grain is kept; also stores
where butter and cheese is laid; In Houses, closets, studies, or places where
books, maps, writings, pictures, medals, or some pretty toys are laid; it also
denotes low rooms, where earthen floors are, and all private close corners,
also behind wainscoate, pictures, hangings, and the like; It is a south-west
Sign.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases, Under, are all incident to the bowels, the meseriack veins,
the Omentum, the diaphragme, spleen, worms, wind in the gutts, obstructions,
the chollick, and illiack passions, hardness of the spleen, hypocondriack,
melancholy, gripings and croaking in the gutts, any disease in the belly, as
hard bound, and the like, etc. Its color is black and speckled mixed together.
Color.


Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, and Places, under are, Achaia, Creet,
Ba ylon, Greece, Croatia, Corinthia, Arthefina, the Dukedom of Athens,
Mesopotamia, Assyria, Gallia, Comota Part, Rhone Part, Silicia. Cities,
Jerusalem, Corinth, Rhodes, Pupie, Sigina, Brundufium, Aretium, Novaria,
Cholosa, Lions, Paris, Bosil, Heidleburge, Erphord, Wrutislain, etc. its Angel
is Humatiel.

Seaventhly of the Sign Libra.
Nature of
LIbra is the Seventh Sign in Order in the Zodiac Circle, it is an airyal,
fanguine, hot and moist, equinoctial, cardinal; moveable, masculine, western,
diurnal, humane Sign; it is the day House of, the exaltation of, and the
triplicity of and, consisting of 8 fixed Stars.

gives of it self.
First. It represents One of a most delicate comely body, of a round and
beautiful visage, very straight, of a neat symmetry and proportion, more subtle
and slender, then gross bodied; a pure sanguine ruddy complexion in youth; but
toward the latter days, subject to spots and pimples, and a very high color,
the hair somewhat yellowish, or inclinable to a sandy flaxen, long and smooth,
also gray eyes, it gives a courteous impartial creature, very just and upright
in all things and actions; yet a contemner of Arts, and conceited of his own
Person, and Abilities.

Places.
Secondly. Places, It signifies high hilly grounds, also fields and gravelly
places, near wind-mills and low barns; or outhouses where hauking and hunting
is used, or where wood has been cut, it also represents the sides of hills, or
tops of mountains, saw-pits, and the like. In Houses, it signifies upper rooms,
as chambers, garrets, bellconeys, turrets, lofts, roofs, eaves of houses, also
shelves, and all places that lies West.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases, under this sign are of the reins or kidnyes which you
please, for the significations of the words are the same, also heat of the
reins in Women, which many times causes death in travel; likewise abortion,
and hard labor, the stone or gravil in the reins ulcers in the kidnyes, gives
all diseases coming of wind and corruption of blood, both in the loins and
kidnyes, weakness in the small of the back, it gives a color crimon Color.
or tawny.

Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms countries cities and places, are Bastriana, Caspia, Seres,
Oasis, Aethiopa, Sabandia, Alsatia, Sundguia, Livonia, Austria, Panuania,
Portugal, the Dukedom of Savoy, Delphinate, Thuscia: Thebaida Trogloditica,
Cities Lisbone Caietam Laudam Sessam Placentia Felkirch Friburge Angentine
Spires Frankford Vienna Harlum Suenoram Winpina Antwerp Landshut Mospachium
Frisinge Heilbrane Arles Lisbone Olysiponis Arefatum Veldkerchium; its Angel is
Zuriel.

Eighthly of the Sign Scorpio.
Nature of
SCorpio is the Eighth Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is a watery, cold,
phlegmatic, feminine, nocturnal, fixed stigmatized, false, deceitful,
treacherous, northern Sign, it is the night house and only joy of, consisting
of 12. fixed Stars, and is the triplicity of,, and Luna.

gives of it self.
First. It represents one of a short low stature, corpulent and strong-bodyed,
yet undecent and slugish, an Indiffernt large face, the complexion a little
pale, not going very straight or upright, somewhat Incurvating with the head,
one subtle cuning and a great deceiver, also quick in action; a dusky muddy
complexion, and sad dark hair, and has much on his body, short neckt, a square
well trust fellow, and the hair curling, it makes man or Woman Impudent and
brazen faced, also a great liar.

Places.
Secondly. Places. It represents, all marshy morish boggy, quaggy nasty durty
stinking lakes, grounds and places, where all manner of vermin and creeping
things do inhabit, also ruinous houses jakes vaults, and places of dung rubbish
and where carrion lies, it does likewise represent nasty stinking gardens,
orchards, and vineyards, etc. In Houses, kitchings, larders, jakes, vaults, or
house of office, sinks dranes and all dark filthy nasty stinking places
whatsoever, both of mudd and water, wether wash house or any such like place,
North or North-west.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases it signifies all infirmities whatsoever in the secreet
parts, gravel and stone in the bladder, inflammations and ulcers there, all
difficulties and imperfections of urine whatsoever; also reptures fistulas
hemorrhoids the French Pox running of the Reins priapismus, also all diseases of
the womb etc. color brown. Color.


Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms countries cities and places are, Norway the higher Bavaria
Comagena Cappadocia Idumea Mauritamia Fesse Gethulia Catalonia Barbary Metagony
Swecia, Cities Aqualegia Pestorium Algiers Valentia in Spain, Trabezond Vrbine
Gamerinum Taruisum Forum Julium Messana Alchstade Monacum Gaunt, Frankford
Part. its Angel, Barbiel, etc.

Ninthly of the Sign Sagittary
Nature of
SAgitary is the 9th. Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is a Fiery hot dry:
masculine, cholorick diurnal: eastern, common: by corporal double bodyed
beastial or 4 footed Sign, the house and joy of, and the and ' s triplicity
containing 31. fixed Stars.

gives of it self.
First. It represents one a bove amiddle stature or size, and has a very well
favored countenance, the visage being some what long: but pretty full and
ruddy, or almost of a Sunburnt complexion, a lovely cheerful countinance, good
hors-men: and great shooters, stout-hearted, a brownish hair or chestnut color,
but subject to baldness; to conclude it represents one on of a handsome
conformity in all the members, yet proud and high minded, but good natured
quickly angry and as soon over: and is valiant without fear: it makes a Man
witty and ingenious, quick of apprehension.

Places.
Secondly. Places. It signifies: all hilly stony places and where fire has
been frequently kept: also stables and Ox staules or cow-houses, upper rooms
in Houses, likewise chimnies stoves ovens furnances, it also represents all
those places that are high and lofty as well in fields as in houses: It is an
East and by South Sign.

Diseases.
Thirdly. It signifies all Infirmities in the thighs and hips, as the sciatica,
etc. Fistulas in those parts, heat of blood, pestilential fevers; and take
this for a general rule, that and signifies falls from horses, and hurts by
four footed beasts, they being both of them signs of Horsman-ship; besides
prejudiceth the body by cholor, heat, fire, and intemperance in sports, danger
of gunshot and arrows, gives a color yellow and red, etc. Color.


Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, and Places under are, Arabia the
happy, Tirrhenia, Celtica, Hispania, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Hungaria, Moravia,
Misnia, Thirronia, Spain. Cities, Toletum, Volaterus, Mutinum, Narbone,
Avenion, Colonia, Agrippina, Studguard, Rotenburge, Ludenburge, Buda, Gascovia,
Cullen; Its Angel is Adnaciel, etc.

Tenthly of the Sign, Capricorn.
Nature of
CApricon is the 10th. Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is an earthy, dry,
cold, nocturnal, cardinal, solsticial, melancholy, feminine, beastial, movable,
southern, domestic sign, the house of, and exaltation of, triplicity of and,
and has 28 fixed Stars.

gives of it self.
First. Those Persons signified by this Sign, are for the most part very weakly
slender men, of a mean stature, and dry constitution, blakish hair, and thin
beard, lean face, a thin narrow chin, and long, also long neck, narrow breasts
the visage long and thin also; a person of little wit, but subtle enough; and
cholorick, yet a coward; his body somewhat disproportioned, as it were hitting
one knee against the other, of a peevish disposition, and is given to lechery
and inconstancy, for the Goat is wanton, and will be playing, etc.

Places.
Secondly. Places. It signifies are, cow-houses, sheep pens, or places where
sheep, goats, and such kind of cattle use to be, also oxen, calves, etc. It
likewise represents all those places, where tools for husbandry, or old wood is
laid up, or where sails for ships, and such materials are bestowed; also fallow
grounds, barren fields, bushy and thorny places; dung-hills in fields, or where
soil is laid, also caves, dungeons, and prisons. In Houses, all dark places and
corners near the ground or threshold of the door, or places under ground; all
low rooms where earthen or paved floores are laid or made, and is a South Sign.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases, Are all incident to the knees and hams, as pains, sprains,
fractures, dislocations, leprosies, itch, scabs, all diseases of melancholy,
and all tumors called schirus; gives a color black and russet. Color.


Countries.
Fourthly. Kigdoms, Countries, Cities, and Places under are, Thrace, Macedon in
Greece, Albania, Bulgary, Illiris, India, the Isle of Orcades; Ariana,
Gedrosia, Marchia, Mazonia, Saxony, Hassia, Thuringia, Stiria, Bofnia. Cities,
Mechlin, Oxford in England, Juliacum, Berga, Gaunt, Brandenburg, Vustusta,
Vndilicorum, Constane, Derthona, Favemia, Vilna, Cleves, Pratum, Tortona,
Derr^ona, Its Angel is Hunuel.

Eleventhly of the Sign Aquary.
Nature of.
A Quary, is the 11th. Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is an airyal, diurnal,
fixed, masculine, humane, sanguine, hot and moist western, rational Sign; the
house and joy of, the tripli^ of and, consisting of 24 fixed Stars, etc.

give of it self.
First It represents a well set person, of a strong able body, not very tall,
yet decently enough composed; a long visage, sanguine complexion, a bright
hair, a very pure skin, yet distorted teeth; to conclude, it gives a very well
shaped person, curious and beautiful, the face fleshy and oval, he is a very
humane affable courteous person, speaking soberly, envious to none, constant to
his friend, and in his opinion, not given to quarrel, yet very merry and second.

Places.
Secondly. Places. It denotes all hilly and uneaven places, such as are newly
dug up, or where minerals, or quarries of stone are; also vineyards, spring
heads or conduits, all airy places. In Houses; the roofs upper parts or eaves,
garrets, chambers, windows, shelves; cubboards heads and the like, it is a
south-west Sign.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases. It denotes all manner of Infirmities incident to the legs,
from the knees to the anckles, all melancholy coagulated humors in the blood,
as cramps; and the truth is, thickness of blood, most usually proceeds from
this Sign, ask old who is lord of the some, and he will tell you the reason; it
also denotes aches and pains in the legs, etc. By this the Ingenious Artists
have a plain way to find out more, and by Doctor Experience, get Materials to
work withal, etc. gives a color blew. Color.


Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms, Countries, Cities, and Places under are, Amazonia Muscovia
Westphalia Svedeland Piedmount Mossel Bavaria Aethiopia Oxiana Sogdiana Media
Arabia the Desert and Stony Croatia. Cities, Hamborough Breme Trent Mountserat
Pisarum Ingolstade Salizburge; Its Angel is Gabriel.

Twelvethly of the Sign Pisces.
Nature of.
PIsces is the 12th. Sign in Order in the Zodiac, and is a cold moist
phlegmatic watery feminine nocturnal bycorporal double bodyed northern idle
sickle common Sign; the house of, the exaltation of, the triplicity of,, and
the, and a constellation of 24 fixed Stars.

gives of itsself.
First. It denotes a Person short of stature, and of no great action, nor none
of the handsomest, yet a pretty good face, and the complexion clear, thick
shoulders, brown hair, a fleshy body, but incurvating somewhat with his head,
not going straight, but something crooked, a stammering fraudulent person, a
pretender of truth, one of shallow brain, a slow voice, and very dull, etc.

Places.
Secondly. Places, It denotes all watery places, as fishponds and water
springs, water-mills moats ditches pools caves hermitages rivers fountains,
(...) the like; In Houses, wells cesterns pumps wash-houses pipes cocks dranes
sinks, and all places where water is kept; it is a north-west Sign, and does
also denote conduits, and places where fouls are, etc.

Diseases.
Thirdly. Diseases, under, is all lameness and aches incident to the feet, as
gouts kib^ chilblanes, etc. All diseases coming of salt slegm mixed humors scabs
itch botches and breakings out about the body, the small pox and measles all
cold and moist distempers, and such as come by catching wet and cold at the
feet, and if you will be pleased but to consider the affinity holds with, you
will soon see the Reason, why wet taken at the feet, strikes so speedily up to
the head, etc. Color bright or white. Color.


Kingdoms.
Fourthly. Kingdoms Countries Cities and Places under are, Cilicia Calabriana
Portaga Galatia Normundy Phasunia Nosamonta in Libia; Garamentis Lydia
Pamphilia Egypt the higher. Cities, Alexandria Hispalis Compostella Parentium
Rhemes Words Ratisbone; Its Angel is Barchiel.

1. Firey signs.
First. LIkewise the discreet Astrologian must understand, that all firey Signs
incline Men to be Cholorick, hasty, furious, quarelsome, revengeful, proud,
ambitious, imperious, importunate, hardy, and rash; involving themselves into
many unnecessary Troubles, yet they are many times Ingenious, but easily
changing their opinions, etc.

2. Airy signs.
Secondly. Airy Signs show Men cheerful, affable, courteous, liberal,
free-harted, faithful, good natured, loving mirth, as singing, dancing, music,
and all civil recreations, yet persons very modest, and of good reason and
undestanding, and are very open hearted if pleased, etc.

2. Earthy signs.
Thirdly. Earthy Signs give Persons of reserved Thoughts, and are slow in
speech and their resolutions, keeping close their councels; they also
frequently prove to be very fraudulent, covetuous, and suspicious, seldom
forgetting injuries, often sorrowful, loving no man's esteem but their own, they
are for the most part prudent and severe, not forgetting past injuries, etc.

4. Watery signs.
Fourthly. Watery Signs make Men Cowards, luxurious, wanton, mutable, dull
fellows, sluggards, no secret keepers, low whineing Voices, and are very
timorous, having much deceit in them; and they are much given to frequent the
Schools and Nurseries of wanton Venus; and that often times to their great
Detriment, and total Ruin, etc.

CHAP. II.
2d. Chap.
IN this Chapter I shall treat of the Names Natures, and Discriptions of the
seven Planets, called wandering and erratick Stars, and I don't much care, if
I begin with that ponderous Planet Saturn; who is the highest of all the rest.

This old surly Gentleman, whom we call Saturn, Saturn.
belongs to the seventh Orb, Mansion, or Sphere, of the celestial Hierarchy
of Angels, in the order of the Thrones; whose principal governing Angels, or
blessed Intelligencees, bearing Rule, are Cassiel, or Zaphkiel, Jophiel, and
Sabathiel, Angels.
etc.

He is said to be by Nature cold and dry, the Author of melancholy, masculine,
diurnal, barren, and the greater infortune.

Saturn gives stature and form of himself.
Secondly, Saturn of himself, gives a person of a middle Stature, of a swarthy
complexion, pale and muddy, as he is nearer or farther from the Earth, he also
gives little eyes, and black; a thin beard, flat broad forehead, black or sad
hair, lank hard and rugged; a hanging lowering eye-brow, thick lips and nose, a
lumpish countenance, thick shoulders, often times crooked, a lean face, a
shufling kind of gate, and for the most part splay footed, and delights to be
alone, and is always prying up and down in one hole or other; sometimes he hits
one leg against the other, and commonly looks downwards.

When Saturn is ill placed.

Saturns Nature when ill placed.
He makes men very willful, malicious, covetous, envious, jealous, and
mistrustful; also timorous, sordid, stubborn, suspecious, slugish, dissembling,
a great liar, and a close malicious fellow, never contented, but perpetually
murmering and repineing, always contemning of women, and speaking ill of them,
etc. Saturn gives a color black. His color.


Saturns nature when well dignified.
Thirdly. When Saturn is or shall be well dignified, then he gives Men of
profound judgments and imaginations, but severe in all their Acts, and men of
reserved thoughts, speaking very sparingly, patient in arguing or disputing,
very sober and grave; he also gives great students in all manner of learning,
especially those things which are most occult; and are very laborious in
obtaining the goods of this lower World; and in all manner of Actions austere,
yet solitious enough.

Fourthly, If Saturn be oriental oriental.
of the Sun, he makes men more short of stature, but decent and well composed.

Fifthly, If Saturn be occidental occidental.
, of the Sun, he makes them more black and lean, and fewer hairs, especially if
he want latitude.

Sixthly, If Saturn have south latitude South lat.
the person is more nimble and active, his greatest south latitude is 2gr. 49m.

Seaventhly, If Saturn have north latitude North lat.
, he makes the person more slugish and heavy, his greatest north latitude is 2
gr. 40 m.

Eighthly. If Saturn have great latitude, the body is fat and fleshy, and you
must note, that south latitude gives most flesh, and north latitude most hair,
yet fleshy also. Gives fat and hairy.


Ninthly. If Saturn be in his first station in his first station.
, he gives but little fat, but if he be in his second station from the Suns
Body, he gives fat ill favored bodies, and very weak.

Tenthly. Now you must note that Saturn is called amongst the Poets by several
Names, names amongst the Poets.
(viz.) as Chronos, Phanon, and Falcifer.

Eleventhly, Saturns greater years are 57; his mean years 43, and his least
years 30 years.
: He rules the North, being according to his own Nature cold.

Twelvethly. quallities and professions.
Qualities and Professions of Men under Saturn, are generally ancient men,
fathers, grandfathers, monks, jesuits, friars, jews, sectaries, husbandmen,
clowns, day laborers, diggers of metal, stone cutters, potters, usurers,
sexstones of Churches, diggers of earth, beggars, slaves, hoggards,
cow-keepers, curriers of leather, night farmers, tinners, plummers, miners
under ground, broommen, porters, car-men, brick-makers, malsters,
chimnysweepers, bearers of dead corpse, scavengers, hostlers, ditchers,
shippards, dyers of black cloth and sad colors, chandlers, herds-men, or
swinyards, coopers, black-smiths, leather dressers, hat-makers, farmers,
plough-men and the like, as collyers, etc.

denotes places out of houses.
Thirteenthly, Saturn denotes places out of houses, woods, deserts, obscure
valleys, caves, dens, holes, lanes, by-allies, mountains, cole-mines,
churchyards or places of burial, stinking muddy places, and where rubbish and
dung is laid, also houses not inhabited, old tattering obscure dreadful
houses, monastries, pits, standing pools, fens, fish ponds, religious places,
lead-mines and quarries of stone, etc.

in houses.
Fourteenthly, Saturn in houses denotes dark places, or some by part of the
house seldom used, also jakes, vaults, sinks, wells, pitts durty muddy
stinking places, or in those parts where the country man's working geer, or
horse harness lies; all ruinous buildings, and old decayed parts of the house
where people seldom come, he also denotes Tombs, and the like.

Countries under Saturn in Capricorn.
Fifteenthly, Kingdoms and countries under the Planet Saturn in Capricorn,
according to great Ptolomy, are as follows; Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria,
India, Arriana, Gordinia, many of which Countries are in lesser Asia.

under Saturn in Aqua.
Those under Saturn in Aquary, are the Sarmatian Country, Oxiana, Sogdiana,
Arabia, P^azamia, Media, Aethiopia, which Countries for the most part belongs
to the more inward Asia.

rules parts of man's body.
Sixteenthly, Saturn rules in the body of Man, the spleen, (and there he keeps
his Court,) the right ear, the bones, the teeth, the retentive faculty
throughout the whole Body.

Diseases under Saturn.
Seaventeenthly, Diseases under Saturn, are Toothache, quartane agues, all
diseases which come of melancholy, cold and dryness, leprosy, rhumes,
consumptions, black jaundise, palsy, trembling, vain fears, formidable fancies
of hobgoblings, gouts of all sorts, hemorrhoids, broken bones, laxations and
dislocations, deafness, pain in the bones, ruptures, iliack passion,
chin-cough, pains in the bladder, all long diseases, and madness that comes of
melancholy, fear or grief; he also gives costiveness, and corrupts the blood by
melancholy.

A few Instructions to the diserving, would I willingly give, if I thought they
would be kindly accepted, which take as follows; as thus,
Take notice, a Planet causes diseases two ways; first by Sympathy, secondly
by Antipathy, and as the cause is so ought the cure to be; for Saturn causes
toothache. Causes disseases by sympathy.
broken bones, dislocations, laxations, deafness, melancholy, and all diseases
of the spleen by Sympathy, and the reason is, because he rules the retentive
faculty throughout the whole Body.

And those parts of the Body which are under the dominion of the Sun and Moon
he fflicts by Antipathy, and you shall know what they are immediately, if you
will have but a little Patience; and take notice of this, it is the greatest
wisdom of a Physician, to know whether Saturn causes the disease by Sympathy,
or Antipathy.

Lastly, You must note, that Saturn has certain Numbers attributed to him, as
2, 7, and 9, the Reasons are as Numbers.
follows, you must understand he has the number 2 alloted him as being next
beneath the Starry Firmament, and also one of the Infortunes; the number 7 he
being the seventh in order, and highest of all the Planets from the Earth; 7
also is a number fatal and climacterical, being joined with the number 9; also
the number 9 is a fatal number, and climacterical being joined with the number
7; for 9 times 7 makes 63, which the wisest of Philosophers do hold to be
fatal, by reason the Nines and the Seavens meet; I now must leave Saturn and
descend a little lower to that Benevolent Star Jupiter.

SECONDLY of JUPITER,
THis Benevolent Star Jupiter, belongs to the sixth Orb, Mansion, or Sphere; of
the Celestial Hierarhcy of Angels, in the Order of Dominations; whose
principal governing Angels, or blessed Angels.
Intelligences bearing rule are, Zadkiel, or Sachiel, and Zedekiel, etc. he is
said to be by Nature hot and moist, Author of Sobriety, Moderation, Temperance,
Justice, and Gravety, Masculine, Diurnal, Fruitful, and the Greater Fortune.

Gives stature and form of himself.
Secondly. Jupiter of himself, gives a Person of a tall Stature, brown ruddy
complexion, an oval visage, high forehead, fair eyes, inclinable to have much
beard, light brown hair, sometimes between red and dark sandy brown, a handsome
well set straight body, large belly, great thighs, long legs and feet, of a
brown ruddy complexion, and his hair soft; a fair conditioned person, and one
abhoring covetuousness.

When Jupiter is ill placed.

His nature when ill placed.
He makes Men hypocritically religious, and ignorant, suffers every one to
cousen him, wastes his Estate foolishly, also crouching and stooping where there
is no necessity, besides he is nothing delighting in the love of his friends,
and of a gross dull capacity, abasing himself in all company, yet many times
knavish, though he has not wit to carry it off, His color is Azure, etc.

His nature when well dignifyed.
Thirdly. Jupiter well posited, makes Men lovers of fair dealing, desiring to
benefit all Men, always doing good things, of a sweet and affable disposition,
very indulgent to Wife and Children, a reliever of the poor, full of Charity
faithful in Religion and all his promises, aspiring in an honest way, yet
bashful, and makes men profound Judges of the Law either Morral or Divine, not
careing for worldly Wealth.

Fourthly Oriental.
If Jupiter be oriental of the Sun, he makes Men more clear of skin, their
complexions between white and red, the body more fat, the eyes more full and
gray.

Fifthly. Occidental.
If Jupiter be Occidental of the Sun, he makes them more short of stature, the
hair of a light brown, or dark flaxen, usually bald about the temples, of a
pure lovely complexion.

Jupiter's greatest North Latitude is 1 gr. 38 m. and his South Latitude 1 gr.
40 m..

Sixthly. Names according to the Poets.
Now you must Note, that Jupiter is called amongst the Poets by several other
Names, viz. Phaeton, and Zeus, etc.

Years.
Seaventhly. Jupiter's greater Years are 79, his mean Yeas 45, and his least
Years 12; he Rules the West.

Eighthly. gives qualities and professions.
Qualities and Professions of Men under Jupiter, are gennerally noble Souls,
bashful, humane, prelates, or Churchmen, Bishops or inferior Clergymen,
lawyers, judges, advocates, governors of Town, Countries, or Cities, Justices
of Peace, Men in command, young scholars, also clothiers, woollen-drapers,
wooll-combers, and such like: jupiter gennerally denotes Youth.

Ninthly. Jupiter denotes places out of houses.
out of houses, denotes woods, bushes, briars, brambles, and places public, as
commentions, synods, convocations near altars of churches, courts of justice,
oratories, tribunal chairs, schools, and all butiful clean places, scattered or
sprinkled with diverse odours, also places for exercise, and where stacks of of
wood is made.

Tenthly Jupiter in houses.
in houses, denotes places where cloths are laid, as ward-ropes, etc. also
halls, dining rooms, chap pels, schools, all sweet neat places, and those of
Commerce.

Countries.
Eleventhly. Kingdoms and Countries under the Planet jupiter in Sagit.
according to Prolomy King of Egypt, are as follows Tuscana, Celtica, Spain,
and Happy Arabia: Under jupiter in Piscies are, Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia,
Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Nasamonia, and Lybia.

rules parts of Man's body.
Twelvethly Jupiter rules in the Body of Man, the liver, veins, blood, ribs,
sides, the digestive Faculty, the natural virtue of Man, etc.

Diseases.
Thirteenthly. Jupiter causes all Infirmities of the Liver and Veins, as
inflammation of the lungs, plurisies, and other aposthumes about the breast and
ribs, windyness in the blood, obstructions both of liver and stomach.

Numbers.
Fourteenthly. Now take Notice, that jupiter has certain Numbers attributed to
him, as 1, 3, and 8, the reasons are as follows; you must understand he has
the Number One, he being the the Greater Fortune, and the Number Three, as
being the third Star or Planet, in Order from the Starry Firmament beneath
Saturn, that surly Gentleman, also as being one of the three Fortunes; and last
of all the Number Eight is attrihuted to him, as containing the Mystery of
Justice and Religion, for Jupiter according to Starry Dialect, does always
represent the Sober Priests and Ministers; also we read of Eight Degrees of
Blessedness, and now I must leave the Orb of Jupiter, and drop down a little
lower to the Sphere of Mars, who is termed a Tory amongst the Stars.

THIRDLY of MARS,
THis Warlike Gentleman Mars, who is a Star of Malevolency, belongs to the
5th. Orb, Mansion, or Sphere, of the Celestial Hierarchy of Angels, in the
Order of Potestates, whose principal governing Angels, or blessed Intelligences
bearing Rule are, Samael, and Madimiel; he is said to be Angels.
by Nature Hot and Dry, Cholorick, Firey, Violent, Author of Strifes, Debates,
Quarrels, and Contentions, Nocturnal, Masculine, the lesser Infortune.

Stature Mars gives of himself.
Secondly. Mars of himself gives a Person strong and bigg boned, lean, of a
middle stature, well set, the complexion sunburnt, or of a brown ruddy color,
round visage, sharp hazle eyes; the hair red or sandy flaxen, and for the most
part crisping or curling, a sharp little chin, thin beard, the sight very quick
and piercing, a furious countenance, his eye brows bent like a bow, reaching to
his nose; of a sharp wit, valiant, full of words, boasting, and lying, also
confident and active, given to cock his hat, and talk of his great Manhood.

When Mars is ill placed.

Nature when ill placed.
He incites Men to tyranical Actions, likewise to thieving and murders, and all
kind of sedition, he also denotes War, strife, debate, and all manner of
cruelty, makes Men talk without modesty or honesty, and lovers of quarrels,
slaughters, cheats, making them traitors, rash and inhumane, being violent and
furious in their actions; his Color Firey or Red. Color.


well placed.
Thirdly. Mars well placed, makes a Man courageous, and inclinable to War,
also invincible in the same, scorning any should exceed him, subject to no
reason, bold confident, immovable, contentious, valliant, hazarding himself to
all perrils, a great boaster of his own acts; yet of a prudent behavior in his
own affairs, careless of Riches, and inclinable to choler.

Oriental.
Fourthly. If Mars be oriental of the Sun, he signifiies some white mixed with
redness, also a desent tallness and his body hairy,

Occidental.
Fifthly. If Mars be occidental, he shows a very ruddy complexion, mean in
stature, little head, smoth body, and not hairy on the body etc. Mars's
greatest north Latitude is 1 gr. 38 m. his south Latitude is 1 gr. 40 m. and
Note this, if a planet has great Latitude he makes men fat, yet south Latitude
gives most fat with activity, and north Latitude most hair and more slow or
slugish.

Names.
Sixthly. Now you must Note, that Mars is called amongst the Poets, by several
other Names, viz, Aris, Pirois, Mauors, and Gradinus.

Years.
Seaventhly. Mars's greater years are in number 66, his mean years 40, and his
least years 15, he Rules the North-west.

Qualities. and Professions.
Eighthly. Qualities and Professions of Men under Mars are, soldiers, gunners,
founders, fergeants, cutlers, chyrurgeons, colonels, captains, gun-smiths,
glaziers, barbers, dyers, edg-tool-makers, watch-makers, apothecaries, tanners,
marshals, bailiffs; all men that works in the fire, and uses edg-tools.

Out of Houses.
Ninthly. Mars denotes out of houses, firey and bloody places, shambles, places
of Execution, and where there have been great Battails fought, and slaughters
made, also people murdered, bake-houses, glass-houses, smiths shops, furnaces,
slaughter-houses places where bricks, tiles, lyme, charcoals, potters ware, and
the like have been burned, also forges, chimnies etc.

In houses.
Tenthly. Mars in houses, denotes places where Iron is, or weapons of war,
bake-houses, oven, chimny stove, furnace, kitching, shop, or where bricks or
lime lies, etc.

Kingdoms.
Eleaventhly. Kingdoms and Countries under the Planet Mars in Aries according
to Ptolomy, are as follows, Britan, Germany, Basternia, the lower parts of
Syria, Idumea, and Judea, etc. Under Mars with Scorpio, Syria, Comagenia,
Cappadocia, Metagonium, Mauritania, and Getulia.

Rules in the Body.
Twelvethly. Mars Rules in the Body of Man, the Gall, the left ear, the
apprehension, and that is the reason that cholorick Men are so quick witted;
and again, Mars rules that faculty which incites Men to valor, he makes a man
a soldier every inch of him, he fortifies the smell, and that is the reason
martial creatures have so good smells as dogs; Mars also rules the taste, the
stones, and face, likewise the attractive faculty in the Body of Man.

Diseases.
Thirteenthly. Mars causes all Diseases of heat, and corruption of blood by
cholor, as pestilence, and burning fevers, also tertian and quotidian agues,
megrim, carbuncles, and plague sores, burnings, scaldings, ring-worms,
blisters, frenzy, fury, hair-brains, sudden distempers coming in the head,
of heat; also yellow jaundice, bloody flux, fistulas, all wounds whatsoever
that comes by sword or gun shot, diseases in the instruments of genneration;
the stone in the reins and bladder, scars and pock-holes in the face, all hurts
by Iron and fire, the shingles, calentures, St. Anthony's fire, and all
diseases coming of anger or passion.

Numbers.
Fourteenthly. Now you must understand, that Mars has certain Numbers
attributed to him, as well as the rest of the Planets, and they are as
follows, viz. 2, 4, 7, and 9. The Number Two belongs to him, as being one of
the infortunes, the number Four he being the fourth in order from the starry
Firmament, the number Seven as being a number fatal and climacterical joined
with 9, and he has also the number Nine it being fatal and climacterical
joined with 7, this Planet and Saturn are likewise both Enemies to Nature; and
now I must leave the Sphere of Mars, and descend to the orb of that glorious
Lamp of Heaven the Sun.

FOURTHLY Of the SUN,
THis Celestial Lamp, which is called Lux Mundi, The Light of the World, or
Anima Mundi, The Soul of the World, belongs to the fourth Orb, Mansion, or
Sphere, of the Celestial Hierarchy of Angels, in the Order of Virtues, whose
principal governing Angels or blessed Intelligences bearing Rule are, Michael,
Uriel, and Schemeliel; he is Angels.
said to be by Nature Hot and Dry, Temperate.

Gives of himself.
Secondly. Sol of himself signifies a Man of a middle Stature, the body strong
and well composed, the face both full and fleshy, of a yellowish complexion,
sometimes of a saffron ruddy, great head, and and a round large forehead;
gennerally great eyes, the hair yellowish and thin, yet curling, but quickly
bald, much beard, very covetuous, yet sufficiently spirited, one aiming at high
things, and of a sharp piercing sight, a quick, full, goggle, and hazle eye,
and for the most part the body full and fleshy.

When Sol is ill placed.

When ill placed.
The Sun ill posited, makes a Man arrogant and proud, disdaining all men, cracks
of his pedigree, he is purblind in sight and judgment, restless and
troublesome, domineering, expensive and foolish, a mere vapourer, endowed with
no gravity of words, but high and prodigal in action, a spend thrift, hanging
on other men's charity, and has little or no soberness in him; Sol is Gold
Color. Color.


Well placed
Thirdly. The Sun well placed, makes a Man of an incomparable Judgment, very
faithful, keeping his word, industrious to acquire honor and a large patrimony,
yet willingly parting with it again, he is prudent, speaks with gravity, but
not many words, one of great majesty and statelyness, speaks deliberately, but
with great confidence, full of thoughts, secreet, trusty; notwithstanding his
great heart, yet he is affable, courteous and humane to all, and has great
command of his affections.

Names.
Fourthly. Take Notice, that Sol is called amongst the Poets by several other
Names, viz. Titon, Ilios, Phoebus, Apollo, Paeon, Osyris, and Diespiter.

Years.
Fifthly Sol's greater years are in number 120, his mean years 69, and his
least years 19, he rules the East.

Qualities and Professions.
Sixthly. Qualities and Professions of Men under the Sun are, chief rulers,
governors, commanders, whither emperors, kings, princes, and men in power
bearing rule; as dukes marquesses, earls, barrons, knights, magistrates,
ambitious men, desireous of honor and preferment, any man in authority etc.
Also goldsmiths, copper-smiths, minters, and coyners of money, all Pewterers
and braziers; but I think pewterers are under Jupiter, and braziers under Mars,
and copper-smiths under Venus, therefore my Author was a little mistaken; in
fine, the solar person is magnanimious, valiant, provident, long lived, wise
and famous, and the Sun is a genneral significator of Men in Questions of Love.

Places cut of houses.
Seaventhly. The Sun denotes out of houses, serene air, Kings pllaces, and
Princes courts, pulpits, altars, thrones, all kingly and magnificent places
that are light and bright.

In houses.
Eighthly. The Sun in houses, denotes the cloister or hall of the house, also
the place or seat of the Master, likewise dineing rooms, and places where gold,
jewels, and other precious things are kept, all brave delightful places.

Kingdoms under Sol in Leo.
Ninthly. Kingdoms and Countries under the Planet Sol in Leo, attributed by the
Prince of Philosophers Great Ptolomy are, Italy, Apulia, Sicilia, Phenecia,
Chaldea, and the Orchenians.

Rules Parts of the Body.
Tenthly. The Sun Rules in the body of Man, the heart, and arteries, also the
sight, particularly the right eye of a Man, and the left of a Woman, the back
with its attendance, likewise the attractive faculty throughout the whole Body.

Diseases.
Eleaventhly. The Sun Causes Diseases and Afflictions of the heart, tremblings,
faintings, sore eyes, pimples and burles in the face, heart-burnings, diseases
of the mouth, rotten fevers, swondings, and such diseases which proceeds from
Red Choler.

Numbers.
Twelvethly. Take Notice that the Sun has certain Numbers attributed to him,
which are as follows, viz. 1, 3, 4, 10, and 12; the Number One as being sole
Monarch of the starry Heavens, and that glorious Lamp which gives light to the
inhabitants of this earthy Fabric, the Number Three, he being one of the three
Fortunes; the Number Four is attributed to him from the four Quarters of the
Year, the Number Ten, as being the end of Life, it being multiplied by 7;
according to the saying of Holy David; and lastly he has the Number Twelve
alloted him, as passing through the 12 Signs of the Zodiac; and thus much for
the Sun: Next I come to Venus the Goddess of Love.

FIFTHLY of VENUS,
THis benevoleut Star Venus belongs to the third Orb, Mansion, or Sphere, of
the Celestial Hierarchy of Angels, in the Order of Principalities; whose
principal governing Angels or blessed Intelligences bearing Rule are, Anael, Or
haniel, and Nogael, Angels.
she is said to be by Nature Cold and Moist, Feminine Nocturual, the Lesser
Fortuue, and is the Author of Pleasure, Mirth, Jollitry, and all delightful
Recreations.

Represents of her self.
Secondly. Venus of her self Represents a Person of a short Stature, or rather
about a middle size, a whiteish brown color, intermixed with red in the cheeks,
little black eye brows, the nether lipp a little bigger then the upper, dimples
in the cheeks, a neat composed slender body, affable and courteous, delighting
in curiosity, a round face, light brown hair and smooth, an eye much rolling
with cheerful looks, pretty well set, the body plump and fat sometimes, in fine
one handsome enough.

Ill placed.
Thirdly. When Venus is ill placed, she inclines Men to be Effeminate,
timorous, lustful, followers of whenches, very slugish, and addicted to
idleness, an adulterer, incestuous, a fantastic spark, spending his moneys in
alehouses and taverns, among loose lacivious People, a mere lazy companion,
not careing for wife or children if married, coveting unlawful beds, given much
to adultry, not regarding his reputation or creddit; if a woman, very impudent
in all her ways, Color milky Sky. Color.


When Venus is well placed.

Well placed.
She signifies one not vicious, but pleasant, loving mirth and good company,
zealous in his affections, loving all manner of honest merryment, as singing,
dancing, music, ringing of bells, easy of belief, and not given to labor or
take any pains, but a good company keeper, loves to go neat and spruce in
apparel, cheerful, nothing mistrustful, delighting in all manner of curiosities.

Oriental.
Fourthly. If Venus be Oriental of the Sun, the body inclines to tallness,
being very straight, upright, and neatly composed.

Occidental.
Fifthly. If Venus be occidental of the Sun, the person is more short of
stature, yet very decent, comely in form, loves to go neat and spruce, Venus,
her greatest north or south latitude is 9gr. 2m.

Terms of Venus.
Sixthly. It is to be understood that Venus is termed amongst the Poets,
Cytheria, Aphrodite, and Erycina.

Years.
Seaventhly. Venus her greater years are in number 82, her mean years 45, and
her least years 8, she Rules the North-west.

Qualities and Professions.
Eighthly. Qualities and Professions of Men and Women under Amorous and
Sanguine Venus are, all Men and Women that deals in diverse sorts of Apparel, or
Linen, and those things which are delightful to wear; as lapidaries, silkmen,
mercers, linen drapers, upholsterers, picture drawers, and such as sell
perfumes; also painters, musicians, semsters, jewelers, embroiderers; she
likewise denotes the mother, and sweet heart, sister; gifts of friends, riot,
gameing, drinking, cards, dice, wedlock, adorners of women, love, affability,
curiosity; in fine, she denotes miliners, glovers, perfumers, players, gravers,
choristers, exchange-men and women.

Out of houses.
Ninthly. Venus denotes out of houses, pleasant fountains, green meadows,
flourishing gardens, the sea and seashore baths, dancing places, sometimes
alehouses, taverns, gameing houses, and places where people of ill Repute
resort.

In houses.
Tenthly. Venus denotes in houses, all places belonging to wowomen, as
garnished beds, stews, also places where gloves, rings, jewels, perfumes, the
place or seat of the woman or mistress of the house, also a music room,
dancing room, bed clothes, and where silk and other rich commodities are kept.

Kingdoms under Venus in Taurus.
Eleaventhly. Kingdoms and Countries under the Planet Venus in Taurus,
according to the best of Philosophers are as follows, the Isles Cyclades, the
seas of little Asia, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Persia; but with Libra she
commands the People of the Island Bractia, of Caspia, of Seres, of Thebais, of
Oacis, and of Troglodis.

Rules Parts of the Body.
Twelvethly. Venus rules in the body of man, all the Instruments of generation,
the Reins or Kidneys, the throat, the seed, testicles and yard; in women, the
breasts, the womb, and lactean veins.

Diseases caused by Venus.
Thirteenthly. Venus causes all diseases of the womb whatsoever, as
suffocation, precipitation, dislocation, etc. All diseases incident to the
members of generation, the reins and navel, also the running of the reins,
FRENCH POX, all diseases coming by inordinate Love or Lust, priapismus, etc.

Numbers.
Fourteenthly. Besides all this, Dame Venus has certain numbers attributed to
her, as well as the rest of the Planets, which are as follows, viz. 2, 3, and
6, she has the number Two as being female, the number Three as being one of
the fortunes, the number Six it being the number of generation, consisting of
two Threes,; and now I must leave the Orb of Venus, and come a little lower to
the Sphere of Mercury.

SIXTHLY of MERCURY,
THis nimble messenger Mercury, who is the God of Eloquence, belongs to the
second Orb, Mansion, or Sphere, of the Celestial Hierarchy of Angels, in the
Order of Archangels, whose principal governing Angels or blessed Intelligences
Angels.
bearing Rule are, Raphael and Cochabiel, he is by Nature Cold and Dry, and is
said to be neither Masculine nor Feminine, because he is convertible, and
participates of the Nature of that Planet he is joined with; he is the Author
of subtle tricks, as thefts, perjuries, cliping, and coining, also all manner
of deceit whatsoever.

Gives of himself.
Secondly. Mercury of himself represents one of a tall spare body, a long face
and nose, high forehead, the hair dark, or for the most part black, long
fingers, feet, arms, and legs; and goes swinging one Arm, a witty subtle man,
full of talk, a yellowish whitely complexion, little beard, but much hair on
his head, one of no great fidelity, except Mercury be fixed, Mercury gennerally
makes, or more properly represents or denotes ingenious Men and Women, given to
Arts and Sciences.

When Mercury is ill placed.

Ill placed.
Mercury ill placed, gives a troublesome wit, and of a fantastic Man, wholly
bent to fool his Estate and Time away, in prating and trying of nice
conclusions, and maggot pated whimsies, to no purpose; in fine, a great liar,
prater, boaster, given to evil arts, a very Idiot, constant to no place or
opinion. Color Gray mixed with Sky.

Well placed
Thirdly. When Mercury is well placed, he denotes one of a subtle politic
brain, intellect and cogitation; a good desputant, arguing with reason and
discretion, a searcher into many secreet mysteries and learning; a man of an
unwearied curious fancy, seeking after hidden things, and makes him complete in
his Studdy or Knowledge, etc.

Oriental.
Fourthly. If Mercury be Oriental of the Sun, the complexion is honey colored,
or sun burt, the stature of the body not very high, but well joynted; small
eyes, and not much hair.

Occidental.
Fifthly If Mercury be Occidental, the Visage is tauny, the body lank, the
limbs small and slender, hollow eyes, and sparkling, red, or fiery; the whole
frame of the body enclineing to dryness, Mercury's greatest south latitude is
5gr. 35m. his north latitude 5d. 33m. and still remember that south latitude
gives most fat, and makes the party nimble and active, north latitude gives
most hair, and makes him sluggish and heavy, yet if the north latitude be
great, he gives fat also.

Names.
Sixthly. It is to be understood, that Mercury is termed amongst the Poets;
Hermes, Stilbone, Cyllenius, and Archas.

Years.
Seaventhly. Mercury's greater years are in number 76, his mean years 48, and
his least years 20, he rules the North-west.

Qualiti^^ and Professions.
Eighthly. Qualities and Professions of Men under Mercury are, merchants,
scholars, secretaries, clarks, all men of learning, etc. Also ambassadors,
commissioners, poets, orators, PRINTERS, Stationers. Usurers, cheaters,
mercuries, haukers, and ballad-singers, if ill dignified; and all such as lives
by their wits; Mercury likewise denotes footmen, shoo-makers, tailors,
philosophers, astrologers, mathematicians, all subtle arts depending upon fancy
or speech, as geometry, astronomy, gravers, mountebanks, factors, attorneys,
scribes, all ingenious tradse-men, besides he denotes clippers and coyners of
moneys, dancers of the Ropes.

Out of houses.
Ninthly. Mercury denotes out of houses, an exchange where Merchants meet,
warehouses, schools, shops markets, mounte-banks stages, all places of
activity.

In houses.
Tenthly. Mercury denotes in houses, all places where pictures, books, maps,
writings, new inventions, or engines for to recreate the mind, wainscot rooms,
studdy, closet; toys for children, and the like.

Kingdoms and Countries.
Eleventhly. Kingdoms and Countries under Mercury, according to Ptolomy's
attribute, are as follows, thus, Mercury with Gemmini, rules Hircania,
Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the lower Egypt, but Mercury with
Virgo Rules Greece, Achaia, Creta, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Ela,
whence they of that Place are in Scripture Called Elamites.

Rules parts of the Body
Twelvethly. Mercury Rules in the Body of man, the brain, the Rational Part,
the imagination, the tongue, hands, and feet, the motional or moving, parts of
man's body, and that is the Reason Mercurialists, (if Mercury be strong) are so
swift in motion, and so fluent in speech; besides he Gives (...) quick
apprehension a strong imagination, and stirs up that faculty in man, which
causes a thirst after knowledge ^e makes a good Penman, yet conceited, and is
very fickle ^n his disposition, and that is that, that makes some men so ^ckle,
or as we commonly call it maggot-pated and whim^cal, but if Saturn should
vouchsafe him a friendly look, he ^s very Constant, otherwise if you look upon
a weather^ock, (by the same) you may safely draw his picture, and ^o
disparagement to his person neither, and I am sure he that cannot draw is not
fit to be a judge in painting, yet ^t is the property of fools, to carp at what
they cannot i^itate.

Diseases.
Thirteenththly. Mercury causes all diseases of the brain, as vertigoes,
^adness, etc. All diseases of the Lungs, as asthmahs, ^tisicks, etc. All
imperfections of the tongue, as stam^ering, lisping, etc. Horseness, coughs,
snuffing in the ^ose, stoping of the head, dumbness, folly and simplici^ (the
epidemical diseases of the time) and whatsoever ^urts the intellectual faculty;
Catharrs, Iliack Passi^, etc,

Numbers.
Fourteenthly. Besides all this, this nimble gentleman has certain Numbers
attributed to him, viz. 2, and 5, and the reasons are these, the Number Two is
his, as being part male, and part female; and therefore is called the
Hermophrodite, the Number Five is attributed to him, as having predominancy
over the five Senses; and now I leave the Sphere of Mercury, and drop down to
the lowest Sphere of all, which is the Orb of the Moon.

SEAVENTHLY Of the MOON,
THis Lumanary, in Holy Writ is called the lesser Light, and was appointed by
God in the Creation, to Rule over the Night, She belongs to the first Orb
Mansion or Sphere, of the Celestial Hierarchy of Angels, in the Order of
Angels, whose principal governing Angels, or blessed Intelligences bearing Rule
are, Gabriel, and Levaniel, she is said to be by Nature Cold and Moist,
Feminine, Nocturnal.

denotes of her self.
Secondly. The Moon of her self denotes one of a pale whitely face, mixed but
with a little red if any, a full and fleshy body, a lowering countenance, short
Arms, fleshy hands, a brown hair, and slow of speech, of a mutable condition,
often changing, a wearisom pevish person, seldom contented, neither delighting
in idleness nor action; and it often happens, that there is some blemish in or
near the eyes, the body fat and phlegmatic.

When ill placed.
Thirdly. When the Moon is ill placed, she denotes an idle person, hating
labor, given to drunkening, a mere sot, one of no spirit, or forecast;
delighting to live beggarly and carelessly, one contented in no condition, a
dreaming kind of a creature.

well placed.
Fourthly. When the Moon is well placed, she denotes a lover of ingenious
sciences, a searcher after novelties, yet naturally propenced to flite and
shift his habitation, ^ted^^st, wholly caring for the present time, timorous,
prodigal, easily frighted, how ever a lover of peace and honesty, delights to
live free from care, and is perpetually tampering in several trades, and
callings etc.

Oriental.
Fifthly. The Moon orintal of the Sun, the body incsmes to (...) ness, but if
occidental more short, and note this, the Moon is occidental from the change to
the full, and from the full to the change again she is oriental, and so becomes
occidental again.

Terms of Luna.
Sixthly. It is to be understood, that the Moon has certain other names, which
are appropriated to her by the Poets, as Lucina, Cynthia, Diana, Phaebe,
Proserpina, Noctilnea, and Catona,

Years.
Seaventhly. The greater years of the Moon are in number 108. her mean years,
66. and her least yeas 25.

Qualities and Professions.
Eighthly. Quallities and professions of men and Women under the dominion of the
Moon, are Empresses, Queens, Princes, Dutchesses, Ladies, widows, Ambassadors,
the common people, Vintners, brewers fishmongers, mariners, carriers,
coachmen, footmen, messengers, fishermen, watermen, mid-wives, nurses,
tapsters, also the mistrses of the house, to which might be aded travelers,
fugitives, fish-women and the like.

Out of houses.
Ninthly. The Moon denots out of houses, wildernesses, woods, rocks, hills,
mountains, forests, fountains, rivers, ponds, seas, and sea-shores, ships
groves, springs, and other sweet waters, high ways, grainaries for corn.

In houses.
Tenthly. The Moon denots in houses, the wash-house cellar, cestern, wells,
pipes, Cocks, dranes, pumps, and all places where water is commonly kept, also
places of linen.

Kingdoms
Eleventhly. Kingdoms and countries under the Moon in Cancer are, Bithinia,
Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, and also Carchedonia.

Rules Parts of the Body.
Twelvethly. The Moon, rules in the body of man and woman, the bulk of the
brain, the stomach, the bowels, the bladder, the nerves, the left eye of a man,
and the right eye of a woman.

Diseases caused by Luna.
Thirteenththly. The Moon causes cramps, convulsions, and all diseases that
often return as agues do also tempanies, apoplexies, palsies cholick, belly
ach, diseases in the bladder, stopping and over flowing of the terms in women,
dropsies, fluxes, all cold and rhumatick diseases sciatica, worms in the belly,
rhumes and hurts in the eyes, surfiets, rotten coughs, convulsions,
falling sickness King's Evil, aposthumes rickets and measles, all coagulate and
crude humors in any part of the body, lethargies and all diseases of phlegm.

Numbers.
Fourteenthly. Besides all this, the Lady Luna, has certain numbers
attributed to her, which are as follows viz. 2, 6, and 9, the number Two, as
being female, the number Six, it being the number of generation, and last of
all the number Nine, as being the utmost receptacle of all Celestial
influences.

Here follows the distributions of the Spirits, viz. vital Animal, and
Natural, particular to the Seven Planets.
1st. THe Vital remaining in the heart, and is governed by the Sun. 2dly. The
Animal remains in the brain, and is governed by Mercury and the Moon viz. the
Moon governes the body of the brain, and Mercury the operative or working part
thereof. 3dly. Jupiter and Venus governs the Natural Part, which remains in the
liver and veins; likewise the Sun and Mars governs the attractive Power;
Jupiter rules the digestive Faculty; Mercury the Imagination or aprehensive
Power; Luna the expulsive Power, and Saturn the retentive Faculty, throughout
the whole body; so likewise the signs Aries, Leo, and Sagitary govern the
attractive faculty, Gemini, Libra, and Aquary, the digestive; Taurus, Virgo,
and Capricorn the retentive, and Cancer, Scorpio, and Piscies the expulsive
Powers; so the attractive faculty is ruled by the fiery triplicity, the
digestive by the airy, the retentive by the Earthy, and the expulsive by the
Watery triplicity, etc. Now this is the root and foundation of the whole work,
and he which well knows the natures and mixtures of the Celestial Bodies,
shall be perfect in Starry Dialect, being capable to read the Language of the
Stars, and distinctly know their Voices, without the knowledge of which, all is
imperfect, and note this mean Learning with an excellent Judgment, avails more
than amean Judgment with the greatest learning; yet is Judgment very much
assisted and perfected by Learning; but every thing Prospers better and is far
more easily perfected that has Nature for its Giude, and favorable Stars, then
that which is attempted by Humane Industry, though never so Dilligent.

A Table of the Planets Essential Dignities.
A Table of the Planets Essential dignities according to the Egyptians and
Chaldeans.
Signs. Houses. Exaltation. Triplicities The Egyptian and Chaldean Terms. Fall.
Detriment. D. 6 12 20 25 30 N. 8 14 22 27 30 D. 6 12 17 24 30 DN. 7 13 19 26 30
ND. 6 11 18 24 30 N. 7 17 21 28 30 D. 6 14 21 28 30 N. 7 11 19 25 30 D. 12 17
21 26 30 N. 7 14 22 26 30 D. 7 13 20 25 30 N. 12 16 19 28 30

A Synopsis of the Signs.
1 The Signs are. 2 Points of the Compass. E. se ws N. en sw W ne es S. wn nw
3 Masc. diur. and hot. 4 Fem. noct. and cold. 5 Moist Signs. 6 Dry Signs. 7
Movable and Cardinal Signs. 8 Fixed Signs. 9 Common Signs. 10 Chol. fie. hot
and dry eastern. 11 Melan. earthy cold and dry, sou. 12 Sang. airyal hot and
moist, west. 13 Fleg. watery, cold, moist, fruit. n. 14 Barren Signs. 15
Command. and northerly Signs. ^ ^ 16 Obeying and Southerly Signs. 17 Signs of
right and long Assen: 18 Signs of oblique or short Assen. 19 Mute and slow of
Voice. 20 The spring hot and moist. 21 The summer hot and dry. 22 Harvest cold
and dry. 23 Winter cold and moist. 24 Beastial Signs. 25 Humane Signs. 26
Double bodyed Signs.

The foregoing Table is so plain and easy, that it needs no explanation,
therefore I shall forbear an Example.

How to take the Pole of Position of any Significator, commonly called the
Circle of Position.
To take the Pole of Position.
FIrst observe, whether the Significator be above or under the Earth, if above;
get his semidiurnal Arch, if under, his seminocturnal Arch; the which being
obtained, must be converted into degrees and minutes, whereof, one third part
is the space of one House, then take the Stars distance from the nearest house
to which he is placed, and by the Rule of Proportion, say; if the third part of
the semidiurnal, or seminocturnal Arch of your Significator, gives the Pole of
the other House? what shall his Distance give? which if it fall in the 3d. 4t.
9th. or 10th. Houses, the Remainder is the Pole of Position but if it fall in
the 1st. 2d. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. or 12th. Houses, you must add or substract it,
to, or from the Pole of the succeeding, or preceding Houses; as may be seen in
the Nativity of Sebastian, King of Portugal, or Henry King of France, or John
Blanchard Junior.

Example in John Blanchard's Nativity.
Example.
The Moons semidiurnal Arch. is 8 h. 15 m. a third part is 2h. 45m. which
converted is, 41gr. 15m. for the space of one House; the Moons distance from
the 10. House, in R. A. is 33gr. 50m. the Pole of the 11th House is 23gr. then
by the log. logar. I say if 41 gr. 15m. (being the space of one house) gives
23gr. the Pole of the 11th. House; what shall 33gr. 50m. (the Moons distance
from the 10th. House) give; I say it gives 18gr. 52m. for the Moons true Pole
or Circle of Position; and now because it is near 19gr. I take 19gr. for her
Pole; and Note this, ^f the odd min. at any time exceed 30, accept of it as a
whole degr. but if they be under 30 reject them.

1. Log. Logar. of 41gr. 15m. Com. Arith. is 8373. 2. Log. Logar. of 23gr. the
Pole of the 11th. 4164. 3. Log. Logar. of 33gr. 50m. the distance is 2488. The
Sum is 5025.

Which is the log. logar. of 18gr. 52m. for the Moons true Pole of Position,
etc.

Note.
And Note this in taking the compli. Arithmetic of any Number, you must take
the log. logar. of your degrees. and min. from the Radius, and the remainder is the
comp. Arith.

As thus; the Radius 10000. Log. Logar. of 41gr. 15m. is sub: 1^27. Rests the
comp. Arith. viz. 8373.

In this Treatise we have often mentioned Equation, or making Proportion; now
for ease to young Artists, we think the best way, will be to do it by a Table
of Logistical Logarithms, where there can be no better to make Proportions,
which take as follows.

First for MOTION.
Take the com. Arith. of 24 hours, and the log. logar. of the Planets diurnal
Motion, also the log. logar, of the hours and minutes desired, add all
together, abateing one unite toward the left hand, and you have the log.
logar. desired.

Example.
The log. logar. of 24h. com. Arith. 6021. Log. logar. of diur. motion 59m.
7855. Log. logar. of 15 hours is 6021. The Sum is 19897.

Which is the log. logar. of 37m. to be added to the Suns Place.

Secondly 2 Numbers given, to find a 3d.

Thus, take the com. Arith. of the 1st. and the log^ logar. of the 2d. and 3d.
add all together, and you will have your desire.

Now if the first Number exceed 60, take the half, and the half of the last,
and work as before; but if the 2d. Number exceed 60, take half, and work as
before; only Note, that what comes out must be doubled and you will have your
desire, and likewise observe, that if it be hours and minutes, it must be
converted into dg. and min^ But if the first be h. and min. and the second dg.
and min. and the 3d. hours and minutes, it will be exact without converting;
always observing, that the first and third Number be of one denomination, and
then you cannot Err.

Also with these Logistical Logarithms, you may work Multiplication, or
Division, which although it be of no great use in this place, yet for a whet to
the Ingenious, we will insert it.

First. For Multiplication, take the log. logar. of one with com. Arith. and
the log. logar. of the other two Numbers, add all together, and you will have
the log. logar. desired.

Secondly in Division. Take the log. logar. com. Arith. of what you would
divide by, and the log. logar. of the number to be divided, and the log. logar.
of one; add all three together, and you have the log. logar. desired, which is
very easy.

To take the semidiurnal Arch of
HOw to take the femidiurnal Arch of the he being in 15gr. of, and in the
Latitude of 46gr. I enter the first Column to the left hand decending with the
place, and guide my eye along till I come just under 46gr. of let. and in the
Angle of Meeting I find 7h. 11m. which is the semidiurnal Arch in 15gr. of and
his seminocturnal Arch in 15gr. of as the Table it self does express; and so
off the roast.

Note, when you would have the semidiurnal Arch of the six southern Signs, you
must take the Compliment to 12 hours; as if the were in 6gr. or, his
semidiurnal Arch is 4h. 24m. understand the contrary in the Northern Signs.

A Table of the quantity of days, showing the Semidiurnal Arch, or Time of
setting, when he is in the Six Northern Signs; and the Seminocturnal Arch, or
Time of his setting, when he is in the Six Southen Signs; from 42, to 50gr. of
Latitude.
Pole 42. 43 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50. Pole. Place (...). m. h. m. h. m. h.
m. (...). m. h. m. h. m. h. m. (...). m. Place. 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0
6 0 30 30 3 3 6 4 6 4 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 6 6 6 27 27 6 6 6 9 6 9 6 9 6:10
6:10 6:10 6:11 6:11 6:11 24 24 9 9 6:13 6:13 6:14 6:14 6:15 6:15 6:16 6:16 6:17
21 21 12 12 6:17 6:18 6:18 6:19 6:20 6:20 6:21 6:22 6:23 18 18 15 15 6:21 6:22
6:23 6:24 6:25 6:26 6:27 6:27 6:28 15 15 18 18 6:26 6:27 6:27 6:29 6:30 6:31
6:32 6:33 6:34 12 12 21 21 6:30 6:31 6:32 6:33 6:34 6:36 6:37 6:38 6:40 9 9 24
24 6:34 6:35 6:36 6:38 6:39 6:41 6:42 6:44 6:45 6 6 27 27 6:38 6:40 6:41 6:43
6:44 6:46 6:47 6:49 6:51 3 3 6:42 6:44 6:45 6:47 6:49 6:50 6:52 6:54 6:56 3 3
6:46 6:48 6:50 6:51 6:53 6:55 6:57 6:59 7 1 27 27 6 6 6:50 6:52 6:54 6:56 6:57
7 0 7 2 7 4 7 7 24 24 9 9 6:54 6:56 6:58 7 0 7 2 7 5 7 7 7 9 ^:12 21 21 12 12
6:58 7 0 7 2 7 4 7 7 7 9 7:12 ^:14 7:17 18 18 15 15 7 1 7 4 7 6 7 8 7:11 7:13
7:17 7:19 7:22 15 15 18 18 7 5 7 7 7:10 7:12 7:15 7:18 7:21 7:24 7:27 12 12 21
21 7 8 7:11 7:13 7:16 7:19 7:22 7:25 7:28 7:31 9 9 24 24 7:11 7:14 7:17 7:20
7:23 7:26 7:29 7:32 7:36 6 6 27 27 7:14 7;17 7:20 7:23 7:26 7:29 7:33 7:36 7:40
3 3 7:17 7:20 7:23 7:26 7:30 7:33 7:36 7:40 7:14 3 3 7:20 7:23 7:26 7:29 7:33
7:36 7:40 7:44 7:48 27 27 6 6 7:23 7:26 7:29 7:32 7:36 7:39 7:43 7:47 7:51 24
24 9 9 7:25 7:28 7:31 7:35 7:38 7:42 6:46 7:50 7:54 21 21 12 12 7:27 7;30 7:33
7:37 7:40 7:44 7:48 7:53 7:57 18 18 15 15 7:28 7:32 7:35 7:39 7:42 7:46 7:50
7:55 7:59 15 15 18 18 7:30 7:33 7:37 7:40 7:44 7:48 7:52 7:57 8 1 12 12 21 21
7:31 7:34 7:38 7:42 7:45 7:49 7:54 7:58 8 3 9 9 24 24 7:32 7:35 7:39 7:42 7:46
7:50 7:55 7:59 8 4 6 6 27 27 7:32 7:35 7:39 7:43 7:47 7:51 7:56 8 0 8 4 3 3 30
30 7:32 7:36 7:39 7:43 7:47 7:51 7:56 8 0 8 5

A Table of the quantity of days, showing the Semidiurnal Arch. or Time of
setting, when he is in the Six Northern Signs and the Seminocturnal Arch, or
Time of his Rising, when he is in the Six Southern Signs; from 51, to 59gr. of
Latitude.
Pole 51. 52 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. Pole. Place h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h.
m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. Place. 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 6 0 30 30 3 3
6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 8 6 8 27 27 6 6 6: 12 6: 12 6: 13 6: 13 6: 14 6:
14 6: 15 6: 15 6: 16 24 24 9 9 6: 18 6: 18 6: 19 6: 20 6: 20 6: 21 6: 22 6: 23
6: 24 21 21 12 12 6: 24 6: 24 6: 25 6: 26 6: 27 6: 28 6: 29 6: 31 6: 32 18 18
15 15 6: 29 6: 31 6: 32 6: 33 6: 34 6: 35 6: 37 6: 38 6: 40 15 15 18 18 6: 35
6: 37 6: 38 6: 39 6: 41 6: 42 6: 44 6: 46 6: 48 12 12 21 21 6: 41 6: 43 6: 44
6: 46 6: 48 6: 49 6: 51 6: 53 6: 56 9 9 24 24 6: 47 6: 49 6: 50 6: 52 6: 54 6:
56 6: 59 7 1 7 4 6 6 27 27 6: 53 6: 55 6: 57 6: 56 7 1 7 3 7 6 7 8 7: 12 3 3 6:
58 7 0 7 3 7 5 7 8 7: 10 7: 13 7: 16 7: 19 3 3 7 4 7 6 7 9 7: 11 7: 14 7: 17 7:
20 7: 23 7: 27 27 27 6 6 7 9 7: 12 7: 15 7: 17 7: 21 7: 24 7: 27 7: 31 7: 35 24
24 9 9 7: 15 7: 17 7: 20 7: 24 7: 27 7: 30 7: 33 7: 38 7: 43 21 21 12 12 7: 20
7: 23 7: 26 7: 30 7: 33 7: 37 7: 41 7: 45 7: 50 18 18 15 15 7: 25 7: 28 7: 32
7: 35 7: 39 7: 43 7: 48 7: 52 7: 57 15 15 18 18 7: 30 7: 34 7: 37 7: 41 7: 45
7: 49 7: 54 7: 59 8 4 12 12 21 21 7: 35 7: 39 7: 42 7: 47 7: 51 7: 56 8: 0 8 6
8: 11 9 9 24 24 7: 39 7: 43 7: 47 7: 52 7: 56 8 1 8: 6 8: 12 8: 18 6 6 27 27 7:
44 7: 48 7: 52 7: 57 8 2 8 7 8: 12 8: 18 8: 25 3 3 7: 48 7: 52 7: 57 8 2 8 7 8:
12 8: 18 8: 24 8: 31 3 3 7: 52 7: 56 8 1 8 6 8: 12 8: 17 8: 23 8: 30 8: 37 27
27 6 6 7: 56 8 0 8 5 8: 10 8: 16 8: 22 8: 28 8: 35 8: 43 24 24 9 9 7: 59 8 4 8
9 8: 14 8: 20 8: 26 8: 33 8: 40 8: 48 21 21 12 12 8 2 8 7 8: 12 8: 17 8: 23 8:
30 8: 37 8: 44 8: 53 18 18 15 15 8 4 8 9 8: 15 8: 20 8: 26 8: 33 8: 40 8: 48 8:
57 15 15 18 18 8 6 8: 11 8: 17 8: 23 8: 29 8: 36 8: 43 8: 51 9 0 12 12 21 21 8
8 8: 13 8: 19 8: 25 8: 31 8: 38 8: 45 8: 53 9 2 9 9 24 24 8 9 8: 14 8: 20 8: 26
8: 32 8: 39 8: 47 8: 55 9 4 6 6 27 27 8: 10 8: 15 8: 21 8: 27 8: 33 8: 40 8: 48
8: 56 9 5 3 3 30 30 8: 10 8: 15 8: 21 8: 27 8: 34 8: 41 8: 48 8: 56 9 5

PROPOSITIONS OF CELESTIAL PHILOSOPHY.
CHAP. III.
WHen Celestial Efficient Causes are absent from inferior things, they cannot
act in sublunary Bodies, unless by some instrumental Virtue; by which they join
near things under them, or from those mixed Bodies: Neither can there any Action
be made upon the Subject, because there is nothing near the Active Virtue,
neither can it produce the effect upon the Subject, the efficient Cause being
wanting; and that this is sufficient to the producing of all the first four
qualities, by which is attained the universal kind of all natural Effects, etc.
Now the Stars do accompany this Light by motion, and we reject the hidden
Influence as superfluous, yea and impossible.

Properties of the Stars
Secondly. The principal Properties of the Stars are two, viz. Intention, and
Extention, the less is the Colors, which may be found in the Stars by our
S^nces; neither from that are corruptible things made Stars; for it has been
said, new appearances have made alteration in the Heavens, which oftentimes,
yea more often; the same are objected by us, for colors may also be found in
uncorruptible bodies. Yea there is nothing to be (...) which has no^ a Color.

There are other properties in the Stars, as the Form and Disposition,
Clearness, Obscurity, and their local motion is a certain Passion, by which
they apply to increase and deminish in light, they rise, set, go back, and
sometimes seem near, and sometimes far of.

Thirdly. The Stars do not act nor suffer by turn, although they receive light
from the Sun, yet from the proper cause of them they ^end a change ^to us, but
they after their Action (...) upon (...) Subject, (...) as they (...) agree in
their Actings, and this shall suffice for all the (...) of their Effects, etc.

Fourthly. Although the Stars by their Motions in the Heaven, do change their
Places, and have the determinate Degree of intention, and the definite quantity
of the Extention of their Light, they do not act upon inferiors, according to
the true and real Intention, and Extention of the Light, which they have in
themselves; but only according to their appearing, when they come to those
Bodies that are subject unto them, wherefore the Stars Govern Sublunary things,
according to that degree of Intention only, and the quality of Extention of
Light, by which they touch those passable Bodies, but the lesser Intention and
Extention are; from whence there is the greatest distance of the Stars, from
subject things; also they act according to that Extention which they cast
forth; as we may most Evidently see in the; for they act according to their
Situation and Parallax, upon the Bodies by which they pass; the Eclipses which
are not beheld have no Influence, and new Appearances only act in those Places
where they are seen; their Effects are only there manifest, and in what places
the Stars rise not, they have no Power.

Fifthly. The Stars are certain, indeterminate, and universal causes to
specificks, and individual effects, but they are determinated for the truth, to
whom they are Visible and of nearest cause; as the makes wax soft, clay hard,
a Worm white, the Skin of Man black, with a Man, he begets a Man, with a Lion,
a Lion.

Sixthly. The Stars cannot be Signs of Effect, unless they be the Causes also;
wherefore Qustions may arise from the manner of the Ancients, that they have no
places by Nature, unless by chance in sudden Effects, in which whilst they
move, the nearest causes of natural Effects, they also move the parts, organs,
and members of things under their influence: In all things brought forth by
Generation, they give Form and Motion, etc. The present State of the Stars are
forced to act their effects according to the preordinate, and preexistant
Power; therefore they cause or incline, and are not altogether Signs and
Constellations, when they are stirred up to act their Effects upon present
things; their Effects proceed from the like Causes of Preordination, for unlike
Causes cannot stir up to Action, dislike preexistances, according to the power
of the Effects, etc.

Seaventhly. And that we may distinguish, and know the Effects of singular
Stars, it is convenient to know the distinction, natures, and order of their
Effects, according to the Doctrine of the best of Philosophers; from the first
principal qualities and mixtures, are given the Matter and substantial Form;
all these we distinguish in the two first Ki^ the Passive or Feminine, the
Active or Masculine; to (...) first we alledg the matter, the quantity and
quality, because it is Passive in all its Qualities; from which flows moisture,
dryness, thinness, and thickness, etc.

To the Masculine we attribute the substantial material Form, because it is
Active, as light and heat; cold, taste, smell, and sound, are the Active Virtues
of Mixtures, etc.

Eighthly. The Virtues or Qualities of Mixtures, are truly worthy of
Admiration, before the multitude Diversities and Effects thereof; for we do not
say they are Elementary, neither to proceed from the Elements, but are
Celestial Qualities, which have altogether their Being from the Celestial
Light; wherefore there are, Elemental and Celestial Qualities of diverse Kinds;
and although the Stars by turns produce elementary Qualities in Transmutation;
yet they produce also, more powerful Qualities in those things which they are
near; as to the production of universal Mixtures: We also say with Aristotle,
that altogether Celestial Qualities, proceeds from the and, agreeing, as vital
Heat, and radical Moisture in Animals; that so we cannot deny from the rest of
the Stars, from which is made such a distinction, of diverse Mixtures of a
contrary Nature; for as the Luminaries with the Malefacts, produces poisonous
Matter, or Enemies to them, etc. so they produce with the Benevolents the
contrary; from whence Antipathy and Sympathy, have their beginning in
themselves, now the Qualities of Mixtures, and also of the Elements, are first
in power, at least according to Nature, afterward into Action; but those have
it, by the manner of their being, for they go successively to Action from their
Powers; wherefore from thence they are restored to their helping and actual
Qualities; by Vital Heat, and Radical Moisture, they give to the Power of
Animals; Sensitive, Digestive, Retentive, and Expulsive Faculties, etc. which
are distinguished in themselves, and they have one and the same Exercise and
Action, to which is Power given; First, then Action, these vital Qualities are
distinguished into two, viz. Naturally, and Violently; First by a final
consumption of preexistant Power in Old Age; Secondly by violent Extention from
contrary and violent Causes; the Stars although they never desist from acting,
and altering of things inferior, yet they do not produce notable Effects from
that alteration, unless in familiar things, etc.

Ninthly. Various, and diverse are the Opinions of the Ancients, about the
celestial Houses, but that which we allow of, is those of Ptolomy's double
temporal hours, all the rest we reject, as void foolish and insignificant; the
Signs and Houses have a real distinction, not in the Heavens; but in the
Subject inferior, according to this manner, the influx of the Stars are to be
received; the Signs have likewise a true and real kind after the same manner;
for the Masculine by a proper influx to the place of their first beginning are
Active; the Feminine, to the place of their first beginning are Passive, so
from the intention of Light, proceeds the Active Quality; and from the
Extention of Light the Passive Quality, etc.

Hileg or giver of Life.
Tenthly. The givers of Life are in Number five, viz. the,, Ascendant,
Midheaven, and, and they which Respect any other, must needs Run into Error and
Confusion.

Now the Aphetical places in the World, from whence the Giver of Life is taken,
are also five, viz. the Ascendant, 11th. 10th. 9th. and 7th. Houses; so that if
the, be found in any of these Aphetical places, he shall be accepted as Hileg
or Giver of Life, but if he should happen to be in the 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th.
8th. or 12th. Houses then Regard the. and see if she be in any of the a
foresaid places which if she be Accept of her for giver of Life, the Nativity
being either Diurnal or Nocturnal; and if the be not so posited, then take
notice of the in the night time and if he be found in any of the Aphetical
places, then, he shall be Hileg or Giver of Life, but if neither nor be thus
found; then Regard the Horoscope, or Ascendant, and that shall be the giver of
Life, but if neither, nor should be posited as a foresaid, then neglect all,
and take the Midheaven for the giver of Life, but take Notice, that this is to
be understod, when the Native is like to dye by the Hand of Justice; and
further Note, that there can be but one Giver of Life in any Nativity, and when
ever that comes to the body or ill Aspect, of the Anareta, or Killing Star, the
Native most certainly Expires.

Lastly. In the next place, you must note, as there are five hilegicals, or
givers of Life; and five hilegical places from whence they are taken, so are
there five places in the figure, from whence the Anareta or Killing Planet is
to be taken; and are as follows viz. the 2d. 12. th 8th. 6th. and 4th.
houses; prefering the 8th. house and its Lord first, the 4th. and it is Lord
next; the 12th. and it is Lord next; the 6th. house and it is Lord next; and last
of all the 2d. house and it is Lord; and note this that the 12th. house commonly
denotes self Murder, or willful sickness, also Diseases unnatural; the 6th.
diseases Natural; the 8th. house Death both Violent and Natural; the 2d. house
Death through Coveteousness and Despair; and the 4th. house is the Grave and
end of all things, and further Note, that fixed Signs, gives lingering
Diseases, Common Signs Variable; and Movable Signs gives diseases, that quickly
Ends one way or other, also Fiery Signs gives diseases of Cholour; Earthy signs
diseases of melancholy, Airyal Signs diseases of the blood and Wind, and Watery
Signs gives diseases of Phlegm, or as we commonly call them phlegmatic
distempers, likewise and gives melancholy distempers, and diseases of the blood
and diseases of Choler, and diseases of Phlegm.

Now as to the measure of Time in Directions, Diverse are the opinions of
Authors, some take a Degree of the Equator for a year, others the Motion of
the, of the day of Birth for a year, others the mean Motion of the Sun; and
some otherwise. But we for the first year after the Nativity, take that part of
the Equator, that a grees with the Right Ascension of the, for that day, and
for the day following, and so successively every day; which shall be the Arches
for so many years, etc.

In the next Place. For the true Zodiacal Way of Directions, and first how to
Direct the Sun being near the Midheaven, etc.
THus we Account the near the Cusp of the House To direct Sol being near the M.
C.
when he is but 3 dg. distant from it, etc. First take the R. A. of the, then
the place of the Aspects viz. the R. A. whether it be to a or; the Latitude in
this Case is to be neglected, if he have not greater then his Orb; if he has,
it is not to be neglected? this is the difference between the Horozontal (or
Mundane) and Zodiacal Aspects, because they are made from the greatest
nearness, to the greatest distance of the Stars, amongst themselves; and above
the real way of them in the Zodiac: The greatest nearness happens in the same
partil Longitude, although they are distant and differ according Latitude;
unless as I have said, the Latitude in either or, exceed the greatness of their
Orb; if it be greater, then is the or in the Zodiac of small force; now sub.
the R. A. of the, from the R. A. of the Planets Aspect, and the Remainder is
the Arch of Direction, etc.

Example, The M. C. is 8 dg. 15m. the in 8dg. 21m. to be directed to the of, in
22dg. 45m. of, etc.

The R. A. of the is 215dg. 58m. the R. A. of is, 262 dg. 8m. I sub. the R. A.
of the, from the R. A. of, and there remains 46dg. 10m. which is the Arch of
Direction, which is to be equated, etc.

Secondly. How to direct the, being near the Horoscope or seventh House.
How to direct Sol being near the Horoscope.
THus, take the obli. Asc. of the, in the Latitude of the Place, if it be in the
Ascendant, and near the Cusp thereof; but if near the Cusp of the seventh
House, his obli. Dece. or the obli. Asce. of his opposite place; then take the
obli. Ascen. or obli. Dece. of the Aspects, under the same Pole, still
neglecting their Lat. if it be not greater then their Orb, then sub. the obli.
Ascen. of the, from the obli. Ascen. of the Aspect, and the remainder is the
Arch of Direction, etc.

Thirdly. How to Direct the above the Earth, being far distant from any of the
Cardinal Houses; if the be above the Earth, and above 3dg. distant from the
Cusp of the Cardinal Houses. do thus*
To direct Sol above the Earth.
FIrst take the distance of the from the Mid heaven in R. A. and from that sub.
the R. A. of the Aspects, which we call the first distance; then get the
Semidiurnal Arch of the, and also of the Aspects, and by the Rule of Proportion
say, if the Semidiurnal Arch of the, gives that R. A. distance; what shall the
Semidiurnal Arch of the Aspect or Promittor give; the product shall be, the
secondary R. A. which if both be made in the Ascending Part of Heaven, sub. the
Secondary Ascension from the Primary, and the remainder is the Ark of
Direction, etc.

Fourthly.
To direct Sol by his Pole.
ANother way; take the Elevation of the Pole of the; and there in the obli.
Ascen. of the; and likewise the obli. Ascen. of the Aspect; sub one from the
other, and the remainder is the Arch of Direction; for this Reason, we have set
the Table of 11th. 3d. 12th. and 2d. Houses, from 30. to 60dg. of North or
Soutt Latitude, etc.

Fifthly.
To direct in the space of Twilight.
How to direct the to any aspect, being under the Earth in the space of
twilight; wherefore the, being found in the space of twilight, he ought to be
directed a bove parallel Circles, to the Horizon; and not a bove horary
Circles, as when the is a bove the Earth; if the be found in the Morning
twilght, first direct the to the degree of the aspect, under the Latiude of the
place, although the is not there, but below thou shall take Notice of the arch of
direction severally, afterward take the distance of the Sun from the
Horoscope, in oblique Ascen. Which call the primary distance, and beware that,
that distance be not greater then the parallel of twilight, which is 18. dg.
for if it be, the is not in that parallel, and in this Case you must work by
the following Rule, but if the be in the parallel of twilight then with the
distance of the, from the Horizon a bove taken, enter the Table of twilight
under the Lat. of the place, which is in the top of the Table and with the Sign
and Degree in the Head or Foot of the Table; and in the Angle of meeting or
body of the Table, you shall find the distance of the from his rising, and
observe the dg. of the Parallel of twilight, which the possesses in the first
Collumn; with taking the proportional part of the place to dg. and under the
same parallel look out the distance of the Direction (that is to say) what
distance the is from the Horoscope, in that parallel of twilight; and this
distance call the secondary distance; then if both the first and second
distance are equal, the true Arch of Direction, is that which you first
counted, viz. the in the Horoscope, but if they are not Equal, substract, the
less from the greater, and the remainder call the Oriental distance, and if the
secondary distance, be greater then the prima ry then sub. The oriental
distance from the arch of direction, and the remainder is the true arch of
direction, which is to be equated as before; and you must take Notice, that in
seeking, of the primary distance of the, from the Horoscope, in the Tables of
twilight, it is sufficient to take the proportional part of the dg. Only,
rejecting the m. which when you have taken, take the dg. of the depression or
parallel of twilight, and in the right line with the parrallel distance, you
shall find the nearest proportional distance, which when you have found by
proportional parts, (the first primary Natural distance of the being neglected
for it does not signify much, to take the dg. and m. Of the depression of
twilight, but it is sufficent to take the greatest and nearest dg. of the long,
with the proportional part.

As For Example.
Exampl.
The directed to the of in no dg. of, being in no dg. of at birth; at the same
time 11 dg. 0 m. of Asend. In the latitude, 44 dg. the being in 15 dg. 46. m.
the obli. ascen. of the ascend: in that latitude is 349. dg. 45. m. the obli.
ascen. of the with the Circle is 368 dg. 28 m. the difference is 18 dg. 43 m. I
enter the Table of twilight in the latitude of 44. dg. and there I look for
this distance 18dg. 43m. and also for 16. dg. of, which I cannot find, but
there is 10. dg. and 20 dg. Now under 10de. of, is 18de. 32m. and under 20 dg.
I find 19 dg. 1 m. the difference is 29m. then I say, if 10dg. gives 29 m. what
shall 6 dg. give viz. 17. m. which being added to 18dg. 32m. makes 18dg. 49m.
and against that in the first Column: is the Parallel of Twilight 13 dg. etc.

primary distance.
Now the Suns primary distance viz. 18 dg. 43 m. being neglected as a foresaid,
I take 18 dg. 49 m. then looking out the aspect, which falls in no dg. of under
the lat. 44 dg. and 13 dg. Parallel of twilight, I find 24 dg. 45 m. which is
the secondary distance and is greater then the Primary by 5 dg. 56 m. and now
the obli. Ascen of the is 8 dg. 28 m. and the obli. ascen. of the aspect is 65
dg. 10 m. and both under the lat. of 44 dg. now I substract, the oblique ascen.
of the, from the oblique ascen. of the aspects, and the difference is 56 dg. 42
m. and because the secondary distance is greater then the primary, I substract
5 dg. 56 m. from the aforesaid 56 dg. 42 m. and there remains 50 dg. 46 m. for
the true arch of direction, which is to be equated as before etc.

To direct at evening Twilight.
But if the be to be directed at Evening Twilight, all things must be noted as
before, but just contrary in all the operations, or else taken in oblique
ascen. to all the opposite places etc.

Sixthly.
To Direct the Sun, being found beyond the Parallel of Twilight, under the
Earth, etc.

To direct under the Earth.
IF the be found under the Earth, whither Oriental; or Occidental, out of the
parallel of Twilight: First take his Seminocturnal Arch, and from thence sub.
his whole Arch of Twilight, and keep the remainder, which is the obscure Arch;
afterward take the Seminocturnal Arch of the Aspect, from whence sub. his
whole Arch of Twilight, and the remainder is the obscure Arch of the Aspect,
etc. Next take the distance both of the and Aspect from the 4th. House in R. A.
then by the Rule of Proportion say, if the whole Arch of Obscurity of the,
gives his distance from the 4th. house, what shall the Arch of Obscurity of the
Aspect give, etc. Which distance being found, you are to observe the same
Rules, as in directing the above the Earth, and all one, as if the arches of
obscurity, was the semidiurnal, or seminocturnal Arches, etc.

Example.
Example.
Let the be in 11dg. 45m. of, to be directed to an Aspect in 22d. 35m. of, the
seminocturnal Arch (...) the is 7h. 7m. the whole Arch of Twilight, being su^
which is one hour 43m. the remainder 5h. 24m. is t^ Arch of Obscurity; the Suns
distance from the 4th. House, in R. A. is 40dg. 11m. etc.

Now the seminocturnal Arch of the Aspect, is 6h. 11m. and his Arch of Twilight
is 1h. 39m. which being sub. from the seminocturnal Arch, leaves 4h. 32m. for
the Arch of Obscurity: Now the Aspects distance from the 4th. House in R. A. is
79d. 10m. then by the Rule of Proportion say, if 5h. 24m. gives 40d. 11m. what
shall 4h. 32m. give, viz. 33d. 44m.

Seaventhly. To direct the Sun to Parallels being found in any part of the
Heavens, do thus.
To direct to Parallels.
FIrst find their Declination with Latitude if they have any, and see what
degree and Minute of the Ecliptic answers to that Declination; so that if he
be near the cardinal Houses, his Direction is as aforesaid, if further of
direct under his proper Pole of Position, etc.

Eighthly. To Direct a Significator having Latitude to any Conjunction or
Aspect.
To direct Significator having Latitude.
AS the Sun keeps his true Course in the Ecliptic, so the rest of the Planets
which have Latitude, when they come to be directed to any Aspect, they move in
their own Spheres according to their succession of lat. we call it succession,
because it is not always the same, but is changed according to the greatest
distance or nearness, that they are to the Nodes; therefore it follows, that a
Significator having lat. when he is to be directed to any Aspect, the lat. of
the Aspect is to be neglected; and the lat. which the Significator has at that
place, where the Aspect falls, is to be taken; and the Directions are as the
others; only neglecting the Rule of the Suns Direction under the Earth, etc.

Ninthly. To Direct a Significator having Latitude, to Parallels.
To direct a Signi. having lat. to Parallels.
FIrst find the Declination of the Star, to whose Parallal you would direct a
Significator with lat. which when you have found, enter the Tables of
Declination with the lat. the Significator shall have in that Place; until you
come to the dg. and min. of the Promittors Declination.

As for Example. I would Direct the to the Parallel Of.
How to direct to a para. of.
SATVRN is in 13 dg. of, and his lat. is 1dg. south Now his Declination will be
found to be 7dg. 37m. which in the Ecliptic answers to about 10dg. of, the is
in 24dg. of; now I enter the Table of Declination under, the opposite part, in
that place the meets with this Parallel, etc. The s North Node is in 19dg. of,
so in that place she will have 3dg. 53m. north lat. with which I enter the
Table of Declination, and against 10d. of, and 4dg. north lat. I find 11dg.
33m. which is too much; so under the said 4dg. of lat. I come to 21dg. of,
against which I find 7dg. 15m. and under 5dg. north lat. I find 8dg. 10m. in
which said 21dg. of, I find what lat. the will have, and by her distance from
her Node, I find she has 4dg. 23m. north lat. Now the diference between 7dg.
15m. and 8dg. 10m. is 55m. therefore I say, if 60m. gives 55m. what shall 23
give, viz. 21m. which added to 7dg. 15m. it will make 7dg. 36m. which shows,
that 21dg. of, is the true Parallel of.

Tenthly.
To direct a Significator to his Aspect.
How to direct a Significator to his own proper Aspects: First find his
Longitude; that is the Longitude; of his Aspect (in the Ecliptic if it be the)
and according to her lat. if it be the, always observing the lat. that she has
at the place of her Aspect, which is found by her distance from her Nodes, as
before taught; then take the R. A. or Ob. A. of the Aspect both in lat. and
long. and work according to our former Rules, but Note this, that the Ascend.
nor M. C. are not to be directed to any of the Planets Aspects in the Zodiac,
but to those in the World only; nor to Parallels in the Zodiac, but those in
the Horizon or World, and those always direct, and never Converse.

Eleaventhly. Of Mundane Directions, etc.
Mundane Directions
THe Aspects in the World, are proportional distances by their Motion about the
World, for a Star that shall be distance from the Horizon, a third part of his
diurnal arch shall cast his to the ascend. and if he be half his diur. arch,
he will cast a to the ascendant, and 2 third parts of his arch is a, and his
whole arch is an, therefore the first house is in to the 11th. and third, and
in to the 10th. and 4th. in to the 9th. and 5th. and in to the 7th. and so of
the rest, etc. although the diurnal and nocturnal Arches differ among
themselves, the Houses have no distinction, property nature or force of
themselves, but from the Stars, and in the division of the Houses by double
hourly times, according to Ptclomy's method, it has no respect to the
Ecliptic, as if there were no such thing, but have only respect to the
semidiurnal and seminocturnal Arches of the Stars; and those Aspects in the
World, to any house, or from any house, have no respect to the Ecliptic, but
aecording to their semidiurnal and seminocturnal Arches; or according to their
motion about the World; these things being rightly understood, the whole
mundane Art of Directions is very easy, etc.

Twelvethly. To Direct the Ascendant, or M. C. to the Conjunction or Opposition
of a Star.
IF you direct the M. C. take the R. A. of the 10th. house from the R. A. of
the of the Star with lat. and after the same manner the with contrary lat. the
remainder To direct the Ascendant.
is the Arch of Direction, etc. But for the Ascend. sub. the ob. asc. of the
Ascend. from the ob. asc. of the Star, with his lat. if he have any; and so for
the but with contrary Latitude, etc.

The Ascendant may be directed another way.
As thus, if you sub. the semidiurnal Arch of the Star, from his R. A. and from
the remainder, sub. the R. A. of the M. C. there remains the Arch of Direction
as before, etc. after the same manner the Ascend. is to be directed to fixed
Stars.

Thirteenthly. How to direct the M. C. to a,, or.
FIrst enter the Table of Declination, with the Stars place, To direct the M. C.
and take his declination according to his lat. and look to what dg. of the
Ecliptic, that Declination answers, if it be not above the greatest obliquity,
if it be? work by the Tables of ascentional difference, and find his
semidiurnal Arch; but if it be within 23dg. 30m. enter the Tables of semidi.
Arches, and look for his coresponding dg. in the Ecliptic, and against it, you
shall find his semidi. Arch, in (...). and (...) which) is to ^ted into dg, and
m. of the Equator; whereof two thirds makes a, being added to the Stars R. A.
if he be in the ^part or Heaven; but if he be in the Ori. sub the sd. (...)
also work as aforesaid to or, etc.

Example.
Example.
Suppose the R. A. of the M. C. is 220dg. to which answers 12dg. 27m. of, and a
Planet were in 28dg. of having ^dg. (...) north lat. I find his declination to
be 23dg. 20m. to which agrees 23dg. of; with that I enter the Table of semidi.
Arch, under the lat. of the place, viz, 52dg. which I find to be 3(...) 46m.
the which being converted into dg. and m. is 56dg. 30m. Now the 2 thirds
thereof is 37d. 40m. which being sub. from 267d. 49m. ^^e Stars R, A. leaves
230d. 9m. for the R. A. of the (...) the Star, from whence I sub. the R. A. of
the M. C. and there remains the Arch of Direction, viz. 10 Degrees 9 Minutes.

Fourtenthly. To Direct the ascend, to a, or aspect etc.
IF the ascend be to be directed to any aspect of a Star, that is above the
Earth; divide the semidiurnal To direct the Ascend.
arch of the Star into three Equal parts, and if you add two of those parts of
the obli. asc. of the Star, taken under the pole of birth, and from that sub.
the obli. asc. of the ascend. the remainder is the arch of direction of; and
understand this that 4 of those parts makes a, and the whole semidurnal arch is
a etc. but take notice that the ascend. and M. C. are to be directed to no
aspects but those in the World.

Another way to direct the ascendant.
Take one third part of the Stars semidiurnal arch, from is right Asc. and from
the remainder sub. the right asc. If the M. C. and the residue is the Arch of
Direction, of Anothe way
^e Aspect as before, etc. But if you add the third part (...) the Stars semid.
Arch to his R. A. and from the sum (...). the R. A. of the M. C. there rests
the Arch of Directi^ to a, etc.

But if you seek for the Aspects under the Earth, you ^e to divide the Stars
seminoct. Arch into 3 equal parts, and do in all cases as before, but instead
of the M. C. take the 4th. House for your Work, etc.

Of a Quartil.
Now for the Quartil Aspect, Substract the R. A. of the M. C. or 4th. House,
from the R. A. of the Star, and the remainder is the Arch of Direction, for
the, etc.

Example.
Or thus, Take the obli. Asc. of the Star with lat. if he has any, (under the
Pole of Birth) and to that add his semid or seminoct. Arch, according as he is
above or under the Earth, and from the Sum sub. the ob. Asc. of the Ascend, and
the remainder is the Arch of Direction of the as before, etc. These Rules are
so plain, and easy that there needs no Example.

Fifteenthly. How to direct the Ascendant or M. C. to a smq. Q. ssq. or Bq.
USe the same method as in the,, or; and Note that a smq. is half the, and the
Q. is a fifth part To direct the Ascendant.
to be sub. from the semid. or seminoct. Arch; the (...) is the semid. or
seminoct. Arch, and half the same added thereto; and the Bq. is a Q. doubled,
as the Tables of the Aspects, in the 2d. Part will plrinly show, etc.

Sixteenthly. Now to direct a Significator, being near the Cusp of any House,
to a Conjunction or Opposition, do thus.
FIrst, if a Significator shall be within 3d. of the M. C. take his R. A. and
the R. A. of the Promittors Body To direct a Siguificator.
or 8, regarding his lat. etc.

But if within 3d. of the Ascendant, take the ob. Asc. of both, viz. the
Significator and Promittor, under the Pole of the House, then sub. the
Significator from the Promittor, regarding his lat. if he have any, and the
remainder is the Arch of Direction, etc.

Likewile, if the Stars be upon, or within 3d. of the Cusp of any other House,
the direction is the same with the House, viz. directed under the Pole of that
House, or by R. A. if upon the M. C. as aforesaid, but if in the descending
part, use the opposite Places, etc.

Example.
Suppose were to be directed to a of, the Sun being on the Cusp of the 9th. in
5de. of, and were in Ezamplo.
18de. of, the Pole of Birth being 44de. Now I take the opposite Sign and degrees.
because the Sun and are in the descending part of Heaven, the poles of the 9th.
and 3d. Houses is 18de. the ob. Ascen. of the Suns opposite place, is about
314dg. from whence I sub. 60de. and there remains 254, which is the ob. asc. of
the Ascend. Now the ob. asc. of s. opposite place under the Pole of 18de. is
297de. from whence I sub the ob. asc. of the Ascend. viz. 254 de. and there
remains the Arch of Direction, 43de. because by the motion of the Primum Mobile
when the Asc^^d. comes to the opposite place of ^, the comes to his, etc.

Seaventeenthly. To Direct a Significatior being above 3 degrees. distant from the
Cusp of any House.
THus, get the semid. Arch of the Star, if he be above To direct a Significator
the Earth, or his feminoct. Arch if under the Earth and his distance from the
proceed. or suc. cusps of the house, (which you please) then take the feminoct.
or semid. arch of the Promittor, (with this Caution) if the Aspect be above the
Earth, take his semid. Arch, but if under the Earth, his seminoct. Arch, and
this you may know by the very Houses themselves, for the 10th. has the 8th.
and 12th. houses for a, and (...) and 7th. for a, the 6th and 2d. for a, and so
of the rest, etc. Then by the Rule of Proportion say; if the semid. or
seminoct. Arch of the Significator gives his distance from the Cusp of the
House, what shall the semid. or seminoct. Arch of the Promittor give; which
shall be the secondary distance of the Promittor, from the Cusp of the
preceding or following House, that you took the Significa. or Promittor from;
which if they be taken both from the Houses preceding, or succeeding; then
sub. the lesser from the greater, and the remainder is the Arch of Direction;
but if the one preceed, and the other succeed, then add the Numbers both
together, and you will have the Arch of Direction, etc.

Eightenthly. To Direct a significator to his own aspects.
But note this, the and are only to be directed this way and when they come to
their own aspects, To direct a Significator
they have most notable Effects, where note that the Direction of the or to
their proper, is no more, then taking the two third parts of their semidiurnal
or seminocturnal arches according to their position, a bove or under the Earth
etc.

The is the whole semidiurnal or seminocturnal arch; and if you ad the fifth
part of the semidiurnal or seminocturnal arch to the, you have the quintil, and
so of the rest; as you have been taught already; so that two third parts of the
semid. or seminoct. arch, is the arch of direction of the, and the whole semid.
or seminoct. arch is the arch of direction for the square aspect etc.

Nineteenthly. To direct a Significator to Parallels in the World
Parallels in the World, are no other than as when two Stars are equally
distant from any of the four Cardinal Houses, etc.

AS thus if one Star be upon the Cusp of the 11th. House, and another upon the
Cusp of the 9th. they To direct a Significat.
are in exact Parallel, being of equal destance from the M, C. etc. So likewise
one being upon the 12th. and another on the Cusp of the 2d. they are also in
Parallel, as being of equal distance from the Horoscope, etc. Where Note that
in these Parallels the distance is found from several parts, as a Star on the
Cusp of the 12th. is in Parallel to the 8th. 2d. and 6th. Houses; and one on
the 11th. is in Parallel to the 9th. 3d. and 5th. Houses, and so of the (...):
Now if two Stars are in Parallel, and both above the Earth, take their distance
from the M. C. in R. A. and call this the 1st. Distance, then by the Rule of
Proportion say, if the semid. Arch of the Significator gives his distance from
the M. C. what shall the semid. Arch of the Promittor give; which being known,
you are to work as in the Direction of the Sun above the Earth, as in the
Zodiacal Aspects, etc.

But if the Star be under the Earth, take their distance from the fourth house
and work as before, their distance may likewise betaken from the Horizon and
work as before with obli. ascen. but if one be above the Earth and another
under the Earth, take the distance of one from the M. C. and the other from the
fourth house and work as before; else take the oppsite place of that which is
under the Earth etc. But if they are both under the Earth take their distance
from the fourth house and work as before, only remember this for the semid
iurnal arches take the seminocturnal arches, for I shall advise you not to be
like the Surveyer who Measured continually from Oxford to London, and from
London to Oxford again; when he was appointed to measure from Oxford to London,
and from London to Cambridg, etc. Now by these parallels in the World we
conceive the significator to remain Imovable in the Horary Circle of his
position, because in a Nativity, the virtue of the significator as well as the
promittor, in the fame, Primum Mobile is Imprinted, and this according to the
opinion of all Professors; etc. Likewise both these Virtues are brought to, by
the Motion of the Primum Mobile from East to West.

Twentyethly. To direct the Sun, being under the Earth to any aspect.
If the be in the space of twilight; first get the direction to direct the
under the Earth.
of the to the aspect of the Promittor, whether it be.. or, as before taught,
which arch call the feigned arch.

Secondly. you must know to what degrees. of the Zodiac. the comes to at that
time, by taking his pole (according to the Rule) and there his Ob. Asc. and to
that by ading the feigned arch a foresaid, and the sum is the Ob. Ascen. of the
dg. of the Zodiac; to which the comes on both sides; else it will signify
little; in this way of direction: then with the 's Primary distance from the
Horizon see what parallel of twilight he possess, and therein the same take his
secondary distance; to which the supposed feigned direction shall come; then by
the Rule of proportion say, if the seminoct arch of the, gives his secondary
distance from the Horoscope; what shall the semid. or seminoct. arch, of the
promittor give, and the fourth Number shall be the secondary distance of the
promittor, from the Cardinal or any other house, from whence you seek a
proportinal distance; and so you obtain the arch of direction; etc.

Twenty 1st. To direct the Sun out of the space of Twilight, etc.
FIrst you are to find the feigned place of the Aspect as before taught.
Secondly you must know to what to direct the out of twilight.
dg. of the Ecliptic the comes to by this direction; then say, if the Arch of
obscurity of the, gives his primary distance from the fourth House, what shall
the obscure arch of the Ecliptical dg. give which the comes to by this
dyrection, and the product is the secondary distance from the fourth House, etc.

Now if the be in the 3d. or fourth Houses, use this distance; but if he be in
the 2d. or fifth Houses, sub. from this distance one third part of seminoct.
Arch and the remainder is the 2d. distance from the 3d. or 5th. Houses: Then
say, if the seminoct. Arch of the give his secondary distance from the
determinate House, what distance shall the seminoct. Arch of the Promittor give
(from that House) so work as you were taught before, etc.

Twenty 2d. To direct a Significator to all Aspects Converse, which are made in
the World.
WHat has been said of Mundane Directions, in directing the Significators, to
the Promittors; the To direct a Significator
difference in this converse Direction, is no other then where as we took the
seminoct. or semid. Arch of the Significator, etc.

Now in this, we take semid. or seminoct. Arch of the Promittor first, and work
as if the Promittor were Significator: But Note this, that none of the cardinal
Houses are to be directed conversly, for they have no Motion to the preceding
Planet or Aspect, etc.

Twenty 3d. To find out the Number of Years the Native may Live according to
Ptolomp's Doctrine, by directing the giver of Life to the West.
THat is, if any Planet, by Body or Aspect shall come between the Giver of
Life, and the Cusp of the Of Years.
7th. House, take his distance by ob. descen. and divide their distance by 12,
and what remains keep; where Note that all the Aspects of and; the remainder
after division, are to be added to the distance of the giver of Life from the
7th. House, and the remainder of the Aspects of and are to be sub. there from,
and what remains shows the Number of years the Native may Live, etc.

Example.
In a Nativity if the is in the 9th. House, his distance from the 7th. House by
ob. descen. is 75de. 56m. likewise casts her to the 7th. House, and the
distance between the of, and the 7th. House, is 32de. 55m. which divided by 12,
there remains 2de. 45m. fere. the Quintil of is distant from the 7th. House,
19de. 37m. which divided Example.
by 12, leaves 1de. 38m. the of is distant 61 de. 28m. which divided by 12,
leaves 5de. 7m. which three remainders being added to the s distance, makes
85de. 26m. The of to the 7th. House is 7de. 57m. which divided by 12, leaves
^de. 40m. fere. s Sisquiquadrat is 34de. 53m. which divided by 12, leaves 2de.
54m. which being sub. from 85de. 26m. leaves 81de. 52m. the number of years
that the Native may live, which is to be equated as in other Directions, etc.

Twenty 4th. Of Secondary Directions.
ALL the directions before treated of, of what nature soever, we call primary
Directions; but by secondary of secondary directions.
Directions, we mean the days that shall succeed the Nativity, wherein shall be
accounted the Aspects of the Stars, both to the Luminaries and Cardinal Houses,
in which days they happen; from these singular days, to which aspects they
belong, they produce their Effects, for the respective Years; as if the first
day is for the first Year, the second day after Birth for the second Year, the
3d. for the 3d. the 4th. for the 4th. Year, and so of the rest successively,
wherefore we are to observe when the is in Aspect to the Stars, for if she be
with the benevolent Stars, or their good Aspects, or with the good Aspects of
the Infortunes, it does denote a healthful and prosperous Year, according to
the Nature of the Houses governed by those Planets in the Radix; but if joined
with the evil Planets, or evilly beheld, or in parallel Declination of the
Infortunes, it shows to those years pointed by those days, in which those evil
configurations shall happen, great crosses and losses, also sicknesses, and
without doubt they shall have notable effects, if at that time there shall be
operating a primary direction of that nature and kind; now before the rest, the
climacterical Years are to be noted; for if in those days the is in or to the
place she was in at Birth, and there happen to be an evil primary direction of
the giver of Life, Death is at the Door, or then much to be feared; also if the
in the secondary directions be afflicted of the Infortunes; likewise the also
in secondary directions; also the same if there happen a bad primary direction,
with which if both the Revolution and Transit agree, it certainly Kills; but
this Subject has already been handled by the Industrious Mr. William Salmon,
In his Horae Mathematicae, etc. Where Note the primary direction is the most
effectual of all; therefore if this be kindly accepted by the Grateful Sons of
URANIA, we will; God willing in another Treatise, be more Full and Copious, yet
except a Man be Stone-blind; or has lost his Senses, here is enough to furnish
the weakest of Capacities, as well as the strongest Genious, as may evidently
appear by the Work.

Now we shall treat of PROGRESSIONS.
W^ Note, that the progression is no otherwise to be taken, but from the space
of time in which the Represents all her Faces, and distances, from the, which
she can have, and return to the same place where she had her beginning from; in
which Compass she Runs through almost 13 Signs, and the Sun one; and the
Progressions according to our Method, have their beginning from these Motions of
the Luminaries; Now the first Lunation Of Progressions.
after Birth, shall Measure out the first year; so likewise the second
Progression the second year; the third Progression the third year etc. And
likewise than the first parts of the Progressions, shall Measure out the first
part of the year, the second part the Middle, part of the year, and the third
part the latter end of the year, or last part thereof etc.

Now for the finding of the Progressions for any year,
We are to Number up so many Lunations from the Nativity; which is done by
putting the in the same face and distance from the, as she had at Birth, and
for every month above the complete year, add 32 dg. 30 m. because they are the
12 parts of one Lunation: and if you would have the progression to many years,
you must Note that the makes 12 Lunations in 354 Days which is 11 Days less
then a year, therefore take the distance of the from the in the Nativrty, and
this you will find a 11 Days before the End of the first year, and where you
find that distance, that shall be the Progression for the 12 th year; and if 22
days be subtracted from the End of the second year, there you will find the
Progression for the 24 th. year, and so you may Proceed to every single year,
and to every month thereof, by the addition of 32 dg. m. 30 and where ever the
(...) shall be well placed in these Progressions the Native shall have much
falicity; and the contrary, etc. those Progressions have always been in great
Esteem by the Learned in past Ages, and much Commended by that great Philosopher
Roger Bacon friar, our own Country Man; who took great pains this way and made
his Lunar Progression monthly, wherein he did use to discover many material
accidents as I have been informed by the Learned Mr B^ech Deceased, who has
seen something thereof in the Library in Oxford and it has (...) as well
observed by others of Great Learning, and Profound Philosophers, it being the
very Doctrine of (...) Potlomy himself,

Secondly of INGRESSIONS
SOme are active and some are passive, the active are the Aspects of the active
Stars, by the universal and Of Ingressions.
Daily Motion, with the Places of the obtained Primary and Secondary
Directions, and pocessions of the Significators.

The passive are the Aspects of the giver of Life in the whole World, with
active Stars of the Secondary Directions, and Progressions (by the active Stars
we mean) those to which Power is given to act; and are to be put in the place
of promi^, viz..... and. also the Luminaries, when they are (...) Promittors,
where Note that all these Ingressions, whether active or passive, Denotes great
good, when they come to the places of benevolent significators, or givers of
Life and one the contrary when they come to the Places of the Malificks. etc.

Thirdly of TRANSITS
SOme are active, and some are passive, the active are the Aspects of the
active Stars, by (...) Of Transits.
Motion of the Hilegs or Givers of Life, in (...) (that is to say) with those
Immovable places, the ^ Transites are the aspects of the universal significator
in the World, with the active Stars at Birth, (...) to their immovable pla^
therefore the difference (...) an ^gression, and at Transit, is this (...) the
places of the (...) respects the immovable, also the Lumi^ are to be observed
in day^ Motions, wheth^ be (...) or (...) of the (...), upon (...) hur^ places*
for when it comes by direction gression (...) good place^ and if the
Luminaries, (...) w^ll placed to the ^ects of the Stars they bring great ^; but
if (...) the con^, they come by direction and progression* to^ and the
Luminaries (...) unfortunated (...) the aspects of the Mali^icks* it is (...)
the Native* and it is (...) to be feared, that (...) signified the from (...)
it is etc. and the to Di^ very (...) happens in those (...) which (...) well
beheld; by^lents, and (...) But (...) contrary if ill be^en they sign^.
Diseases, Slaugh^ers and the like and this you will find never fail, it being
according to Great Ptolomy's own Doctrine in this most Heavenly Science, and
whosoever thou art, that makes practice thereof shall see the Truth and
Certainty of it etc.

Fourthly. Of the Part of Fortune, and how to take it.
ANd in this we shall digress from the Vulgar way of our Modern Authors, who
have admonished us Of the
to observe the distance of from, and that shall be the distance of the from
the Ascend. all this we do not deny, but then it must be in the Sphere of, and
there it will have the true distance from the Ascend. with the same lat. and
decli. of north or south, although the same happen in Signs of contrary
denomination; for is not always in the Ecliptic, but moves continually in the
s Orbit, and this is to be noted, that so far as the in his circular Parallel
is distant from the dg. ascending, so far shall be distant from the in her
Parallel or Sphere, etc.

Now our Method in taking it is twofold; first if the Nativity be diurnal, the
true distance of the from the Ascend. being added to the R. A. of (with respect
to her lat.) will give the true R. A of the, etc.

But if the Nativity be Nocturnal, let distance from the Ascend. be sub. from
the R. A. and there will remain the true R. A. of the as before, etc.

Secondly. Let the Nativity be either diur. or noct. add the distance of from
the Ascend. to the R. A. of, and the sum shall be the R. A. of the, where note,
that in taking the distance of from the Ascend. it must be done in ob. A. and
under the lat. of Birth, etc.

Now this way is much different from that which is used by our modern Authors,
for if it be well noted, a man's own reason will tell him, that their way cannot
be true, but very erroneous, because they never regard the lat. a thing which
ought seriously to be considered, etc.

And if the be not true taken, it will cause a great error, because many times
in noct. Nativities the happens to be Giver of Life; when it shall chance to be
posited in an Aphetical Place, and not, for we prefer the before the Ascend.
besides it is also directed for the Riches of the Native, and his gain in all
affairs, therefore ought warily to be taken.

Now if these things be kindly accepted of by the Grateful Sons of URANIA, we
will (God permitting) afterward show the Demonstrations according to
Mathematical Rules, and then its probable, the Eyes of the common Astrologers
may be open, being able to discern the difference between Light and Darkness.

Fifthly of ANTISCIONS Which I have spoke of in the fore going part but for the
better Instruction of Young Students, I shall give a beter demonstration of the
same; which take as follows.
ANtiscions are no other than real Parallels of Declination which are exact
parallel Lines from the Tropicks of and, being so far extended on the o^ Of
Antisoions.
side of the Tropicks, as they themselves are on the other side, and it is to
be observed always in (...) of the A^ tiscion, that there must be regard and to
the lat. as (...) as the long^ no w^ are taught by our modern Author to observe
how much the Planet, is short of either of (...) Tropicks in Signs Degrees and
Minutes, and so far shall his Antiscion fall beyond it; all this we own,
provided the Latitude be taken, etc.

Example.
Suppose a Planet were posited in 24 dg. of having 2dg. north lat. you will
find by the common way, that (...) casts his Antiscion to 6d. of, but his lat.
being considered Example.
you will find his declination falls out to be 23d. 21m. which in the Ecliptic
answers to 7d. of, and makes the Antiscion to fall in 23d. of which is 17d.
more than the common way; and this by Practice and Reason, you will find to
agree with our Method, and further observe, if a Planet be in,,,,, or, with
great north lat. he can have no Antiscion except the by her lat. should meet
with it; also if a Planet be in,,,,, or, with great south lat. so that it
exceeds the Ecliptic, there can be no Antiscion neither, etc.

Sixthly. How to find the Semidiurnal and Seminocturnal Arch of a Star, when
his Latitude shall cause his declination to exceed the Ecliptic Line.
FIrst find his declination with lat. and with the same enter the Tables of
Ascentional Difference, and if How to find the Semid. or Seminoct. Arch a Star.
it be in any of the 6 northern Signs; add the ascentional difference, to 90d.
and you have the semid. Arch, in de. and m. which you may convert into hours
and minutes, by a Table for that purpose in the 2d. par, but if you sub. the
said ascentional difference from 90dg. the remainder will be the seminoct.
Arch, understand the contrary in the southern Signs, you may find the
ascentionol difference an other way, which is thus, add the tangent of the
declination, to the tangent of the lat. and the Sum is the Sign of the
ascentional difference, and this I have given you because we have no Tables of
ascentional Difference in the Book.

Seaventhly and Lastly. How to Equate the Arch of Direction, etc.
DO thus, add the Arch of direction to the R. A. of at Birth, and look for that
Sum in the Tables of How to equate the Arch of Direction.
R. A. in the Ecliptic; and take the de. and m. corosponding thereto, then in
an Ephemeris see how many days and hours the from the day and hour of Birth
will be, e're he come to that de. and m. and so many years it will point out;
and for every two hours more then the complete day account one month, and so
you have the true Arch of direction.

Suppose the Arch of direct. were 46dg. 30m. R. A. were 197dg 31m. the sum is
243dg. 1m. to which in the Tables of R. A. answers 4dg. 58m. of; Now the Birth
was, October the 1st. 1648. If you enter an Ephemeris for that date (or for any
other date, provided it be exact) and look for 4dg. 58m. being s place, you
will find it to fall on the 16th. day of November 6h. 18m. which points out
from the day of Birth, 46 years, 3 months, 4 days, and 12 hours; this is the
only real and exact Method used in the Universe, agreeing with that never to be
forgotten Prince of Philosophers Great Ptolomy; unto whom as it is said, an
Angel appeared, and opened unto him the parts of the earth, but some he was
commanded to keep secreet, which was those under the north Pole, as it is
recorded, by that famous Mathematician Doctr. John D^ page 153. This Method is
also practiced in Arabia, Persia, and India, as I have been well informed by my
very good Friend Mr. Cordwel Worral. whose Assistance we had in doing some part
of this Piece, and he says in those Countries they are far more exact, then
any of our Nation are, nay we cannot, neither dare we presume to that exactness
as they do, either in horary Questions or Nativities; for almost by inspection
of a Nativity, they will give a true account of the general and particular
Accidents, during the whole course of the Natives Life, both how, and when they
shall happen, a thing something strange to our apprehensions, and now the reason
why we cannot do the like, is because we do not use their true Method, but
follow the false Doctrine of Regiomontanus and Argol, whose directions with all
their Desciples, are insipid vain and foolish, also wholly without Reason, or
Truth; yet we cannot neither will we deny, but that those Tables of theirs are
of excellent use, therefore we count ourselves beholding to them, for their
Laborious Studies in framing them, but for their Doctrine it is not so much
Worth as the nameing it; much less to be Prectized, and Extalled as it has
been by our selves and others, yet although we have been great followers of them,
we will say with the wise King when we were Children, we acted as Children, but
since we are Men we are come to know better; for now we have seen their
Erroneous Examples; and the Truth of the Doctrine practiced; therefore, we will
follow their ways no more, but Cleave to those Rules which we Know to be most
Certain and True and

Now let no Man Doubt of what we here Declare, for it is as true as a South Sun
makes twelve a Clock at noon, but enough of this here, for wise Men Esteem many
words, and many lies both a like, and he that will instruct others in the
Truth, must never deny the Truth himself, therefore he that talks much and
does little, is like unto him that Sails with a Side Wind, and is borne with
the Tide to the wrong Shore, and note this that from page 86 to page 117 we had
that Doctrine from Placidus de titis Primum Mobile, but all the Rest of this
Part is wholly mine, and the second Book is done by Mr Bishops own hand, and
that very Learnedly, without any assistance.

Thus I conclude the sirst Part, Resolving to Remain Gods faithful Servant, the
Kings Loyal Subject, and my Countries Friend,

Yours Richard Kirby

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Author has an infalliable Remedy for the Gout, and also teaches the
whole Doctrine of Astrology, to, those that are desierous to Learn, and
Calculateth Nativities Exactly.

FINIS.
THE MARROW OF ASTROLOGY The Second Part. Wherein is contained, A TABLE of
HOUSES, Calculated for the Latitude of LONDON: With Tables of Semidiurnal and
Seminocturnal Arches. ALSO TABLES of Twilight and Mundane Aspects; And the
whole Doctrine of Nativities, laid down in Twenty Genitures, according to the
true Intent and Meaning of Ptolomy, wherein is discovered the Errors of Argol,
Regiomontanus, and others. The like never before done in ENGLISH.

By JOHN BISHOP, Student in Astrology and Chimistry.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Streater, near Paul's-Wharf in Thames Street, and
are to be Sold by the Booksellers in London, 1687.

To the honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society, Health and
Prosperity.
Honored SIR,
COnsidering those many and signal Favors that I have received from you
(notwithstanding my unmeriting deserts) are too great to be buried in the Sea
of Forgetfulness, without my humble and thankful acknowledgment of the same, so
that I have here offered my Mite to be put into your Treasury, (which I do not
to add the least Atome to your Worth, but to make these my Junior Labors
appear with the better lusture) for the Present is so small that I am dubious
of your acceptance, yet although the Lines are unpolisht, the Subject is
Divine, because it is an Epitomy of the Celestial Philosophy of Ptolomy King
of Egypt, from whose Ashes I have endeavored to make a Lixivium which may take
off those Spots and Blurs which have defiled the beauteous Vrania's Face, by
the Innovations of Regiomontanus and Argol, and most of onr modern Authors, and
yet the thing it self is not new, but is the true genuine Method that was
practiced when the Principles of Artists were not corrupted, and when Princes
themselves were well acquainted with the Language of the Stars; and because
nothing of this nature was ever Printed in the English Tongue, I have at spare
hours made this Essay, which I have presumed to put under your Honor's
Protection, your Name being sufficient, but more especially your Verbal
Commendation, to give it a better Reception and Esteem among all Persons of
Honor and Eminence, than he that is,

Honored SIR, Your humblest Servant, JOHN BISHOP.

TO THE READER
COurteous and Impartial Reader, I here present you with the Second Part of
this most useful and necessary Piece of Astrology, wherein I have used all
means possible to gratify ^hee; it is true the Subject is not common, I mean as
to the Me^hod of it, but I Presume it is the most-Exact of any as to Astrology,
that ever was taught in England, or by any, that could ^ver speak the English
Tongue; neither had this come forth at ^his time, but by the sole Assistance of
that famous Mathemati^an, and my loving Friend, Mr. Cordwell Worral, whose ^are
and partly his Pains gave Life to this Piece, which soon ^eceived Motion, he
having been acquainted with this kind of ^earning among the Persians and other
of the Eastern Sages, ^here they are so Dextrous that they can tell a Person
the parti^lar Transactions of his whole Life, and for the time of Death, ^ey
seldom Err, but we here in England cannot pretend to it, ^y we do not know
after a person is dead the direction that ^lld, by the common Method that is
now practiced, as has ^en proved by many Nativities where the Astrologers has
pro^ised long Life, and the Natives sometimes have dyed in their ^fancy, or at
least 20 or sometimes 30 Years before the directi^ could operate, which they
would have to Kill, which things ^th produced a Scandal upon the Art, and
Artists; nay I be^eve if Heraclitus and Democritus, should view the Methods ^at
many of our Artists take, they would find exceeding great ^use for their
lamenting and laughing at them and their practice, because their Method is not
demonstrable, which thing after had given my self to the Study of Astrology,
for the space of 1^ Years I began to doubt of the Certainty of it by reason I
often found it to fail, at last it was my good hap to meet with t^ Ingenious
Thomas Moor Esquire. who in discource on that Subje^ made it apparent, that there
was little truth in that way wh^ was commonly practiced, and by his means I was
brought to (...) aquainted with the Learned Dr. Wright who was the first (...)
England that ever understood this Method, which he learned (...) being
conversant in the works of that Learned Monk Placid^ where in his Celestial
Philosphy, he has laid down, and tr^ explained Ptolomy's Writings, which till
then laid very (...) stuse, so that as I said by conversing with Dr. Wright I
was c^firmed in my judgment, and so came to know truth from f^hood, by what I
learned, likewise from the aforesaid Mr. Wo^ and being willing to oblidge all
the true sons of Uraina, I (...) willing to publish it because Mr. Kirby was
going to Print so^thing of the first part, I lent my help to the finishing of
it, (...) that the World should not be abused to Buy one thing twic^ was the
more willing to Publish this at this time, that so (...) Bound up together you
might have an Entire Work, and I h^ I have done things with that plainness that
it may be well und^stood by the meanest Cappacity, and also have given such
Ex^ples as may Explain the whole Matter, with the greatest (...) imaginable;
and truly I do not doubt but those of understa^ing will approve of this Labor
of mine, but Ignorant Zoi^ will Contemn it, for the old Proverb is, he that
Builds on (...) Highway, will hear many things from them that find fault,
(...) especially the Vulgar, but I wish those Thrasoes would put for something
more Excellent, before they find fault with, and C^ at the Labors of others,
wherefore let none Rashly judge of t^ Work until he be thoroughly informed of
the same, I know i^ contrary to what has been taught, by Regiomontanus (...)
Angol, whose Doctrine is insipid, but for his laborious wor^ Framing those
Excellent Tables the World is much engaged to him, and we are no less Engaged
to our Famous Country Men namely Mr. Lilly and the Famous and Learned Mr.
Gadbury Mr. Coley, and Mr. Salmon, whose aspiring Fanceis have Raised up
Mo^numents, to their never dying Fames, and doubtless if this method had been
common when they Wrote of Art they would have done it in a far more Lofty
Style, but however I hope this may be a Foundation for the Ingenious to Build A
Mighty Fabric upon, whose Top may Pierce the Spheres, and like Jacobs Ladder
to reach through the Stary Region; I could ^ish that some more Noble Pen had
been Employed, in doing so great a Piece of Service for the World, but none have
ing attempt^d it, I have presumed to make this Essay; and if it meet with (...)
kind acceptance, I intend God willing to add something more ^reatful, which this
Age never looked after, for we have been ^ke the Dog in the Fable, never to
look after the Substance ^f things, but are content to take up with the mere
shaddows, ^ay and not only so, but often Villifie them that make it their
^siness to dissipate those Clouds of Ignorance, which are between (...) and the
Beatious Urania, but let such dull Animals enjoy their Opinions, for to those I
do not write, but only to the In^nious who will make Reason their Judge, as
for such let their James be Eternal, to dwell above Spite, Scorn or Reproach,
but ^r the Evil Heads, who Envieth the Knowledge, that comes ^om others, and
wish all to be in dullness, like themselves whose leads are full of nothing but
Chimera's their Hearts of Reveng ^d Malice, and their Mouths of nothing but
Railing, let them ^ontinue in their Ignorance and Folly, for I Envy not their
^inciples nor their Glory in their Art, and if any such there (...) that will
oppose any part hereof, I am Ready to answer them, ^t in Railing but Modesty,
that so I may reform him or those ^m their Erroneous Way, and so Astrolgy shall
beget a good ^teem, as it had formerly, when and where the true Principles ^re
practiced, for I doubt not but Ptolomy whose Method this was, had the
Quintesence as to Art (for if we may Credit the Sayings of that Famous
Mathematician Dr. John Dee,) he was taught it by an Angel, but however he came
by it, his way in the most Demonstrable, whose sayings I have endeavored to
bring in to practice, now if any one through mistakes should Err, let him not
blame me but his own Ignorance, and let him study by the Rules that are laid
down, and then I doubt not but he will have better Success, which I Pray every
one may have, this is industrious, such I shall be willing to oblige, whilst I
am Urania's Servant, and my Countries Friend, to my Power,

John Bishop.
September the first 1686. From my House at the Golden Ball in Virginia Street,
near East-smithfield, Land.
To his entirely beloved Brother, Mr. John Bishop, on his excellent Book,
entitled, The Marrow of Astrology.
WHen first I chanced this noble Art to view,
With all my vigor I did it pursue,
But never saw it Perfect, till in You:
How many Years has Titon traced his Sphere,
Since beauteous? Urania did appear,
But always Blurs upon her comely Face,
Eternal shame to this our Junior Race.
Hark! now She Is Fair, She Is Beauteous, and what not:
You Have laid her open, and not left a spot
Whereby She may obnoxious be to those,
From whence continual Discords have arose:
Envy's banished, Malice dare not appear,
But all to this our Art must now give ear,
The Quintescence whereof you have wrote it here.
In Honor's Arms I wish your Skill and Pain,
May be embraced, and then our Art again
Will gain its Glory, and its former Praise,
And, Phoenix like, out of its Ashes raise
Herself aloft, and sail quite through the Sky,
Freeing Herself from all past Treachery;
But hold! My guiddy Pen, where do you run?
How can you th'inclos'd Excellencies shun,
Of this, the Treasure of our Art most high,
Known by, The Marrow of Astrology?
Here, sporting in these Sheets, you will Learn an Art,
By which you may wonderful things impart;
Ponder each Sentence, and observe them well,
The Minds of other Men you may foretell.
Into a fruitful Vineyard here you're led,
With this Celestial Art for to be fed,
As with the sweetest Grapes, that from the Vine
Yields all sorts of comfortable Wine;
What need we to the Tavern run at Night,
Whilst with Canaries, here you may delight
Your self with Art, far richer than they be;
So let the Marrow live eternally:
No Limner ever, by his cunning Skill,
Drew half so fair, as this their living Quill,
That never will die, but always live and flourish,
And all the Sucklings of Urania nourish,
With their Example never done before,
By any Tyro on the English-shore;
Here Is Bishop's Council, and Physicians Wit,
The Devil's in it, if one of those will not hit
The Nail of your Understandings dull,
And drive Astrology into your Skull,
Remaining there to purge your putrid Brains,
And make you dextrous in the Starry Trains,
Removing thence those cursed Innovations
Of Argol, that has ruined many Nations;
But now we'll crown our Authors Labor here,
Extolling them above the Starry Sphere;
Let Us their Great Names above the Regions raise,
And crown their Quills with Laureats of Bays.
Descend you Powers above to our Assistance.
Chronos, descend thy lofty Sphere, and then
Lend us thy Aid to Praise our English Men,
Cast off thy old Saturnine Habit here,
And in thy Splendour gloriously appear.
Great Phaeton, next Chronos, we implore,
Come from your Orb, our Authors to adore.
Quirenus, God of War; come down and see
The Gods of Art, though not of War like thee.
Phoebus, with all your glorious Rays come down,
Lend us your mighty Aid, these Men to Crown.
Cytheria fair, come lend us but a smile,
And then return, lest that you do beguile
Our tender hearts, as well as Mars the great
Arise aloft unto your glorious seat.
Swift Hermes too, we want thy mighty aid,
For to confirm what here before is said.
Cynthia, in all your Starry Dress appear,
Amongst these your Kinsfolks and Relations here,
Stay your swift Course, lend us also your Rays,
To give our Authors Heckatombs of Praise;
They all concluded, and with one Voice said,
The Starry Art now prostrate she is laid;
They took their leaves, and up aloft did fly
Unto their former Orbs in the Azure sky.
And so, dear Brother, I do here conclude,
Begging your pardon for what here is rude,
In these my Junior Lines, yet it is my Will,
And the first Crop that ever dropped from my Quill;
And what is here amiss, impute it to my Skill.
So I remain your loving Brother, Nicholas Bishop.
October. 28. 1686.
THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
INgenious Reader, you that buy this Book
Must not for high-flown Strains within it look,
For it is not dressed according to the Times,
In Garments rare, no more than my dull Rhimes,
But in a modest Dress it does appear,
And sober Artists thou art blessed with here,
Who understands the very Grounds of Art,
Witness the Wonders daily they impart,
By this disdained Astrologick Art;
This Art in former Ages was adored
By Learning, but by most it is now abhorred;
And, if Josephus credited may be,
Princes themselves studied Astrology.
Here Is Calculations and Examples rare,
Will raise your ponderous Souls above the sphere
Of this ungrateful and Superbean Age,
With what they understand not, fall in rage,
And swears what does exceed their Apprehensions,
Proceeds from cursed or devilish Inventions:
To such dull Sots our Authors don't impart
Their Skill, and this, The Masterpiece of Art,
But to Uranian Souls that is this way bent,
Unwearied Pains here is taken to content,
Their searching Fancies and ingenious Mind
With Rarities that suits your Temper kind,
And when they have read this Book, able may be
To Calculate any Nativity.
Now, Phoenix like, by them this Art's renewed
Ingeneniously: Astrologers conclude,
Nothing beyond the Marrow there can be;
So let it live unto Eternity.
And to our Authors, for their Skill and Pains,
Eternaliz'd let be their glorious Names
In never-dying Volumes to their Fames.
Yours and Vrania's, JOSEPH STREATER.

The Contents of the First Part.
OF the Characters of the Planets, Signs and Aspects, with their manifold
Division, Page 1 The Planets Aspects, 3 Of the Radiations of the Houses and
Signs. 7 Of Antiscions, and how to take them. 8 Of the Sign 13 Of the Sign 14
Of the Sign 16 Of the Sign 17 Of the Sign 19 Of the Sign 21 Of the Sign 22 Of
the Sign 25 Of the Sign 26 Of the Sign 28 Of the Sign 29 Of the Sign 31 Of the
Planet 34 Of the Planet 39 Of the Planet 44 Of the Sun. 49 Of Venus. 54 Of
Mercury. 59 Of the Moon. 65 Of the Distribution of the Spirits Vital, Animal,
and Natural. 69 A Table of Essential Dignities. 70 A Synopsis of the Signs. 71
How to take the Pole of Position. 72 Of Propositions of Celestial Philosophy.
79 How to-direct the near the M. C. 86 How to direct the being near the Ascen.
or 7th. 87 How to direct the being distant from the Houses. 88 How to direct
the in the space of Twilight. 89 How to direct the beyond the Parallel of
Twilight 92 How to direct the to all Parallels. 93 To direct a Significator
having lat. 93 To direct a Significator having lat. to par. 94 To direct a
Significator to his own Aspects. 95 Of Mundane Directions. 96 To direct the
Asen. or M. C. to the or of a Star. 97 To direct the Ascen. or M. C. to any
other Aspect. 98 To direct the Ascen. to any Aspect. 99 To direct a
Significator being near any House 101 To direct a Significator being distant
from the Houses. 102 To direct a Significator to his own Aspects. 103 How to
direct to Parallels in the World. 104 To direct the to any Aspect under the
Earth. 106 To direct the out of the space of Twilight. 107 To direct to Aspects
Converse. 108 To find out the Number of Years. 108 Of secondary Directions. 110
Of Progressions. 110 Of Ingressions and Transits. 115 Of and how to take it.
116 Of Antiscions. 118 How to equate the Arch of Direction. 120
The Contents of the Second Part.
WHat a Nativity is, and how to Rectify it, Page 1 How to set a Figure, 2 A
Table of the Poles of the Houses, 5 A Table for Converting H. and M. into Dg.
and M. 6 A Table of Houses, 7 A Table of the 's Latitude, 19 Of the Twelve
Houses, 21 A Table of Semidiurnal and Seminocturnal Arches, 27 An Explanation
of the aforesaid Tables, 30 Charles the Fifth Emperor of Germany's Nativity,
32 Philip King of Spain his Nativity, 35 Henry King of France his Nativity, 37
Sebastian's Nativity King of Portugal, 40 Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweedland's
Nativity, 43 The Duke of Parma's Nativity, 45 Lord Mollins his Nativity, 47
Cardinal Aldobrand his Nativity, 49 John Columna his Nativity, 51 A Child's
Nativity, 53 Cardinal Farneii his Nativity, 55 Cardinal Fachinettii his
Nativity, 58 Mr. Lilly's Nativity, 60 Prince of Aldobrand's Nativity, 6^ Henry
Dutton's Nativity, 64 Saffold Lee's Nativity, 67 John Blanchard's Nativity, 69
James Gales Nativity, 71 John Bishop his Nativity, 73 Debora Daniel her
Nativity, 74 Cautions to be observed, 76 After fol. 76. in this 2d Book are the
Tables of Twilight, also of the Mundane Aspects, with the Uses of them.
THE MARROW OF ASTROLOGY, PART, II.
First, What a Nativity is, and how to Rectify it.
A Nativity is the true Time, or the very Moment of any ones Birth, in which
the Child comes into the World, beginning then to be a visible Member of the
Creation, the Stars beginning then to Act and Operate, by the Power of the
Angel, or Angels ruling those Constellations, Of a Nativity.
arising, or then being in Greatest Power at the time of the Birth, according
to the Saying of St. Jerome, when he comes to Comment upon the 18 of St.
Matthew and the 10th verse, says thus; Great. is the Dignity of Souls, for
every one at their first appearance into the world, have an Angel appointed for
their Custody, and safety; But seeing the true Time is hard to come at, by
Reason of the difference and uncertainty of all Clocks, Watches, and Dyals, the
Ancients have left several ways to Rectify it by, as the Truetine of Hermes
the Animoder of Ptolomy, and also by the Accidents of the Native, as for the
Truetine of Hermes, or Animodar, of Ptolomy, I shall say little in this place,
because it is sufficiently handled by almost all Authors, and what I have here
to say is to Rectify a Nativity by Accidents; which briefly is thus. First set
your figure by the following Table of Houses for the Estimate Time, then
observe the Accidents, whether Sickness, Honor, Loss, or what more you can
get, but especially sickness, or croses, and if it be sickness, take the true
pole of the giver of Life, with his Parallels if the, or, or, or else if it be
the Ascendant the ob. Asc. under the pole of Birth, and observe the nature of
the Promittor, and his Parallels, with the other Planets, whether he may give
such a distemper or no, so that if you find your arch of direction to long, or
to short, you are to raise or depress the pole of poshtion of your
Significator, and by that means you will find the true time; always observeing,
that you must only direct the giver of Life, to the bad aspect of the
Infortunes, for sickness, and no other, as thus, if the be giver of Life, the
nor Asendant being directed to any bad aspects can not kill, or cause Diseases
as shall be showed in their proper places, for that has been the senseless
opinion of most of our Artists, to think that one may give Life, and another be
directed to kill, which is the most irational thing in the World.

Secondly.
Of setting a Figure.
Of setting a Figure, diverse have been the Oppinions of our Modern Authors about
this Point, but that which we allow of, is according to Ptolomy, (whom our
Modern Athors say, would have the Heavens to be divided into 12 equal parts in
the Ecliptic; as if the Asendant be 15 dg. the second must be 15 dg. and the
3d. 15 dg. etc.) but those persons are extremely mistaken, for Ptolomy never
taught that Doctrine, but only they misinterpret his saying, for Ptlomy's
System is the most demonstrable of any in the World, as shall be taught in
another Work, wherein the falce imaginations of Copernieus and his followers,
shall be as Clearly confuted, as Argol and Regiomontanus are in this; but here
I say, that the following Table of Houses, are the only true extant, which I
have Calculated for the Merridian of the famous City of London, and are far
more exact, then those of Rogiomontanus, which he calls the Rational way, which
we say is the most Irrational way, and without Reason; now the use of these
Tables follows; suppose I would set a figure for the 25th of September, at 4h.
20m. p. m. (or afternoon,) in the Ephemeris against the day of the month, I
find the s place to be in 12 dg. 30 m. at noon, with which I enter the Table of
Houses with in, and under the 10th. House with 12 dg. or 13, (take which you
will,) because the minutes are 30, you may add a degrees. then take 13 dg. under the
10th. House, and in the Column toward the left hand, Right against the said 13
dg. you will find 12 h. 48 m. to which I add my 4 h. 20 m. and it makes 17 h. 8
m. with which I enter the Tables again, and under the title time from Noon, I
look for my 17 h. 8 m. which I find Exactly, and in a Direct line, I have the
Cusps of all the six Oriental Houses thus, The 10th. House is 18dg. 00m. The
11th. Hnuse is 05dg. 30m. The 12th. House is 25dg. 36m. The Asendant is 29dg.
58m. The Second is 28dg. 14m. The Third is 28dg. 08m.

The Opposite Houses have the Opposite Signs, Degrees, and Minutes, thus;

Houses Opposite. 1. 7. Signs opposite... etc. 2. 8... 3. 9... 4. 10... 5.
11... 6. 12...

So that you see the first House is in Opposition to the 7th. the 2d. to the
8th. the 3d. to the 9th. etc. And also, that is in Opposition to, to and to etc.

And because this Table of Houses is only Calculated for the Lattiude of
London, and serves for no place but under that Lat. I have here incerted a
Table showing the poles of the 11th. 12th. 2d, and 3d. Houses in all places,
from 30 dg. to 60 dg. North or South Lat. presupposing them to be sufficient
for all the Nativities, that can come into the hands of any of our Artists,
which are as follows.

The Table.
Asc. 11 and 3 12 and 2 dg. d. m. d. m. 31 11 25 21 58 32 11 52 22 47 33 12 19
23 35 34 12 48 24 24 35 13 17 25 13 36 13 48 26 4 37 14 17 26 55 38 14 49 27 46
39 15 20 28 38 40 15 52 29 32 41 16 25 30 25 42 16 59 31 22 43 17 36 32 16 44
18 13 33 13 45 18 50 34 11 46 19 28 35 9 47 20 7 36 8 48 20 49 37 8 49 21 33 38
10 50 22 17 39 11 51 23 4 40 16 52 23 51 41 20 53 24 40 42 26 54 25 34 43 32 55
26 29 44 41 56 27 25 45 51 57 28 24 47 0 58 29 26 48 13 59 30 30 49 26 60 31 39
50 42

The Use of this Table.
In the first Column is the lat. of the place from 30 dg. to 60 dg. of lat. and
right against it you have the poles of Example.
the 11th. 3d. 12th. and 2d. Houses.

Example, if I would know the poles elevation of the 11th. 3d. 12th. and 2d.
Houses for the lat. of 53dg. I enter with 53. under the Title of the Asc. and
right against it I find under the 11th. and 3d. 24dg. 40m. which is the poles
elevation, and under the 12th and 2d. I find 42dg. 26m. which is the poles
elevation for the 12th. and 2d. Houses, and so of any other etc.

A Table for converting Hours and Minutes of Time, into degrees. and m. of the
Equator.
ho. degrees. m. degrees. and min. of the Equa. m. degrees. and min. of the Equa. 1 15 1 0:
15 31 7: 45 2 30 2 0: 30 32 8: 0 3 45 3 0: 45 33 8: 15 4 60 4 1: 00 34 8: 30 5
75 5 1: 15 35 8: 45 6 90 6 1: 30 36 9: 0 7 105 7 1: 45 37 9: 15 8 120 8 2: 00
38 9: 30 9 135 9 2: 15 39 9: 45 10 150 10 2: 30 40 10: 0 11 168 11 2: 45 41 10:
15 12 180 12 3: 00 42 10: 30 13 195 13 3: 15 43 10: 45 14 210 14 3: 30 44 11: 0
15 225 15 3: 45 45 11: 15 16 240 16 4; 00 46 11: 30 17 255 17 4: 15 47 11: 45
18 270 18 4: 30 48 12: 0 19 285 19 4: 45 49 12: 15 20 300 20 5: 00 50 12: 30 21
315 21 5: 15 51 12: 45 22 330 22 5: 30 52 13: 0 23 345 23 5: 45 53 13: 15 24
360 24 6: 00 54 13: 30 25 6: 15 55 13: 45 26 6: 30 56 14: 0 27 6: 45 57 14: 15
28 7: 00 58 14: 30 29 7: 15 59 14: 45 30 7: 30 60 15: 0 sec min. sec. sec. min.
sec.

A Table for converting E^noctial Degrees. into H. and of Time, and the contrary.
dg. h. m. dg. h. m. degrees. ho. m. 1 0: 4 31 2: 4 70 4: (...) 2 0: 8 32 2: 8 80
5: (...) 3 0: 12 33 2: 12 90 6: (...) 4 0: 16 34 2: 16 100 6: (...) 5 0: 20 35
2: 20 110 7: (...) 6 0: 24 36 2: 24 120 8: (...) 7 0: 28 37 2: 28 130 8: (...)
8 0: 32 38 2: 32 140 9: (...) 9 0: 36 39 2: 36 150 10: (...) 10 0: 40 40 2: 40
160 10: (...) 11 0: 44 41 2: 44 170 11: (...) 12 0: 48 42 2: 48 180 12: (...)
13 0: 52 43 2: 52 190 12: (...) 14 0: 56 44 2: 56 200 13: 2^ 15 1: 0 45 3: 0
210 14: (...) 16 1: 4 46 3: 4 220 14: 4^ 17 1: 8 47 3: 8 230 15: 2^ 18 1: 12 48
3: 12 240 16: (...) 19 1: 16 49 3: 16 250 16: 4^ 20 1: 20 50 3: 20 260 17: 2^
21 1: 24 51 3: 24 270 18: (...) 22 1: 28 52 3: 28 280 18: 4^ 23 1: 32 53 3: 32
290 19: 2^ 24 1: 36 54 3: 36 300 20: (...) 25 1: 40 55 3: 40 310 20: 4^ 26 1:
44 56 3: 44 320 21: 2^ 27 1: 48 57 3: 48 330 22: (...) 28 1: 52 58 3: 52 340
22: 4^ 29 1: 56 59 3: 56 350 23: 2^ 30 2: 0 60 4: 0 360 24: (...)

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degr. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Aries. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 0 0 0 8 40 22 27 26 42 12 49 2 33 0 4 1 9 46 23 21 27 23 13 20 3 22
0 7 2 10 52 24 15 28 2 14 4 4 12 0 11 3 11 58 25 9 28 42 14 48 5 2 0 15 4 13 3
26 2 29 21 15 31 5 52 0 18 5 14 8 26 54 0 1 16 13 6 42 0 22 6 15 12 27 46 0 40
16 55 7 31 0 26 7 16 16 28 38 1 20 17 38 8 21 0 29 8 17 19 29 29 2 0 18 20 9 11
0 33 9 18 2 0 20 2 39 19 3 10 2 0 37 10 19 25 1 10 3 1^ 19 46 10 52 0 40 11 20
28 1 59 3 59 20 29 11 43 0 44 12 21 31 2 49 4 38 21 13 12 33 0 48 13 22 34 3 38
5 17 21 56 13 24 0 51 14 23 37 4 27 5 57 22 40 14 15 0 55 15 24 40 5 16 6 36 23
23 15 6 0 59 16 25 42 6 5 7 15 24 7 15 57 1 3 17 26 44 6 53 7 55 24 50 16 48 1
6 18 27 46 7 41 8 35 25 34 17 40 1 10 19 28 47 8 30 9 14 26 18 18 31 1 14 20 29
48 9 18 9 53 27 2 19 22 1 18 21 0 49 10 6 10 34 27 46 20 14 1 21 22 1 50 10 55
11 12 28 30 21 5 1 25 23 2 50 11 43 11 52 29 14 21 57 1 29 24 3 51 12 31 12 32
29 58 22 49 1 33 25 4 51 13 19 13 12 0 42 23 41 1 36 26 5 50 14 8 13 52 1 27 24
33 1 40 27 6 50 14 57 14 34 2 12 25 25 1 44 28 7 49 15 43 15 24 2 57 26 18 1 48
29 8 48 16 30 15 51 3 42 27 11 1 52 30 9 47 17 16 16 31 4 28 28 4

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degr. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Taurus. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 1 52 0 9 47 17 16 16 31 4 28 28 4 1 55 1 10 45 18 23 17 11 5 13 28
57 1 59 2 11 43 18 51 17 55 5 59 29 50 2 3 3 12 41 19 39 18 31 6 44 0 43 2 7 4
13 38 20 26 19 12 7 29 1 37 2 11 5 14 35 21 13 19 52 8 14 2 31 2 15 6 15 32 22
0 20 32 9 0 3 25 2 19 7 16 29 22 47 21 13 9 47 4 19 2 23 8 17 25 23 34 21 54 10
34 5 13 2 26 9 8 21 24 21 22 35 11 21 6 7 2 30 10 19 17 25 7 23 16 12 8 7 1 2
34 11 20 13 25 53 23 57 12 55 7 55 2 38 12 21 10 26 39 24 38 13 42 8 49 2 42 13
22 7 27 26 25 19 14 30 9 43 2 46 14 23 4 28 12 26 0 15 17 10 37 2 50 15 24 0 28
59 26 42 16 4 11 32 2 54 16 24 56 29 46 27 24 16 52 12 27 2 58 17 25 52 0 33 28
6 17 40 13 22 3 2 18 26 48 1 20 28 47 18 28 14 17 3 6 19 27 45 2 7 29 30 19 16
15 13 3 10 20 28 42 2 54 0 13 20 4 16 9 3 14 21 29 39 3 41 0 55 20 52 17 6 3 18
22 0 35 4 29 1 37 21 40 18 2 3 22 23 1 30 5 17 2 20 22 28 18 57 3 26 24 2 26 6
6 3 2 23 17 19 52 3 31 25 3 21 6 55 3 46 24 6 20 48 3 35 26 4 17 7 44 4 29 24
55 21 44 3 39 27 5 12 8 33 5 12 25 45 22 40 3 43 28 6 8 9 21 5 55 26 34 23 36 3
47 29 7 3 10 9 6 39 27 24 24 32 3 51 30 7 58 10 58 7 22 28 14 25 29

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degr. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Gemini. Time from h. Noon m. 10. 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2.
d. m. 3. d. m. 3 51 0 7 58 10 58 7 22 28 14 25 29 3 55 1 8 54 11 46 8 6 29 4 26
25 4 0 2 9 49 12 35 8 50 29 55 27 21 4 4 3 10 45 13 23 9 34 0 46 28 18 4 8 4 11
41 14 12 10 18 1 36 29 15 4 12 5 12 38 15 1 11 3 2 27 0 12 4 16 6 13 34 15 51
11 47 3 18 1 9 4 21 7 14 30 16 40 12 31 4 9 2 6 4 25 8 15 26 17 30 13 16 5 0 3
3 4 29 9 16 22 18 19 14 1 5 51 4 0 4 33 10 17 18 19 9 14 46 6 42 4 57 4 38 11
18 14 19 58 15 31 7 33 5 54 4 42 12 19 10 20 48 16 16 8 24 6 51 4 46 13 20 7 21
38 17 1 9 15 7 48 4 51 14 21 3 22 28 17 46 10 6 8 45 4 55 15 22 0 23 19 18 32
10 57 9 42 4 59 16 22 56 24 9 19 17 11 49 10 39 5 3 17 23 52 25 0 20 4 12 41 11
36 5 8 18 24 47 25 51 20 49 13 32 12 33 5 12 19 25 43 26 42 21 5 14 24 13 30 5
16 20 26 39 27 33 22 20 15 25 14 27 5 21 21 27 35 28 24 23 6 16 7 15 23 5 25 22
28 31 29 14 23 51 16 58 16 20 5 29 23 29 27 0 5 24 37 17 50 17 17 5 34 24 0 23
0 56 25 23 18 42 18 14 5 38 25 1 19 1 48 26 9 19 33 19 11 5 43 26 2 15 2 40 26
55 20 25 20 8 5 47 27 3 12 3 32 27 41 21 17 21 5 5 51 28 4 9 4 23 28 27 22 9 22
2 5 56 29 5 6 5 14 29 13 23 1 22 59 6 0 30 6 3 6 4 30 0 23 53 23 56

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degrees. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Cancer. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 6 0 0 6 3 6 4 0 0 23 53 23 56 6 4 1 7 0 6 56 0 47 24 45 24 53 6 9 2
7 58 7 48 1 33 25 37 25 50 6 13 3 8 55 8 41 2 19 26 28 26 47 6 17 4 9 52 9 33 3
5 27 20 27 44 6 22 5 10 48 10 25 3 51 28 11 28 40 6 26 6 11 45 11 17 4 37 29 2
29 36 6 31 7 12 42 12 9 5 23 29 53 0 33 6 35 8 13 39 13 2 6 9 0 44 1 29 6 39 9
14 36 13 54 6 55 1 36 2 25 6 44 10 15 33 14 46 7 40 2 26 3 21 6 48 11 16 30 15
37 8 26 3 17 4 17 6 52 12 17 27 16 28 9 12 4 8 5 12 6 57 13 18 24 17 20 9 57 4
59 6 8 7 1 14 19 21 18 12 10 43 5 50 7 4 7 5 15 20 18 19 4 11 28 6 41 8 0 7 9
16 21 15 19 55 12 14 7 31 8 56 7 14 17 22 12 20 46 12 59 8 22 9 53 7 18 18 23 9
21 37 13 45 9 13 10 50 7 22 19 24 6 22 28 14 30 10 3 11 46 7 27 20 25 3 23 19
15 14 10 53 12 42 7 31 21 26 0 24 9 15 59 11 42 13 38 7 35 22 26 57 25 0 16 44
12 31 14 34 7 39 23 27 54 25 51 17 29 13 20 15 30 7 44 24 28 51 26 41 18 14 14
9 16 26 7 48 25 29 48 27 32 18 58 14 58 17 22 7 52 26 0 45 28 23 19 42 15 47 18
18 7 56 27 1 42 29 14 20 26 16 36 19 14 8 0 28 2 39 0 4 21 10 17 25 20 10 8 5
29 3 35 0 55 21 54 18 14 21 5 8 9 30 4 32 1 46 22 38 19 2 22 1

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degrees. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Leo. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12 d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d. m.
3. d. m. 8 9 0 4 32 1 46 22 38 19 2 22 1 8 13 1 5 28 2 36 23 22 19 51 22 57 8
17 2 6 24 3 26 24 5 20 40 23 53 8 21 3 7 20 4 15 24 48 21 28 24 49 8 25 4 8 16
5 5 25 32 22 17 25 45 8 29 5 9 12 5 54 26 16 23 6 26 40 8 34 6 10 8 6 43 26 58
23 54 27 35 8 38 7 11 4 7 32 27 41 24 42 28 31 8 42 8 12 0 8 20 28 23 25 30 29
27 8 46 9 12 56 9 8 29 6 26 18 0 22 8 50 10 13 52 9 57 29 42 27 6 1 18 8 54 11
14 48 10 45 0 30 27 54 2 14 8 58 12 15 43 11 33 1 13 28 41 3 10 9 2 13 16 38 12
21 1 55 29 28 4 7 9 6 14 17 33 13 9 2 36 0 15 5 3 9 10 15 18 28 13 57 3 18 1 2
5 59 9 14 16 19 23 14 44 4 0 1 48 6 55 9 18 17 20 18 15 31 4 41 2 35 7 52 9 22
18 21 12 16 18 5 22 3 21 8 49 9 26 19 22 6 17 6 6 4 4 8 9 46 9 30 20 23 0 17 53
6 45 4 55 10 42 9 34 21 23 54 18 40 7 26 5 42 11 39 9 38 22 24 48 19 26 8 6 6
28 12 35 9 41 23 25 42 20 11 8 47 7 14 13 31 9 45 24 26 35 20 57 9 28 8 0 14 28
9 49 25 27 29 21 43 10 8 8 47 15 25 9 53 26 28 23 22 30 10 48 9 34 16 23 9 57
27 29 17 23 16 11 29 10 22 17 21 10 1 28 0 10 24 2 12 9 11 9 18 18 10 5 29 1 3
24 47 12 50 11 56 19 16 10 8 30 1 56 25 32 13 30 12 44 20 15

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degr. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Virgo. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 10. 8 0 1 56 25 32 13 30 12 44 20 15 10 12 1 2 49 26 17 14 9 13 31
21 13 10 16 2 3 42 27 2 14 49 14 19 22 11 10 20 3 4 35 27 47 15 29 15 6 23 10
10 24 4 5 27 28 32 16 9 15 54 24 9 10 27 5 6 19 29 17 16 48 16 41 25 9 10 31 6
7 11 0 2 17 28 17 29 26 10 10 35 7 8 3 0 46 18 9 18 17 27 11 10 39 8 8 54 1 30
18 48 19 5 28 11 10 42 9 9 46 2 14 19 27 19 53 29 11 10 46 10 10 38 2 58 20 6
20 41 0 12 10 50 11 11 29 3 42 20 48 21 29 1 13 10 54 12 12 20 4 26 21 26 22 17
2 14 10 57 13 13 12 5 10 22 5 23 5 3 15 11 1 14 14 3 5 54 22 45 23 53 4 16 11 5
15 14 55 6 37 23 24 24 41 5 18 11 9 16 15 45 7 21 24 4 25 30 6 19 11 12 17 16
36 8 4 24 43 26 19 7 21 11 17 18 17 26 8 47 25 23 27 9 8 23 11 20 19 18 17 9 30
26 2 27 59 9 26 11 23 20 19 7 10 12 26 41 28 50 10 30 11 26 21 19 57 10 55 27
22 29 41 11 34 11 31 22 20 48 11 39 28 1 0 32 12 37 11 34 23 21 38 12 22 28 40
1 22 13 41. 11 38 24 22 28 13 5 29 20 2 14 14 45 11 42 25 23 18 13 47 29 59 3 6
15 50 11 45 26 24 8 14 29 0 39 3 58 16 56 11 49 27 24 58 15 11 1 19 4 51 18 2
11 53 28 25 48 15 54 2 2 5 44 19 8 11 56 29 26 38 16 37 2 39 6 38 20 14 12 0 30
27 28 17 21 3 19 7 32 21 21

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degr. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Libra. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 12 0 0 27 28 17 21 3 19 7 32 21 21 12 4 1 28 18 18 4 3 59 8 27 22
27 12 7 2 29 8 18 46 4 40 9 22 23 33 12 11 3 29 56 19 29 5 20 10 17 24 40 12 15
4 0 45 20 11 6 2 11 12 25 48 12 18 5 1 34 20 54 6 43 12 8 26 57 12 22 6 2 24 21
37 7 24 13 5 28 6 12 26 7 3 13 22 20 8 5 14 1 29 16 12 29 8 4 2 23 4 8 46 14 57
0 25 12 33 9 4 52 23 47 9 28 15 53 1 35 12 37 10 5 41 24 31 10 10 16 51 2 45 12
40 11 6 30 25 15 10 52 17 50 3 55 12 44 12 7 19 25 59 11 35 18 50 5 6 12 48 13
8 8 26 42 12 18 19 51 6 17 12 51 14 8 57 27 26 12 59 20 53 7 28 12 55 15 9 46
28 10 13 43 21 56 8 40 12 59 16 10 35 28 53 14 26 23 0 9 52 13 3 17 11 24 29 37
15 10 24 5 11 4 13 6 18 12 13 0 20 15 54 25 11 12 17 13 10 19 13 2 1 4 16 39 26
18 13 30 13 14 20 13 51 1 48 17 23 27 26 14 43 13 18 21 14 41 2 32 18 8 28 35
15 56 13 21 22 15 30 3 16 18 54 29 45 17 10 13 25 23 16 19 4 1 19 39 0 55 18 24
13 29 24 17 9 4 46 20 26 2 6 19 39 13 33 25 17 58 5 31 21 14 3 17 20 54 13 36
26 18 48 6 16 22 1 4 29 22 10 13 4 27 19 37 7 1 22 49 5 42 23 26 13 44 28 20 26
7 46 23 37 6 56 24 42 13 48 29 21 16 8 32 24 26 8 10 25 57 13 52 30 22 6 9 18
25 15 9 25 27 13

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degrees. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Scorpio. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12 d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 13 52 0 22 6 9 18 25 15 9 25 27 13 13 55 1 22 56 10 5 26 5 10 42 28
30 13 59 2 23 46 10 52 26 56 12 0 29 46 14 3 3 24 37 11 39 27 47 13 20 1 2 14 7
4 25 28 12 25 28 39 15 41 2 18 14 11 5 26 19 13 12 29 30 16 4 3 35 14 15 6 27
10 13 59 0 24 17 18 4 52 14 19 7 28 0 14 47 1 11 18 53 6 10 14 22 8 28 50 15 36
2 13 20 19 7 28 14 26 9 29 40 16 26 3 10 21 47 8 47 14 30 10 0 31 17 17 4 6 23
16 10 5 14 34 11 1 22 18 8 5 3 24 46 11 24 14 38 12 2 13 19 0 6 1 26 17 12 42
14 42 13 3 4 19 51 7 0 27 49 14 0 14 46 14 3 55 20 42 8 0 29 20 15 18 14 50 15
4 47 21 34 9 2 0 56 16 35 14 54 16 5 38 22 25 10 6 2 31 17 53 14 58 17 6 29 23
17 11 9 4 6 19 11 15 2 18 7 21 24 9 12 14 5 42 20 29 15 6 19 8 13 25 2 13 21 7
19 21 48 15 10 20 9 6 25 55 14 29 8 57 23 6 15 14 21 9 58 26 49 15 37 10 37 24
24 15 18 22 10 51 27 44 16 48 13 18 25 42 15 22 23 11 45 28 39 17 58 14 0 27 0
15 26 24 12 40 29 35 19 11 15 42 28 17 15 31 25 13 34 0 32 20 27 17 24 29 35 15
35 26 14 28 1 29 21 43 19 8 0 52 15 39 27 15 22 2 26 23 3 20 54 2 9 15 43 28 16
17 3 24 24 24 22 31 3 26 15 47 29 17 12 4 23 25 47 24 18 4 43 15 51 30 18 8 5
23 27 10 26 5 6 0

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degr. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Sagittary. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2.
d. m. 3. d. m. 15 51 0 18 8 5 23 27 10 26 5 6 0 15 55 1 19 4 6 24 28 37 27 51 7
16 16 0 2 20 0 7 26 0 6 29 38 8 32 16 4 3 20 56 8 29 1 37 1 26 9 48 16 8 4 21
52 9 32 3 11 3 15 11 4 16 12 5 22 48 10 35 4 48 5 5 12 20 16 16 6 23 44 11 38 6
27 6 56 13 35 16 21 7 24 41 12 42 8 8 8 46 14 50 16 25 8 25 38 13 47 9 52 10 37
16 5 16 29 9 26 35 14 53 11 40 12 27 17 20 16 33 10 27 33 16 0 13 30 14 16 18
34 16 38 11 28 31 17 8 15 20 16 4 19 48 16 42 12 29 30 18 18 17 19 17 51 21 1
16 46 13 0 30 19 28 19 18 19 37 22 13 16 51 14 1 29 20 39 21 20 21 21 23 25 16
55 15 2 28 21 51 23 30 23 4 24 36 16 59 16 3 28 23 4 25 32 24 48 25 47 17 4 17
4 29 24 19 27 44 26 31 26 57 17 8 18 5 30 25 36 28 58 28 14 28 8 17 11 19 6 31
26 55 2 17 29 57 29 19 17 16 20 7 33 28 14 4 38 1 39 0 30 17 21 21 8 35 29 34 7
0 3 20 1 41 17 25 22 9 37 0 55 9 24 5 0 2 51 17 30 23 10 39 2 17 11 53 6 38 4 1
17 34 24 11 42 3 39 14 23 8 15 5 10 17 38 25 12 45 5 2 16 59 9 51 6 19 17 43 26
13 48 6 27 19 30 11 27 7 27 17 47 27 14 52 7 53 22 5 13 2 8 34 17 51 28 15 57 9
20 24 39 14 36 9 40 17 56 29 17 2 10 49 27 20 16 9 10 46 18 0 30 18 8 12 19 30
0 17 41 11 51

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degrees. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Capricorn. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2.
d. m. 3. d. m. 18 0 0 18 8 12 19 0 0 17 41 11 51 18 5 1 19 14 13 50 2 37 19 10
12 56 18 9 2 20 20 15 23 5 19 20 38 14 2 18 13 3 21 26 16 57 7 55 22 5 15 8 18
17 4 22 34 18 32 10 29 23 30 16 13 18 22 5 23 42 20 8 13 2 24 54 17 17 18 26 6
24 50 21 45 15 37 26 17 18 20 18 30 7 25 59 23 22 18 7 27 41 19 22 18 35 8 27 9
25 0 20 35 29 4 20 24 18 39 9 28 19 26 39 23 0 0 26 21 25 18 44 10 29 28 28 20
25 22 1 46 22 26 18 48 11 0 38 0 2 27 43 3 5 23 28 18 52 12 1 48 1 45 30 0 4 23
24 30 18 57 13 2 59 3 28 2 16 5 39 25 31 19 1 14 4 10 5 10 4 27 6 54 26 32 19 5
15 5 22 6 54 6 33 8 8 27 33 19 9 16 6 34 8 39 8 39 9 20 28 33 19 14 17 7 46 10
25 10 43 10 31 29 32 19 18 18 8 59 12 12 12 42 11 41 0 30 19 22 19 10 12 13 59
14 40 12 50 1 29 19 27 20 11 27 15 46 16 31 13 58 2 27 19 31 21 12 40 17 33 18
20 15 5 3 25 19 35 22 13 54 19 21 20 5 16 11 4 23 19 39 23 15 8 21 10 21 52 17
17 5 20 19 44 24 16 22 23 0 23 33 18 22 6 16 19 48 25 17 37 24 50 25 13 19 26 7
13 19 52 26 18 53 26 39 26 49 20 29 8 9 19 56 27 20 10 28 26 28 22 21 32 9 5 20
0 28 21 27 0 12 29 53 22 34 10 2 20 5 29 22 43 1 57 1 23 23 35 10 59 20 9 30 24
0 3 41 2 50 24 36 11 55

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degrees. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Aquary. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12 d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 20 9 0 24 0 3 41 2 50 24 36 11 55 20 13 1 25 17 5 26 4 14 25 36 12
51 20 17 2 26 34 7 11 5 37 26 35 13 45 20 21 3 27 51 8 56 6 58 27 33 14 39 20
25 4 29 8 10 40 8 17 28 31 15 32 20 29 5 0 25 12 25 9 33 29 28 16 26 20 34 6 1
43 14 10 10 49 0 24 17 19 20 38 7 3 1 15 54 12 ^3 1 20 18 13 20 42 8 4 19 17 37
13 14 2 16 19 6 20 46 9 5 37 19 22 14 24 3 11 20 0 20 50 10 6 55 21 4 15 32 4 5
20 53 20 54 11 8 13 22 45 16 40 4 58 21 46 20 58 2 9 31 24 24 17 46 5 51 22 39
21 2 13 10 49 26 2 18 53 6 43 23 31 21 6 14 12 6 27 38 19 56 7 35 24 23 21 10
15 13 24 29 13 20 58 8 27 25 14 21 14 16 14 42 0 37 22 0 9 18 26 5 21 18 17 16
0 2 10 23 0 10 9 26 56 21 22 18 17 19 3 42 24 0 11 0 27 47 21 26 19 18 37 5 11
24 58 11 50 28 38 21 30 20 19 55 6 40 25 55 12 40 29 29 21 34 21 21 12 8 8 26
51 13 29 0 20 21 38 22 22 29 9 35 27 47 14 18 1 11 21 41 23 23 4 11 1 28 41 15
6 2 1 21 45 24 25 23 12 26 29 36 15 54 2 51 21 49 25 26 20 13 50 0 29 16 43 3
42 21 53 26 27 3^ 15 13 1 22 17 31 4 32 21 57 27 28 54 16 35 2 14 18 2^ 5 23 22
1 28 0 12 17 56 3 ^5 19 8 6 13 22 5 29 1 2 19 16 3 56 19 56 7 3 22 8 30 2 47 20
3^ 4 45 20 44 7 53

A Table of Houses for the Latitude of 51 Degrees. 32 Min. according to Ptolomy.
Sol in Pisces. Time from h. Noon m. 10 11. d. m. 12. d. m. Ascend. d. m. 2. d.
m. 3. d. m. 22 8 0 2 47 20 34 4 45 20 44 7 54 22 12 1 4 3 21 50 5 35 21 41 8 43
22 16 2 5 19 23 5 6 23 22 17 9 33 22 20 3 6 35 24 18 7 12 23 2 0 23 22 24 4 7
51 25 30 8 0 23 47 11 13 22 27 5 9 6 26 42 8 48 24 31 12 2 22 31 6 10 21 27 53
9 35 25 15 2 51 22 35 7 11 36 29 3 10 22 26 0 13 41 22 39 8 12 51 0 12 11 7 26
45 4 30 22 42 9 14 26 1 20 11 52 27 30 15 19 22 46 10 15 20 2 27 12 37 8 14 16
8 22 50 11 16 33 3 33 13 23 8 5 16 57 22 54 12 17 45 4 39 14 ^7 29 4^ 17 46 22
57 13 18 57 5 44 14 54 0 25 18 35 23 1 14 20 ^9 6 48 15 35 1 9 19 25 23 5 15 21
21 7 51 16 17 1 52 20 14 23 8 16 22 32 8 54 17 (...) 2 36 21 3 23 12 17 23 43 9
56 17 44 3 19 21 52 23 16 18 24 54 10 58 8 26 4 2 22 41 23 20 19 26 5 11 59 19
^9 4 46 3 30 23 23 20 27 16 13 0 19 52 5 30 24 19 23 27 21 28 26 14 0 20 33 6
14 25 8 23 31 22 29 36 15 0 21 15 6 58 25 58 23 34 23 0 45 15 59 21 56 7 42 26
47 23 38 24 1 54 16 58 22 39 8 26 27 36 23 42 25 3 ^2 17 56 23 18 9 10 28 26 23
45 26 4 10 18 52 23 59 9 5^ 29 15 23 49 27 5 18 19 47 24 39 10 3^ 0 4 23 53 28
6 26 20 40 25 21 11 22 0 53 23 56 29 7 33 21 34 26 22 12 5 1 43 24 0 30 8 40 22
27 26 42 2 49 2 33

A Table of the Moons Latitude.
D. North. Ascending D. Sign. 0 Sign. 1 Sign. 2 South. Descending. Sign. 6
Sign. 7 Sign. 8 0 0 0 2 30 4 20 30 2 0 11 2 39 4 25 28 4 0 21 2 48 4 30 26 6 0
31 2 56 4 34 24 8 0 42 3 5 4 38 22 10 0 52 3 13 4 42 20 12 1 2 3 21 4 45 18 14
1 13 3 28 4 48 16 16 1 23 3 36 4 51 14 Moons. Latitude.
18 1 33 3 43 4 53 12 20 1 43 3 50 4 55 10 22 1 52 3 56 4 57 8 24 2 2 4 3 4 59
6 26 2 12 4 9 4 59 4 8 2 21 4 14 5 0 2 30 2 30 4 20 5 0 0 Sign. 5 Sign. 4 Sign.
3 North. Descending. Sign. 11 Sign. 10 Sign. 9 D. South. Ascending. D.

THis is a Table of the s lat. for every other degree of her distance, from the
or, the Use is thus, to find the s lat. you are to substract the s place in
Signs dg. and min. from the, or if the be in less Signs and dg. then the you
must sub from, for it is one and the same thing; but if you are minded to sub.
the from the, and the be in fewer Signs and dg. then the, you are to add the
Circle, that is 12 Signs, but use which you please, it is all one, and comes to
the same thing; and although this Table is made but to every other dg, yet we
suppose the Work may be true enough, but those that please, may equate for
every dg. but this we think to be as good as any Table whatsoever.

Example.
Example.
IF the be in, 13dg. that is 5 Signs 13dg, and the in, 5dg. that is 3 Signs 5dg.
now by sub. the from the; there will remain 2 Signs 8dg; with which I enter
with 2 Signs at the top, and 8dg. in the left hand Collumn, and in the Angle of
meeting I find 4dg. 38m. which is the s lat. and is South, because the last
separated from the; but if it had last separated from the the lat. had been
North; this Method you must-always observe in the s Lattitude.

Next concerning the 12 Houses and their Significators.
Of the first House.
THis House has signification of the true Description Of the Houses.
of the Natives body, as to form and Stature, with the Temperature, and
qualities of the Mind, it is called the first House, or East Angle, from whence
is Judged the beginning of every Enterprise it is the first Cardinal House, and
has for its Triplicity the 5th. and 9th. which behold each other by Aspect, in
World; where is made this Rational division, of the Houses; from whenc the true
mundane aspects do proceed, this is the first and chiefest aphetical place, for
any of the givers of Life, to be placed in, it is in to the 11th. and 3d.
Houses and in to the 10ht. and 4th. so that when it is Directed to the body or
opposition of any Planet, there the M. C. comes to the; the Asc. is sometimes
giver of Life in a Nativity, which when it is the evil Directions thereof to
the Malificks, signifies great Sicknesses, and by being Directed to the
Anaretta it signifies Death; and this is to be observed only when the Asc. is
giver of Life; and not else, but we know it is and has been the opinion of all
our Modern Authors, to say that the or may be givers of Life, and the Asc.
being directed to the bad Aspects of the maleficks denotes sickness, nay say
they and most commonly Death, which is the most senseless argument in the
World, to think that one should be giver of Life, and a another to give Diseases
and it may be a third to kill, which we cannot a llow of, for whatsoever is
giver of Life that same is most Certainly, to be directed for sickness and
Death, but to this some will say we must not be too severe in Judging, upon the
giver of Life, and that the Asc. being directed to a bad Aspect of the
Infortunes, al though it be not giver of Life, yet it shall have Power to kill,
this makes Ptolomy's Doctrine void, concerning the giver of Life, who says no
ill direction thereto shall kill if it be not giver of Life, and therefore
there shall be but one certain giver of Life, which our late Authors cannot
make, corrospond, which must make agreat confusion in Art (which Ptolomy never
taught) they say likewise we are to respect the Principal giver of Life, (and
secondly the Ascen.) and when either of them come to any bad direction it shall
have power to kill, but we one the contrary say, that whosoever shall have powe
of giveing Life, by his position shall keep and preserve the Life, by his force
and strength, and no other shall be able to destroy it, viz. If the be giver of
Life, whether the Asc. or part of shall have any power (by being directed to
bad Aspects) to kill; understand the same by the Asc. or when any of them are
givers of Life; therefore all Diseases in general or particular are taken from
the giver of Life, and none else, as shall be further Examplyfied in its Proper
place, some again will admit of several givers of Life, and say that those
Nativites who have most givers of Life are the most fortunate, and receive the
most power, for the prolonging of Life, but is contrary to sense or reason, for
where there is more gives of life then one there is more evil directions of
them, to the evil rays of evil planets and so consequently more evil signified
thereby for that Nativity must needs be of a more inferior condition, and of a
shorter life that shall have more givers of Life then one, sometimes they will
direct the Asc. to ill Aspects to kill, when as the or being giver of Life are
fortunately placed to which the direction properly belongs, but for a
conclusion of this House Note that the Asc. is never to be directed but to
those Aspects in the World, and not in the Zodiac. nor to parallels but to all
those in the World, always observing the Lat. in Mundane directions, neither
can the Asc. or M. C. be directed to any Aspects conversly, I have been the
larger upon this House, because by what has been said here may be observed in
the other Houses, however I will give an Epitomie of all in breife etc.

Of the second House
THis House has signification of the fortune of the Of Fortune.
Native, as to Riches or poverty, and all sorts of goods in general, and is in
to the 6th House and 10th Houses, and this Triplicity chiefly relates to Action
and Profit in the World, it is in to the 12th. and 4th. Houses, and in to the
11th. and 5th. Houses of indifferent good fortune when well beheld by good
Planets or by their bodyly presence; yet it is the place of an Anaretta, being
in 8 to the 8th. House, for if,, or Lord of the 4th. or 8th. should be posited
therein, and no Planet in the 4th. 6th. 8th or 12th. Houses, then the Planet in
the 2d. 4th. 6th. 8th. and 12th Houses are alloted for the anarettical place of
the Malificks.

Of the third House
WHich signifies Brethren Sisters Cousiins and Neighbors, it is a House of
delight in travel, and also Learning and procureing new aquainttance Of
Brethren.
cadent, this House is in to the seventh and 11th. and in to the 12th. and
6th. and in to the Asc. and 5th etc.

Of the fourth House.
Takes Notice of the Father, and also Houses Lands Tenements Inheritances, and
the Natives Dwelling place, it is the Angle of Sorrow, it signifies the Grave
and the End of all things, and is the worst of all the four Angles, by being in
to the 12th. and 8th. as if Sorrow Death and the Grave, had made an everlasting
Of Fathers.
Friendship, it is in to the first and the 7th. and in to the 2d. and 6th. and
no Good can be expected, by any direction of this House, to the body of any
Planet whatsoever, for at the same time it brings a to the Asc. and 7th. and an
opposition to the 10th. observe that this is the Angle of Evil.

Of the fifth House.
FRom whence is Judged the Children of the Native and is the House of Mirth and
Pleasure, of Gaming of Taverns, Ambassadors, the Wealth or Substance of the Of
Children.
Father, and is a good House, as being in to the Asc. and ninth, but in to the
8th. and 2d. and in to the 3d. and 7th. this House signifies Good, for when it
is directed to the body of any Star, the Asc. at the same time comes to the
thereof, etc.

Of the sixth House.
SIgnifies sickness, servants, tennents, and all sorts of small Cattle, it is a
cadent house, and one of the annaretical Of Servants.
places; it is in to the 10th. and 2d. in to the 9th. and 3d. and in to the
8th. and 4th. etc.

Of the seventh House
IS the great Angle of business, as signifying Marriage, Lawsuits, Controversies,
Duels, and all Public Enemies, Of Business
it shows the Nature and condition of the Wife, consideration being had to the
Planet, the first aplyes to after Birth: for the first Wife, the second for the
second, and this House is in to the 3d. and 11th. in to the 10th and 4th. and
in to the 9th. and 5th. we a low 3dg. below the Cusp of this House for the
place of the giver of Life, that is, if the giver of Life should happen to be
out of the house, yet if he be not elongated above 3dg. he shall still be
allowed for giver of Life etc.

Of the eighth House.
Has signification of the Natives Death, and of the goods of persons deceased,
Legacies, Wills, and the Of Death.
Wives Portion; it is a very unfortunate House, having no affinity with the
Ascen. it is in to the 12th. and 4th. in to the 11th. and 5th in to the 10th.
and 6th. and is the Strongest an naretical place of the Malificks etc.

Of the ninth House.
SIgnifies Religion, Learning, and Piety, likewise Sea Voyages, and
Pilgrimages, it is in to the first and Of Religion.
5th. in to the 12th. and 6th. in to the 7th. and 11th. and is a very good
House, for when it is directed to the body of any Planet, at the same time the
Ascen. comes to the thereof.

Of the tenth House.
THis is the most glorious Part of the Figure, for it signifies Kings, Princes,
and Magistrates; and all Of Kings.
Honors and preferments, whatsoever, therefore all Honors, and Dignities,
comes upon the directions of the M. C. or that Glorious Lamp of Heaven the, and
not the Ascen. or, or any other, as some have vainly imagined, the M. C. is
directed by R. A. to Aspects always direct, and never to any in the Zodiac,
but only to those in the World, this House is often talten for giver of Life;
viz. sometimes in Princes Nativities, or when the Native is likely to Dye by
the hand of Justice, this House is in to the 2d. and 6th. in to the Asc. and
7th. and in to the 12th. and 8th. Houses, etc

Of the eleventh House.
SIgnifies friends, and is the House of hope, and has the signification of the
Natives friends, and of all the assistance, that he may hope for, by their
means; it is termed the good Angle, and is in to the 3d. and 7th. in to the 2d.
and 8th. in to the Asc. and 9th this Of Friends
House being directed to the body of any Planet, the Asc. at the same time
comes to his etc.

Of the twelveth House.
Signifies private Enemies, Imprisonments, Sorrow and Trouble, Witch-cravft,
and all private Devilish Dealing, it also signifies great Cattle, this is
called the Evil Sperit, it has for its Triplicity the 8th. and 4th. House it
is in to the 3d. and 9th. and in to the 2d. and 10th. Of Enemies.
Houses, and is a very Evil house, from whence may be Expected nothing but
Sorrow and Trouble, and thus have given a Description of the 12. Houses, and
how they behold one another, which when it is a little practiced will be a great
Light to the Arch of Directions.

A Table of Semidiurnal, and Seminocturnal Arches.
The Pole of 44dg. The Pole of 47dg. The Pole of 50dg. Semid. Semid. Semid.
Simin. Semin. Semin. D h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 0
6 0 3 47 7 24 6 0 6 51 7 34 6 0 6 56 7 44 30 1 6 2 6 48 7 25 6 3 6 53 7 35 6 2
6 58 7 45 29 2 6 4 6 50 7 26 6 5 6 55 7 36 6 4 6 59 7 47 28 3 6 6 6 51 7 27 6 7
6 57 7 37 6 6 7 1 7 48 27 4 6 8 6 52 7 28 6 9 6 59 7 38 6 8 7 3 7 49 26 5 6 9 6
54 7 29 6 10 7 0 7 39 6 9 7 5 7 50 25 6 6 11 6 55 7 30 6 12 7 2 7 40 6 11 7 7 7
51 24 7 6 13 6 56 7 31 6 14 7 4 7 41 6 13 7 9 7 52 23 8 6 14 6 58 7 32 6 15 7 5
7 42 6 15 7 10 7 53 22 9 6 15 6 59 7 33 6 17 7 7 7 43 6 17 7 12 7 54 21 ^0 6 16
8 ^0 7 33 6 19 7 8 7 44 6 19 7 14 7 55 20 ^1 6 1^ (...) 2 7 33 6 20 7 9 7 44 6
21 7 15 7 56 19 ^2 6 20 7 3 7 34 6 20 7 11 7 45 6 23 7 17 7 57 18 ^3 6 21 7 4 7
34 6 24 7 12 7 46 6 25 7 19 7 58 17 ^4 6 23 7 6 7 35 6 27 7 13 7 46 6 26 7 20 7
58 16 ^5 6 24 7 7 7 3^ 6 27 7 14 7 47 6 28 7 22 7 59 15 ^6 6 25 7 8 7 36 6 29 7
16 7 48 6 30 7 24 3 0 14 ^7 6 27 7 10 7 36 6 30 7 18 7 48 6 32 7 25 3 0 13 ^8 6
29 7 11 7 37 6 34 7 19 7 49 6 34 7 27 3 1 12 ^9 6 30 7 12 7 37 6 33 7 20 7 49 6
36 7 28 8 2 11 ^0 6 32 7 13 7 38 6 34 7 22 7 49 6 38 7 30 8 2 10 ^1 6 33 7 14 7
38 6 3^ 7 28 7 50 6 40 7 31 8 3 9 ^2 6 34 7 15 7 38 6 38 7 24 7 50 6 41 7 33 8
3 8 ^3 6 36 7 17 7 38 6 39 7 26 7 50 6 43 7 3^ 8 4 7 ^4 6 38 7 18 7 38 6 4 7 27
7 51 6 45 7 36 8 4 6 ^5 6 39 7 19 7 39 6 43 7 28 7 51 6 47 7 37 8 4 5 ^6 6 4^ 7
20 7 39 6 44 7 29 7 51 6 49 7 39 8 4 4 ^7 6 42 7 21 7 39 6 46 7 30 7 51 6 51 7
4^ 8 5 3 ^8 6 4^ 7 22 7 39 6 48 7 31 7 51 6 53 7 41 8 5 2 ^9 6 45 7 23 7 39 6
49 7 33 7 51 6 54 7 43 8 5 1 ^0 6 47 7 24 7 3^ 6 51 7 34 7 51 6 56 7 44 8 5 0
Semid. Semid. Semid. D. Semin. Semin. Semin.

A Table of Semidiurnal and Seminocturnal Arches.
The Pole of 51 dg. The Pole of 52 dg. The Pole of 53 dg. Semid. Semid. Sem.
Semin. Semin. Sem. D. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 0 6
0 6 58 7 48 6 0 7 0 7 52 6 0 7 3 7 57 30 1 6 2 7 0 7 49 6 2 7 2 7 54 6 2 7 5 7
58 29 2 6 4 7 2 7 51 6 4 7 4 7 55 6 4 7 7 8 0 28 3 6 6 7 4 7 52 6 6 7 6 7 56 6
6 7 9 8 1 27 4 6 8 7 6 7 53 6 8 7 8 7 58 6 8 7 11 8 2 26 5 6 10 7 8 7 55 6 10 7
10 7 59 6 10 7 13 8 4 25 6 6 12 7 9 7 56 6 12 7 12 8 0 6 12 7 15 8 6 24 7 6 14
7 11 7 57 6 14 7 14 8 1 6 15 7 17 8 7 23 8 6 16 7 13 7 58 6 16 7 16 8 3 6 17 7
18 8 8 22 9 6 18 7 15 7 59 6 18 7 17 8 4 6 19 7 20 8 9 21 10 6 20 7 17 8 0 6 20
7 19 8 5 6 21 7 22 8 10 20 11 6 22 7 18 8 1 6 22 7 21 8 6 6 23 7 24 8 11 19 12
6 24 7 20 8 2 6 24 7 23 8 7 6 25 7 26 8 12 18 13 6 26 7 22 8 3 6 26 7 25 8 7 6
27 7 28 8 13 17 14 6 28 7 23 8 3 6 28 7 27 8 8 6 30 7 30 8 14 16 15 6 29 7 25 8
4 6 30 7 28 8 9 6 32 7 32 8 15 15 16 6 31 7 27 8 5 6 32 7 30 8 10 6 34 7 30 8
16 14 17 6 35 7 28 8 5 6 34 7 32 8 11 6 36 7 35 8 17 13 18 6 37 7 30 8 6 6 36 7
34 8 11 6 38 7 37 8 17 12 19 6 39 7 32 8 7 6 38 7 35 8 12 6 40 7 39 8 18 11 20
6 41 7 33 8 7 6 40 7 37 8 12 6 42 7 41 8 19 10 21 6 43 7 35 8 8 6 42 7 39 8 13
6 44 7 43 8 19 9 22 6 45 7 37 8 8 6 44 7 40 8 13 6 46 7 44 8 20 8 23 6 47 7 38
8 8 6 46 7 42 8 13 6 48 7 46 8 20 7 24 6 49 7 39 8 9 6 48 7 43 8 14 9 50 7 48 8
20 6 25 6 51 7 41 8 9 6 50 7 45 8 14 6 52 7 50 8 21 5 26 6 53 7 42 8 9 6 52 7
47 8 14 6 54 7 51 8 21 4 27 6 55 7 43 8 10 6 54 7 48 8 15 6 57 7 52 8 21 3 28 6
56 7 45 8 10 6 56 7 50 8 15 6 59 7 54 8 22 2 29 6 57 7 46 8 10 6 58 7 51 8 15 7
1 7 55 8 22 1 30 6 58 7 48 8 10 7 0 7 52 8 15 7 3 7 57 8 22 0 Semid. Semid.
Sem. D. Semin. Semin. Sem.

A Table of Semidiurnal, and Seminocturnal Arches.
The Pole of 54 dg. The Pole of 5^ dg. The Pole of 56 dg. Semid. Semid. Semid.
Simin. Semin. Semin. D. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 0
6 0 7 5 8 2 6 0 7 7 8 5 6 0 7 9 8 12 30 1 6 2 7 7 8 3 6 2 7 8 8 7 6 2 7 1^ 8 14
29 2 6 5 7 9 8 5 6 5 7 10 8 9 6 5 7 14 8 15 28 3 6 7 7 11 8 6 6 7 7 12 8 10 6 7
7 16 8 17 27 4 6 9 7 13 8 7 6 9 7 14 8 12 6 9 7 18 8 19 26 5 6 11 7 15 8 9 6 12
7 17 8 13 6 12 7 20 8 20 25 6 6 13 7 17 8 10 6 14 7 19 8 15 6 14 7 22 8 22 24 7
6 15 7 19 8 11 6 16 7 21 8 16 6 16 7 25 8 23 23 8 6 17 7 22 8 13 6 18 7 23 8 17
6 19 7 27 8 25 22 9 6 19 7 24 8 14 6 20 7 25 8 18 6 21 7 29 8 26 21 10 6 22 7
26 8 15 6 22 7 27 8 19 6 23 7 32 8 27 20 11 6 24 7 28 8 16 6 25 7 29 8 20 6 26
7 34 8 2^ 19 12 6 26 7 30 8 17 6 27 7 31 8 21 6 28 7 36 8 30 18 13 6 28 7 32 8
18 6 29 7 33 8 22 6 30 7 39 8 31 17 14 6 31 7 33 8 19 6 32 7 35 8 23 6 33 7 41
8 32 16 15 6 33 7 35 8 20 6 34 7 37 8 24 6 35 7 43 8 33 15 16 6 35 7 37 8 21 6
36 7 39 8 25 6 37 7 45 8 34 14 17 6 37 7 39 8 22 6 39 7 41 8 26 6 39 7 48 8 35
13 18 6 3 7 41 8 23 6 41 7 43 8 27 6 41 7 50 8 36 12 19 6 4 7 43 8 24 6 43 7 45
8 28 6 43 7 52 8 37 11 20 6 44 7 45 8 25 6 46 7 47 8 29 6 46 7 54 8 37 10 21 6
46 7 47 8 25 6 48 7 49 8 30 6 48 7 56 8 38 9 22 6 48 7 49 8 25 6 50 7 51 8 30 6
50 7 58 8 38 8 23 6 50 7 50 8 26 6 52 7 53 8 30 6 52 7 59 8 39 7 24 6 5^ 7 5^ 8
26 6 54 7 54 8 31 6 55 8 1 8 39 6 25 6 54 7 54 8 26 6 56 7 56 8 31 6 57 8 3 8
39 5 26 6 57 7 55 8 27 6 59 7 58 8 32 6 59 8 5 8 40 4 27 6 59 7 57 8 27 7 1 8 0
8 32 7 2 8 7 8 40 3 28 7 1 7 59 8 27 7 3 8 2 8 33 7 4 8 9 8 40 2 29 7 3 8 0 8
27 7 6 8 4 8 34 7 6 8 10 8 41 1 30 7 5 8 2 8 27 7 7 8 5 8 34 7 9 8 12 8 41 0
Semid. Semid. Semid. D. Semin. Semin. Semin.

An Explanation of the Tables, of Semidiurnal and Seminocturnal Arches.
THe use of the preceding Tables are so easy, that they need but little
explanation, yet nevertheless, I think it convenient to say something of them,
to show their use, and likewise how they are made; so that if you should have
occasion for any other Latitudes, than what is here incerted, you may make them
your self, which is thus, if the Star or Planet have North or South Latititude
you are to observe the Declination, which if it be under 10 dg. you may take it
by Argols Primum Mobile, or Mr. Gadbury's Doctrine of Nativities, but if it be
10 dg. or upward of lat. you are to work by Trigonomitry, according to the
Method of the Ingenious Mr. Coley, in his Clavis Astrologiae; and having found
the Declination under the Pole of the Place, you must observe that if the
Declination fall in any of the 6 Northern Signs, add the difference of
Ascension to 90 dg. and you have the semid. Arch, in degrees. and min. but if you
sub. the difference of the Ascension from 9 dg. you will have the seminoct^
Arch; but if the Declination should fall in any of the southern Signs, sub. the
difference of Ascension from 90 dg. and you will have the semid. Arch. but if
you add the difference of Ascension to 890 dg. you will have the seminoct.
Arch; which when you have obtained, if you divide it by six, you will have the
hourly Times, or the length of the true Planetary Hours, and if you divide the
se^^d. or seminoct. Arch by three you will have the true distance of one House;
and so by that Method obtain the true division of all the Houses according to
Ptolomy; 2 of which Parts makes a, as may be seen by the Table of Mundane
Aspects; where is laid down all the Aspects, that are made in the World; The
finding of the semid. or seminoct. Arch, is thus, under the lat. of the place,
you have the semid. Arches of all the Northern Signs, as,,, on the top of the
Table, and for,,, in the Table; now having obtained the semid, Arch, the
seminoct Arch is obtained thus, by sub the semid. Arch from 12 hours, and the
remainder is the seminoct. Arch, you have likewise the seminoct. Arches for all
the Southern Signs, that is,,, on the top of the Table, and,,, on the bottom of
the Table, and so when you have obtained the seminoct. Arch, take the
complement thereof to 12 hours; and you will have the semid. Arch, which is so
easy; that it need no further Example, the semid. or seminoct. Arches, may be
easily converted either into hours and minutes, or degrees and minutes, by the
Table for that purpose, which I need say no more of in this Place.

Next follows some particular Genitures, that were taken by Argol and others,
showing what Errors they built their Judgment upon, and I will leave it to the
Consideration of any Artist, that has so much Sense as to know his right hand
from the left, (who is nearest the Truth) etc.

Charles the 5th. of Austria, Emperor of Germany, His Nativity.
Chr. 5th. Emp. of Austria. Born Feb. 23d. at 15h. 39m. P. M. An. 1500. Lat.52.

Latitude.
2: 0 South 0: 50 South 0: 53 North 1: 3 South. 3: 0 North 2: 4 South.
Declinations
15: 13 9: 37 19: 52 6: 8 2: 18 1: 51 25: 54



IN this Nativity, I will be something large; by which other directions may be
found, in the same manner; First he was made Emperor at 19 years of Age; at
which time the comes to the 12th House, and to the second House, in which
places; the one beholds the M. C. with a, and the other by a, and the in to in
the Zodiaek; and to a Q. of in the world; but that which was most material, was
the to the parallel declination of, in about 25dg. of; the s Arch of twilight
is 29dg. 30m. which is 1h. 58m. by converting it, his seminoc. arch is 6h. 32m.
from which sub. his arch of twilight, and there rests 4h. 34m. which is the s
arch of obscurity (because the is under the earth, and out of his parallel of
twilight) now the arch of twilight for 2^d. of, is 2d. 18m. the seminoc. arch
of 25d. of is 5h. 9m. the Arch obscurity of 25dg. of, is ^h. 5 m. the distance
of the from the 4th. House is 54d. 6m. then I say, if the s Arch of obscurity
4h. 34m. give his distance from the 4th. House 54dg. 16m. what distance shall
2h. 5 m. (the Arch of obscurity of 25dg. of) give, and it makes the secondary
distance 34d. 22m. from which being subtracted the primary distance of 25d.
of, which is ^6d, 51m. which is taken by substracting the R. A. of 25d. of from
the R. A. of the 4th. House, and there remains the arch of direction 17dg. 31m.
which being equated is 19 years.

At 41 years of Age he met with great Losses at Sea, at which time the was
directed to a mundane parallel of; thus, the semidiurnal arch of is 52dg. 33m.
and the semid. arch of the place of, is 62dg. 27m. those two being added
together, makes 115, which I put in the, 1st. place, and in the 2d. place I put
52dg. 33m. in the third place I put the distance of the of, and the, which is
4^dg. 25m. in R. A. (for the place is in R. A. 232dg. 3m. and the R A of the is
27^dg. 28m.) and the th. number is the s secondary distance from the M C. ^0dg,
45m. which sub. from her primary distance 57dg. 28m. leaves the arch of
direction 3^dg. 43m. which being equated, points out 41 years; he dyed at 58
years, and almost 7 months, on the 21 of September, at which time the being
giver of Life, comes to the of, by converse direction; s distance from the th.
House is 5dg. 4 m. his R A is 45dg. 43m. the Pole of the 1 th. and 5th. Houses,
is 2^dg. the seminoc. arch of is 6 dg. 37m. the 3d. part thereof is 23dg. 13m.
s Pole is near 6dg. where in the place of in ob. asc. is 227dg. 21m. the ob.
asc. of the under that Pole, is 280 dg, 19m. from which the place of being
subtracted, leaves the arch of direction 52dg. 58m. which being added to the R
A of the, 345dg. 44m. makes 398dg. 42m. from which sub. the circle, and there
rests 38dg. 42m. to which agrees 11d. 10m. to which place the from the day of
the birth comes to in 58 days and 13 hours, which points out the true time of
the direction, there was near opperating at that time, the to her own proper,
both in the Zodiac and in the world, which are thus wrought: And first to her
in the world, the seminoc. arch of the is 127dg. 27m. and distant from the asc.
4dg. ^2m. in the semidi. arch is 52dg, 33m. and from these comes the 4th.
number, which is the secondary distance from the M C, which being sub. from the
primary distance, there rests 55dg. 33m. for the arch of direction, the to her
own in the Zodiac is thus, the s ob. asc. in the lat. of 52 dg. is 314dg. 52m.
and in 6dg. of, the will have 4dg. 32 South lat. in which place her ob. asc. is
9dg. 52m. to which the circle being added, and ob. asc. of the subtracted,
there rests 55dg. for the Arch of Direction.

Phillip the 3d. King of Spain, his Nativity.
Phillip the 3d. King of Spain, Born, 1578. April the 14th at 14h. 47m. P. M.
Lat.41.

Latitude.
0: 6 North. 1: 35 North. 1: 39 South. 1: 13 South. 3: 0 South 4: 14 South.
Declination.
23: 15 0: 43 18: 17 19: 13 9: 40 1: 37 23: 40



THis King dyed at 42 Years, and 11 Months; but he was first took ill of a
Distemper, At 36 Years and 2 months of Age, which never left him till Death,
which was almost 7 Years after, in this Nativity the Ascen. is the giver of
Life, and at the time when he was first took ill, was directed to the body of,
Lady of the 8th in, and in to, he having great dignities in the 8th. and are
both of a nature, by being so near in aspect: there was also at that time, the
to a sesquiquadrat of, near the in the Zodiac, and the likewise to the
parallel of declination of, but the wound was chiefly given by, and continued
by the rest, but did not Dye until the ascendant, which was giver of Life, was
directed to a of; the directions are as follows: First the ascendant to the
body of, the R A of with lat. is 26dg. ^^m. the seminoc. arch is 5 h. 26m.
which converted is 81 dg. 30 m. which added to the R A of (...): ^2. makes,
107dg. 52m. from which sub. the R A of the ^th. House 7^dg. 9m. and there rests
34dg. 43m. which being equated points out 36 Years, and 2 Months, as before,
this might have been wrought by taking the ob. asc. of in the ascendant with
her lat. and the arch would have been the same, but only to show this way of
direction. Next the ascen. to the of, the R. A. of the M. C. is 253dg. 9m. the
R. A. of is 295dg. 23m. from which sub. the R. A. of the M. C. and there rests
4^dg. 41m. which being equated gives 43 Years, fere, at which time he dyed,
this Disease is demonstrated by being in parallel declination of the, and in
mundane parallel of, and in mundane parallel to, and likewise from th Zodiacal
of to in; you may here observe, that according to the Method of our modern
Authors, the ascendant would have come to the of 20 Years sooner, if it had
been directed in the Zodiac, as they teach; but no rational Man upon
consideration can think, that the space from the 1^th House to the second, can
be any more than a sextile, it being but a 6th part of the Heavens, but those
Innovations of Regiomontanus and Argol, have brought so much Error into the
World, that it is hard to throw out again, to receive the true and genuine
Principles of Art; but I doubt not although this may seem strange at first to
the Ingenious, yet after a little consideration, they will readyly agree with
us, but those that will not, let them follow their old Erroneous Way still.

Henry the 4th. King of France, His Nativity.
Henry the 4th. King of France, was Born 1553. December the 13th. at 14h. 13m.
P. M. Lat. 48.

Latitudes.
1: 55 South 1: 26 North 0: 8 South. 2: 12. North. 5: 0 South. Declinations
9: 13 0: 40. 22: 42. 23: 30. 17: 12: 5: 16.

Note that the is in the 22d. 37m. of.



IN this Nativity the is giver of Life, by being placed upon the Cusp of the
7th. house, which power she cannot be denied, except she had been elongated
3dg. I shall only observe two principal directions, the first was at 41 Years
of Age he received a Wound on the Face, about the lower Jaw, at which time the
was directed to a of in the World; thus, the seminoct. Arch of the is 5h. 37m.
her distance from the 7th. House 4dg. 15m. s seminoct. Arch is 6h. 41m. so I
say, if 5h. 37m. gives 4dg. 15m, what shall 6h, 41m. give, Facit, 5dg. 3m.
which 5dg. 3m. I add to the Primary distance of from the 4th. House, which is
37dg. 34m and the sum is 42dg. 37m. for the Arch of direction, which being
Equated makes something above 40 Years, a little before the was in a Mundane
Parallel of, by the Motion of the Primum Mobile, being come to be in equal
distance from the 4th. house, thus, the seminoct. Arch of the is 5h. 37m. which
I add to the seminoct. Arch of, which is 7h. 50m. the is 13h. 27m. then I say,
if 13h. 27m. gives 5h. 37m. what shall 98d. 28m. give, which is the difference
between the R. A. of, and the R. A. of, I find it makes 41dg. 7m. which is s
Secondary did. from the 4th. house, which I Sub. from her Primary distance
79dg. 53m. and it leaves 38dg. 46m. for the Arch of direction. Note, that all
these directions, are best wrought by the Logistical Logar, Note that if your
Number exceed 60. Take half, or if it be above 120, take a 4th part, if you
make use of a 4th. multiply what comes out by 4, or if you take half, double
what comes out. Example, In the last foregoing Operation, where I say if 13h.
27m. gives 5h. 37m. what shall 98dg. 28m. give, Logistical Example.
Log. of 13h. 27m. comp. Arithmetic is 3506 The Logistical Log. of 5h. 37m.
10287 The Log. Logar of half 98dg. 28m. which is 49dg. 14m. 859 It makes 4652
which is the log. logar. of 20dg. 33m. which being doubled is 41dg. 6m. all
directions may be worked thus with great ease and exactness, Next, this King
died at 56 Years of Age. and a half, which was May the 14th. 1610. at which
time the who is giver of Life, was directed to the of in the Zodiac; thus, the
opposite place of the s obl. asc. under the pole of Birth is 211dg. 25m. which
being Sub. from the o^l. asc. of the Ascend. leaves 4dg. 15m. for her did.
from the west angle; now to find the s pole of position I do thus, because she
is between the 6th. and 7th. houses, I take her seminoct. Arch which is 5h.
37m. which being converted into dg. and m. is 84dg. 15m. this being divided by
3, leaves 28dg. 5m. for the space of one house; now if the pole of the 7th. is
48dg. the pole of the 6th. is 37dg. the difference is 11dg. then I say if 28dg.
5m. give 11dg. what shall 4dg. 15m. give, this work by log. logar, gives 1dg.
40m. which because it exceeds 30m. I take 2dg. which I sub. from the pole of
the 7th. house 48dg. and there rests 46dg. for the s pole of position, under
which pole, the obl. asc. of the opposite place of the, is 210dg. 59m. the obl.
asc. of the opposite place of s Zodiacal in 11dg. 1m. of, with 3dg. 21m. of
North Lat. which the will have when she comes to that place, is 270dg. 3 m.
from whence sub. 210dg. 59m. the obl. asc. of s opposite place, and there rests
59dg 38m. for the Arch of direction, which being equated, points out 56 Years
and a half, by converse Motion, or more properly by the Motion of the Primum
Mobile, the and came to be of equal distance from the 4th house, which we call
a Mundane Parallel; the work is thus, the seminoct Arch of the is 5h, 37m, her
R. A. is 5dg. 33m. her distance from the 4th. house is 79dg. 53m. s seminoct.
Arch is 6h. 41m. his R. A. is 343dg. 14m. the difference between the R. A. of
and the R. A. of the with the Circle is 4 dg. 19m. then I add the seminoct.
Arches of and the together, and they make 12h. 18m. then I say, if 12h. 18m,
give 5h, 37m, what shall 4^dg, 19m, give (which is the difference of R. A.) it
makes 19dg. 19m. which I sub. from the s Primary distance 79dg. 53m. and there
remains 60dg. 34m. for the Arch of of direction, the Reason: why he did not dye
upon the Mundane of and Parallel of, was because by direct directions they fell
near the Rays of, and in his Terms, also in Parallel Declination of.

Sebastian, King of Portugal, His Nativity.
Sebastian, King o^ Portugal, was born Jan. the 19th. at 13h. 46m. 1554. P. M.
Lat.40.

Latitudes.
1: 43 South 1: 44 North 0: 4 South 1: 10 North. 1: 48 North 2: 51 North.
Declinations.
7: 47. 0: 8. 16: 42. 17: 56 22: 2. 12: 40. 16: 12.



T^ Nativity was very unfortunate, by reason the who was giver of Life, was in
Parallel declination of, and she being posited in the 9th. House, which show
great crosses in Voyages, which this King was never fortunate in, for in going
to War in Africa, he was Wounded, of which he died upon the place at 24 Years
of Age, 6 Months, and 11days. Argol in this Nativity has laid the aside, as
useless, to whom the dignity of giver of Life, does properly belong, for
according to his Method, he cannot make any direction of her to Kill, but
directs the Ascend. to the of to kill, but by his Rules, by reason it falls in
Signs of short Asc. it is Equivolent to a. likewise the place where the
direction fell, was in the Terms of and succeeded by her Antiscion, according
to the common way, which are causes sufficient for the preserveing him, but as
we have said in the discourse of the Houses, that neither the M. C. nor Ascend.
are to be directed to any Aspect in the Zodiac, now in this Nativity the is
most certainly giver of Life, and by direction comes to the 21dg. of, fere,
where she has 4dg. 21m. North Lat. and there she meets with a Parallel
declination of, which is 7dg. 47m. the work is thus, the s declination is 16dg.
12m. to which in the Ecliptic corosponds 15dg. 40m. of, whose semid. Arch is
6h. 57m. the 3d. part thereof is 2h. 19m. which converted is 34dg. 45m. now the
pole of the 9th. House, is 16dg. fere, the R. A. of the is 147dg. 29m. the
difference between that and the M. C. is 11dg. 26m. now to find the s pole, I
do thus, if 34dg. 45m (the 3d. part of the s semid. Arch, and the space of one
House) give 16dg. the pole of the 9th. House, what shall 11dg. 26m. give, which
is the difference between R. A. of the, and the R. A. of the M. C. the
Calculation is thus.

Example.
the log. logar of 34dg. 45m. co: Ar. is 7628 the log. logar. of 16dg. the pole
of the 9th house is 5740 the log. logar. of 11dg. 26m. the difference of R. A.
is 7200 which added, gives the log. logar. of 5dg. 16m. 10568 which is the s
pole of position; Now because it is but 5dg. 16m. I only take 5de. but if the
m. had exceeded 30, I would have taken 6dg. now because the is in the
descending part of Heaven, I take her opposite place under the pole of 5dg.
likewise with her contrary Lat. where I find her obl. Asc. to be 328dg. 56m.
obl. asc. of 21dg. of, with 4de 21m. South lat. is 354de. 9m. from which the
obl. asc. of the being sub. leaves 25dg. 13m. for the Arch of direction, which
being equated points out the true time of his Death; when came to the 10th.
house he was made King, but now some will object (you say) the was giver of
Life, and was Annareta, pray why did not the to the of kill, to that I answer
for Diverse Reasons, first when the came to the of, she had great North lat.
above 4dg. and had almost dg. South lat. so that when she came to the
opposition, she was so far out of the rays of, by her lat. that there was not
power to kill, nay scarcely to do any hurt; secondly it fell in the terms of,
thirdly it was succeeded by her Mundane; more of this direction I have spoken,
in the 9th. section foregoing; where this is exactly explained, that the like
may be performed upon any Nativity etc. Now in taking the secondary direction
for the 24th. Year, I take 24days from the Birth and for 6 Months I take 12h.
and for 11days I take 40m.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweedland, his Nativity.
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweedland. Born December. 19th. at 7h. 42m. A. M. An.
1594. Lat.59.

Lattitude.
0: 29. North. 0: 47. South 0: 14. North Declinations.




THis King dyed of a Wound at 37 Years and 10 Months old: In this Nativity the
is Giver of Life, and by direct direction, is directed to the of, the of, and
the of to kill, and all in the terms of; now all these Directions fell in the
Zodiac, the to the of, and of; the Work is thus, the ob. Asc. of the under the
Pole of Birth, is 313d. 15m. from which I sub the ob. asc. of the Ascen. and
there remains 20d. 4^m. for the s primary distance; now the ob. asc. of ^^d. of
(the place where the direction falls) is 35^d. 21m. from which I sub. the ob.
asc. of the, and there remains 37d. 6m. for the Arch of Direction, under the
Pole of Birth; but because the is under the Earth, and in the morning Twilight,
I direct him in that parallel; the work I will insert, but I have not inserted
a table of Twilight for the lat. of 59dg. but in the following Nativity I will
set down the Table; so that by the working of this, and the following, you may
be able to do the like in any Nativity; for I have in this small Treatise, only
inserted such Tables, as may be useful in all the Nativities, that may, be in
the Dominions of great Britain, France, or Ireland, but to show the Work,
which is thus, I enter the tables of Twilight, for the lat. of Birth, with the
OS primary distance, and under 28 or 30dg. of, for in this case there need not
so much exactness, because their difference is so small, for between 20 and
30dg. there is but 6m. difference, in the parallel of twilight (as aforesaid) I
find 8dg. of depression, and against that parallel in a direct line I look for
25 of, and by taking the proportional part, between 20 and 30dg. I find it to
be 16dg. 33m. which is the secondary distance, which I substract from the
primary distance, and there rests the East Distance, which is 4dg: 15m. now
because the secondary distance is less than the primary, I add this east
distance to the Arch of direction, (but had the secondary distance been greater
than the primary) I had sustracted the east distance from the Arch of
direction, but here being added to it, it makes 41dg. 21m. for the true Arch of
direction, which being equated, points out the very time of his Death, (viz.) 7
Years 10 Months, then quickly after the was directed to the body of, by
converse motion, which you may work by the foregoing Rules, the Pole of
position of, is about 43dg. his ob. asc. there is 250dg. 40m. the ob. Asc. of
is 291, for in directing conversly take the Pole of the Promittor, and take the
ob. Asc. of the Significator under that Pole, and by substracting the lesser
from the greater, you have the Arch of Direction as in other Opperations.

The Duke of Parma, His Nativity.
The Duke of Parma was Born, 1569. March the 26th. at 16h. 24m. P. M. Lat.44.

Latitude.
2: 35 North 0: 42 North 0: 9 South. Declination.
0, 6



THis Native Dyed at 52 Years, and 11 Months of Age, of a Dropsy, and the is
most certainly giver of Life; and Don Argol does not mind so much Reason, but
very Learnedly directs the Ascend. to the of to Kill, truly a very learned
piece of Art, and the reason is, because he is in Signs of long Asc.: Now
Argolians plead this, and clear the matter, how your Patron can make his
Argument good, truly in my opinion there isso little reason in his Words, that
I think he did not understand how to Rectify, and direct a Nativity, or else
instead of informing, he went about to Infatuate the Genius of all his
Followers, but to the purpose; If the of had power to Kill, why should it be a
Dropsy, seeing the Aspect was made in. an airy Sign, and near the Bulls Eye, a
Star of a hot fiery Nature? and why do not such Aspects always Kill, which I
can produce several such directions, from several Nativities, and yet they have
not been Mortal? but in this, as I said before, the is most certainly giver of
Life, who at the time of Death, is directed to a of, in the Zodiac, which fell
in the beginning of, a watery Sign, and the Sign upon the 8th. being watery
also, and the is upon the Cusp of the 6th. and is likewise afflicted; all which
considered according to Ptolomy's Doctrine, denotes weakness of the Lungs, and
watery Disseases, and that the cause of the Death should be so, for the
aforesaid Reasons, the manner of the direction which killed was thus, the ob.
asc. of is 8dg. 28m. from which I sub. the ob: asc. of the Ascendant, and there
rests 18dg: 43m: for s primary distance, the ob: asc: of 0dg: is 65dg: 10m:
from which I sub: the ob: asc: of 8dg: 28m: and there remains 56dg: 42m: for
the Arch of direction, now I enter the Tables of Twilight for 44dg: lat: where
I look for 16dg: of, and in that place to find primary distance, and under
10dg: of I find 18dg: 32m: and that answers to the parallel of 13dg: and under
20dg: of I find 19dg: 1m: in the same parallel of 13dg: now because is in 16dg:
I make proportion between 10dg: and 20dg: and I find the difference to be 29m:
which for 6dg: give 17m: that being added to 18dg. 32m. makes 18dg. 49m. but
the true distance is 18dg. 43m. which is to be rejected, and 18dg. 49m. to be
taken. then in the same parallel of Twilight, I look for odg. and I find 24dg.
45m. which is s secondary distance; from which I sub. the primary distance, and
there rests 5dg. 56m. which is the east distance; now because the secondary
distance is greater than the primary, the east distance is to be sub. from the
first Arch of direction, 56dg. 4m. and there remains 50dg. 46m. for the true
Arch of direction, to be equated as in other directions, about the same time
also, comes to a sesquiquadrate of in the World, by converse Motion.

The Lord Mollins Senator of Venice, His Nativity.
The Lord Mollins, Senator of Venice, was Born No. 20. at 2h. 0m. A. M. An.
1572. Lat.45.

Latitude.
2: 2 North 1: 25 South 1: 23 South 2: 3 North. 1: 49 North 2: 23 South.
Declinations.
15: 53 16: 16 20: 28



THis Native dyed at 63 years of Age, wanting but 14 days; at which time Argol
directs to the Antiscion of, and to kill; I commend Argol, for here he has hit
upon the true giver of Life; and I suppose at unawars, but how he makes the
come to the Antiscion of, and at that time, I do not know; for by Argol's
Account, s Antiscion should fall in 9d. 10m. of; but considering has almost
2d. north lat. I find his Antiscion will fall in 16d. of: Now let us see who is
in the Right, Argol, or my self; the is in the 11th. House, the space of one
House, is 22d. 12m. The Pole of the 11th. is 19d. the Pole of the 12th. is 34d.
the difference, is 15d. the ob. asc. of the 11th. House, is 247d. 15m. the ob.
asc. of the under that Pole, is 294d. 22m. from whence I sub. the ob. asc. of
the 11th. House, and there remains 7d. 7m. for the s distance from the 11th:
House; then I say, if 22d: 12m: give 15d: what shall 7d: 7m: give, etc. A
Synopsis of the Work.

Example.
Log: logar of 22d: 12m co: Arith: is 5682 Log: logar of 15d: is 6021 Log:
logar of 7d: 7m: is 9259 It makes the Log: logar of 4d: 8m: 10962.

So because I find it near 5d. I add 5d. to the Pole of the 11th. House, and
that gives the Pole of the, to be 24d. his ob. asc. under that Pole is 256d.
44m. the ob. asc. of 16 of, under that Pole is 325. 51. from whence I sub. the
ob. asc. of, and there remains 69d. 7m. for the Arch of Direction, which added
to the R. A. of 246. 30. makes 315. 37. which in the Ecliptic answers to 13d.
8m. of; to which place the comes in 63 days; and this is the true way to equate
for the Arch of Direction, in all your Operations; likewise the at the same
time was directed to his own proper in the World; now according to Argol, it
should have been above 5 years sooner; so you may see Argol's Rule will not
hold good, in so much as taking the Antiscions, and Note, that these Antiscions
are the true Parallels of Declination, and when the giver of Life is directed
thereto; especially if it be to the Annaretta, it is always Fatal to the
Native, and as bad as any Direction whatsoever; but with the good it signifies
good.

Cardinal Aldobrandini, His Nativity.
Cardi. Aldobrandini, was Born, 1571. March the 30th at 22h. 49m. P. M. Lat.42.

Latitudes.
2: 58 North. 0: 54 South 0: 0 2: 47 North. 1: 13 South 3: 56 South.
Declinations.
9: 6. 8: 5. 7: 46. 7: 34. 4: 44.



THis Native was made Cardinal at almost 21 Years of Age, at which Time was
directed to the of and in the Zodiac; they being placed in the 9th. House: He
dyed at 49 Years, and 11 Months of Age; which was March 10th. 1621. This
Nativity was taken by Argol, and he has incerted it in his last Edition of
Critical Days, Page 184; and considering there, what should be the Direction to
ki^^; (...) imitates Don Quixot, in two Respects, first he kicks out of doors,
not allowing him to be giver of Life, to whom that Dignity does properly
belong; secondly he views the Ascen. which he could no ways bring to bear with
any thing Material; therefore he knocks out of her place, and puts her in a
new, and so forges a Direction; for he puts the in 25d. and so directs the
Ascen. to her to kill, which he makes to come up at 50 Years of Age, and could
find never another direction to kill; truly a very learned Piece of Art; but if
you examine the s place, you will find it in 25d. 18m. of 11, so that the will
be but a, but I suppose Argol was given to dream waking; and would teach the
World such Absurdities, and many of the giddy Multitude are so mad as to
believe him; but I hope in Time their eyes will be opened; and as I said
before, the is most certainly giver of Life, and the Direction which killed
him, was to the mundane Parallel of, both direct and converse. 1st. the direct
Direction is thus directed, the s semid. Arch is 6h. 27m. and his distance from
the M. C. is 17d. 47m. the seminoct. Arch of, is 6h. 33m. his distance from the
4th. House, 30d. 6m. Then I say, if the semid. Arch of, gives his distance from
the M. C. what shall the seminoct. Arch of give; now I find it gives 18d. 3m.
which added to the first distance of, from the 4th. House, viz. 30d. 6m. it
makes 48d. 9m. for the Arch of Direction, which is to be equated, this was the
Direction which killed; and because I mentioned the converse Direction, I will
show the way of working it also, although that was over before this came up;
now the Converse is thus wrought; first take s seminoct. Arch, then his
distance from the 4th. House, and say, if his seminoct. Arch give his distance
from the 4th. House, what shall the semid. Arch of give; I find it gives, 29d.
38m., which added to his distance from the M. C. 17d. 47m. it makes 47d. 25m.
for the Arch of Direction; I only mention this to show the Method of Converse,
as well as direct Directions; but some will say, you make the killing Planet,
pray why did not the to his 8 kill; to which I answer, because had great lat.
and was so far from the Ecliptic, that never touched the sharpness of that
Aspect, therefore it could do no hurt, much less kill, which Method must be
used in all Directions, whether the Significator and Promittor have the same
lat. if not, it must be considered.

John Columnia, His Nativity.
John Columnia, Patriarck of Jerusalem, was Born 1612. Apll. the 21. at 16h.
26. P. M. Lat.42.

Latitudes.
1: 7 South 0: 50 North 0: 41 South ^: 2 North. 1: 55 South 3: 53 South.
Declinations.
7: 14 16: 34 9: 30 7: 17:



THis Native died at 25 Years of Age, complete, of of an Apoplexy, and in the
figure the is giver of Life, but Argol in this nativity thinks the is yet a
sleep, and therefore lays him by, and being Minded to Dance the Antic, he
directs the Ascen. to the of to Kill, now I would know what has to do to
kill, in this Nativity, or if he had, why should it be an apoplexy; but Argol
never minded that, so as something stood but in the way it must kill, if it did
but look one the Ascend. sure Argol if he had lived much longer, he would have
packt so many killing Directions on the Ascend. that he would have made the
World run lapsided, and so have had a Motion like his addle Brain, Now I think
that neither Argol nor none of his followers, can give a Reason why the of here
could kill, if there were such a direction of the Ascend. at that time, for as
I have said elsewhere the Ascend. can never be directed to Aspects but in the
World, well but here the is giver of Life, and at the time of Death is directed
to the of in the Zodiac, and to the Mundane Parallel of in the Ascend. and in
also, first for the of the ob. Asc. of the under the pole of Birth is 18dg.
52m. from which I sub. the ob. Asc. of the Ascend. and there remains 2dg. 33m.
for the s primary distance, the ob. asc. of the of is 44dg. 27m. from which I
sub. the ob asc. of., and there remains 25dg. 45m. for the Arch of direction,
now I enter the Tables of twilight, and work as before is taught, in the
Nativity of the Duke of Parma, 2dly. the is directed to a Mundane Parallel of,
by converse Motion, which falls in the 12th. House, above the Earth, the work
is thus, the seminoct. Arch of is 5h. 3^m. and his distance in ob. asc. from
the Ascend. is 9dg. 20m. and the semidi. Arch of is 6h. 45m. then I say, if s
seminoct. Arch give, his distance 9dg. 20m. what shall the semid. Arch of give,
I find it give 11dg. 20m. which is s secondary distance, this being added to
his primary distance 12dg. 33m. makes 23d. 53m. for the Arch of direction, now
that should have power to Kill is plain, by being in parallel declination of,
and going to the parallel declination of, and in to, and in mundane parallel
of, all which signify great Grief in the Head; as the Apoplexy, and this the
more certain, because he is in the Ascen. although it were not, he being so
much afflicted, Ruling the animal Spirit.

A Child's Nativity.
A Child Born April the 3d. 1652. at 9h. 47m. P. M. Lat.45.

Lattitude.
0: 19 North 0: 3 South. 4: 14 South. Declinations.
21: 59 11: 59 21: 19 21: 19



The Right Ascension of The Hourly Time of 114. 9 18. 57. Diurn. 29. 17 12. 57.
Noct. 315. 40 18. 51. 198. 32 11. 9. Diurn.

THis Child when it was born, was very weakly, so that it was baptized so soon
as it came into the World, but it passed over that very well, and Lived till it
was almost 3 Years of Age, at which time, by playing near a small Stream of
Water, fell in, and was Drowned, now the Query is, why this Child's Death should
be by Drowning, and why it should live no longer, and what Direction it was
that killed it, I have in this Treatise mentioned a new way of taking the, I say
a new way, but it is the old way mentioned and practiced by Ptolomy, himself,
as it is a tested by those that have been among the Arabians, and Persians, who
own Ptolomy's Works to be the only True, and that which is taught amongst us,
to be nothing but a parcel of patched up Stuff, without sense or reason, as
reason it self will testify: Now why this Child should dye by drowning, and why
it should live no longer is plain; for in this Nativity, neither the nor are
givers of life, by reason they are not in any aphetical place, neither
(according to Ptolomy's Doctrine) can the Ascend. be taken for giver of life,
because the is in an aphetical place, therefore shall be accepted for giver of
life; which at the time of death is directed to the mundane of; thus, the
semid. Arch of, being converted is 66dg. 54m. the distance in R. A. of from the
M. C. is 37dg. 55m. which subtracted from the semid. Arch of, leaves 28dg.
59m. for s distance from the Ascendant; s semid. Arch is 113dg. 45m. and his
distance in R. A. from the M. C. is 46dg. 28m. then I say, if 66dg. 54m. give
28dg. 59m. what shall 113dg. 55m. give, I find by the log. logar. it gives
49dg, 17m. for s secondary distance, from the M. C. from which I substract the
primary distance 6dg. 28m. and there rests 2dg: 49m: for the true Arch of
direction: I only insert these Examples, this way to show of direction; this
Natives death is plainly showed to be by Water, by reason of s position in the
8th: in, and by the giver of life's being in parallel declination of in the
8th: and also of the.

Odoardy Card. Farneij.
Odoardy Card. Farneij Born December. the 6th. at 18h. 16m. P. M. An. 1573. Lat.44.

Latitude.
1: 46 North. 1: 18 South 1: 5 North 1: 41. South. 1: 56. South 1: 473. South.
Declinations.
18: 36. 18: 35. 5: 26. 23: 26. 21: 31. 25: 28. 19: 25.



HE was made Cardinal at 17 Years, and 3 Months; he dyed at 52 Years, and 2
Months, of a Cattarh, and a great flux of humors, and Argol because he could
see nothing of to kill, directs the Ascen. to the Antiscion of, when as the is
wholly giver of Life, neither could the Antiscion of in give a flux of humors;
now according to our Method, the is directed to the of in the Zodiac; thus,
the ob. asc. of in the lat. of 44d. is 289d. 32m. the ob. asc. of the of in the
beginning of, is 344d. 50m. from which sub. the. ob asc. of, and there rests
55d. 18m. for the Arch of direction, which is but the supposed Arch of
Direction, because is in the Parallel of Twilight, therefore are those
necessary Tables of Twilight Framed, which are incerted to the latter Part of
this Piece, (for the Convenience of the Artist) by which may be performed,
this, or any other Operation with the greatest exactness; this Example may
serve for all, yet I have showed the way in two other Nativities in this Book;
the Manner of working is thus, first I sub. the oblique asc. of the Ascendant,
from the ob. asc. of, and there remains 20d. 57. for s primary distance, which
I seek in the Tables of Twilight, and by the nearest Proportion I find 13d. of
depression in the Parallel of Twilight, and against it in a direct Line I find
20d. 14m. and under that Parallel in a direct Line, I look for 2d. the place of
the of, which I seek in a direct Line from 13d. of depression, in the Parallel
of Twilight, which I find to be 18d. 20m. which I sub. from the first distance
found in the Table, viz. 20d. 14m. and there remains 1d. 54m. for the east
distance, now because the secondary distance is less then the primary, I add
this 1d. 54m. the east distance to the Arch of direction before found, and it
is 57d. 12m. for the true arch of direction, which was succeeded by a of the,
and she in of in the Nativity, which could show no less than a flux of humors
to kill, but if be found with the giver Life, by body or aspect, if he take
upon him the Nature of a Malesick, he much helps forward a flux of humors,
especially if it be the Nature of; and this according to the doctrine of
Ptolomy, he was made Cardinal upon s direction to the of, in the World, and the
M. C. to the of, the M. C. is thus directed, the Pole of 3d. House is 33d.
whose ob. asc. is 98d. 35m. the ob. asc. of under that Pole, is 318d. 3m. from
whence I sub. the ob. asc. of the ^d. house 298d. 35. and there rests 19. 18m.
for the arch of direction.

Now is directed to the of thus, the seminoct. arch of is 7h. 39m. his primary
distance from the ascen. is 20d. 57m. the seminoct. arch of is 4h. 44m. Now
because the is made from the 5th. House, I direct the 5th. House to the of,
(which observe;) the Pole of the 5th. House is 18d. the ob: desc: is ^8d: 35m:
the ob: desc: of under that Pole, is 62d: 38m: from whence I sub: the ob: desc:
of the 5th: House, 28d: 35m: and there rests 34d: 3m: for s primary distance;
then I say, if the seminoct; arch of 7h: 39m: give his prim. distance, 20d:
57m: what shall 4h: 44m: s seminoct: arch give: I find it to be 12d: 58m: which
is s secondary distance; now because both distances are taken from the
preceding house, I sub s secondary distance from his primary distance 34d: 3m:
and there rests 21d: 5m: for the arch of Direction:

Now if I would have the dg: of the Ecliptic that comes to by that arch, I
proceed thus; first I find the s Pole after this manner I find the 3d. part of
his seminoct. arch, or the space of one house to be 58d: 15m: the difference
between the Pole of the ascen: and 2d: house, to be 11d: then I say if the
space of one house 38d: 1^m: give 11d: the difference between the asc: and the
second house, what shall 20d. 57m: s primary distance give, I find it gives
about 6d: which 6d: I sub from the Pole of Birth, 44d: and there remains 38d:
for s Pole of position; now under that Pole I find s ob: asc: to be 284d: 35m:
to which I add the arch of direction 21d: 5m: and the Sum is 305d: 40m: which I
seek in the pole of 38d: to which I find 15d: 20m: to corospond now in the
Tables of Twilight under the pole of 44d: I seek for s prim. did. 20d: 57m:
and I find to be in the parallel of 13d: 28m: under which I take 15d: of, and
there I find the s secondary distance, to be 20d. 46m: using the part
proportional; then by the Rule of Proportion I say, if the seminoct: arch of
7h: 39m: give, his secondary distance 20d: ^m: what shall s seminoct: arch, 4^:
44m: give, I find it gives 1^d: 51m: for s secondary distance, which sub. from
his primary, 34d. 3m: leaves 21d: 12m: for the true arch of direction, which
being equated, points out the true time when he was made Cardinal, I have been
the larger upon this, to show the true use of the Tables of Twilight.

Antonii Cardinal Fachinetii his Nativity.
Antonii Cardinal Fachinetij, Born Mar. the 10th. at 21h. 45m. P. M. An. 1575.
Lat.44.

Latitude.
30. North 4. North. 4. North 1: 20. South. 3: 5 North 4: 48. South.
Declinations.
22: 12 23: 38 13: 16 0: 2 0: 17 4: 6 9: 30



THis Nativity was rectified by Argol, who says about 7 Years of Age this
Native was sick almost to Death, and for that he directs the Ascend. to the of
which could not possible signify any sickness, because the Ascend. is not giver
of Life, for all sicknesses of what nature soever are signified by the giver of
Life, by being directed to the bad Aspects of the Infortunes, now the direction
that signified this sickness, was the who was giver of Life, by being directed
to the body of the, by, converse Motion, thus, the s pole is about 16dg. her
obl. asc. under pole is 352dg. 48m. which sub. from the obl. asc. of the with
the Circle leaves 7dg. 19m. for the Arch of direction: for the is in of at
Birth, and Evily placed, and the was likewise directed to the ssq. of in the
World; he was made Cardinal at ^6 Years of Age, at which time the is directed
to the Q. of in the Zodiac the pole of the is 20dg. his obl. asc. under that
pole is ^dg. 8m the. Q. of falls in 19dg. 41 of whose ob. asc, is 15dg, 20m,
from whence sub, the obl, asc, of the and there remains 15dg, 12m, which being
Equated falls at 16 Years,

He dyed at 31 Years of Age, at which time Argol directs the to the body of,
but that cannot be for the is not giver of Life, (but any thing that stands in
the way whither reason or no reason all is one) but as I said before the is
giver of Life, and he is directed to the body of at the time of Death, thus,
the Pole of the is 20dg the obl, asc, of under that pole is 27dg, 38m. from
which I sub, the obl, asc, of the odg, 8m, and there remains 27d, 30m, for the
arch of direction which aded to the R, A, of the makes 27d, 39m, which in the
Ecliptic answers to 29d, 45m, to which place the comes, at 31 days fere and
because has some small North Lat, the was succeeded with the Parallel
declination of also, which was so Fatal a direction, that nothing but a Miracle
could Preserve; by this you see that it is the giver of Life, only that is to
be directed for sickness, and death, and none else as is well Explained
elsewhere.

Mr. William Lilly, His Nativity.
William Lilly, Student in Astrology, was Born 1602. May the ^st at 1h. 36m.
Mane. Lat.53.

Lattitudes.
2: 59 North 1: 57 North 1: 53 North 0: 25 South. 2: 22 South. 3: 0. North
Declinations.
14: 27: 3: 22: 11: 01: 17: 50: 17: 9: 11: 2 19: 46:



THis Nativity I incert, because it is one that all our Artists have reveiwed,
and they make him to have 4dg. ascending, but I think I am able to prove this
to be his true Nativity: He dyed at the Age of 79 years 5 weeks and 4 days;
and I have not met with any Artist, that could give a demonstrative Reason of
the Direction that should Kill him, at that time; the is most certainly giver
of Life, who at the time of Death is directed to a mund. parallel of by
converse motion, being carried about by the Primum Mobile, which way of
direction I should have explained in the ^st. part, where I laid down the Rules
for all manner of directions, from the Method of the learned Placidus, but when
I did help to translate that, I did not rightly understand this, but after a
more serious consideration, I came to find, that these directions are full as
powerful as any, and to make my further Confirmation of it: I here following
show you an Example from the aforesaid Placidus, who has most excellently
laid down the Rules of Ptolomy, far before any Man in Europe, exactly agreeing
(...) the method of the Persians, Arabians, and most of the Eastern Learning,
which have been compared by that Ingenious Mathematician, and my good friend
Mr. Cordwell Worral, when he was in those Countries for some years together,
but as I said before, the giver of Life, was directed to the mundane parallel
of at the time death thus, the declination of the is 1^ dg. 4 m. which in the
Ecliptic, answers to about 2dg. of, whose semid. Arch is 4h. 6m. the
declination of is (...) dg. ^m. his semid. Arch is 6h. 4m. the two semid.
Arches added together makes 10h. 46m. the R. A. of the is 28^d. ^0m. the R. A.
of is 158d. 30m. the difference of the R. A. is 126d. 0m. then I say if 10h.
46m. gives 12^dg. what shall 4h. 6m. give, I find it gives 48d. 4m. the s
primary distance from the M. C. is 32dg. 6m. which added together makes 80dg.
10m. for the Arch of direction, which added to the R. A. of 47dg. 36m. it makes
127dg. 46m. which in the Ecliptic points out 5dg. 26m. to which place the
comes at 79 days, and a little above 2h. from the time of birth, now that
should Kill is very plain; for 1st. he is in aspect to Lord of the 4th. having
dignities in the 8th. but the most material thing is s being in exact parallel
declination of at birth, which made him of the same nature; which must always
be observed: For if at any time or should be in parallel declination with the
Lord of the 8th. 4th. or 12th. that the giver of Life, by being directed to
their bad Rays, may as well Kill, as by being directed to them, themselves,
and this will be a great light to the Art if duly observed, these Rules, I hope
will make the Art of Astrology as demonstrable, as any part of the
Mathematics, and that in in a short time.

John G. Prince of Aldobrand, His Nativity.
John G. Prince of Aldobrand, was Born 1591. November the 1st at 0h. 2m. A. M.
Lat.42.

Latitude.
1: 28 South 0: 58 North 1: 55 South 3: 36 South. 3: 12 South 4: 17 South.
Declination.
21: 3 17: 59 21: 5 14: 20 26: 30 22: 13 11: 7



HEre is a Wonder for our Argolians to gaze at, that the Ascendant should pass
the of, and not kill, when some of them can produce almost a hundred
Nativities, and the Persons all dead, and not a quarter so much operating to
kill, but it is almost impossible that such a Direction should kill, or do any
hurt, because the Ascen. is not giver of Life, etc. He dyed at 45 Years, and 6
Months of age, at which time who is giver of Life, was directed to the mundane
Parallel of, by converse Motion, being moved about by the Primum Mobile; the
Operation is thus, the s declination is 14d. 20m. to which aagrees 8d. 21m. of,
whose semid. arch is 5h. 7m. the declination of is 2^d. 5m. which in the
Ecliptic answers to ^d. 30m. the semid. arch thereof is 4h. 39m. the two
arches being added, makes 9h. 46m. the R. A. of is 215d 58m. the R. A. of is
307d. 28m. the difference of R. A. is 91d. 30m. s primary did. is 0d. 8m. now
I say, if 9h. 4^m. give 91d. 30m. what shall 5h. 7m. give?

Example.
The Equation is made thus. The log. logar. of 9h. 46m. co: Ar. is 2116. The
log. logar. half the 2d. number. viz: 45d. 45: 1178. The log: logar: of 5h: 7m: is
10692. It gives the log: logar: of 23d: 58m. 3986.

Which because the second number was taken, but half I double, and it makes
47d. 56m. for s secondary did: to which I add the primary did. 0d: 8m: and it
makes 48d 2m. for the arch of direction, which added to 215d: 58m: s R. A.
makes 264d. 0m: to which in the Ecliptic answers 24d. 30m. to which place
comes at 45 days and a half; this Nativity I had Verbatim from the Works of
that learned Monk Placidus, where whosoever reads shall find abundance of
satisfaction.

Mr. Henry Dutton, His Nativity.
Henry Dutton was Born, 1666. August the 11th. at 13h. 52m. P. M. An. 1500.
Lat.51. 32

Latitudes.
0: 7 North 1: 36 South 0: 48 South 0: 48 North 0: 10 South 2: 4 South.
Parallels.
22: 15 2: 50 14: 30 11: 37 0: 19 3: 2 14: 33



THis Native dyed at 19 years and 6 months of Age, of a Consumption, this
Nativity was given me by the Ingenious Mr. Coley, but he gave it me but 22dg.
of ascending, but by rectification I find it to be as I have here incerted it,
the Nativity according to our modern Authors, is one of the best that ever I
see, but according to our method it is a very evil one, and yet I do believe
there is not one Artist in 40 can give any reason for his death at that time,
or why he should dye of a Consumption, seeing the Ascend. is no ways afflicted,
but befriended by the of, and by the of both and, is in to and to and in to,
and neither of them any way afflicted, so that some of our Artists would have
insured this Natives Life for a small matter; now I say if the Nativity had
been but 22dg: of Ascending, he could not without a Miracle have lived a month,
the Reason is this, the is giver of Life, which then would just have come to
the parallel of, which in this was but just 3m. past, it was a bad Nativity for
these reasons, the is in parallel of, and in sesquiquadrate of, he being Lord
of the 8th: in the 6th: which did exactly show the nature of his death, he
heing in an earthy Sign, with the there also, so that had he lived longer, he
would have always been afflicted with martial and saturnine Distempers, for
the aforesaid reasons, and so always sickly, and but of a short Life; that
should be anaretta is plain, for diverse reasons, 1st. he is falling into the
4th. House, and is in of, but the most material Argument, is his being in exact
parallel of the at Birth; the direction which killed, was the giver of Life, as
I said before to the sesquiquadrat of in the world, I find the s Pole is about
30dg: under which Pole you may find according to our former rules, that the
direction came up just at the time of death, I would have incerted the manner
of the Calculations and Directions at large, but that I have laid it down in
other Examples, that it were tautology to repeat it here; I think no Argolian
whatsoever can Cavil at this, by showing a more demonstrable Direction, if he
do, I will listen to him, but otherwise, if he cannot let him hold his tongue?
for I know it is more easy to Carp than Copy, but for Carpers I do not direct
my Discourse unto, but for those Ingenious Artists that are not only willing to
Learn, but also willing to promote Learning, without railing and approbrious
Terms: This direction is wrought, by the same method with Saffold Lee's that
killed him, and note that these directions are all mundane, and so the more
powerful, for those aspects that are made in the world, are more powerful than
those in the Zodiac, which has never been observed all along, so that we have
never had half the directions that belong to a Nativity, and so by that means
they were forced to make any thing to kill, allthough it did not belong to that
place, which has brought a great scandal, not only upon Artists, but the Art
it self, which I suppose is as demonstrable as any other Science whatsoever;
for the Art it self is true, if truly practiced, and I hope what is here done
may be a means to stir up some more noble Pen, to perform what is here begun;
it is true the Ingenious Author that gave me this Nativity, was something
desirous to promote these things, or else I had scarce done it so soon, but as
this find acceptance in the World, I shall be further encouraged to employ my
Studies, for their further satisfaction.

Saffold Lee, His Nativity.
Saffold Lee was Born, 1684. August the 1st. at 15h. 56m. P. M. Lat.51. 32.

Latitude.
1: 37 North 1: 9 North 1: 5 North 5: 9 South. 0: 43 South 4: 0 North
Declination.
11: 3 3: 48 20: 8 14: 40 1: 8 16: 18 13: 24



THis Child's Father, is a very Ingenious Person, and understands Astrology very
well, who first set the Figure himself; the Estimate was about 7m. later; but
here it is truly rectifyed. The Godfather of this Child is an Artist likewise,
from whence it had its Name, I suppose he had not given it His Name, but that
he thought it would live to a great Age, but he was on the wrong side of the
Hedge a great way, for the Child dyed at 17 weeks, of Age, of the Convultions;
now if there be any skeptical Critic that will oppose me, let him take up the
Cudgels in this, and show me a reason for this Child's short Life, and why it
should dye of such a Distemper, I suppose they will say that is an easy thing
to do, for say they, the to the Body of did that, to which I offer 2 Objections
to the contrary; first the is not giver of Life, therefore that direction could
signify nothing; secondly the has much greater lat: then, so that being
directed in her own Sphere (where she ought to be) she is past the Body of,
when the direction comes up, so that she by that direction had no power to do
the least hurt, for as I have said elsewhere, there can be but one giver of
Life, and that must only be directed to the bad aspects of the Maleficks, both
for sickness and Death; but in this Child's Nativity, the Sun is most certainly
giver of Life, who is so much afflicted, that without a Miracle it could not
live, for first he is in exact mundane parallel of, in the 12th: House, which
is full as bad as his, which is enough of it self to kill, but the direction
which killed (which also did exactly operate at the same time) was the to the
smq. of Lady of the 4th. House, she having great Dignities in the 8th. House,
also the direction was made Converse, where it exactly met the Parallel of, as
I said before, the s Pole is about 48d, his ob. asc, is 125, 46. the ob. asc.
of the smq. of is 125. 27: which sub. from the ob. asc. of, because the
direction was made converse, and there rests 19m, for the Arch of Direction,
which if you Equate according to our Method, points out the exact time of
Death, that it should be such a Disease is very plain, from her bare position
by being in, and in the Terms of; and here in this place I will show how these
semiquartils are taken, the same Method is to be observed in the ssq. Example,
In this Nativity, the declination of is 1d, 8m. which in the Ecliptic answers
to about 27d. of whose semid arch is 6h: 6m: with which I enter the Table of
mundane Aspects, where I find the smq. to be 45d. 45m. under s pole 48d. I find
the obl asc. of to be 17^d. 12m. from whence I sub. the smq. 45d. 45m. and
there remains 125d. 27m. for the ob. asc. of the smq. these things are so easy,
that a little Practice will quickly make an Ingenious Fancy Master of these
Truths, which we hope after Ages may reap the benifit of, although in this
ungrateful Age it is not regarded.

John Blanchard, His Nativity.
John Blanchard was Born 1673. December the 14. at 10h. 56m. P. M. Lat.51. 32.

Latitude.
2: 33 South 1: 5 North 0: 10 North 1: 30 North. 0: 2 North 2: 0 North.
Declinations.
1: 5 14: 34 20: 18 23: 28 19: 36 21: 33 24: 6



THis Nativity was taken by the Natives Father, who is my Friend, and a very
Ingenious Man, who took great pains to find a reason, by the Argolian Precepts,
for this Child's Death, for he dyed at 7 Years and 2 Months of Age, of the stone
and also a Fever, and I think few of our Artists can give any reason for his
Death, now if there be any truth in Art, it is most certainly demonstrable, and
if there be no truth in it, they are Folls that pretend to it, but I think,
that what has been said in this Book is sufficient to demonstrate the truth of
the Art, and that this is the Real Method, which till this time has never been
discovered in England, but as I said, this Native dyed at 7 Years and 2Months
old, and the is most certainly giver of Life who at the time of Death is
directed to the ssq. of Lord of the 8th. House, the manner of the Operation is
thus, the s semid. arch is 8h, 15m, the space of one house is 41dg; 15m, the s
distance from the M, C, in R, A, is 33dg, 50m, the pole of the 11th house 23dg,
then I say if 41dg, 15m, give 23dg what shall 33dg, 50m, give, and I find it
gives 18dg, 52m, for the s true pole of position, now because it is ne^ 9dg, I
take, 19dg, under which pole the onl, asc, of the is ^03dg, the obl, asc, of
under that pole is 245dg, their difference is 142 dg, from whence I sub, sque
of 135dg; and there remains 7d, for the arch of direction, also about that time
the comes to a Mundane Parallel of, which made the Evil the greater, and
without a Miracle the Native could not Live past such a Violent Direction, I
the rather incert these Examples to inform the Artists (of this Rational
Demonstration of the Art) then to make the Book swell, or to get to my self a
Name, because I know I shall displease some foolish Critics, but the Ingenious
will be thankful, that their Eyes may be opened, whom I wish all Health,

James Gale, His Nativity.
James Gale was Born October the 22nd. at 7h. 43m. Mane. An. 1683. Lat.51. 32.

Lattitude.
1: 4 North 1: 2 North 1: 10 South. 1: 0 North. 2: 30 South. 4: 30 South.
Declinations.
1: 50 6: 30 24: 20 14: 36 12: 16 23: 4 2: 10.



THis Native dyed at 2Years and 8Months of Age of Convultions and Gripes, and I
think no Argolian can give the least reason for its Death, at that time, unless
they direct the to the of, which cannot Kill for the is not giver of Life,
neither is annareta, but if he were the considering her Lat. is past the of,
above a degrees. at Birth therefore that direction can hold no Water to plead for
them; now according to Ptlolmy's Rule, the Asc. is giver of Life, which at the
time of Death is directed to the of; thus, the R. A. of the M. C. is 152dg. 6m.
the R, A, of, is 154dg, 38m. from whence sub. the R, A, of the M, C, and there
remains 2dg, 32m, for the arch of direction for when the M, C, came to his body
then the ascen, came to his, and observe that the M, C, and ascen, are always
directed to aspects in the World, and to none in the Zodiac, nor to any
Converse: why this Child's distemper should be Convultions, Gripes, and
Looseness, is plain from s position in, and by being in Parallel Declination
of, and she being in very Evily placed which could signify no Less.

John Bishop, His Nativity.
John Bishop, the Author's Son, Born Sep.ber the 7th. 1681. at 5h. 56m. P. M.
Lat. 51. 32.

Latitudes.
0: 18 North. 0: 2 South. 0: 55 South. 2: 0 South. 0: 30 South. 5: 0. North.
Declinations.
19: 29 22: 34 18: 14 2: 0 16: 8 8: 10 15: 33



THis Native dyed at 2 Months old of Convulsions; I took the Time exactly by a
large Quadrant, now according to my own Judgment, and the Judgment of several
other Artists, I could not find, but that this Child might have lived to a
considerable Age, or at least, till the Ascen. was directed to the of, for I
was of the conceited Method of Argol, to pack all upon the ascen. but since I
came to be acquainted with the never failing Rules of Ptolomy, I find I was in
the dark, and it is a Miracle that this Child should live, for the Ascen. could
not be directed for Sickness nor Death, because is giver of Life, who at the
time of Death is directed to the mundane parallel of Lord of the 4th. being
both exactly distant from the Cusp of the 7th. House; I shall forbear to incert
the Calculation, because I have said so much elsewhere, viz. in the first Part,
where the mundane Parallels are sufficiently demonstrated, the likewise is much
afflicted, by being in smq. to Lord of the 8th. House, and in the 8th. and
likewise in smq. of upon the Cusp of the 6th. House, and and are likewise in
parallel Declination to one another, so that as I said before, the giver of
Life being so much afflicted, without any assistance from the Fortunes, it was
impossible according to Art, that the Native should pass over such violent
possitions, etc.

Deborah Daniel, Her Nativity.
Deborah Daniel, Born January the 28th. 168^/^ At 3h. 42m. Mane. Lat. Land.

Lattitudes.
0: 35 North. 0: 17 North. 0: 58 South 1: 40 South. 1: 30 South 1: 30 North.
Declinations.
20: 23 23: 18 9: 53 15: 12 20: 42 18: 52 15: 10



THis Native dyed at 4 Years, and almost 6 Months of Age, of a Vomiting and
Looseness, with a violent Fever, which carried her off, in less then two days I
the rather incert this Nativity, because I know many of our Artists, nay all of
them can give a Reason for this Child's Death, and that is, the to the of the
which they will pretend shall kill, but that I deny; first, the direction was
not come up at the time of Death, and if it had, it could not kill, for neither
the nor are givers of Life, and besides the Direction fell in the Terms of, nor
can any one, show me a President of this kind to kill; now according to
Ptolomy's Doctrine, the Ascen. is giver of Life, which at the time of Death is
directed to the smq: of Lord of the 4th. House, he being in a watery Sign, must
needs give a flux of Humors, with a Fever, I suppose I need not incert the
manner of the Direction, because I have said something of it elsewhere, and
besides, I hope by this time, the Reader will be able to do the like upon any
other of the like occasion, and so by a little Practice, amongst our Ingenious
Professors, this most sublime Art of Astrology, will be practiced in its true
Method; which Divinative Art is, and has, been the most abused of any Art
under the Celestial Canopy, by a parcel of bare pretenders, who perhaps may
form a Scheam, but when they have done, know no more how to give Judgment,
(notwithstanding their Twenty one Years Experience) then those who ask the
Question, only they have got some of the innecessary Terms of Art, with which
they tell a fair Story, the whole time stareing the Querent in the Face
Austerely, and so deceive the World; neither should it be exposed to such
common Uses, as our Non-Artists about this City put it to; and as I said
before, notwithstanding their 21 Years Experience, in all that time have not
learned 21 Grains of Sense, which may properly be referred to this ingenious
Art, the understanding of which they so much pretend to; yet this we must
acknowledge, we are extraordinarily beholding to 3 or 4 of our Famous Country
Men, who by their learned Volumns, have made known to the World, that which
before they knew not, as that most Ingenious Piece of Art, entitled Mr.
Coley's. Clavis, and that Laborious and incomparable, Mr. Gadbury's Doctrine of
Nativities; thus I conclude my twenty Genitures, with some Cautions worthy of
Observation, by the Ingenious Astrologer, as well for the Judging of Horary
Figures, as Nativities, which are as follows.

Cautions worthy of Observation.
1st. NArrowly observe all the Aspects, as well those in the World, as those in
the Zodiac, for many times a Zodiacal Aspect may promise good in the Business,
when there may be a Mundane Aspect will frustrate the good promised by the
other, and that is the Reason, our Artists so many times fail in their
Judgment; also Parallels in this case, are to be carefully heeded, whether they
be Parallels of Declination, or in the World, for by those Parallels, many
times the Planets assume other Natures, for or, by being in Parallel of or, may
take their Nature so much, that they are wholly Infortunes; these things being
observed, I doubt not, but Astrology, will obtain as much Creddit, as now it
does reproach, which is not occasioned by the Art, but by the Artist; for it
had the Venerable Esteem of many Famous Persons, (even in the first Age of the
World) if we may believe that Famous Antiquary, Josephus, and I doubt not but
most of the Patriarcks were well acquainted with this kind of Learning, but we
in this Age are so stupid, to think, that it is a thing by chance or lot, and
not to be much relied upon, for say they, the Astrologer looks no farther than
the Stars, and by their motions and aspects, he makes a Judgment according to
his own fancy, and he tells us a story of and being Infortunes, and of and
being Fortunes, when the Stars are at that vast distance, that it is almost
impossible we should feel any of their Influence.

To which I answer, when the Almighty had finished the Creation, he made Laws
and Bounds to every part thereof, and the and Stars he made for Signs, for
Seasons, for Days, and for Years. Genesis 1. 14. and then it follows, they were
also to give light upon the Earth: Now by reason they were for Signs,
consequently they must Signify something, and God in the 5 of Esa. 14. has
this sharp Sentence, Therefore my People are gone into Captivity, because they
have no knowledge. and Solomon says, the wise Man falls forward, but the
fool falls backward, that is the wise Man (according to Ptolomy's saying in
his Cent. Apho. 5) fall, but he foresees it, and is prepared before it comes,
but the Fool never regards it till it is upon him, and so is taken like a Bird
in an evil Net; now I would not be misunderstood in this place to tie a fatal
necessity upon the Stars, knowing that he that made them, can counter-mand
their Power, neither do I think, that the Stars in themselves have any Power to
Act or do any thing, no more then the Body without the Soul; for it is not from
the Stars, that we have Coldness, Dryness, Pestilence, Famine, or Plenty, or
any other thing either good or bad, and yet they are the Signs of all these
Things, and in this I must forsake the Opinion of Placidus, whose Words are
used in the first part of this Book, who says, The Stars cannot be Signs of
Effect, unless they be Causes also: but then you will say, how can that be, or
from whence do the Causes proceed? (I answer) from those Governing Angels which
are as Watchmen, appointed to Execute the Will of the Almighty, and that there
are Seven of those Angels, (according to the Number of the Planets or Erratick
Stars) is plain from Scripture, for in the 8 of the Rev. and the 2v. St. John
says, And I saw the Seven Angels, which stood before the Presence of God, and
to them was given Seven Trumpets; and when they came to Sound in their Order,
some smote the Seas, another the Trees, and the other darkened the Sun, and
every one as they Sounded, produced heavy Judgments among the Inhabitants of
the Earth, and St. Paul in the 1 of Heb. and the 14 says, Are they not all
mimistring Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them who shall be Heirs of
Salvation; and if for ministering Spirits to the Godly, undoubtedly, they are
likewise Scourges for the Wicked; for when Balaam went about that unjust
Exercise, the Angel stopped him by the way; and when the rude Sodomites went
groping about the Street, they knew not the Reason, but might well suppose it
some giddyness of Brain, when it was the Angel that smote them with Blindness;
likewise when the Egyptians first Born were all struck dead in one Night, the
Astrologers would Judge some strange Configuration of the Planets, but it was
done by an Angel: Had we seen those thousands of the Israelites fall so
suddenly of the Plague, we should have been apt to attribute it to some
sudden infection of the Air, but Holy David saw it was an Angel with His Sword
drawn; thus humane Reason is apt to ascribe Events to wrong Causes, attributing
those things to an ordinary course of Nature, which the God of Nature does by
Supernatural Agents; and that every Country, City, nay, and every particular
Person, has his or their, governing Angel is very plain, for who can think any
other, but that the Great God loses much Glory by our Ignorance; for how can
we give him the Honor due to his Name, while we conceive too narrowly of Him,
and his Works: To know him as he is, is past the Capacity of our finite
Understanding, we must have other Eyes to discern that incomprehensible
Goodness; but to see him in his Divine and Miraculous Works, is that whereof we
should be inquisitive; neither is there any thing in the World, that can so
much import us; for if we could conceive aright of this sensible and material
World, it is enough to amaze the most enlightened Reason of Humanity.

For if this Globe of Earth, in regard of the immence Greatness, be accounted a
World? what shall we say of so many thousand Stars, which are for the most part
so much bigger than the Earth? how then I say can we but admire so many
thousand Worlds of rouling Light, continually over our heads, made by the
Omnipotent Power, and all regularly guided by the Infinite Providence of the
great God, how slenderly must that Man think of the workmanship of the
Almighty, that looks upon all these but as so many Torches set up in the
Firmament, only so bigg as they seem; and contrarily with what awful respects
must he needs be carried to his Creator, that knows the vastness and perpetual
motions of those Glorious Bodies, ruled and upheld by the mighty Word that made
them.

Brute Creatures may behold these vissible things perhaps with sharper Eyes
than us, but Spiritual Objects are so far out of their reach, as if they had
no being; nearest therefore to Beasts, are those men, who suffer themselves to
be led wholly by their Senses, as to believe nothing but what is suggested by
the purblind and unfaithful Informer; let such men doubt whither they have a
Soul in their Body or no, because their Eyes never saw it, or that there are
any Stars in the Firmament at noon day, because they appear not, or that there
is any Air wherein they breath, because nothing appears to them, but an
Insensible Vacuity; surely all that know they have Souls must of necessity
believe the rule and government of Angels, which they see not: If from no other
grounds, yet out of that Anology, which they cannot but find between this
lesser and the greater World, for as this little World Man, consists of an
outward vissible Body, and an inward Spiritual Soul, which gives Life and
Motion to that organical Frame, so possessing all parts, that it is wholly in
all, and in each part wholly; so must it be also in the great Universe, the
sensible and material part whereof has being and moving from those Spiritual
Powers, both Supreme and Subordinate, which dwell in it, and also fill and
actuate it, therefore every rational Man looks about with no other Eyes than
St. Paul's in 2. Cor. 4. 18. We look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal, but
the things which are not seen are Eternal.

There is multiplicity enough of wonders in the visible World, but the
spiritual and intelligable World, is that which is more worthy to take up our
Hearts, both as we are Men endued with Reason, and also that the Infinite
Goodness has been pleased to enlighten our Eyes, to Contemplate on things
above: So I shall conclude this Discourse with the words of St. Paul Romans 1.
20. For the Invisible things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly
seen, being understood, by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead.

Thus Courteous Reader I have done what I thought fit at this time, and I hope
have given that Light, which may serve to conduct any one through the darkest
passage in the whole Doctrine of Astrology; and I wish you as much Felicity in
reading, as I have had in pening of it: I have had but little assistance in the
composing of it, only I must acknowledge, I am engaged to the Ingenious Mr.
Coley, for helping me to Placidus's Primum Mobile, from whence I took the
Doctrine of Directions, that are incerted in the first Part, from page 86. to
page 117. by the assistance of my Ingenious Friend Mr. Cordwell Worrall, but
for the second part, I have done without any assistance, only the method of the
Tables of Twilight, but I have quite altered them, and for the Tables of
Aspects, and Semid. and Seminoct. Arches, with the Tables of Houses I have
calculated de novo: and for my Discourse all along, if I have given offense to
any person I am heartily sorry, assuring you I meant no harm, hoping you will
make your favorable constructions from my good intentions, for what I have
done, have been really for a faithful Information: Now to the only Wise Creator
of Heaven and Earth, be all Praise (whom I most humbly Implore, for a Blessing
upon his most Sacred Majesty, and all the Royal Family, and my Countries Good
in general) which I shall ever desire whilst I am,

John Bishop.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
IF any Person or Persons are desirous to Learn, or be instructed in any Part
of Astrology, or willing to have their Nativities Calculated according to the
best Method, may be accomodated by the Author, at his House in Virginia Street,
at the Golden Ball, near East-smithfield.

Likewise the Author by his Study in Chimistry, has obtained the Knowledge of
some good Medicines, as one that certainly cures the Stone, and helps
difficulty of making water, also a good Medicine for the Cure of Surfeits, or
Gonorheas, all Fluxes he presently cures, although of several Years standing,
the Jaundice he cures effectually, in four Days time, without Blood-letting or
Purging, and several other Chimical Medicines, as the true Elixir Proprietatis,
etc.

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 44 Degrees.
Paral 0 ^ 10 20 0 ^ 10 20 0 ^ 10 20 30 3 5 9 5 6 4 59 4 50 4 41 4 30 4 22 4 16
4 13 4 10 4 6 55 6 52 6 42 6 30 6 16 6 3 5 50 5 43 5 38 5 34 5 8 42 8 39 8 26 8
11 7 52 7 34 7 19 7 9 7 2 6 58 6 10 32 10 2^ 10 11 9 52 9 30 9 8 8 49 8 36 8 27
8 21 7 12 24 12 17 11 59 11 36 11 9 10 43 10 20 10 4 8 52 9 45 8 14 19 14 12 13
51 13 22 12 50 12 19 11 52 11 32 11 18 11 9 9 16 17 16 9 15 44 15 11 14 32 13
55 13 24 13 0 12 44 12 33 10 18 18 18 7 17 38 16 58 16 14 15 33 14 56 14 29 14
10 13 58 11 20 23 20 9 19 35 18 53 17 59 17 12 16 30 15 59 15 37 15 23 12 22 31
22 17 21 38 20 45 19 47 18 53 18 6 17 30 17 4 16 48 13 24 45 24 28 23 45 22 46
21 37 20 35 19 42 19 1 18 32 17 13 14 27 5 26 44 25 14 24 44 23 30 22 19 21 19
20 33 20 1 19 39 15 29 32 29 10 28 10 26 49 25 24 24 6 22 59 22 6 21 30 21 4 16
32 7 31 45 30 32 28 59 27 ^3 25 54 24 38 23 41 32 59 22 32 17 34 46 34 27 33 ^2
31 16 2^ ^5 27 45 26 20 25 19 24 30 23 59 18 37 32 37 16 35 40 33 38 31 30 29
38 28 0 26 55 26 3 25 26 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30
3 4 10 4 12 4 13 4 19 4 26 4 35 4 41 4 48 4 53 4 55 4 5 34 5 35 5 37 5 44 5 53
6 5 6 13 6 22 6 28 6 30 5 6 58 6 58 7 1 7 9 7 20 7 34 7 44 7 56 8 3 8 5 6 8 21
8 21 8 25 8 34 8 47 9 3 9 15 9 28 9 37 9 40 7 9 45 9 44 9 48 9 56 10 13 10 31
10 45 11 0 11 10 11 13 8 11 9 11 7 11 13 11 21 11 39 11 59 12 14 12 31 12 42 12
45 9 12 33 12 31 12 36 12 46 13 4 13 25 13 43 14 1 14 13 14 16 10 13 58 13 55
13 59 14 12 14 29 14 52 15 11 15 30 15 44 15 48 11 15 23 15 19 15 23 15 35 15
54 16 17 16 49 16 59 17 14 17 18 12 16 48 16 43 16 47 16 59 19 19 18 42 18 6 18
28 18 43 18 47 13 18 13 18 7 18 10 18 22 18 45 19 9 19 32 19 56 20 12 20 17 14
19 39 19 31 19 33 19 46 20 12 20 36 20 59 21 24 21 41 21 46 15 21 4 20 54 20 55
21 8 21 34 22 1 22 25 22 51 23 9 23 13 16 22 32 22 19 22 20 22 33 22 55 23 26
23 51 24 17 24 36 24 42 17 23 5^ 23 44 23 44 23 57 24 19 24 51 25 17 25 44 26 3
26 7 18 25 26 25 9 25 8 25 20 25 43 26 15 26 42 27 10 27 30 27 37 30 20 10 0 20
10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 47 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 5 33 5 31 5 23 5 12 5 0 4 49 4 38 4 33 4
26 4 24 4 7 30 7 26 7 16 6 58 6 43 6 27 6 13 6 5 5 56 5 59 5 9 29 9 24 9 10 8
47 8 27 8 6 7 48 7 35 7 25 7 21 6 11 29 11 24 11 6 10 40 10 12 9 46 9 23 9 7 8
55 8 49 7 13 34 13 28 13 5 12 34 12 0 11 28 11 0 10 39 10 25 10 18 8 15 44 15
35 15 7 14 30 13 50 13 11 12 38 12 12 11 56 11 46 9 17 58 17 46 17 13 16 49 15
41 14 56 14 17 13 45 13 27 13 16 10 20 15 20 3 19 22 18 31 17 34 16 42 15 57 15
19 14 59 14 45 11 22 40 22 26 21 37 20 36 19 30 18 30 17 38 16 54 16 21 16 15
12 25 12 24 54 24 0 22 46 21 30 20 20 19 20 18 29 18 4 17 45 13 27 53 27 30 26
28 25 1 23 33 22 13 21 4 20 7 19 38 19 16 14 30 45 30 18 29 3 27 20 25 39 24 8
22 51 21 52 21 12 20 47 15 33 52 33 19 31 46 29 47 27 50 26 6 24 39 23 36 22 39
22 18 16 37 22 36 37 34 43 32 22 30 ^6 ^8 6 26 26 25 18 24 17 23 50 17 41 17 40
22 27 58 35 9 32 2^ (...) 12 28 22 27 2 25 57 25 23 18 46 6 44 46 41 37 38 5 34
57 32 21 30 31 29 3 27 39 26 50 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10
20 30 3 4 24 4 25 4 28 4 34 4 41 4 50 4 59 5 9 5 16 5 18 4 5 53 5 54 5 57 6 4 6
13 6 26 6 38 6 49 6 57 6 59 5 7 21 7 21 7 25 7 34 7 45 8 0 8 15 8 29 8 39 8 41
6 8 49 8 49 8 52 9 4 9 17 9 34 9 51 10 8 10 20 10 23 7 10 18 10 17 10 22 10 34
10 48 11 7 11 27 11 45 11 58 12 1 8 11 46 11 44 11 50 12 3 12 19 12 40 13 2 13
22 13 36 13 39 9 13 16 13 13 13 19 13 32 13 40 14 12 14 36 14 58 15 13 15 17 10
14 45 14 41 14 46 15 0 15 19 15 43 16 9 16 33 16 50 16 54 11 16 15 16 9 16 14
16 28 16 49 17 14 17 42 18 7 18 25 18 29 12 17 45 17 37 17 42 17 57 8 18 8 45
19 14 19 41 20 0 20 5 13 19 16 19 7 19 11 19 25 19 47 20 15 20 45 21 14 21 33
21 40 14 20 47 20 36 20 38 20 53 21 15 21 45 22 16 22 47 23 7 23 13 15 22 18 22
14 22 5 22 2^ 22 44 23 15 23 47 24 19 24 30 24 37 16 23 50 23 34 23 34 23 49 24
12 24 44 25 18 25 50 26 12 46 19 17 25 23 25 4 25 2 25 17 25 41 26 13 26 48 27
21 27 24 27 52 18 26 57 26 36 26 32 26 45 27 9 27 42 28 18 28 52 29 16 29 24 30
20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 50 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 6 9 6 5 5 54 5 40 5 25 5 11 4 59 4 50 4 42
4 40 4 8 19 8 15 8 1 7 38 7 18 6 58 6 39 6 25 6 18 6 14 5 10 33 10 27 10 9 9 39
9 12 8 46 8 21 8 2 7 53 7 48 6 12 51 12 43 12 18 11 42 11 7 10 31 10 4 9 42 9
28 9 22 7 15 15 15 5 4 33 13 49 13 5 12 22 11 49 11 22 11 3 10 56 8 17 46 17 33
16 54 16 0 15 6 14 15 13 35 13 2 12 39 12 30 9 20 44 20 8 19 20 18 15 17 11 16
10 15 22 14 43 13 16 14 5 10 23 10 22 49 21 52 20 34 19 17 18 6 17 10 16 25 15
54 15 40 11 26 6 25 41 24 32 22 59 21 27 20 6 19 1 18 8 17 33 17 16 12 29 20 28
50 27 24 25 33 23 42 22 10 20 55 19 51 19 14 18 52 13 32 58 32 18 30 28 28 16
26 5 24 17 22 49 21 37 20 56 20 29 14 37 5 36 9 33 51 31 9 28 34 26 26 24 46 23
28 22 38 22 7 15 42 5 40 45 37 38 34 13 31 10 28 43 26 46 25 18 24 22 23 45 16
49 17 46 48 43 53 37 37 33 55 31 3 28 50 27 10 26 8 25 24 17 47 58 41 28 36 52
33 30 30 57 29 3 27 53 27 3 18 46 2 40 5 36 4 33 7 31 1 29 36 28 44 30 II 20 10
0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 4 40 4 41 4 44 4 51 5 4 5 13 5
25 5 36 5 44 5 46 4 6 14 6 15 6 18 6 27 6 41 6 54 7 10 7 24 7 34 7 37 5 7 48 7
48 7 52 8 3 8 19 8 35 8 54 9 11 9 23 9 27 6 9 22 9 22 9 26 9 38 9 57 10 38 10
38 10 58 11 12 11 17 7 10 56 10 58 11 2 11 13 11 34 11 55 12 20 12 42 12 58 13
4 8 12 30 12 28 12 32 12 48 13 10 13 34 14 1 14 26 14 44 14 51 9 14 5 14 2 14 6
14 22 14 46 15 12 15 41 16 8 16 27 16 35 10 15 40 15 36 15 40 15 56 16 21 16 49
17 21 17 50 18 10 18 18 11 17 16 17 10 17 14 17 30 17 56 18 26 18 59 19 30 19
52 20 1 12 18 52 18 44 18 47 19 3 19 31 20 2 20 38 21 10 21 33 21 42 13 20 29
20 18 20 16 20 37 21 5 21 38 22 15 22 49 23 13 23 23 14 22 7 21 53 21 54 22 10
22 39 23 13 23 52 24 27 24 53 25 3 15 23 45 23 28 23 28 23 44 24 13 24 48 25 28
26 5 26 31 26 41 16 25 24 25 4 25 2 25 17 25 47 26 23 27 4 27 42 28 9 28 20 17
27 3 26 40 26 36 26 51 27 21 27 57 28 40 29 19 29 46 29 57 18 28 44 28 17 28 1^
28 24 28 54 29 31 30 15 30 28 31 23 31 34 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 51 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 6 20 6 19 6 7 5 51 5 35 5 1 5 6 4 56 4 48
4 46 4 8 40 8 33 8 16 7 53 7 30 7 8 6 4 6 35 6 26 6 22 5 11 0 10 51 10 29 9 58
9 28 8 59 8 34 8 15 8 4 7 58 6 13 26 13 14 12 46 12 6 11 28 10 51 10 20 9 57 9
42 9 34 7 15 59 15 44 15 8 14 19 3 31 12 45 12 8 11 40 11 21 11 10 8 18 39 18
21 17 36 16 37 15 37 14 41 13 57 13 23 12 59 12 47 9 21 18 21 6 20 11 18 59 17
46 16 40 15 47 5 7 14 39 14 24 10 24 28 24 1 22 53 21 25 19 59 8 41 17 39 16 52
16 19 16 1 11 27 44 27 0 25 46 23 59 22 17 20 45 19 33 18 38 18 1 17 39 12 31
23 30 39 28 54 26 43 24 41 22 54 2^ 30 20 27 19 44 19 18 13 35 32 34 35 32 20
29 38 27 11 25 6 23 29 22 16 21 27 20 57 14 40 36 39 13 36 8 32 45 29 48 27 22
25 3^ 24 8 23 11 22 37 15 47 58 45 23 40 38 36 12 32 30 29 44 27 36 26 2 24 57
24 17 16 16 28 40 4 36 35 32 12 29 45 27 57 26 44 25 59 17 50 0 43 44 38 51 34
48 31 58 29 55 28 35 27 41 18 50 55 42 28 37 34 44 16 31 57 30 23 9 25 30 II 20
10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 4 46 4 47 4 51 4 58 5 8 5 20
5 33 5 47 5 56 5 58 4 6 22 6 22 6 26 6 36 6 48 7 5 7 20 7 39 7 50 7 53 5 7 58 7
58 8 3 8 14 8 29 8 48 9 9 9 29 9 42 9 45 6 9 34 9 33 9 39 9 51 10 10 10 3^ 10
56 11 18 11 13 11 37 7 11 10 11 8 11 14 11 28 11 48 12 12 12 41 13 5 13 22 13
26 8 12 47 12 44 12 50 13 5 13 26 13 53 14 25 14 51 15 10 15 15 9 14 24 14 20
14 26 14 41 15 4 15 33 16 7 16 36 16 56 17 1 10 16 1 15 55 16 1 16 17 16 42 17
13 17 49 18 20 18 42 18 48 11 17 39 17 31 17 36 17 53 18 20 18 52 19 30 20 3 20
26 20 32 12 19 18 19 8 19 12 19 28 19 57 20 31 21 10 21 45 22 10 22 17 13 20 57
20 44 20 47 21 4 21 33 22 9 22 50 23 26 23 52 23 59 14 22 37 22 21 22 23 2^ 39
23 9 23 46 24 29 25 7 25 34 25 4^ 15 24 17 23 59 23 59 24 15 24 45 25 23 26 7
26 47 27 15 27 23 16 25 59 25 36 25 34 25 5 26 20 26 59 27 45 28 26 28 55 29 4
17 27 41 27 15 27 1^ 27 2 27 56 28 36 29 23 30 5 30 35 30 44 18 29 25 28 54 28
47 29 1 29 3^ 30 12 31 0 31 43 32 ^4 32 24 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 52 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 6 40 6 36 6 22 6 3 5 45 5 27 5 13 5 2 4 56
4 53 4 9 1 8 56 8 36 8 10 7 44 7 19 7 0 6 44 6 35 6 30 5 11 29 11 21 10 54 10
21 9 45 9 13 8 48 8 27 8 15 8 8 6 14 4 13 52 13 18 12 35 11 50 11 9 10 36 10 11
9 55 9 46 7 16 46 16 31 15 48 14 53 13 57 13 7 12 27 11 56 11 36 11 25 8 19 37
19 19 18 25 17 17 16 9 15 8 14 20 13 42 13 17 13 4 9 22 41 22 18 21 10 19 47 18
25 17 11 16 14 15 29 14 59 14 43 10 26 0 25 28 24 6 22 23 20 44 19 17 18 9 17
17 16 43 16 23 11 29 41 28 59 27 16 25 8 23 9 21 27 20 7 19 7 18 28 18 3 12 33
54 32 59 30 43 28 5 25 42 23 42 22 9 21 0 20 13 19 44 13 39 2 37 40 34 35 31 16
28 21 26 1 24 13 22 54 21 59 21 26 14 46 30 43 54 39 9 34 45 31 11 28 24 26 19
24 48 23 46 23 8 15 46 50 45 4 38 41 34 13 30 53 28 30 26 45 25 35 24 52 16 43
23 37 31 33 32 30 45 28 45 27 25 26 36 17 49 41 41 11 36 21 33 5 30 47 29 18 28
21 18 45 26 39 20 35 30 32 55 31 12 30 8 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 10
10 20 0 10 20 30 3 4 53 4 5 4 58 5 5 5 17 5 29 5 45 5 58 6 7 6 11 4 6 30 6 31 6
36 6 45 7 0 7 16 7 36 7 53 8 4 8 9 5 8 8 8 8 8 13 8 24 8 43 9 2 9 26 9 46 10 0
10 6 6 9 46 9 46 9 52 10 5 10 25 10 47 11 25 11 38 11 54 12 1 7 11 25 11 24 11
30 11 44 12 7 12 31 13 2 13 28 13 46 13 54 8 13 4 13 2 13 8 13 23 13 48 14 15
14 49 15 18 15 37 15 46 9 14 43 14 39 14 45 15 2 15 28 15 57 16 34 17 5 17 26
17 35 10 16 23 16 17 16 23 16 40 7 7 17 39 18 18 18 51 19 15 19 25 11 18 3 17
55 18 0 18 18 18 46 19 20 20 1 20 36 21 2 21 12 12 19 44 19 34 19 37 19 55 20
25 21 1 21 44 22 21 22 48 22 59 13 21 26 21 31 21 15 21 33 22 4 22 41 23 26 24
5 24 32 24 43 14 23 28 22 52 22 53 23 42 23 42 24 21 25 7 25 48 26 16 26 28 15
24 52 24 32 24 31 24 49 25 20 26 0 26 48 27 30 27 59 28 11 16 26 36 26 12 26 9
26 25 26 57 27 39 28 28 29 12 29 42 29 55 17 28 21 27 54 27 49 28 2 28 35 29 17
30 8 30 53 31 24 31 37 18 30 8 29 35 29 27 29 41 30 13 30 55 31 48 32 33 33 5
33 19 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 53 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 7 6 6 53 6 38 6 17 5 55 5 36 5 22 5 9 5 43
4 59 4 9 35 9 19 8 58 8 29 7 58 7 31 7 11 6 54 6 46 6 39 5 12 11 11 52 11 23 10
45 10 4 9 28 9 2 8 40 8 28 8 20 6 14 55 14 34 13 56 13 6 12 13 11 29 10 54 10
26 10 10 10 0 7 17 49 17 24 16 35 15 32 14 26 13 32 12 48 12 14 11 53 11 41 8
20 56 20 24 19 23 18 4 16 44 15 38 14 45 14 3 13 38 13 22 9 24 18 23 39 22 23
20 43 19 6 17 46 16 43 15 53 15 23 15 4 10 28 0 27 13 25 38 23 30 21 33 19 57
18 42 17 45 17 9 16 46 11 32 17 31 15 29 10 26 27 24 7 22 13 20 45 19 39 18 56
18 29 12 37 30 36 1 32 59 29 42 26 49 24 34 22 51 21 34 20 44 20 13 13 45 3 42
18 37 36 33 13 29 41 27 ^0 25 ^0 23 3^ 22 33 21 57 14 43 37 37 14 32 46 29 33
27 12 25 3^ 24 24 23 43 15 57 31 42 0 36 7 32 15 29 29 27 33 26 17 25 28 16 48
23 39 51 35 4 31 52 29 38 28 11 27 16 17 44 10 38 6 34 21 31 46 30 7 29 4 18 49
37 41 25 36 56 33 58 32 6 30 54 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10
20 30 3 4 59 4 59 5 5 5 13 5 26 5 41 5 55 6 10 6 21 6 26 4 6 39 6 39 6 46 6 55
7 12 7 31 7 50 8 8 8 22 8 28 5 8 20 8 19 8 26 8 37 8 57 9 20 9 43 10 4 10 21 10
28 6 10 0 9 59 10 7 10 20 10 42 11 8 11 35 12 0 12 19 12 27 7 11 41 11 39 11 47
12 2 12 26 12 55 13 25 13 53 14 15 14 24 8 13 22 13 18 13 26 13 43 14 9 14 41
15 15 15 46 16 9 16 19 9 15 4 14 58 15 6 15 24 15 51 16 26 17 2 17 36 18 0 18
11 10 16 46 16 38 16 46 17 4 17 33 18 10 18 49 19 25 19 52 20 ^3 11 18 29 18 19
18 26 18 44 19 15 19 54 20 35 21 13 21 42 21 54 12 20 13 20 0 20 6 20 24 20 56
21 37 22 20 23 1 23 3^ 23 43 13 21 57 21 41 21 45 22 4 22 37 23 19 24 4 24 47
25 18 25 31 14 23 42 23 23 23 26 23 43 24 17 25 (...) 25 48 26 33 27 5 27 18 15
25 28 25 5 25 6 25 23 25 57 26 42 27 37 28 17 28 51 29 5 16 27 16 26 48 26 48
27 3 27 37 28 23 29 13 30 1 30 36 30 50 17 29 4 28 32 28 28 28 43 29 17 30 ^4
30 55 31 44 32 20 32 35 18 30 54 30 16 30 9 30 22 30 57 31 44 32 37 33 27 34 3
34 18 ^

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 54 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 7 17 7 13 6 55 6 32 6 12 5 49 5 31 5 18 5
10 5 7 4 9 56 9 48 9 23 8 50 8 17 7 48 7 23 7 5 6 54 6 49 5 12 42 12 31 11 57
11 13 10 28 9 50 9 17 8 54 8 39 8 32 6 15 39 15 23 14 38 13 40 12 43 11 55 11
14 10 44 10 25 10 15 7 18 48 18 26 17 28 16 14 15 ^3 14 3 13 12 12 35 12 11 11
58 8 22 12 21 44 20 29 18 56 17 27 16 13 15 12 14 27 13 58 13 42 9 25 59 25 22
23 44 21 46 19 57 18 27 17 15 16 21 15 46 15 26 10 30 18 29 25 27 16 24 47 22
33 20 44 19 19 18 16 17 34 17 11 11 35 35 34 16 31 16 28 2 25 17 23 7 21 27 20
13 19 24 18 57 12 47 32 40 39 35 58 31 38 28 12 25 35 23 37 22 13 21 17 20 43
13 42 2 35 41 31 20 28 10 25 52 24 15 23 10 22 30 14 56 9 40 31 34 43 30 53 28
11 26 19 25 4 24 18 15 46 59 38 31 33 46 30 36 28 26 26 59 26 8 16 42 54 36 52
33 6 30 36 28 57 27 58 17 48 27 40 15 35 44 32 51 30 58 29 50 18 57 33 44 0 38
30 35 9 33 2 31 43 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 5 7
5 7 5 12 5 21 5 33 5 50 6 8 6 22 6 36 6 42 4 6 49 6 48 6 54 7 5 7 22 7 44 8 6 8
26 8 42 8 49 5 8 32 8 31 8 38 8 51 9 10 9 36 10 3 10 26 10 45 10 53 6 10 15 10
13 10 21 10 36 10 58 11 27 11 58 12 25 12 46 12 56 7 11 58 11 55 12 3 12 20 12
44 13 17 13 52 14 22 14 45 14 55 8 13 42 13 37 13 45 14 4 14 30 15 6 15 43 16
18 16 43 16 54 9 15 26 15 19 15 26 15 47 16 15 16 53 17 33 18 11 18 39 18 50 10
17 11 17 2 17 9 17 29 17 59 18 40 19 23 20 3 20 33 20 45 11 18 57 18 46 18 52
19 12 19 43 20 26 21 12 21 54 22 25 22 38 12 20 43 20 29 20 34 20 54 21 27 22
12 23 ^0 23 45 24 17 24 31 13 22 30 22 13 22 16 22 36 23 10 23 57 24 47 25 34
26 7 26 21 14 24 18 23 58 23 59 24 18 24 53 25 41 26 33 27 22 27 57 28 12 15 26
8 25 43 25 41 26 0 26 37 27 25 28 18 29 9 29 45 30 ^0 16 27 58 27 28 27 25 27
42 28 18 29 ^8 30 3 30 55 31 32 31 48 17 29 50 29 15 29 8 29 25 30 ^0 30 51 31
4^ 32 41 33 19 33 2^ 18 31 43 31 2 30 52 31 (...) 31 42 32 34 33 31 34 26 35 5
^5 (...) 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 55 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 7 42 7 34 7 16 6 48 6 22 5 59 5 40 5 26 5
18 5 14 4 10 31 10 18 9 51 9 13 8 35 8 2 7 36 7 16 7 5 6 59 5 13 20 13 12 12 35
11 43 10 52 10 8 9 30 9 8 8 53 8 44 6 16 41 16 19 15 28 14 20 13 14 12 18 11 34
11 1 10 41 10 39 7 20 9 19 40 18 32 17 4 15 14 14 31 13 37 12 56 12 30 12 1^ 8
23 59 23 20 21 49 19 56 18 13 16 46 15 40 14 52 14 20 14 3 9 28 22 27 26 25 23
23 0 20 52 19 6 17 46 16 49 16 11 15 50 10 33 44 32 2^ 29 27 26 18 23 38 21 31
19 56 18 48 18 3 17 37 11 41 32 38 50 34 13 29 57 26 34 24 2 22 10 20 49 19 57
19 26 12 40 24 34 5 29 46 26 40 24 27 22 53 21 52 21 15 13 28 56 33 12 29 26 26
48 25 0 23 47 23 5 14 45 30 37 3 32 21 29 15 27 9 25 46 24 57 15 41 31 35 29 31
48 29 21 27 44 26 49 16 47 6 38 54 34 28 31 38 29 49 28 43 17 56 25 42 44 37 18
33 59 31 52 30 39 18 47 12 40 18 36 26 33 55 32 36 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0
10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 5 14 5 4 5 2 5 30 5 44 6 2 6 20 6 38 6 52 6 58 4 6
49 6 58 7 6 7 8 7 36 7 59 8 23 8 46 9 3 9 10 5 8 44 8 43 8 52 9 6 9 17 9 54 10
23 10 51 11 11 11 19 6 10 30 10 28 10 37 10 53 1^ 18 11 48 12 22 12 53 13 16 13
25 7 12 16 12 13 12 22 12 40 12 57 13 41 14 20 14 53 15 19 15 29 8 14 ^3 13 58
14 7 14 26 14 56 15 33 16 14 16 52 17 20 17 31 9 15 50 15 43 15 51 16 11 16 33
17 23 18 7 18 49 19 19 19 31 10 17 13 17 28 17 36 17 56 18 30 19 13 20 0 20 44
21 17 21 30 11 19 26 19 15 19 22 19 41 20 7 20 2 21 5^ 22 38 23 13 23 26 12 21
15 21 0 21 6 21 26 22 3 22 50 23 42 24 31 25 8 25 22 13 23 5 22 46 22 50 23 11
23 39 24 37 25 32 26 23 27 1 27 15 14 24 57 24 34 24 36 24 56 25 34 26 24 27 21
28 14 28 53 29 8 15 26 49 26 22 26 21 26 41 27 9 28 11 29 9 30 4 30 44 30 59 16
28 43 28 11 28 8 28 25 29 4 29 57 30 57 31 53 32 35 32 51 17 30 39 30 1 29 55
30 10 30 49 31 43 32 44 33 41 34 24 34 40 18 32 36 31 51 31 41 31 55 39 33 33
28 34 30 35 29 36 13 36 30 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0

A Table of Twilight for the Latitude of 56 Degrees.
Paral. 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 8 9 8 1 7 3 7 8 6 37 6 12 5 50 5 37 5 20 5
22 4 11 10 10 56 10 24 9 40 8 56 8 20 7 50 7 30 7 16 7 10 5 14 24 14 5 13 19 12
19 11 19 10 31 9 52 9 25 9 7 8 58 6 17 55 17 3^ 16 26 15 6 13 48 12 46 11 57 11
22 10 58 10 46 7 21 4^ 21 14 19 4^ 18 2 16 23 15 ^4 14 4 13 20 12 50 12 35 8 26
17 25 24 23 26 21 9 19 5 17 27 16 13 15 20 14 44 14 25 9 31 41 30 24 27 32 24
31 22 54 19 55 18 42 17 2^ 16 39 16 15 10 39 34 36 58 32 22 28 11 24 53 22 28
20 39 19 24 18 35 18 6 11 32 22 28 ^5 25 8 22 58 21 30 20 3^ 19 57 12 37 21 31
32 27 56 25 23 23 39 22 30 21 50 13 44 0 35 31 30 54 27 9 25 51 24 31 23 43 14
40 3 34 5 30 27 28 5 26 33 25 38 15 45 45 37 32 33 9 30 21 28 38 27 34 16 55 5
41 27 36 2 32 38 30 45 29 32 17 45 58 39 7 35 6 32 55 31 31 18 51 40 42 25 37
53 35 ^9 33 33 30 20 10 0 20 10 0 20 10 0 0 10 20 0 10 20 0 10 20 30 3 5 22 5
23 5 2 5 40 5 54 6 14 6 35 6 55 7 11 7 18 4 7 10 7 10 7 1^ 7 30 7 49 8 15 8 41
9 ^7 9 27 9 35 5 8 58 8 58 9 5 9 21 9 43 10 13 10 45 11 16 11 40 11 49 6 10 46
10 45 10 53 11 12 11 37 12 11 12 47 13 23 13 50 14 1 7 12 35 12 32 12 40 13 1
13 29 14 8 14 47 15 28 15 58 16 9 8 14 25 14 20 14 2^ 14 50 15 2^ 16 3 16 47 17
30 18 3 18 15 9 16 15 16 8 16 15 16 38 17 11 17 56 18 43 19 30 20 6 20 19 10 18
^6 17 56 18 3 18 26 19 1 19 49 20 39 21 29 22 7 22 21 11 19 57 19 44 19 50 20
14 20 50 21 41 22 34 23 2^ 24 7 24 21 12 21 50 21 34 21 38 22 ^1 22 39 23 32 24
28 25 23 26 5 26 20 ^3 23 43 23 23 23 25 23 49 24 28 25 22 26 20 27 ^8 28 1 28
17 1^ 25 38 25 13 25 1^ 25 36 26 16 27 12 28 12 29 12 29 57 30 13 1^ 27 34 27 4
27 1 27 24 28 4 29 1 30 3 31 ^5 31 5^ 32 7 ^6 29 32 28 56 28 50 29 11 29 51 30
49 31 53 ^2 5^ 33 44 34 1 17 31 31 ^0 49 30 39 30 59 3^ 39 32 38 33 43 34 4^ 35
36 35 53 18 33 3^ ^2 4^ 32 29 2 46 (...) 26 34 26 35 33 36 3^ (...) 28 ^7 46 30
(...) (...) 0 ^ 20 10 0 20 10 0

The Use of these Tables of Twilight.
THe first Colume, on the left hand, is the Parallel of Twilight; the Body of
the Table shows the distance that the Sun must be from the Ascen. or 7th House,
to make those Parallels; so that when you use them the Work is thus, First,
Take the Ob. asc. of the Ascen. under the Pole of the Birth, from whence
substract the Obl. asc. of the Sun, so you have his primary distance, which
seek in the Table in the nearest Degree the is in, and having found it, see in
the Colume toward the left hand, and see what Parallel answers to it, and under
the same Parallel take out the Arch of Twilight for the Promittor: Also see the
Example of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and the Duke of Parma, which will
sufficiently inform you in the Use.

The Use of the following Tables.
IN the first Colume is the Semidiurnal, or Siminocturnal Arches, from 3 Hours,
to 9 Hours, and is Calculated to every 6 Minutes; now over against the
Semidiurnal Arch, in a direct Line, is the space of the House, that that
Seminocturnal or Diurnal Arches gives; with all the Mundane Aspects, truly
Calculated, to the very Degree and Minute, which is sometimes twice as much as
at other times, and the reason is, because the Seminocturnal and Semidiurnal
Arches are sometimes so much longer than at other times, etc.

Semidiurnal or Seminocturnal Arches. h. m. Space of one House. d. m.
Semiquartile. smq. d. m. Sextile. d. m. Quintile. Q. d. m. Quartile. d. m.
Trine. d. m. Sesquiquadrate. ssq. d. m. Byquintile. Bq. d. m. Opposition. d. m.
3 0 15 0 22 30 30 0 36 0 45 0 60 0 67 30 72 0 90 0 3 6 15 30 23 15 31 0 37 12
46 30 62 0 69 45 74 24 93 0 3 12 16 0 24 0 32 0 38 24 48 0 64 0 72 0 76 48 96 0
3 18 16 30 24 45 33 0 39 36 49 30 66 0 74 15 79 12 99 0 3 24 17 0 25 30 34 0 40
48 51 0 68 0 76 30 31 36 102 0 3 30 17 30 26 15 35 0 42 0 52 30 70 0 78 45 84 0
105 0 3 36 18 0 27 0 36 0 43 12 54 0 72 0 81 0 86 24 108 0 3 42 18 30 27 45 37
0 44 24 55 30 74 0 83 15 88 48 111 0 3 48 19 0 28 30 38 0 45 36 57 0 76 0 85 30
91 12 114 0 3 54 19 30 29 15 39 0 46 48 58 30 78 0 87 45 93 36 117 0 4 0 20 0
30 0 40 0 48 0 60 0 80 0 90 0 96 0 120 0 4 6 20 30 30 45 41 0 49 12 61 30 82 0
92 15 98 24 123 0 4 12 21 0 31 30 42 0 50 24 63 0 84 0 94 30 100 48 126 0 4 18
21 30 32 15 43 0 51 36 64 30 86 0 96 45 103 12 129 0 4 24 22 0 33 0 44 0 52 48
66 0 88 0 99 0 105 36 132 0 4 30 22 30 33 45 45 0 54 0 67 30 90 0 101 15 108 0
135 0 4 36 23 0 34 30 46 0 55 12 69 0 92 0 103 30 110 24 138 0 4 42 23 30 35 15
47 0 56 24 70 30 94 0 105 45 112 48 141 0 4 48 24 0 36 0 48 0 57 36 72 0 96 0
108 0 115 12 144 0 4 54 24 30 36 45 49 0 58 48 73 30 98 0 110 15 117 36 147 0 5
0 25 0 37 30 50 0 60 0 75 0 100 0 112 30 120 0 150 0 5 6 25 30 38 15 51 0 61 12
76 30 102 0 114 45 122 24 153 0 5 12 26 0 39 0 52 0 62 24 78 0 104 0 117 0 124
48 156 0 5 18 26 30 39 45 53 0 63 36 79 30 106 0 119 15 127 12 159 0 5 24 27 0
40 30 54 0 64 48 81 0 108 0 121 30 129 36 162 0 5 30 27 30 41 15 55 0 66 0 82
30 110 0 123 45 132 0 165 0 5 36 28 0 42 0 56 0 67 12 84 0 112 0 126 0 134 24
168 0 5 42 28 30 42 45 57 0 68 24 85 30 114 0 128 15 136 48 171 0 5 48 29 0 43
30 58 0 69 36 87 0 116 0 130 30 139 12 174 0 5 54 29 30 44 15 59 0 70 48 88 30
118 0 132 45 141 36 177 0 6 0 30 0 45 0 60 0 72 0 90 0 120 0 135 0 144 0 180 0
6 0 30 0 45 0 60 0 72 0 90 0 120 0 135 0 144 0 180 0 6 6 30 30 45 45 61 0 73 12
91 30 122 0 137 15 146 24 183 0 6 12 31 0 46 30 62 0 74 24 93 0 124 0 139 30
148 48 186 0 6 18 31 30 47 15 63 0 75 36 94 30 126 0 141 45 151 12 189 0 6 24
32 0 48 0 64 0 76 48 96 0 128 0 144 0 153 36 192 0 6 30 32 30 48 45 65 0 78 0
97 30 130 0 146 15 156 0 195 0 6 36 33 0 49 30 66 0 79 12 99 0 132 0 148 3^ 158
24 198 0 6 42 33 30 50 15 67 0 80 24 100 30 134 0 150 45 160 ^8 201 0 6 48 34 0
51 0 68 0 81 36 102 0 136 0 153 0 163 12 204 0 6 54 34 30 51 45 69 0 82 48 103
30 138 0 155 15 165 36 207 0 7 0 35 0 52 30 70 0 84 0 105 0 140 0 157 30 168 0
210 0 7 6 35 30 53 15 71 0 85 12 106 30 142 0 159 45 170 24 213 0 7 12 36 0 54
0 72 0 86 24 108 0 144 0 162 0 172 48 216 0 7 18 36 30 54 45 73 0 87 36 109 30
146 0 164 15 175 12 219 0 7 24 37 0 55 30 74 0 88 48 111 0 148 0 166 30 177 36
222 0 7 30 37 30 56 15 75 0 90 0 112 30 150 0 168 45 180 0 225 0 7 36 38 0 57 0
76 0 91 12 114 0 152 0 171 0 182 24 228 0 7 4^ 38 30 57 45 77 0 92 24 115 30
154 0 73 15 184 48 231 0 7 48 39 0 58 30 78 0 93 36 117 0 156 0 175 30 187 12
234 0 7 54 39 30 59 15 79 0 94 48 118 30 158 0 177 45 189 36 237 0 8 0 40 0 60
0 80 0 96 0 120 0 160 0 180 0 192 0 240 0 8 6 40 30 60 45 81 0 97 12 121 30 162
0 82 15 194 24 243 0 8 12 41 0 61 30 82 0 98 24 123 0 164 0 184 3^ 196 48 246 0
8 18 41 30 62 15 83 0 99 36 124 30 166 0 186 45 199 12 249 0 8 24 42 0 63 0 84
0 100 48 126 0 168 0 189 0 201 36 252 0 8 30 42 30 63 45 85 0 102 0 127 30 170
0 191 15 204 0 255 0 8 36 43 0 64 3^ 36 0 103 12 129 0 172 0 193 30 206 24 258
0 8 42 43 30 65 15 87 0 104 24 130 30 174 0 195 45 208 48 261 0 8 48 44 0 66 0
83 0 105 86 132 0 176 0 198 0 211 12 264 0 8 54 44 30 66 4 89 0 106 8 133 30
178 0 200 15 213 36 267 0 9 0 45 ^0 67 30 9^ 0 108 0 135 0 180 0 2^2 3^ 216 0
270 0

Note, That in this Treatise there is often used Abreviations, or Words in
short, which are known to the Ingenious, but for the sakes of young Learners I
have here explained them.

For Ob. Asc. or Obli. Asc. Read Oblique Ascension. Ascen. or Ascend.
Ascendant. R. A. Right Ascension. M. C. Mid. heaven. Semid. or Semidi.
Semidiurnal. Semin. or Seminoct. Seminocturnal. Sub. Substract. Co. ar.
Complement arithmetical. Ob. Oblique. Desc. Descention. Lat. Latitude. H.
Hours. De. or dg. Degree. M. Minute. Log. Logar. Logistical Logarithms. Asc.
Ascension.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Courteous Reader,
although there has been care taken, yet sometimes, by the Printers oversight
and my absence from the Press, there has passed these Faults; which you are
desired to amend before thou read the Book, and in so doing you will merit
the Authors thanks.

PAge 3. Line 5. for Ptlom'ys read Ptolomy's; p. 3. l. 30. for house, r. house.
p. 20. l. 4. for wc, r. we. p. 20. l. 17. for significators, r. significations,
p. 20. l. 24. for for r. for. p. 21. l. 30. for powe; r. power. p. 21. l. 33.
for whether, r. neither. p. 22. l. 6. for Nativites, r. Nativities. p. 22. l.
9. for gives, r. givers. p. 23. l. 8. dele 4th, 6th, 8th, and 12th. Ibid. and
for houses, r. house. p. 54. l. 32. for this way to show of direction, r. to
show this way of direction. p. 69. l. 34. for ^olls, r. Fools. p. 70. l. 15.
for sq. r. the ssq.


