The King's Reasons (With some Reflections upon them) For withdrawing himself
from Rochester, written with his own Hand, ( Or rather Copied from his own
Speech after the Bawdy Affidavit.) and ordered by him to be published, ( By
Henry Hills, but that he was out of the way.)
THE World cannot wonder at my withdrawing my self now this second time, ( or
rather making my Exit from a Stage, where, after I had played my last Act, there
was nothing more to be done.) I might have expected somewhat better usage,
after what I had Writ to the Prince of Orange by my Lord Feversham, and the
Instructions I gave him, ( that is, to have been restored as I was, with all my
Priests and Irish about me.) But instead of an Answer, such as I might have
hoped for, ( had I deserved it) What was I to expect after the Usage I received
by the making the said Earl a Prisoner, against the Practice and Law of
Nations; ( though it was an oversight in me, indeed, to send an Obnoxious
Person of my Errand, and he neither Ambassador, Herald, Drummer nor
Trumpeter.) The sending his own Guards at Eleven a Clock at Night to take
Possession of the Posts at White Hall, without advertizing me in the least
manner of it. ( Because there was no occasion for it.) The sending to me at one
of the Clock, after Midnight, when I was in Bed, a kind of an Order by three
Lords, to be gone out of my own Palace, before 12 that same Morning? ( But
perhaps they wanted my Room, not my Company, and then what says the Proverb,
Cede Majoribus.) After all this, How could I hope to be safe, ( And yet 'twas
well I was no safer,) in the power of one who had not only done this to me, (
Which was just nothing at all.) and Invaded my Kingdoms without any just
occasion given for it, ( but my going about to ruin the Established Government
of the Nation and the Protestant Religion. Though now I better recollect my
self, I cannot call it an Invasion neither, because he came in at the solemn
Invitation of the Nobility and Gentry of my whole Realm.) but that did by his
first Declaration lay the greatest Aspersion upon me that Malice could Invent,
in that Clause of it which concerns my ( Adopted) Son. I appeal to all that
know me, nay, even to himself, that in their Consciences, neither he nor they
can believe me in the least capable of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of so little
common sense, to be Imposed on in a thing of such a nature as that. (Vid. My
Speech to the Lords in my Book of Midwifery, Fol. 36, 37.) What had I then to
expect from one, who by all Arts has taken such pains to make me appear as
Black as Hell to my own People, as well as to all the World besides? What
Effect that has had at home, all Mankind have seen, by so general a defection
in my Army, ( Because they would not fight with their Bodeis against their
Souls.) as well as in the Nation amongst all sorts of People. ( All which I
drew upon my self, as is well known by the Reasons of the Lords, for inviting
in His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, by my Adhearing to pernicious
Popish Councils, and endeavoring to settle a Popish Succession, to advance the
Kingdom of Antichrist: And I did ill to say One, when the cry against me was
so universal.

I was Born Free, and desire to continue so; and tho I have ventured my Life
very frankly on several occasions for the Good and Honor of my Country, ( in
needless Wars for the destruction of the Protestant Religion) and am free to do
it again, and which I hope I shall yet do, as old as I am; to redeem it from
the Slavery it is like to fall under ( God forbid it, for it is ill falling into
the hands of an Exasperated Prince.) Yet I think it not convenient to expose my
self to be secured ( which might easily have been done, had it been thought
convenient,) as not to be at liberty to effect it, and for that reason to
withdraw ( tho fore-warned fore-arm'd you will say) but so as to be within call,
when the Nations eyes shall be opened ( by putting on a huge pair of Jesuitical
Spectacles) to see how they have been Abused and Imposed upon by the specious
pretenses of Religion and Property, ( which I was going about to destroy.) I
hope it will please God to touch their Hearts, to make them sensible of the ill
condition they are in, and bring them to such a Temper, that a Legal Parliament
may be called ( tho this Prayer be needless, for I hear such a Parliament, a
thing I never intended in my Life, is at hand) and that among other things
which may be done, they will agree for Liberty of Conscience, for all
Protestant Dissenters ( tho I speak not this from my heart) and that those of
my own Persuasion may be so far considered as to have a share in it, as they
may live peaceably and quietly ( till they shall be in a condition again, as
soon as may be, to revenge my Cause) as Englishmen and Christians ought to do
( with Plots and Massacres) and not be obliged to transplant themselves, which
would be very grievous, especially to such as love their own Country ( so long
as it is in subjection to the Pope) and I appeal to all Men, who are
considering Men, whither any thing can make this Nation so Great and
Flourishing as Liberty of Conscience. (There Is no body questions it, but) some
of our Neighbors dread it ( especially the French Clergy,

I could add much more to confirm all I have said, but now is not the proper
time: ( Enough a conscience, and more than will be believed this Hundred Years.


