THE King of Moroccos LETTER BY HIS AMBASSADOR TO THE King of England.
WHEN these our Letters shall be so happy as to come to Your Majesty's sight, I
wish the Spirit of the Righteous God may so direct Your Mind, that You may
joyfully embrace the Message I send. The Regal Power allotted to Us, makes us
first common Servants to our Creator, then of those People whom we Govern: So
that observing the Duties we owe to God, we deliver Blessings to the world. In
providing for the Public Good of our Estates, we magnify the Honor of God,
like the Celestial Bodies, which though they have much Veneration, yet serve
only to the Benefit of the World. It is the excellency of our Office to be
Instruments, whereby Happiness is delivered to Nations.

Pardon me Sir! This is not to Instruct, (for I know I speak to one of a more
clear and quick sight than my self) But I speak this, because God has pleased
to grant me a happy Victory over some part of those Rebellious Pirates, that so
long have molested the peaceable Trade of Europe; and has presented further
occasion to root out the Generation of those, who have been so pernicious to
the Good of our Nations: I mean since it has pleased God to be so Auspicious
to our beginnings, in the Conquest of Sallee, that we might join and proceed in
hope of like Success in the Wars of Tunis, Algiers and other places ( Dens and
Receptacles of the inhumane Villainies of those who abhor Rule and Government.)
Herein whilst we interrupt the Corruption of malignant Spirits of the world, we
shall glorify the Great God, and perform a Duty, that will shine as glotious
as the Sun and Moon, which all the Earth may see and reverence: A work that
shall ascend as sweet as the Perfume of the most precious Odours in the
Nostrils of the Lord; a work grateful and happy to men; a work whose Memory
shall be reverenced so long as there shall be any remaining amongst men, that
love and honor the Piety and Virtue of Noble Minds. This Action I here
willingly present to You, whose Piety and Virtues equal the Greatness of Your
Power, that we who are Vicegerents to the Great and Mighty God, may hand in
hand Triumph in the Glory which the Action presents unto us.

Now because the Islands which You Governs, have been ever Famous for the
unconquered Strength of their Shipping, I have sent this my Trusty Servant and
Ambassado^, to know whether in Your Princely Wisdom You shall think sir to
assist me with such Forces by Sea as shall be answerable to those I provide by
Land; which if You please to grant, I doubt not but the Lord of Hosts will
protect and assist those that Fight in so glorious a Cause. Nor ought you to
think this strange that I, who so much Reverence the Peace and Accord of
Nations, should Exhort to a War: Your Great prophet CHRIST JESUS was the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah, as well as the Lord and Giver of Peace; which may
signify unto You, That He which is a Lover and Maintainer of Peace, must
always appear with the terror of his Sword; and wading through Seas of Blood,
must arrive to Tranquillity. This made James your Father of Glorious memory, so
happily Renowned amongst all Nations. It was the Noble Fame of Your Princely
Vitues which resounds to the utmost corners of the earth, that persuaded me to
invite You to partake of that Blessing wherein I boast my Self most happy. I
wish God may heap the Riches of his Elssings on You, increase Your Happiness
with your Days; and hereafter perpetuate the Greatness of Your Name in all Ages.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1682.


