AN ELEGY On the Death of that most Laborious and Painful Minister of the
Gospel Mr. JOHN NORCOT, Who fell asleep in the Lord the 24th of this instant
March 1675/6.
HOw does my troubled Soul amused stand,
On thoughts of God's most sore Chastising hand;
Let Heaven assist my Pen, and help indite
This Mournful Elegy I Am moved to write.
My grieved heart knows not what way to take,
Its love to show and lamentation make.
David for Jonathan was sore distressed,
And in like sort has sorrow seized my Breast.
Beloved John is gone, dear Norcot's dead;
That Man of God, who has so often fed
Our precious Souls with Manna from above:
Whose powerful preaching did engage our love
To Jesus Christ. O! he had care and skill
To feed poor souls and do his Master's will.
But is he from us also took away,
What, breach still upon breach! Lord Jesus stay
Thy hand, such strokes are hardly born,
Here Is cause for hundreds to lament and mourn.
The loss is great the Churches do sustain,
Poor sinners too like cause have to complain.
There Is few like him surviving to arouse
Their sluggish souls out of their sinful drouse.
They now may sleep secure and not awake.
Until they fall into the Stygian Lake.
This Golden Trumpet's stopped, 'twill sound no more,
To warn them of what danger's at their door.
To win sinners to Christ he did not spare
His strength nor time, thought nothing was too dear
To part with all, if any ways he might,
Their Souls turn from false ways unto the right:
Like as a Candle which much light does give,
Does waste it self, whilst from it we receive
Much benefit; so did he clearly burn,
To the wasting of himself unto the urn.
This godly Preacher in a little space,
Much work did do, he swiftly run his race;
With His might performed what ever he found to do.
God graciously did bless his work also,
Yea few (I think) have had the like success,
In turning sinners unto righteousness.
O were the worth of this good man but known,
It might produce an universal groan.
Let Brethren dear of different minds lament,
For he for you in prayers much time has spent;
He loved you all, though I have cause to fear,
The like affection some did scarcely bear.
'Twould pierce ones heart to think in such a time,
Obedience unto Christ should be a crime;
Or that offense should in the least be took,
'Cause from Gods word he durst not turn nor look.
He would own naught but what thus says the Lord,
Add would not he nor minish from Gods Word.
Come let us live in love, we (...),
When at his Port we all arived (...)
Let sinners mourn, who shall their loss repair,
Who for their Souls so naturally did care.
Well may ye fear God will proclaim new wars,
When he calls home his choice Ambassadors.
What may a Sodom look for from above,
When such who stood 'ith gap, God does remove.
O tremble City, what is God about,
Look for new flames, thy Lots are calling out.
And now chastized flock a word or two,
I Have double sorrow when I think of you.
When that the Harvest does for Reapers call,
To lose your Labourer, this wound's not small.
O who shall bear the burden of the day,
If God does take the Laborers thus away.
When Pylots die, how shall the Seaman stear,
Amongst Rocks and Sands, when storms also appear.
Have we not cause to think the crafty Fox,
Will out abroad and prey upon the flocks.
And Ravening Wolves also will grow more bold.
And scare some silly Lambs out of the fold;
If God proceed to call the Shepherds home,
O what will of so many flocks become.
'Ith' midst of all, in this does comfort lie,
The chiefest Shepherd lives when others die.
And he be sure who for the Sheep did bleed,
Will stick to them in times of greatest need.
Come cease your grief, don't you know very well,
The care God has of his own Israel.
And its no more which now is come to pass,
Then what by you some time expected was,
And what is done is but our Fathers will,
Therefore be silent, every one be still:
For should we yield to passion I have fears,
We should grieve Christ and wound our Souls with tears.
The narrow Sluices too of dribling eyes,
Would be too straight for those great Springs that rise.
But since our Vessels fills up to the top,
Lets empty them, for every sin a drop.
For it lets wish we were composed of Snow,
Instead of Flesh, yea made of Ice, that so
We might in sense of sin and it loathing,
Melt with hot love to Christ, yea thaw to nothing.
And should our sins deprive our Souls of him,
Let tears run from our Eyes till Couches swim.
Yet let us not grudge him that most happy bliss,
Who now in glory with Christ Jesus is.
He did his work apace, his Race is run,
He'as touched the Gole yea and the prise has won.
AN EPITAPH.
A Sweet and godly Preacher does lie here,
Who did his Master Jesus love so dear,
And sinners Souls, that he his strength did spend.
And did thereby ('it is thought) hasten his end,
He brought himself by preaching to the Grave,
The precious souls of sinners for to save.
He lies but here asleep, he is not dead:
To God he lives, to Christ his soul is fled,
And over while must he awake again,
And evermore with Christ in glory reign.
By B. K.
London, Printed for Ben. Harris at the Stationers Arms in Sweetings Rents near
the Royal Exchange, 1676.


