CHRIST ALONE THE WAY TO HEAVEN: OR, JACOB's LADDER IMPROVED. Containing Four
SERMONS, Lately Preached on GENESIS, XXVIII. XII.

Wherein the Doctrine of Free Grace is displayed, through Jesus Christ.

Also, discovering the Nature, Office, and Ministration of the holy Angels.

To which is added, One Sermon on Romans 8.1. With some short Reflections on Mr.
Samuel Clark's new Book entitled, Scripture Justification.

By Benjamin Keach.

Acts 5.31. Him has God Exalted, etc.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by Benja. Harris, at the upper-end of Grace
church-street, next Cornhill. School.

Page 60. line 5. r. climb up. p. 62. l. 28. bl^^ out in. p. 71.72.73.77 78.
several lines should have double Comma's, being Citations, and so i^ 2 or 3
other pages. In the Medium, etc. p. 3^* l. 22. for federally r. decretively.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Six Churches of Believers, Baptized upon the Profession of Faith in
Hampshire, and to their respective Elders and Deacons; viz, at South-hampton,
Mr. Richard Ring Pastor; at Christ-church, Mr. Humphrey Richards Pastor; at
Ringwood, Mr. Nath. Lane, Pastor; and at, and near White-church, Mr. Richard
Kent, and Mr. Joseph Kent Elders; at Lymington, Mr. John Ramsey Pastor; at
Gosport, Mr. John Webber Pastor; Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ, be Multiplied.
Honored and Beloved,
I Being lately cast among you by the providence of God; and being refreshed by
seeing, and beholding your Order, Unity, Love, and holy Zeal for God and
Religion, together with that kind Reception you gave me, have, as a token of my
Respects, Dedicated these ensuing Sermons to you; some of you also giving
Encouragement for the Publication of them. That which I desire of you (which
also I have hinted in Letters to you, since I returned to London) is that you
would labor to strengthen one another's hands, not only by your mutual
Prayers, and by assisting one another, but also that you, by your respective
Messengers do meet together one or twice in the ^^ar, to know each other's
Estate, and wherein you may be further Serviceable one to another; which may
prove many ways to your Advantage: It Is matter of great joy, to see how you are
united in one Spirit, both in matters of Faith, and Practice, though Satan has
endeavored to disturb the peace of some of you; but may be God suffered it,
That such that are approved might be made manifest. The Lord increase your
numbers, and cause you to flourish like the Palm Trees. Now, that which remains
for you (the Churches of Jesus Christ) is, that you show your Love, and holy
zeal for the Support of your painful and faithful Pastors, and encouragement of
such Gifts that you may have amongst you, by helping them to what Learning they
may be able to attain unto, for their better Accomplishment for the Minister^;
and by removing one gran^ Discouragement, by a faithful endeavor to support
your present Ministry by a comfortable Gospel-maintenance, as God has
ordained, to the uttermost of your Ability; by which means also, you will
acquit your selves of that common charge cast upon the Baptized Churches, viz.
They starve their Ministers* How should they Provide Bread for your Souls
should they be le^^ to the Cares and Encumbrances of this Life, in providing
Brea^ for their own Families; but since you have received it as your undoubted
Duty, to discharge them from all worldly Business according to your Abilities,
I need say no more to this.

Lastly, Let me exhort you all to strive to continue in Love and Union, and
adorn your sacred Profession, (...) a holy Conve^sation; and by dying to this
World, and so to prepare for t^^ coming of our Lord, which now draws very near:
The Virgin^ I fear are asleep, but sad will it be with some, if the Midnight
Cry should find them so to be; as to these Sermons, I shall say b^^ little, not
knowing they deserve such a Publication, though I ha^^ been pressed to do it, yet
I hope with the blessing of God, they m^^ be of profit to some (as you have
assured me others of my form^^ poor Labors have been to many,) and if I know
my own Hea^^ that it is which incourages me still to Write; for some other ways
I have reason enough to throw away my Pen, and nev^^ Write more; but since God
gives me Encouragement, I shall little regard those Discouragements from Men,
but if this way do too much, I am certain some others do too little, who I kn^^
are far more able, and better accomplished to write than I, b^^ where God gives
but two Talents, he requires but the improvement of Two; the Substance (...) of
these Sermons some of yo^ heard. The good Lord bless you all, and establish you
in the Doctrine of free Justification, by Christ alone, and in all other
Fundamental Truths, and that you may be kept from all extremes* You will
perceive in the latter part of this Treatise How Satan is laying his Ax at the
Root or Foundation, etc. many errors and Heresies abound in these evil Days,
the Lord pour out more o^ his Spirit, and ^ndow you and I, with that precious
Grace o^ Humility; that we may be even clothed therewith, and no^ Judge and
Censure one another, who all hold the head. To conclude let me beg a
remembrance of me in your prayers, who hope I shall never forget you whilst in
this Tabernacle, and shall subcribe my self your Servant in the Gospel.

^orsly-Down, Nov. 4th. 16^7. Benja. Ke^

CHRIST ALONE THE Way to Heaven: OR, JACOB'S LADDER IMPROVED, etc.
SERMON I.
GENESIS, xxviij. xij. xiij. 1. And he Dreamed, and behold, a Ladder set upon
the Earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven: and behold the Angels of God
ascending and descending on it.

2. And behold, the Lord stood above it, and said, I am the Lord God of
Abraham, thy Father, etc.


JACOB having got the Blessing, was sent away by Isaac his Father, and it is
said verse 10. That he went from Beersheba, and went toward Haran. And

Night coming on, he laid himself down to sleep, though he had but hard lodging,
For he took of the Stones of the place, and put them for his Pillow. v. 11.

And he Dreamed, and behold a Ladder, etc.

Jacob was like to meet with great Trouble, being forced to fly for fear of his
Life; ( Esau being enraged against him, first for getting his Birthright; and
now also his Blessing.) God no doubt gave him this Dream to succor and comfort
him in his Journey; and not only so, but to discover a greater Good to him than
his present Support; even to make known by this Dream, the Messiah that should
proceed from his Loins, by whom he, and all his true Seed should ascend to
Heaven, and be with God for ever.

In my Text are Two Things to be noted.

The Parts of the Text Opened, and Terms Explained.
I. A Vision: viz. He saw a Ladder, the Top reaching to Heaven.

II. An Oracle, or Voice from Heaven; God spoke to him saying, I am the Lord
thy God, etc.

It may be necessary to speak a little briefly by way of Explication, and
chiefly to show what may be either Primarily, or more Remotely, or
Subordinately signified, or held forth by this Ladder.

1. I understand by this Ladder directly, and Primarily is meant our Lord Jesus
Christ: Nor am I alone in this respect; for diverse learned Men hint the same
thing; among which I might mention our late (...) upon the Holy Bible, on the
place, be^^^ by Reverend Mr. Pool. He says, This Ladder represents Christ, by
whom Heaven and Earth are united; who is called the way to Heaven, which this
Ladder was. Moreover, very evident it is, that our Savior himself refers to
Jacob's Ladder, Joh. 1.51. speaking of himself and of the Angels ascending and
descending upon, the Son of Man.

2. But more Remotely or Subordinately it may refer (as some think) to the
Church of Christ: Some being on Earth, and others in Heaven; of their going
from Earth to Heaven; and as thus, it may represent God's special Providence,
and Care of Jacob, either Personally considered, or Mystically i. e. the whole
Church, bearing the name of Jacob who by degree^. through the Providence and
blessed Favor of God, and ministration of the Angels, ascend from a low State,
to an exalted State, or from a State of Grace on Earth, to a state of Glory in
Heaven. It may represent (says Mr. Pool) to Jacob, the Providence of God; who
though he dwells in Heaven, extends his Care, and Government to the Earth; and
particularly makes use of Angels as ministering Spirits, for the good of his
People; who are not Idle but always in motion.

Behold a Ladder, etc.] This word, [ Behold,] has various Acceptations;
sometimes it calls for Observation, and Attention; and sometimes for
Admiration; Behold what manner of Love is this! 1 John 3.^.
etc. It may referr to both these in my Text: Such a Ladder, the Foot standing
upon the Earth, and the Top of it reaching to Heaven, calls both for diligent
Attention, and Observation; and also for the highest Admiration.

The Second Branch of this Vision is, That of the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon this Ladder* or upon the Son of Man: Job. 1.^1.
Verily verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see Heaven open, and the
Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the Son of Man.

There are Two Things to be noted.

1. The Persons mentioned. 2. The Motions of the Persons.
1. The Persons mentioned are the Angels of God.

2. The Motion of these Persons, they ascended, and descended, Reciprocally
upon this Ladder; that is, upon Christ, either Personally, or Mystically
considered; and as one Observes, when they are said to ascend, they Minister to
Christ Personally considered; and when said to descend, they minister to Christ
Mystically considered: i.e. to the Church.

How the Angels minister to Christ, and to his Church, I purpose to speak unto,
and open that in one Sermon upon this Text, and shall therefore speak no more
to it now.

And behold, the Lord God stood above it. In our Text this word [ behold] is
thrice repeated, which doubtless may den^te the important matter signified
thereby.

By the [ Lord God,] I understand, GOD the FATHER, who is represented above it,
as the contriver and maker of this mystical Ladder; who indeed prepared the
Body of Christ, and so found out this wonderful way to Heaven; Heb. 10.5.
and said, I am the Lord thy God; that is in Christ, I am thy God, or a God in
Covenant with thee Jacob, and with all thy true Spiritual Seed, (...)
who strive to ascend up to me by this glorious Medium: for doubtless, God the
Father being above it, it does also denote; that this Ladder is the only way to
the Father; Joh. 1^.^.
No man comes to the Father, but by me. So much by way of Explication.

I. Observe.] God knows how (even by Dreams) to instruct and comfort his People.

(...)
The Apostle says, That God at sundry times, and in diverse manners, (...)
spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets. Sometimes by Angels;
sometimes by special Inspiration; sometimes by Visions, and sometimes by
Dreams; In a Dream, in a Vision of the Night; (...) ^3.15.^^.
when deep Sleep falls upon Men, in slumbring upon their Beds, then he
opens the ears of Men, and seals their Instruction.

I shall speak a little as to Dreams, in general, of wh^el^ there are three
sorts.

1. Natural Dreams. The nature and (...) Dreams Opened.
2. Diabolical Dreams. 3. Divine Dreams.
1. Some Dreams are mere natural Dreams; and these may arise from the
Temperature of the Body; Melancholy, (...)
and Phlegmatic Persons, have their special Dreams; so have those that are of a
Sanguine, or of a Choleric Complexion: The First, as Naturalists observe, are
inclined to Dream of things ^en^ing to Sadness; perhaps of Death, of Graves or
of dead Men. The Second, of Sottish things. The Third, of Pleasant and
Delightful things. The Fourth, of War, Blood, Contention; or of Fighting, and
Wranglings.

2. A Dream comes through multitude of Business; Eccles. 5.3.^.
Commonly (as Mr. Caryl observes) a Man Dreams at Night of what he has been
doing in the Day, as experience shows.

3. Natural Dreams, some affirm are caused by the Diet, or Food which we eat,
some Meat, especially inclining to some special thoughts and Dreams.

4. As the same Author notes also, Natural Dreams arise from vehement
Affections, to, or desire of, what we want; the Prophet signifies; Isa. 2^.7.
The hungry Man Dreameth he Eats, and the thirsty Man Dreameth he Drinks:
These are called Natural Dreams because they arise from Natural Causes; or the
rise of them are seated in Nature.

Secondly, There are some Dreams that are no doubt Diabolical, or arise from
the Injections of the Devil; I am subject to think, but few godly Christians,
but by sad experience may find they at some times have been afflicted by filthy
or hateful Dreams, dreaming of such things which their Souls abhor; ask them,
and they will tell you: The Devil well knows what Corruptions are in our
Hearts, or in the Unregenerate part; and if God restrains him not, he may work
upon, and stir up those evil Humors when we are asleep: Take Mr. Caryl's
words; Satan is skilful and diligent in soliciting our Lusts and Corruptions
both Day and Night, both Sleeping and Waking: Yea, the Devil can inspire false
Doctrines and Opinions by Dreams, as well as provoke to wicked Practices of
such Dreams: If there be among you a false Prophet, (...)
or a dreamer of Dreams, etc. False Prophets had many Dreams; and as the good
Prophets had their Dreams from GOD, so the false Prophets had their Dreams from
the Devil. All diabolical Dreams are either Dreams of Lies, or Falsehood, like
Satan himself; or else, Filthy and Defiling, for he is an unclean Spirit.

Thirdly, There are some Divine Dreams. Dreams are of three sorts, says
Reverend Mr. Perkins: -- Natural, Perkins Vol.1. p. 203.
arising from the Constitution of the Body. Diabolical, such as come by the
Suggestion of the Devil. Divine, which come from God. Some Dreams may be called
Divine Dreams;

1. Because they arise immediately from God's Spirit; it is the divine Spirit
that Injects those Thoughts into our Hearts whilst we Sleep.

2. Because the Subject matter of them is Divine, Spiritual, or Heavenly; God
speaking hereby unto us, and sealing up either Instruction, Reproof, or Comfort
to our Souls. Mr. Caryl Notes Five Messages God sends Men by Dreams, which take
as follows.

First, What God speaks to Men by Dreams. Genesis 1.24. Genesis 31.24.
To Reprove, or Admonish: Thus God dealt with Abimelech in a Dream, that he
should not meddle with Sarah; and with Labon, that he should not hurt Jacob, or
hinder him in his Journey back to his Father's House.

Secondly, God sends Dreams to instruct and inform: There are teaching Dreams,
as that of Joseph was, not only to show him what to do about Mary his espoused
Wife, but to instruct him about the great Mystery of God manifested in the
Flesh, to save lost Man.

Thirdly, Dreams are sent for Support, and Consolation in time of Trouble.
[Thus he cites Jacob's Dream in our ^ext;] God (says he) comforted Jacob by
that Dream when he was in a desolate Condition, and a^sured him of his
Presence; but no doubt in it was contained as much Instruction as of
Consolation.

Fourthly, Some Dreams are sent of God upon a sad Message, to Afflict and
Terrify; Job be moaned his Sufferings and Sorrows by such Dreams: When I say my
Bed shall comfort me, Job. ^.^^.14.
my Couch shall ease my Complaint; then thou scarest me with Dreams, and
terifiest me through Visions.

Fifthly, God fore shows by Dreams, what shall come to pass: He reveals his
own Counsels as to future Providence, by Dreams and Visions, the Seven Years
of Famine were revealed to Pharaoh in a Dream: Dan. 7.^.
and the great things of the Church, and of the World too, were revealed to
Daniel in a Dream.

There are some who affirm that a Man is never in a sound, or deep Sleep when
he Dreameth; which certainly is a great mistake: Genesis 15.12.
For does not the Text say, That a deep Sleep fell on Abraham when God by a
Dream revealed to him what should become of his Posterity, and how they should
be in Egypt Four Hundred Years.

I find that Divines give several Reasons why God used to apply himself to Man
by Dreams; or this way speaks to him: Of which Mr. Caryl gives five Reasons:

1. Because in Sleep, Man is (as I may say) at best leisure for God to deal
with him; he is not so busy nor distracted, See Caryl on Job, cap. 13.
or hurried with the Affairs of this Life: Some Men are so filled with earthly
thoughts whilst awake, that they have no time, no leisure to hear what God has
either by his Word, or by Conscience to say unto them.

2. Because when they are awake, they are ready to debate and discuss what they
receive by their own Reason, we are subject (as he observes) to Logic it with
God, or use Arguments to avoid sharp Convictions darted into the mind: But in
Sleep we take things barely as offered, without Reasonings, or Disputings
against it.

3. Because in Sleep, when all is still and quiet, that which God represents to
us, takes more with the Soul, and leaves a deeper Impression upon the Mind of
Man; for common experience teaches us how Dreams, (and specially some) stick;
and how those Apprehensions which we have in our Sleep dwell with us, and abide
in our Memory, when awake: Nay, perhaps some remarkable Dream we had Twenty,
Thirty, nay, more than 40 years ago, are still fresh in our Minds, we finding
it was of God and full of Instruction: As I could tell you of one I had when
Young; a discovery to me of those great Troubles and Sorrows I should meet
with, I thought I was with the Lord Jesus, and he gave me a touch, and bid me
follow him; which I did, though I saw no form) and he spoke to me, and told me, I
should suffer hard things for his Sake; and soon after my Trials began, which
were known to many, though this was between 30 and 40 years ago, yet is as fresh
in my Memory as if not above a Year since.

4. Because the Lord hereby would clearly show his Divine Skill in Teaching and
Instructing Man; or that he has a peculiar way or art in Teaching: He Teaches
so as none of the Wise Masters of Learning were ever able to Teach and Instruct
their Scholars; there was never any Man could Teach another when Asleep; they
that are Taught ought to be more than Awake, they ought to exercise all their
Senses, Care, and Diligence; but now God is such a Teacher, such an Instructor,
that when we are Asleep, nay in a deep Sleep, he can convey Instruction, and
Teach us his Lessons: This surely does magnify his Skill, Divine Wisdom and
Power: Who but God can teach thus? As he can give a Heart t^ Understand, and
can give Understanding to the Heart of Man, so he can teach us and discover
himself, and (...) up Instruction to us when we are asleep.

5. It may also be, because God would hereby assure us, that the So^l is a
distinct Essence, and has it is distinct Operations from the Body; and that
even Death it self cannot deprive the Soul of Man of it is Working* for what i^
Sleep but a kind of Death? Sleep is a short Death, and Death is a long Sleep.
Now, when the Bo^^ is (as it were) laid aside, the Soul can go to work when the
Body lies like a Block, and stirs not; the Soul can bestir it self, and act
about many matters, and run it is thoughts to the utmost ends of the Earth
without the help of the Bodily Organs, or Powers; yea, raise up the thoughts to
the highest Heavens, in blessed intercourse with God himself. There is no need
to prove matter of Fact that it it is so: What Night, with reference to some or
other, does not utter this point of Knowledge? Nor, need I (says the same
Author) stay to prove that this is [if not a Demonstrative] yet a very Probable
Argument of the distinct Substantiality of the Soul from the Body; namely, it is
Operations when the Body [with all it is proper and peculiar Faculties and
Powers] is asleep, and contributes nothing to those Operations: And though it may
be objected, that irrationa^ Creatures may have Dreams; yet their Dreams do, no
doubt, differ as much from those of Men as themselves do. To this effect Caryl,
and other Learned Men speak.

1. But from hence I would not have people to regard all sorts of Dreams; It Is
dangerous to regard all sorts of Dreams.
especially considering as I hinted before, Satan has such power admitted him,
as sometimes to suggest evil and pernicious thoughts into our Minds when we are
asleep; some Dreams being Diabolical, and others arising from Natural Causes,
and are Vain, and Ridiculous.

2. It therefore ought to be considered how we may know Divine Dreams from
others: And this be sure of, How to know Diabolical Dreams.
that whatsoever Dreams tend to draw the Soul from God, or to embrace any
Notion, or Doctrine that is repugnant to the Word of God, is not Divine; not
from God, but from the Devil.

3. Moreover let no person now expect God should speak unto them by Dreams or
Visions; for though he did so frequently before Christ came, yet Now, in these
last days, God has spoken unto us by his Son; Heb. 1.1.2.
and we have a more sure Word of Prophecy: God now, God does not now speak
often by Dreams.
[as reverend Perkins notes] does not usually speak to us by Dreams, yet he
being a free Agent, may so do if he please; and no doubt, sometimes he does
thus speak [tho' not commonly] for the Instruction and Consolation of his
People. Yet let a^^ take heed they are not deceived by Dreams: Luthe^ observes
how many in his time were deluded b^ Dreams, and Visions; which they falsely
attribute^ to God, as the immediate Author of them, and from hence prayed
earnestly about two things.

1. That God would give him a good Understanding of the Scriptures, and of his
Mind revealed therein.

2. That he would not send him Dreams or Visions, Yea, [saith he] I contracted
with God that h^ would not: Brethren the holy Scriptures are those sacred
Oracles by which God speaks to us, and (...) them i^ contained all things which
are necessary for us to know as to Faith, and Practice; being sufficient to
make every Man Wise to Salvation through Faith in Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 3.15, 16,
17.
and Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works: Therefore certainly such
that are not satisfied to adhere to the holy Scriptures as a sufficient Rule in
all points of Faith, and Practice* but desire God to speak unto them by Dreams,
o^ Visions, are deluded by Satan, and do thereby cas^ great contempt upon the
holy Scriptures.

But no more as to Dreams in general, we will now come to this remarkable
Dream, and Vision Jacob had: And behold a Ladder, etc.

The main Doctrine raised.
II. Observe.] The Lord Jesus may fuly be compare^ to a Ladder that is set upon
the Earth, and the To^ of it reaching to Heaven.

This Proposition I shall open God assisting. -- And,

First, I shall run a parallel between Jesus Christ, and Jacob's Ladder. And
Show that Christ may be compared to Jacob's Ladder. In respect both of his
Person, and Offices. Now,

Before I proceed I know not, my Brethren, why we may not run the Parallel so
far as there is a clear Parity, and it is consistent with the Analogy of Faith.

1. A Ladder is the contrivance of the Wisdom of Man, for the reaching,
attaining, A parallel between Christ and a Ladder, especially Jacob's Ladder.
or doing of some thing which the Author designed thereby to do: So JESUS
CHRIST as Mediator, GOD-MAN in one Person, is the rare and wonderful
contrivance of the infinite Wisdom of God, for his attaining, or accomplishment
of his own most glorious design, and purpose, which is the Glory and Exaltation
of his own Name, and the Salvation of his Elect, who on this Mystical Ladder
must ascend to Heaven.

2. A Ladder is a proper means, or Medium to attain to that thing, or
accomplish that work which it was contrived, or made for, and possibly, without
which Medium it was impossible for the Person to reach to that thing, or do
that work which he designed, and purposed to attain unto, or to accomplish, and
bring to pass: So JESUS CHRIST is the only way, and means which GOD has found
out to bring us to Heaven. The Builders of Babel thought to get up to Heaven by
a contrivance of their own, even by erecting a mighty Tower, Genesis 11.^.
the top of which (they said) should reach to Heaven; but they were soon
confounded: And like to them Mystery-babylon has sought out other ways to
Heaven, then by this Mystical Ladder Jesus Christ; they think to get
Justification, Romans 9.31.32.
and eternal Life by their own good Works, and by other Sacrifices (then by the
one Sacrifice of the Cross) which they offer up for the living, and the dead;
but they are but Babel-builders; even blind, and deceived Wretches, Romans ^^.3.
whom God has confounded, and will confound: Brethren, there is no other way
nor means to obtain eternal Life, but by Jesus Christ alone: Ioh.14.6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man comes unto the Father but by
me: Jesus Christ went to Heaven, as our blessed Head, and Representative, by
his own Blood; Heb. 9.12.
by his own Blood, he entered in once, into thy holy Place; to show that there
is no other way by which Sinners can go to Heaven this only suiting with the
Wisdom of God, Romans 3.^6.
and every ways answering his own glorious Purpose and Design in manifesting,
and magnifying the Glory of all his blessed Attributes, and making the Law
honorable by Christ^ fulfilling all the Precepts thereof, and bearing the
penalty of it, to free us from the Curse thereof: Some think to get to Heaven
by a Sober, Moral Life; others by their own Faith, and inherent Holiness, and
Obedience to the precepts of the Gospel, but in opposition to all these (...),
Christ is the Way^ it is by his Righteousness alone, Romans 3.^^, 24, 2^, 2^.
we are Justified in the sight of God, his perfect Obedience to the Law, is our
Title to eternal Life, 1 Pet. 2.24
and by his death (who bore Hell pangs for us) we are delivered from
everlasting Wrath, Act 4.1^.
and Condemnation; Neither is there Salvation in any other: For there is no
other Name given under Heaven, whereby we must be Saved; For either Soul or
Body, there is no other Person, no other Sacrifice, no other Righteousness, no
other way, or thing: But by this Mystical Ladder Jesus Christ alone, by which
we can be Saved.

3. A Ladder must be long enough to to reach the thing desi^ed: Now Jesus
Christ, in respect of his two Natures, is prepared so by the Wisdom of God,
that in his Person he may be said to reach from Earth unto Heaven.

1. As touching his Humane Nature, which is the F^ot of this Ladder; this
stands as it were upon the Earth: -- And,

2. As touching his divine Nature, which is the Top of the Ladder; this
reaches unto Heaven; and in these two Natures in the Person of Christ, we have
what is represented by Jacob's Ladder; for as these two Natures are in his
Person united together, Heaven and Earth are united together: Ioh. 1.1.2.
And now that he is God, see John, 1.1.2. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Christ, in respect of his divine
Nature, is here called the Word; he was before the beginning of the Word, even
(...) everlasting; or ever the Earth was; He was with God, Prove. 8.^7.
and was God, not a Creature; he was not Created at the beginning, but was the
Creator, the Maker of Heaven and Earth; all things were made by him; not as the
Instrumental Cause of all things, or any Instrument in the Father's hand, but
as a Principle Efficient Cause of all things: Without controversy, 1 Timothy 3.1^.
great is the mystery of Godliness; God was manifest in the Flesh. The Word was
made Flesh, Ioh. 1.14.
and dweit among us: That is the Son of God, or second Person in the Trinity:
The Evangelist (as one observes) rather says, he was made Flesh, then he was
made Man, more plainly to distinguish the two Natures in Christ; to assert the
truth of his Humane Nature; to let us know that Christ assumed his Humane
Nature in common; not the particular Nature of any; it is not said he was
changed into Flesh, but by his assuming it, he was made Flesh, or He, the Word,
Took upon him the See^ of Abraham, Heb. 2.14.15. Christ GOD and MAN in one
Person.
even, the same common Nature of all the Elect.

Brethren, Jesus Christ is perfect God, and perfect Man, in one Person,
therefore his Person may truly be said to reach from Earth to Heaven.

Pray Observe; Jacob saw the Foot of the Ladder
to stand upon the Earth. The Foot went not lower than the Earth: this might
signify Christ should take upon him the Seed of Abraham, or the Nature of Man,
not the Nature of Angels; it was to raise to Heaven the Inhabitants of the
Earth, not the infernal Spirits, or Devils of Hell: Had the foot of the Ladder
only reached to the Air, or come down into the middle Center of the Earth, it
might have seemed doubtful, whether st was prepared for Fallen Angels, or for
fallen Mankind, to get up to Heaven; but the foot of it standing on the Earth,
Heb. 2.17.18.
denotes, no doubt, the same thing which the Apostle speaks; Verily he took not
hold on the Nature of Angels, but of the Seed of Abraham he takes hold.

First, It was requisite He should be MAN, and so have his Foot upon the Earth.

Why Christ is MAN.
1. That he might in our Nature perform that perfect Obedience to the holy Law
of God, which was required of Mankind; for no Righteousness short of that can
Justify us, or carry us to Heaven.

2. He must be Man, that he might be capable to Suffer and Dye for Mankind; God
considered simply in himself, could not dye.

3. Because the Justice of God required the same Nature which Sinned, to suffer
even the same Nature that broke the Law, to dye, and to bear the Wrath of God.

4. He must be Man, that so he might Simpathize with us, or have a feeling of
our Infirmities; it must be such a Nature of Man that was clothed with
Infirmities, which we have, or are atttended with since the Fall, because he
came to raise fallen Man: Now our Infirmities are of two sorts.

1st. Penal and Painful.

2ly, Sinful and Culpable Infirmities. It was the first of these Christ did
take; he had a Nature that could Hunger and Thir^^ (...) be Weary, and suffer
Pain and Misery both (...) and Body, as we are liable to; Heb. 4.14, 15
We have (...)-Priest which cannot be touched with ^^e feeling of ^^r
Infirmities, but was in all points Tempted like as we are, yet without Sin.
This shows he was really Man, or had a true Humane (tho not a Sinful) Nature:
It behoved him to be made like unto ^is Brethren, that he might be a merciful,
Heb. ^.17, 1^.
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation
for the Sins of the People: For in that he himself has suffered being Tempted,
he is able to succor them that are Tempted.

Secondly, It was necessary also that he should be GOD.

1. That he might reach Heaven, Why Christ mus^ be God.
I mean the full demands of God's Justice, by way of Satisfaction: A mere Man
could not satisfy infinite Justice, or make up that Wrong our Sins ha^ done to
God; but seeing both the Natures in Christ make but one Person, when Christ
dyed, he that was truly God dyed: Hence it is said, Act. 20, 2^.
God purchased the Church with his own Blood: Which was an infinite
Satisfaction to divine Justice: had we all lain in Hell for ever, we could not
have paid one Farthing of that Debt we owed to God; and because we could not
Satisfy, therefore must have Suffered for ever.

2. That he might sustain in his Body the Wrath of God, and severe Punishment
due to us for our Sins; for none but he that was God could bear so great a
Burden and heavy Wrath, as all the Sins of the Elect were, and did incur:
Suppose the Sins but of one Person, (and he be none of the greatest Sinners
neither) yet if charged upon him, would they not sink him down to Hell; Oh!
what Power, what Strength then, save the Strength of an infinite Person, could
bear, as well as satisfy for, all the Sins of so many Thousand Persons, even
the whole number of God's Elect.

3. He must be God that he might be able to overcome all our Enemies, not only
for us, but also in us, and preserve us from the greatest Evils, and bestow
upon us the greatest Good: He must lay his Hands upon both; viz. He must bring
God down to us, and carry us up to God; I mean reconcile God to Man, and Man to
God, which he could not do, unless he be God blessed for evermore: how could he
know our Hearts, our Wan^ our Necessities, except he was the Eternal Go^* How
also could he Quicken us, and raise us from (...) Dead, and destroy the Power
of Satan in o^ Souls, and take away that cursed Enmity, which naturally is in
our Hearts against God? Romans 8.7.


Now, thus we may clearly perceive, that the Spiritual Ladder is long enough to
reach from Earth to Heaven.

Fourthly, As a Ladder must be long enough (...) reach to the thing or place
desired, so also must be broad or wide enough, if there are mo^^ than one to go
up, even many Persons, it must (...) wide enough for them all

Even so this Ladder this way, is broad enoug^ for so many that are appointed,
or ordained to g^ to Heaven, or to be Saved. Brethren, Christ is a (...) Way,
or Medium to carry all the Elect to Heaven Not One, but All.

1. In that he took not into Union with his Divine Nature, the Single Person of
any, but the common Nature of all that Sinned, who shall be Saved. Ar^ wh^^th
on John 1. chap.14, ^, p, (...).
Take here what a worthy Write Notes: If Christ had only taken the Person (...)
a Man, then there must have been two Persons (...) Christ, a Person Assuming,
and a Person Assumed, yea, then that only Person which Christ Assumed, should
have been advanced, and Saved, (...) should have Saved that Person, and no
other, (...) he had Assumed the Person of a Man; with us the Soul and Body
united make a Person, but in Christ the Soul and Body were so united as to have
their subsistence, not of themselves, (as in us) but in the Godhead: No sooner
was the Soul united to the Body, but both Soul and Body had subsistence i^ the
second Person in the Trinity. So not the Assuming of a Person, but the Nature
of Man, common to all, Heb. 2, 16
etc. He took not the Nature of Angels, b^^ the Seed of Abraham: Tho^ it was
the common Nature of all Men, or of all the Sons and Daughter^ of Adam, which
he took, yet the Holy Ghost calls it the Seed of Abraham, intimating that the
design, and purpose of God was, that Christ should die for no more than were
comprehended in the Election of Grace; Christ is not a common head to all
Adam's Seed; no, but only of them that the Father gave to him.

2. So many as were ordained to eternal Life, Act. 13.4^.
shall by Christ be saved: True, the Blood of Christ has virtue, or worth
enough in it to save the whole World, but it can be effectual to none but to
those for whom it was shed, or to them to whom the Holy Ghost does apply it;
which is to all that do believe, all that Christ died for, he prayed for, and
does now interce^d for, that they may receive of the Merits of his Blood; (but
he did not pray for the World) yet he it is able to save to the uttermost, Heb.
7.25.
(even to the last round of the Ladder) all that come to God by him, seeing he
ever lives (observe it) to make intercession for them. No Man can ascend this
Ladder without the mighty power of God; nay, no Man can come to it except the
Father draw him; the Election of the Father, the Redemption of the Son, and the
Application of the Spirit are of like, and the same Extention. I^^. ^, 36.
All that the Father has given to me, shall come unto me; the Holy Spirit will
enlighten them, work Faith in them, bring them all to take hold of, and ascend
this Ladder: So wide as the spe^i^l love of God is, so wide is this spiritual
Ladder, and it is indeed so broad that Three Thousand Persons could set their
Feet upon it, Act. ^.4^.
and ascend up at one, and the same time: no 'Man ever by an act of true and
saving Faith attempted to ascend thereon, that found it too narrow, and
straight for him, though the way to Heaven comparatively is narrow.

Fifthly, A Ladder which reaches from Earth unto Heaven, ought also to be
exceeding strong and firm.

Ioh. 1.1.2.
Now, Jesus Christ, this spiritual Ladder; though he be Man, yet he is also God,
the most high God, Phil. 2.6.
Coeternal, Co-essential, and Coequal with the Father; and therefore he is
mighty strong* he is able to bear the weight of all our Sins, and of our
Persons, and Infirmities; He is mighty to save: Isa. 53.1.
Cast thy Burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee. Though he is
represented in our Text by a Ladder, Exodus 1^.6.
yet he is also called a Rock, Numb. 20.11.
a strong Rock, a high Rock, an everlasting Rock; 1 Cor. 1.^, 4.
and pray what is firmer than a Rock* A Rock is locus exelus, a high place;
Rocks, as One notes, Robinson.
though they have their Roots very low, and deep, yet their Tops are high and ^o
^ring* and lifted up above the surface of other pa^^^ of the Earth: Some Rocks
reach to the Cloud^; the Lord Jesus is a high Rock, in regard of the Dignity of
his Person; Ioh. 3.31.
He that comes (...) H^aven is above all: Heb. 1.2. Ph^^. ^.^.
He is the brightnes^ (...) the Father's Glory; God has exalted him, and given
him a Name above every Name. A Ro^^ (...) locus stabilis a place of Firmness,
and Stability; Rocks keep their place, and move not* Now this Ladder is as firm
as a Rock, Christ is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1* 24.
Originally, Essentially, (...), Perfectly without Alteration, without
Diminition.

1. In Christ, all the Attributes of God are united together, Psalm. ^5 1^, ^
to save all that venture on him; Justice and Mercy in him are met together,
and Fiss each other; He is the Man of God's Right Hand, (...).
made strong for himself, as well as for us.

2. Christ is not only Strong, as Mediator, in respect of his Person, but also
by God's Eternal De^ree and Purpose; God's absolute Decrees are compared to
Mountains of Brass; Ze^^. 6.^.
he is fixed, and stands firm and sure, by God's Eternal Purpose; hence called
a sure Foundation: Isa. 28, 16.
No need to fear venturing up upon such a Ladder; should Millions of Sinners at
once get upon it, it is strong enough to bear them, tho they are never so heavy
laden with Sin and Iniquity: He that has born the weight of Divine Wrath, and
Vengeance, Psalm, 55, 22,
can bear, and sustain the weight of all that come unto him, and venture
themselves upon him by Faith and Dependence, though never so vile and notorious
Sinners.

Sixthly, A Ladder so exceeding high, must have many Rounds, or Gradations to
ascend by.

So Jesus Christ, in undertaking our Salvation, proceeded gradually, Step by
Step. Ioh, 6, 58.


1. He came down from Heaven to fix his Foot in our Nature upon the Earth.

2. He was Incarnate, or assumed a Body prepared for him by the Father; Heb,
10, 5.
A Body have thou prepared me.

3. He was Born of a Virgin, though without Sin: That Is the third Gradation.

4. He lived a Holy and Spiritual Life, in exact Conformity to that holy Law
which we had broken and violated, Heb. 7, 26.
to procure a Title for us unto Eternal Life.

5. He died the Cursed death of the Cross to satisfy divine Justice for us; and
in our stead. Gal. 4, 4, 5.


6. He Rose again from the Dead the Third Day, for our Justification. Romans 4.25.


7. He Ascended up into Heaven, Romans 8.34.
there is the top of the Ladder; there he is now in Person, though he is with his
People on Earth by his spirit; Lo, I am with you always! Mat. 28.20.


8. He makes Intercession, pleading the Merits of his Blood for us: These are
some of those Gradations, or Steps of Jacob's Ladder, by which all Believers
ascend to Heaven.

Seventhly, He that would attain to what he desires, by climbing, or
descen^ing up upon (...) Ladder, must first come to the Foot of it, an^ so
Gradually ascend Step by Step.

So that Man, that would go to Heaven, mus^ be first brought to the Foot of
Jesus Christ, i. e. he must see his own lost, Ze^^ 12.1^*
and miserable Condi^^on, Mat. 11.2^.
and know the Impossibility of getting to Heaven any other way: All Self*
righteous Person were never brought to the Foot of this La^de^ to the Foot of
Jesus Christ, A^t. 2.36.
to acknowledg^ themselves wretched and undone Sinners^ (...) No Alas! A^t.
16.3^, 31.
they see^in^ Necessity of Christ, nor o^ his Righteousness! They* like the
Jews of Old* being ignorant of God's Righteousness, Romans 10.3^
go about to establish their own Leg^^^ or Inherent Righteousness: He that
thinks he can get Wings t^ fly up to Heaven, or can build a^ Tower wit^ his own
hands, whose Top shall reach thither so that he can that way be saved, will
neglect nay slight this glorious Contrivance^ of God (...) infinite Wisdom, of
Saving Sinners by Jesus Christ and so never come to Christ's Foot: Isa. 41.2.
(...) it is ^ai^^ God called Abraham to his Foot: A (...) maybe said to be
brought to the Foot of (...) Christ* who is effectually Convinced of the (...)
he is in, without Christ; and of (...) own I ^ability any other way, to Step
one Ste^* toward Heaven; but with the Publican cry^ out, Mat. 11.2^.
Lord have Mercy upon me a Sinner. Brethr^n, there are none but sensible
Sinners, mea^^ and heavy-l^de^ Sinners that will come to Christ, the ^le^t,
before called, are in the same Condition, (...) 2, 2 3^
^or state of Wrath with the rest of Mankin^, and are enlightened by the holy
Spirit to see it, and acknowledge it before they ascend up this spiritual
Ladder.

2. Now a po^r Sinner being, brought thus to the Foot of Christ, the first
Step, or Gradation he makes in ascending on this Ladder, (...) ^.31.
is to believe in Christ; to venture his Soul upon him alone; to trust on him,
on his Righteousness, ^ Ioh* 3.3^
And on the Merits of his Blood for Justification, etc. He that firmly, and
savingly Believes in Christ, may be said to set his Foot on this Ladder, to
ascend. Some Men do not begin (...); they would be at the top of the Ladder,
Some wo^ld begin at the Top of the Ladder.
before they have se^ ^their Feet on the first Round of it; because all that
shall be Saved are Elected and they begin there, and hence think; if they ^are
Elected, though they are not called, but are in their Sins, they are Justified,
Pardoned, and in as good Estate, as the best Believer in the World. But this is
a great Mistake, the Decree of Election, without the Execution of it, puts
nothing into actual Existence: God Decreed from all Eternity to create the
World, but the World was not therefore from Eternity actually Created. Ephesians,
2, 3.
No more are any of the Elect actually Justified, and in a State of Life, until
by the Spirit, Joh. 3, 18.
they are united to him and so Believe. 2 Cor. 5.17
A Man cannot be Dead and Alive at one and the same time: Or, be Condemned and
Justified; or be a Child of the Devil, and yet a Child of God. Grace makes a
Relative, as well as a Real change all one and the same time; the first Step a
Person takes, I say, toward, Heaven, [pray observe it,]
is to Believe in Christ; and that a Sinner, before he does Believe, is brought
to the Foot of Christ: i. e. He sees himself Lost and Undone in the first Adam,
and till then under Wrath.

3. And then that he may go up, upon this spiritual Ladder, he must Step
forward on the next Round, which is that of Obedience to Christ's holy
Precepts; Take my Yoke on you, Mat. 11.29
and learn of me. First, our Lord calls all that are weary, and heavy-laden, to
come unto him; that is, to Believe in him, and then to take on them the Yoke of
Gospel-Obedience, as Baptism, and Church-member-ship: Then they that gladly
received the Word, (...). 2.41.
were Baptized, and the same day then were added unto them about Three Thousand
Soul.

4. And then go on unto Perfection; or pre^^ forward in the way of Holiness,
and so go step by step, Psalm. 54.^.
or from Strength to Strength in Sion adding one Grace of the Spirit unto
another.

Eighthly, 2 Pet. 5.6.7.
He that would go up a very high Ladder, ought to take care to set his Feet
direct or straight upon it; not carelessly, or awry but full upon it.

How Sinners ascend on this Ladder.
So all that would ascend on this Ladder, Jesus Christ, must exert a direct act
of Faith; he must fix his Soul plum upon him, or firmly upon him: A poor Sinner
must see that he takes hold o^ Christ in a Promise, with a true and fixed Faith
not with a false or presumpteous Fa^^^, but by the Faith of the operation of
God* Col. 2.12.
which is ^ Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
called the Faith of God's Elect; Tit. 1.1.
being only peculiar unto them, (...) ^^o a^ the chosen of God: A false Faith
is (...) dangerous as a false- Step a Man takes in ascending ^ a Ladder, A mis
believer, as bad a^ (...) unbeliever.
who missing his standing, an^ (...) falls down and perishes; and so shall al^
M^^believers as well as all Un-believers perish ^^^nally: He that believes not
aright, had as g^^^ believe not at all

Ninthly, As he that climbs up a Ladder ough^ to kn^w it is Strength, so he
Ventures his L^ft and whole Body upon it.

So that Man that ventures on this spiritual Ladder, (...) 6^.1.
Jesus Christ, ought to know the Strength and Power of Christ, to Justify, to
Pardon, and eternally to Save him; he must venture all the stress of his
Salvation on him alone; Christ is the only Foundation, 1 Co^. 3.11.
he must venture his whole Soul upon him; Trust entirely in him; buil^ only
upon him, and come to the Father by him I know on whom I have Believed: 2 Timothy
1.^^.
I know hi^ Power he is mighty to Save, yea, Psalm. 71.2.
able to save to the uttermost (as was hinted before) In the Lord do I put my
trust; Again, Psalm. 31.6. Psalm. 16.1.
(says David) In thee do I put my Trust.

Tenthly, A Man that ventures to ascend up upon a Ladder so exceeding high, the
top whereof reaches above the Clouds, even to Heaven, as he shows his Faith is
not small, so his Courage is great.

Brethren, This of Venturing on Christ, Believing on Christ, shows, that a
Saint's Faith and Courage is not small; Faith lies above Sense; nay, above
Reason; I mean Faith in Christ, to believe in a Crucified Savior; to seek
Justification by the Righteousness of another; by a Man hanged on a Tree; 1
Cor. 1.23
the Greeks counted this Foolishness. To get this way to Heaven, shows a Man
acts above himself: Some would say to a Man that is resolved to ascend up on
such a Ladder, Friend, you can never get up to Heaven in such a way; you will
certainly fall, or faint before you get thither; what Faith have you? What
prodigious Courage have you? So here the poor Soul says I fear not, God ^^^th
set this Ladder up, and fixed it firmly, and G^^, Commanded me to Believe in
Christ; he ^ath bid me venture up on this Ladder: He has revealed in his Word,
that this way, Act. 4.11*
and By no other, we must be Saved, and I will venture upon him: Many have gone
this way safe to Heaven already, and none can go any other way; I must
therefore believe in Christ, ascend to Heaven by him, or else perish for ever.
Isa. 41.1^.14.
I know God will help me, and uphold me, and I will therefore, not be afraid; I
am convinced of Righteousness, because Christ, as my Head, is gone to the
Father; his Righteousness, and not my own, must carry me thither; his
Righteousness is Perfect, and I am Complete in him; and as I have Righteousness
in him, so in him I have Strength also.

Brethren, Without Faith and spiritual Courage* no person will adventure to
climb up this Ladder; Ioh. 1^, ^.
nay, without Faith, no Man can ascend or come to the Father: Believing in
Christ, is a climbing up, or ascending up upon this Ladder.

Eleventhly, It is a vain thing for a Man to hope to get up to the Top of a
Ladder, that will not first set his Foot on the lower Roun^ thereof.

So it is a vain thing for any to hope to be Saved, or to get to Heaven, who do
not first Believe, and receive R^^^nerating Grace; for he that, Mark. (...)
Believes not, shall be Damned.

Twelfthly, He that ascends up very high on a Mighty Tall Ladder, has a clear
Sight, or Prospect of Heaven; and the higher he goes the smaller the Earth
appears to him; it seems but a little spot; nay, it being a dark Body, (...),
at last not perceive it to be any ^^ing at all, or quite lose the sight of it;
and (...) step, he takes, the further he goes from (...) and the higher he
comes to Heaven, and has a clearer Sight of that.

So he, who by Faith and Communion with God, gets up upon this spiritual
Ladder, Jesus Christ, has a clear Prospect of the Glory (...) Heaven; (...)
11.2^
Moses by Faith, saw him that is invisible: Faith presented to his view the
Angel of the Covenant, and God Reconciled in him; viz. the Lord Jesus Christ.
(...) 2.13
Carnal, or Earthly Persons, are at such a great distance from Heaven, that
they cannot discern the Glory of it; they have no Sight, no Eyes to see afar
off; but the Earth, R^^. 1^.^^.
and Earthly things appearing to the Carnal sight, being always in their view,
they are exceedingly Affected therewith. But Believers, (...)
who are dwellers above, and who daily make a further Prog^ession H^a^e^ (...)
the Earth, and Earthly this ^s as (...) ^^^ry step they take, they go f^rt^e^
(...) from Earth in their Love and (...) and Contemplations; Our conversatio^
(...) ^^^ven: Others mind Earthly things, (...) the Earth, and therefore speak
of (...) but Believers are said to dwell in Hea^^^ (...) grand Enemy of the
Saints, is said to open (...) Mouth to blaspheme against God, to blaspheme his
Name, and his Tabernacle, and all that dwell in Heaven; that is, in the Church
of God, (...) 3^.16.
Militant, they shall dwell on ^igh^; they are out of those confused Hurries,
and Noises, Dangers, Romans 8.8.9
and Perplexities others, who dwell below are attended with* They are born
from above, have heavenly Hearts, heavenly Principles, heavenly Desires,
heavenly Ends and Aims, and heavenly Lives; 1 John. 1.2.3.
they have Communion with the God of Heaven; 2 Cor. 4.18.
heavenly things are their Delight; they s^a^ so high above, that they are
Ravished with that sight which they have of Heaven.

There are some other things that I might speak of, as held forth by this
glorious Type of Christ; or which might be improved for our Instruction from
hence, but I shall leave them until the next time, and close now with a brief
word of Application.

USE.
1. By way of Admiration. Admiration*
See what a wonderful person Jesus Christ is! Behold the Son of Man, or this
spiritual Ladder that reaches from Earth to Heaven, behold it with Admiration!
Who would have thought of such away to Heaven? Who, but infinite Wisdom, could
have found out such a way to the Father? What Workman but the eternal God,
could make such a Ladder? The Father is said to be above it, or on the top of
it, to denote this way he Prepared, and only by this way we must go to him, if
ever we come to Heaven. Christ is God and Man, in One Person, Heaven and Earth
meet together in him; he brings God to us, and carries us up to God, God is
reconciled to us in him, and we are reconciled to God by him.

2. Be exhorted to get up on this Ladder: If ever you think to see the Father,
he is above it, as the end of our Journey, as our Hope and Reward; he calls
upon you Sinners to Adventure up this Ladder; to believe in his Son: He is
above it to direct you, uphold you, and encourage you, therefore fear not; nay,
he is above it, declaring himself in Covenant with all that come to him by
Jesus Christ, and to be their God; Genesis 28.13.
I am the Lord God, of Abraham, etc. This he spoke to Jacob, as standing above
it, or on the top of this Ladder.

3. Bless God for Christ, for his devising of such a way to raise us up, who
were sunk so low, and had no strength, no skill, no helper, none that could
bring us to God, nor find out a way to save our Souls, but God himself only,
therefore he says, Deliver him from going down into the Pit, Job. 23.24.
I have found a Ransom.

Rep^^o^*
Reproof.] This may be also for Reprehension to diverse sorts of Persons,

1. To such that deny the D^^ty, or Godhead of Jesus Christ: If he be no more
than a mere Man, the Ladder is too short to reach up to Heaven: He could not
reach so high as to satisfy divine Justice, or to bring us to God, it being
through the worth and dignity of his Person, who being an infinite Person, or
God over all, there was an infinite Worth and Merit in his Sufferings and
Obedience. True, he might have saved himself, (being Perfect, never having
Sinned, nor broke God's Law,) though he had been but a mere Man; but it is from
his being God as well as Man. Substituted in our stead, and standing in our
Law-place as our great Head and ^ponser, ^^ that gave such Worth and Merit for
us by his Obedience, and suffering to the Law and Justice of God. Moreover, how
else also could he have overcome Death, the Devil, and all our Enemies, and
have raised himself from the Dead? Death would have kept him under it is Power,
and he had never came out of the Grave to ascend so high as Heaven to raise us
thither.

2. It Reprehends all such also, who seek by any other way or means to go to
Heaven: Romans 10.3.
We have new Babel-builders, or Work-mongers that think to climb up to Heaven
by their own Works, by their own Faith, and sincere Obedience: And others by
the Light within; which is but a branch of the First-covenant, or law of God,
writ in the Heart; Gal. 5.21.
and if there had been a Law that could have given Life, or raised us up to
Heaven, verily, Righteousness had been by the Law; Gal.2.21.
But then, (as the Apostle says) Christ is dead in vain.

Examine.] Try your selves, Examine.
by what you have heard, whether you have ascended on this Ladder, yea, or nay;

1. Were you ever brought to the Foot of Christ? Did you ever see your lost
Condition in the first Adam, and that there is no other way to be Saved, but by
the Lord Jesus?

2. Are you at the lowest part of the Ladder, and there rest; or are you got up
toward the top thereof? There is no resting, no stay to be made when you first
ascend, or first believe in Christ, or on any attainment of Grace, but you must
mount up, or ascend up higher, from Faith to Faith; Romans 1.17.
have you stepped up on the Roand of Obedience? have you took Christ's yoke upon
you? [this seems too hard a step for some to take:] are you got above the Earth
in your Affections? does the Earth, and the things thereof, grow less and less
every day in your sight? as in a natural respect it does to him that soars very
high, or climbs upon a Ladder, to the very Clouds. Are you willing to leave
Earth, to leave this World, to go to Heaven? Phil. 3.12.13.14.
Paul longed to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: He pressed toward the
mark. Do you dwell in Communion with God?

^las! many love to be below, they like those lower Regions best: See how it is
with you; but no more at this time.

SERMON II. October. 27. 1695.

GENESIS xxviij. xij. xiij. [ -- And behold a Ladder, etc.]


DOCT. I. The Lord Jesus may fitly be compared to a Ladder, that is set on the
Earth, and the top of it reaches up unto Heaven.
I Have run the Parallel in many respects between Christ and such a Ladder, in
respect had to his Person and Offices, as our Savior and Blessed Mediator: I
shall proceed to some further Particulars.

Thirteenthly, He that climbs up a Ladder looks upwards as he goes; he does not
turn his eyes down toward the Earth, for that is dangerous.

So he that sets out in the way to Heaven by Jesus Christ, must look up; his
eye must be set on Heavenly things; 2 Cor. 4.18.
While we look not at things that are seen, but at things that are not seen,
etc.

1. This look my Brethren may refer to his Underderstanding; his Understanding
is enlightened; it is opened to see the Nature and Excellency of Heavenly
things: That the eyes of your Understanding being enlighthed, Ephesians. 1.1^.
that ye may know what is the Hope of your Calling, and what is the Riches of
the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. What the Eye is to the Body, that
the Understanding is to the Soul.

2. It may refer to his Affections: Set your Affections on things above; Col.
3.2.
where Christ sits on the Right Hand of God. A Believer's Desires and
Affections are Spiritual and Heavenward.

3. It denotes moreover, the Exercise of Faith* Such, with Moses, by Faith see
him that is invisible. Did not the Eyes of Believers see something above
excelling all things here below, Heb. 11.27.
they would never ascend by Faith on this Ladder, nor slight and conntemn all
the Riches, Pleasures, and Glory of this World.

4. It may also denotes the excellent Frame of their Hearts: They are born from
above; they have received a heavenly Nature, an heavenly and spiritual Frame;
and therefore they look upwards; They that are after the Flesh, Romans 8.5.
mind the things of the Flesh; but they that are after the Spirit, the things
of the Spirit.

5. This of looking upwards, may signify a Believer's Hope and Expectation:
Their Hope is in Heaven, not in this Life; If our Hope be only in this Life, 1
Cor. 15.19.
we are of all Men most miserable. As they are born from above, so they are
traveling thither; their Faces are set heavenward, Heaven is their
Inheritance. They seek an heavenly Country; men of the World have their eyes
downwards. A man that looks downward that climbs up a Ladder, is in danger of
falling; however, he must make a pause, or stand still, but a Believer must go
on his way, he must not look back, nor stand still, but press forwards, as Paul
did. He must not look back.

Fourteenthly, A Ladder is a narrow way to go upon, and it is a difficult thing
to travel all day upon it.

So Jesus Christ, who is the way to the Father, is a narrow way; Narrow is the
way that leads to Life. The way to Hell is broad, Mat. 7.13.14.
multitudes go in that way, but the way to Life is narrow; tho this Ladder is
wide or broad enough for all the Elect of God, even for all for whom it was
prepared, Joh. 6.36. Heb. 7.25.
for all that come to Christ, for the vilest Sinner that is helped to venture
himself upon him; yet comparatively it is a very narrow way.

1. A Narrow way is opposed to that which is Broad, where any careless or
negligent Person may go, or multitudes may travel in it. Now Christ is so
narrow a way, many cannot go this way, What Is meant by the narrowness of the
Way to Heaven.
it is not wide enough for them; Christ will not allow them the Liberty they
will take and will have; let what will come of it, they will have their Lusts
their Riches, their Honors, their sensual Pleasures, their old Companions,
their sinful Customs, and sinful Practices, the way must be broad enough for
them, and their base Consorts too, or they will not go that way.

2. It may be called a narrow way, Mat. 7.13.14.
because it is hard to find it, a narrow Path is not soon found or discerned as
a broad, common beaten road is: Christ is a way not discerned by Carnal
Persons; 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit, they are foolishness
to him; neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned.

Man naturally accounts the way to Heaven by Jesus Christ, a foolish thing* 1
Cor. 1.18.
because they cannot comprehend how they should be Justified by the
Righteousness of another, and he a poor Man (as he was accounted) who was
Crucified on a Tree: to be Justified by their own Works, or by their own
Righteousness; this seems easy to discern; it is natural to them to seek t^ be
saved in such a way: all men being bor^ under the Covenant of Works; Brethren,
Christ is a way that lies above human^ Reason; it is a Mystery that depends
wholly upon divine Revelation; it is as strange and as an unlikely a thing to
mere natural Men to think to be ^aved or to go to Heaven this way; as it is for
them to think a Ladder may be made, and set upon the Earth, the top of which
shall reach up to Heaven: So that Men may that way, i. e. by climbing up on
that Ladder, go to Heaven. They look with an eye of sense, and not by an eye of
Faith.

3. Narrowness may denote the Difficulty of walking in this way: Christ is not
only a way hard to find, Mat. 16.24, 25.
but also hard to walk in; Faith leads the Soul to deny it self; i. e. of
Sinful-self, natural-self, and righteous-self; and to do this is hard and
difficult, and not only to deny ourselves in all these respects, but also to
take up our Cross: O it is this also that renders the way narrow! What deny
ourselves of every Flesh-pleasing and profitable Lust, and of all our own
Wisdom, Honor, Relations and Righteousness, and take up the Cross too!

(1.) This includes all Losses and Damage, even to part with all for Christ's
sake.

(2ly.) To take up our Cross, denotes Shame and Reproach for the sake of Christ.

(3.) It denotes also Pain and Suffering; nay, Death it self, when called to it.

(4.) Faith leads the Soul to mortify Sin, to crucify the Flesh, Romans 8.1^. and
cap. 1^.14.
with the Affections and Lusts: The Dominion and Power of Sin must be broke
Sin, must not reign; we must not only leave Sin, but mortify it also: This is
hard to do, and to follow Christ whither soever he goes, or does lead us; to
follow him fully; constantly, universally; and now, this is no easy thing to do
to the Flesh.

4. Narrowness of the Way, or Ladder, may signify what careful steps must be
taken by all that climb up thereon; we must step straight forward; viz. Lead a
holy and strict life; For without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord. Heb.
12.14


We must take heed we do not suffer our feet to slide, or slip; therefore have
need to say with holy David, Order my steps in thy Word, Psalm. 119, 133.
and let not any iniquity have Dominion over me: Direct all the thoughts, and
motions of my Heart, and Actions by thy Spirit, accompanying thy Word, that
Pride, Passion, earthly Mindedness, nor any evil Inclinations or Affections may
lead me astray.

Fifteenthly, It Is dangerous to look back.
It is dangerous for a Man that climbs up a high Ladder, that reaches to
Heaven to look backwards.

So nothing is more dangerous for a Person that makes a Profession of Religion,
(then with the Young Man in the Gospel) who was not far from the Kingdom of
Heaven, to look back; He that sets his Hand to the Plough, Luke 9.62.
and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Our blessed Lord bids us
Remember Lot's Wife; Luke 17.3^
why so? She, alas! for looking back, was turned into a Pillar of Salt, as an
everlasting monument of God's Displeasure; and to fore-warn all Persons to take
heed that they do not look back: If any Man draw back, my Soul shall take no
pleasure in him. Nay, such God's Soul abhors, Heb. 10.38. Deuteronomy.32.1^.
it brings upon them his high Displeasure, which is Death; or it will procure
Death, and Perdition on all such in the end.

But, my Brethren, know this, Why some fall away, or draw back.
that all those who look back, never made one true step upon this Ladder; they
never had one Dram of saving Faith, but ventured on Christ with a false Faith;
and from hence could not see a far off, but slavish fear possess them; and they
being afraid, faint, and so look back, and fall down, and are destroyed for
ever; and the higher they (...), (...)
the greater is their fall: But we are not of them that draw back to Perdition.

Sixte^^thly, A Ladder that stands upon the Earth, and the Top reaches to
Heaven, had need to have ^ore Footing to stand upon.

(...) Media^^r ^^ands (...).
Now, Jesus Christ, our Mediator has most sure and firm Footing to stand upon;
i. e. He stands upon the Foot or firm Ground of God's Purpose, and everlasting
Counsel, and blessed Decree; t^^' he was set up upon the Earth in time, yet he
was in that holy Counsel, held between the Father and the Son, Set up from
everlasting, (...).
before ever the Earth was. The Wisdom, the Power, Purpose* good Pleasure, and
eternal Counsel of God has fixed his Standing firm for ever; as you heard
before.

Seventeenthly, (...)
A Man that gets up a Ladder, should his Feet, through carelessness, or otherwise
s^ip, he must catch hold of the Ladder with his Hands, and by holding fast, he
may set his Feet right again, and prevent a fall, or danger of Death.

Beloved, the best of Christians, through Carel^se^s, ^^ Satan's Temptations
may have their ^^^t s^ip; I mean they may slip, or fall into one S^^, or
another; or into one Error or another: What a slip had Noah, (...) ^3* 2.
Lot, David and Peter, and many more besides them, even many a dangerous slip;
but by taking hold of Christ, and of the Covenant, and free Promise of Pardon
by the hand of Faith, (...).
they all recovered themselves, though some of their Slips broke their Bones, and
cost them many a Tear; Nay, it made David to W^^^e^ his Couch with his Tears;
(...).
Yet he got safe to Heaven. O what an excellent Grace is the Grace of Faith,
the hand of Faith, and how useful and necessary at such a time? Luke 22.32*
I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not. Our Faith, in the Seed or
habit, shall never fail; did not Christ preserve our Faith, strengthen our
Faith, our Souls would soon finally fall, and perish for ever: If any Man sin,
1 John 2.1.2.
we have an Advocate with the Father. -- I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Sins; Heb 8.12. Isa. 43.^5.
and their Iniquities I will remember no more. -- I am he that blotteth out
thine Iniquities for my own Sake, etc. O what hold is here, when our Feet slip,
for the hand of Faith to take hold of! Jesus Christ, my Brethren, has paid all
our Debts, he has satisfied the Justice of God for all our Sins, for those
committed after Faith, as well as those committed before Faith and Union with
him, all Vindictative Wrath is gone for ever; no Sin can make a breach in our
Justification, nor break our Union with Christ; Romans 8 38.39.
Nothing can separate us from the Love of God, Romans 8.1.
which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. -- There is therefore now no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus. None can condemn such, if sins committed
after we believe were not Satisfied for, or Pardoned, there would be
condemnation to every Believer, because all have Sin, all daily Sin, but their
Sins are not imputed to them, they were all laid upon Jesus Christ; and his
Righteousness is for ever and at all times imputed to them that are in Christ
Jesus; and once in him, for ever in him, So that a true Believer can never fall
finally from this spiritual Ladder.

Eighteenthly, To raise up a Ladder, whose Foot stands upon the Earth, and the
Top of it reaches up to Heaven, is not easily done; it needs all mighty
Strength, it calls for great Strength, wonderful Power, and also much Wisdom,
and Skill; it is hard, you know, to raise a Ladder that reaches up but four or
five Stories, or to the Top of a high House or Building; What Power of Man then
can raise up such a Ladder that reaches from Earth to Heaven?

Almighty power (...) forth in ^aising Christ this spiritual Ladder.
My Brethren, as none could contrive, and make such a Ladder, i. e. such a way
to Heaven, but God himself, who by his almighty Wisdom, and Power built this
World: So none but he could raise up this Ladder; it required infinite Wisdom,
and Strength to raise up Christ, when he was so low, being born down under the
Guilt and Weight of our Sins, even low as Hell; for Hell pangs took hold of
him: O how low was he, when in the Garden, in his bloody Agony, and in the
Grave! Could Sin, Death, or Devils, yea all the powers of Hell and Darkness
have kept him down, he had never been raised from the Dead* and from under
Wrath, nor ascended up to Heaven: But what is too hard for God to do? He was
raised by the Power of the Father; Romans 6.4.
or by the Glory of the Father; as the Apostle words it; that is by his
glorious Power, and to his eternal Glory; God has both raised up the Lord, and
will also raise us u^ by his own Power. He first raised him up, as to his
Humane Nature, out of a dry Root: And has raised up an Horn of Salvat^on for
us in the House of David. (...).
An Horn of Salvation, or a powerful Salvation. Also he raised him up when Sin
and Wrath lay upon him; and when he was Dead, and lay in the Grave. Nay, my
Brethren, he raise^ himself up, as I shall show you hereafter, which is a
greater wonder still, and more mavelous.

Ninteenthly, A Ladder, whose Foot stands upon the Earth, and the Top of it
reaches up to Heaven, is wonderfully Elivated, or Exalted.

So Christ considered as Mediator, is wonderfully Elivated, or Exalted, both in
respect o^ his Person, and Offi^es. The elivation or exaltati^n of Christ.


True, as he was God, and in the form of God, and thought it not Robbery to be
equal with God, he could not be said to be Exalted; but taking our Nature upon
him, he was abased, he Humbled himself, He took on him the ^orm of a Servant,
and became Obedient unto Death: As considered as Mediator, he is Exalted, and
has a Name above every Name in Heaven, or Earth. Isa. 52.13.


First, In respect of his Person: Behold my Servant shall deal prudently, he
shall be Exalted, and Extolled, and be made very high* here are three words
signifying the same thing, to express and hold forth the Glory and Exaltation
of Jesus Christ.

1. He has the Glory of God, Christ exalted as Mediator. Col. 2.9.
the Glory of the whole Godhead in him* The fullness of the Godhead dwells
bodily in this blessed Person, the Man Christ Jesus; and it pleased the Father
it should be thus. Heb, 1.3.
He is the brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his
Person.

2. In that all the Glory of his Father's House is hung upon him, placed in
him; he is the true Eliakim, the glory of the house of David, Isa. ^2.^^
and of God's Israel: Nay, all the Glory of the holy Attributes sl^ine forth in
him, and are united and meet together in sweet Harmony in him; He is the Man of
God's right Hand, whom he has made strong for himself: To manifest his own
Glory, and to raise up his Elect to a most excellent State for ever.

3. In that the same divine Worship and Adoration which is due to the Father,
is due to the Man Christ Jesus; this, my Brethren, tends greatly to lift up,
elivate, and exalt him to the Heavens: Joh. 5.23.
That all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; all Men
must thus honor, and Worship him.

Brethren, Divine worship due to Christ.
this is one of our strongest Arguments to prove that our Lord Jesus Christ is
God, the true God, God by Nature, i. e. because Divine Adoration is due to him;
even the same worship that is due to the Father; were he a mere Man, not the
most high God, it would be great Idolatry to worship him: I am the Lord, Isa
48.11.
that is my Name; and my glory will I not give unto another, Isa* 42.
etc. the Apostle John would have worshipped the Angel; (thinking no doubt it
had been Christ) I fell at his Feet to worship him, Rev. 19.10.
and he said, see thou do it not, I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy Brethren
that have the Testimony of Jesus; worship God. Here Note two things

1. That no mere Creature, though never so glorious, ought to be worshipped with
divine Worship; I am but a Creature equal in Office with thee, though not in
Nature, (as if the Angel should say)therefore see thou do it not.

2. That divine Worship alone belongs to God; Worship God: -- it is written,
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Math 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve. But all Men are to worship Christ: and not only
Men but the holy Angels also; and again, when he brings in his first begotten
into the World, Heb. 1.6.
he says, and let all the Angels of God worship him: All the Angels, the
mighty Angels that excel in Glory, Power, and Strength, bow down before him,
and worship at his Feet: So far is he exalted above them, he is* beloved, the
head of all Principalities, (...)
and Powers; he is their great and glorious Prince and Sovereign, they are all
at his Command, are his Servants, and Retinue; they all wait upon him, and
willingly serve, and obey him.

4. Christ is lifted up, or exalted in that he is the immediate Object of our
Faith and Trust: True; the Father is Primarily the object of our Faith, but
Brethren, Christ is the immediate Object thereof; Ye believe in God, Joh. 14.1.
believe also in Me: And this, because he is equal with the Father, and as
Mediator we must by him believe in God the Father, and come to the Father by
him: No Man comes to the Father, verse. 6.
but by me. But again,

5. Brethren, Jesus Christ is lifted up and exalted in that the Government of
the World is committed unto him; Joh. 5.^.
The Father Judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son; the
Father Judges no Man, but by the Son, all the administration of Judgment,
Rule, and Authority in the Church, and in the World, is in the hands of Christ,
as Mediator; Pro. 8.1^.
he pulls down and sets up; By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Judgment. All
Power and Authority in Heaven and Earth is his; Mat. 28.2^.
it is his essentially as God, and it is given unto him as Mediator.

6. Christ is Lifted up, or exalted, Col. 3.11.
in that he is all, and in all, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, etc. but
Christ is all, and in all, He is our All to the Father; he is our all with the
Father; and our All from the Father, he is our All by way of Merit; he is
meritoriously made All to us; he purchased All that good we have, and expect to
have, both Grace here, and glory hereafter.

Jesus Christ is All to us by way of Conveyance, as he meritted all for us, so
it is through him all good things, or divine Blessings, are communicated to us.
As he is the Fountain that contains all things, so he is the Conduit-Pipe,
through whom all good is conveyed to us also.

Again, (...)
he is All to us by way of Efficency and Causality; he works all our Works in
us, and for us, Ioh. 15.6.
and without him we can do Nothing: It is from him the Head that the whole Body
receives Nourishment; so he it is that blesses that Nourishment, Col. 2.19.
that Food, viz. himself, his Word, his Ordinances, and all afflictions to us,
which we live upon.

Who or what Persons exalt Christ.
Secondly, Christ is wonderfully lifted up, or is exalted to Heaven, if we
consider the Persons, who are said to Greaten, and Magnify Him.

1. The Father magnifies him, Act. 5.31.
and has exalted him at his Right hand to be a Prince, and a Savior: This
Exaltation of Christ denotes his Abasement, because he condescended so low, to
humble himself, and to dye the Cursed death of the Cross; therefore he is
exalted: See what Paul says;

Phil. 2.9.10.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every
Name; that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, etc. Not at the naming
of Jesus, but at his Name. that is in respect of his Power, Authority, and
Glory which he has above all in Heaven and Earth considered, as he consi^teth
in both Natures or as Mediator, God-man.

2. All the Saints of God, and Faithful Mini^ of the Gospel, exalt Jesus
Christ: True, they cannot add any thing to his Glory, but they give or ascribe
the highest Glory unto him as his due. The Apostle lifted him up above: Moses,
above Ang^ls; nay, as equal with the Father; Paul desired, ^ Cor 2.2.
to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, and resolved he should be
magnified in his Body, (...). 1.^^.
whether it were by Life or by Death. (1.) In that they all, did all things
they did, in his Name. (2.) By his Power. (3.)To his Praise, and Glory. (4.)
Also in showing all Knowledge, Learning, Parts, Righteousness, moral Virtues,
Gifts, and all Duties of Religion, are Nothing, or avail Nothing to a Man out
of Christ; because it is his Righteousness, his M^rits exclusive of all, or any
thing else that is the matter of our Justification before God.

3. All the holy Angels likewise exalt Christ, adore and magnify hi^.

Thirdly, God ha^^ exalted him from Earth to Heaven, in respect of his Office
(in which als^ he is the Antitype of Jacob's L^^de^) wh^c^ (...) I have hinted
at already, yet I ^^all add (...).

1. Christ is chosen of God, a^ I said, (...) ^.33.
to be the only Mediator between God and Man, our Days-Man, that lays his hands
upon both; and as Mediator he is a King, Priest, and Prophet.

First, He is a Priest excelling the Highpriests under the Law, being the
substance and Antitype of all those Priests; he is both Priest, Altar, Christ
exalted in his Offices, first as a Priest.
and Sacrifice: they were made Priests by men, he is made a Priest by God
himself; they without an Oath; he by an Oath; they had Infirmities, he had
none. The Priest under the Law could not continue, by reason of Death, he
abides a Priest for ever: They offered up Sacrifices that could not take away
Sins, but by his one Sacrifice, Heb. 10.14*
all sins are done away for ever. He bore the sins of his People indeed; he
entered into the holiest of all; he appears before God indeed, they only
Typically. He made Atonement indeed, they but Typically and Ceremonially: He
Judges of Uncleanness indeed, they but Typically; he makes true Judgment,
because he knows all men's Hearts: He offers up unto God the true Incense; he
blesses the People, by conferring Grace, and divine Habits to them, and by
turning them from their evil ways. Acts 3 26.


He beyond the Priests under the Law, does determine all, (yea the hardest)
Controversies; he resolves all doubts between God and Man, such as these
following;

1. How God is Just, and yet Gracious; or how an offended God can, and does
justify guilty Sinners.

2. In and by by him we see how Justice and Mercy meet together, and
Righteousness and Truth kiss each other: Psalm. 2.85.10.
The one exalting the highest Satisfaction on terms of pure and severe Justice;
and the other crying for infinite Mercy.

3. He resolves this Question; viz, How an unrighteous and ungodly Man can be
justified with God.

4. How Sin can be Punished, and yet Pardoned:

5. How the Debt can be Paid, and yet be freely forgiven.

Brethren, Christ is a Priest, and as a Priest he is the Antitype of Jacob's-
Ladder; and as so considered, he is exalted on high; for in and by this Office
he brings God and Man, Heaven and Earth together; I mean by that Atonement he
has made by his bloody Sacrifice; It pleased the Father by him to reconcile
all things to himself, whether they be things on Earth, Col. 1.20.
or things in Heaven. Heaven and Earth are not at a farther distance from each
other, as Naturally we are unto God, in respect of our state and Spirits, R^m ^
7.
such Enmity is in the hearts of all unrenewed Sinners against God; but says
the Apostle; But now in Christ Jesus ye that were afar off are made near by the
Blood of Christ. Ephesians. 2.13.
The way is by his Death, by his Blood which was shed upon the Earth; here we
were, and here is the Foot of the Ladder. God's Justice requires an infinite
Satisfaction, and Christ being God, reached Heaven; i. e. the full demands of
divine Justice: Such a Days-Man we needed, who lays his hands upon both. By
his being a Priest in his o^^ering up that one Sacrifice he reconciled God to
us, Heb. 1^.14.
and by his Spirit he reconciles us to God, by his applying and making the
Atonement efficacious, or effectual to us, Ephesians. 1.20.
that in the dispensation of the fullness of time, he might gather together in
one, all things in Christ.

This is done in him, even in Christ alone, none but he has done it, or could
do it. God by him, who stands at the top of the Ladder, comes down to us, as
well as we go up to God; it is by Christ that God comes down to us in a way of
Mercy, Peace, and Reconciliation; and it is by Christ we go up to God in a way
of Faith, and dependence. Beloved, Heb. 10.20.
God and poor Sinners meet together on this Sacred Ladder (or blessed Medium
and contrivances of infinite Wisdom) in Christ, we who were Strangers and
Enemies, meet with a holy and just God, with joy and comfort: You that were
sometimes alienated, and enemies in your Minds by wicked Works, Col. 1.21.
has he reconciled in the body of his Flesh, through Death. Romans 5.10.
When we were Enemies we were reconciled unto God by the Death of his Son. Now
this is done by Christ as a Priest in dying; But

Secondly, He is the Antitype of Jacob's Ladder, as our High Priest also,
Christ is o^r Highpriest in his Intercession.
by his Intercession now in Heaven.

1. He interceeds with God for us in Heaven also.

2. He interceeds by his Spirit in us: Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.2^.
By his Intercession in heaven he prevails with God for the Blessings of his
Atonement; and by his Spirits intercession in us, all those Blessings are
applied, and so made effectual to us. By virtue of his Satisfaction, God is
brought near to us; and through Application of his Blood, by his Spirit, we are
brought near unto God: And thus is Christ, the blessed Medium or Way, by which
Peace is made between Heaven and Earth, or God and Sinners.

Moreover, by this glorious Me^ium we have free access unto God, which is the
effects of Christ's Priestly Office.

It is on this Sacred Ladder we come with holy boldness to the Throne of Gra^e:
It is by the blood of Jesus, Heb. 4.16. (...).
through him by one Spirit we have both ( that is Jews and Gentiles,) access
unto the Father. (...).
Again he says, In whom we have boldness and access with Confidence, through
Faith of ^im.

Christ is the Way of our Union with God, and also of our Com^union: All that
divine and blessed intercourse that passes between God and us, Heb. 4.^5, 1^.
is in and by Jesus Christ; Seeing then we have a great High-Pri^^t, Heb ^^.19.
t^^t is passed into Heaven, let us therefore come ^oldly to the Throne of
Grace, etc. Again he says, Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into
the holiest by the blood of Jesus.

Christ is exalted as a King.
Secondly, Christ is exalted as he is a King, and also as King, he is the
Antitype of Jacob's Ladder; and in this respect wonderfully exalted: Him has
God exalted at his Right Hand, to be a Prince, Acts 5.31.
and a Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and remission of Sins. Christ is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only Potentate; It is by him Kings reign,
and Princes decree Judgment. He pulls down one, and sets up another as it
pleases him. Heb 1 ^2
[1.] Christ, my Brethren, is the Father's Heir, his Firstborn. [2.] He is
also qualified with all Princely Wisdom, and so fit to reign over all; Angels
Men and Devils are subject unto him. [3.] He is chosen-King. [4.] He is by the
Father anointed King with the Oil of gladness above his Fellows. Heb. 1.^.
[5.] And he is proclaimed King for ever. [6.] He has the Government on his
Should^rs; (...).
he rules in us, and subdues all our Enemies; he bows and bends our Spirits and
stubborn Wills to submit to his Sover^ignty; he mortifies all our Co^ruptions,
and brings us out of the Prisonhouse, Isa. 6^.1.
and spoils the strong Man armed: he has conquered the World, Mat. 12.49. John
10.33
Sin, and Devils for us, and does, and will also subdue them i^ us; he is both
King of Saints, and King of Nations.

Thirdly, Christ as he is a Prophet, Christ is exalted as a Pr^phet.
is also the Antitype of Jacob's Ladder; and as thus considered he is exalted.

1. He received his Doctrine from Heaven, and brings it down to Earth. He is
said to speak from Heaven, and yet he spoke on Earth; and when he spoke on
Earth as Man, he was in Heaven as God: And thus the Foot of the Ladder was on
Earth, and the Top reached to Heaven. Moreover, by his Speaking he makes such
Hearts of men as were earthly* to be heavenly, and lifts us up in our Desires,
Meditations, and Affections from earth to heaven.

Christ is lifted up and exalted as a Prophet, and higher in Glory than all the
Prophets of God.

A Prophet is the Mouth of God to the People. Now, Jesus Christ, received his
holy Doctrine from God, Ioh. 1^.49*
and spoke as his Father gave Commandment. -- Moreover, he excels all other
Prophets;

1. All the Prophets of God besides him, were inspired by him

2. They received the Spirit but by Measure; but he without Measure.

3. Other Prophets only could speak to the Ear, he speaks to the Heart.

4. Other Prophets could cause Men only to hear that were alive; but Christ can
make them that are deaf and dead to hear. John 5.25.


5. Other Prophets can teach men Wisdom who have Uunderstanding, but Christ can
Teach Fools to Understand, Job, 36.22.
as well as give Understanding to the Heart. Who teaches like him?

6. He can open the Ear as well as give Instruction.

7. All the Teachings of other Prophets and Teachers are in vain, without his
divine Teachings.

8. He can cause such whom he Teaches to remember what they hear. 1 Cor. 3.4.5.


9. He Teaches powerfully, and instructs with a high hand, and yet he Teaches
sweetly.

10. He Teaches not only Efficaciously, but also Infallibly, and removes all
Obstructions that hinder Sinners from hearing and receiving what he says unto
them. He can teach men Wisdom as you have heard when they are asleep; O who
teaches like him. What it is to preach Christ.


Christ is lifted up to Heaven, in that he is the Sum and Substance both of Law
and Gospel: I mean the Antitype of all Types, Reader, this was not delivered
when I preached on this subject, but it is the substance of another Sermon,
preached at another time and place, which for some Reasons is added here.
and Substance of all Shadows: He is the great Subject of Gospel-ministration.
What have Ministers to Preach but Jesus Christ? I have formerly showed you what
it is to Preach Christ, so as to exalt him and lift him up in the ministration
of the Gospel.

First, It Is to Preach the Excellencies of his Person.

1. To Preach that he is GOD, God by Nature, not a petty-god, a god by Office,
but the most high God, the eternal God, Co-essential, Coequal, and Coeternal
with the Father.

2. To Preach that he is MAN, truly Man, made of a Woman, John. 1.14. Heb.
2.14.15.
of the same Flesh and Blood that the Children partake of.

3. That he is GOD and MAN, in one Person, both Natures making but one Christ,
by a wonderful, and hypostatical Union.

Secondly, To Preach Christ is to Preach his Incarnation, his Birth, his Life,
his Death, his Resurrection, his Ascension, and his Intercession.

Thirdly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach his holy Doctrine, and his exemplary
Life, phil. 2.5, 6.
in his sweet Spirit, great Condescension, wonderful Abasement, infinite Love,
Mercy, Faithfulness, Meekness, Charity, etc.

4. To Preach the Preciousness of Christ, Phil. 3.8. 1 Pet. 2.
is to Preach Christ.

5. To Preach Christ, is to Preach the necessity of Christ, and of his Death:
And that

1. Because of that voluntary obligation he entered into with the Father. in
behalf of the Elect from Eternity; that holy Covenant, and Compact said a
necessity upon him to dye in our stead.

2. In respect of God's eternal Decree, and purpose, he being a Lamb slain
before the beginning of the World.

3. In respect of those ancient Prophesies concerning him, and of his Work, and
Office which must be all accomplished.

4. In respect of all those Types and Shaddows that pointed to him, which must
be fulfilled in their Antitype, etc.

5. And in respect of all the Saints who lived under the Old Testament, who
ventured their Souls and Salvation upon him, as to come and was to dye for them.

6. In respect of the Nature, Holiness, and Justice of God, and of his absolute
Threatening, pronounced against Adam, and all Mankind in him.

7. In respect of the Sanction and perfect Holiness of the Law; and of that
Curse it laid all Men under.

8. Moreover, there is an absolute necessity of Christ, and of Faith in him, in
respect of God's Revealation, there being no other Way, Person, or Means, found
out or revealed, to redeem fallen Man, but Jesus Christ only.

Heb. 7.25.
Fourthly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach the power and ability of Christ, to
save all that believe in him, or that come to God by him.

Fifthly, To Preach Christ, exalt him, and lift him up, is to Preach his
Readiness, and Willingness, as well as his Power, and Ability to save.

Ephesians. 3.8.
Sixthly, It Is to Preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

Seventhly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach Christ the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God; i. e. in whom all the glorious Attributes of God are united in
sweet Harmony, and shine forth in equal Glory, and Strength to save Sinners,
lost and undone Sinners.

Eighthly, ^ Tim. 2.5
To Preach Christ, is to preach him not only the one Mediator, between God and
Man, but also our blessed Surety, or the Surety, and Testator of the
New Covenant.

Ninthly, To preach Christ, is to preach him in all his offices, as you have
heard.

Tenthly, To Preach Christ, exalt Christ alone, is to preach his Satis^action;
1 Cor. 1.30.
or that full and complete Reconciliation he has made by his Obedience, 2 Cor.
5.21.
and suffering; our Faith and Holiness adding nothing thereunto.

Eleventhly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach Justification only by him; i. e.
That he and his perfect Righteousness alone is that which Justifies us, as it
is Imputed to us that believe; Act. 13.39.
his active Obedience being that which is our only Title to Heaven; Romans 3.28.
and that his Death (he bearing all God's vindictative Wrath for our Sins) is
that only which delivers us from Hell. Gal. 3.24.


Twelfthly, To Preach Christ, exalt Christ, is to Preach him the Way, the only
way to the Father; No Man comes to the Father, but by me. Ioh. 14.6.


To preach him the Truth, that all truth is in him, centres in him, found and
experienced in him, and proceeding from him. Col. 3.3.4.


To p^each Christ the Life, the life of our Souls; not only having purchased
Life for us, Ioh. 6.35.
but infuseth Life, or a vital Principle into us, and preserves that Life; that
he is the Bread of Life, and the Water of Life. That Christ is the hidden Manna
that came down from Heaven; (which the natural Man knows not) that by coming
to him, by believing on him, 1 Cor. 2.11.
or receiving of him, we live; and that by our Union with him, he is ours; and
his Righteousness, and all the Merits of his Blood, even all his Riches, both
Grace and Glory, becomes ours; or we have an Interest in him, and all he is,
and has.

Thirteenthly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach him to be our Bridegroom, 2 Cor.
11.2.
that espouseth us in Conjugal Affections, in Knowledge, in Faithfulness, Hos.
2.19.20.
in Mercy, and in loving Kindness for ever. Ioh. 10.14.
That he is our Physician, that heals all our Diseases: Our Shepherd to gather
us, or bring us home to his Fold, that feeds, leads, protects and defends us.

To Preach Christ the only Head of the Church, having absolute Power over his
Body, Col. 1.19.
and graciously guiding and influencing it, and every Member thereof.

To Preach Christ the only Foundation, and chief Cornerstone, upon whom the
Church is built, 1 Cor. 3.11
and every lively Stone is united, to build our Salvation on him, to Trust on
him, and to have all our Faith and Hope in him.

To Preach Christ, is to Preach him the Sun of Righteousness, like as the Sun
in Glory, he is the Anima Mundi, the very Soul of the new World, Mal. 4.2*
in respect of Light and Life, as well as Heat; and in respect of his
fructifying and comforting Influence; and by his expelling all our Darkness,
causing a lovely Spring, and blessed Day in all such Souls on whom he rises
and shines.

Z^ch. 13.1.
To Preach Christ the Fountain, to wash us, as well as the Sun to enlighten us,
and our only Physician to heal us. 1 Cor. 1.3^.
To Preach Christ in a Word* is to Preach him to be every thing that God has
made him to be unto us; even both Wisdom and Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption.

Fourteenthly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach him, as I said, to be the
Antitype of all Types, and the Substance of all Shadows.

1. The second Adam, public Person, and great Covenanting Head, and blessed
Representative of all his Elect; out of whose Side his Spouse is taken.

2. The true Noah, and Heir of the World, that builds the Ark, and that saves
all just Persons; the true Preacher of Righteousness, that sends the Dove, and
that repairs the lost World.

3. The true Melchizedeck, without Father and Mother, Heb. 7.3.17.
made a Priest by an Oath, that blesses Abraham, and all his true Seed.

4. The true Abraham, to whom all the Promises are made; Gal. 3.16.2^.
the Father of all the Faithful, and that turns the Bon^-woman and her Son out
of Doors, Cap. 4.^0.
and recovers the Captives.

5. The true, and Antitypical Isaac, long promised before Born, and brought
forth out of a dry Root, by the mighty Power of God, and Word of Promise; three
days dead, and yet, as to his Deity, dyed not, and yet was Offered up for a
Sacrifice by his Father.

6. The true Jacob, who as a Prince, prevailed with God.

7. Our Joseph, who was Sold into the hands of the wic^ed Ishmaelites; and who
by his Abasement, was raised to Honor, and made Lord-Treasurer of all the
Land, who feeds all Famished and hunger-starved Sinners, to whom all must go
for Bread, and before whom, all his Brethren must bow.

8. Our Moses, that brings all the Children of Israel out of Spiritual Egypt,
and Bondage of Sin, and Satan.

9. The true Joshua, that carries God's Israel into the Land of Promise.

10. Our strong Samson, that slew the devouring Lion, and who, by death, or
dying, destroyed our Enemies,

11. The true David, beloved of God, and his only Anointed, with whom the
Covenant stands fast for ever.

12. The true Solomon, the Prince of Peace, that excells all in Wisdom, both
Men and Angels; that builds God's Temple, and bears the Glory: and that Marries
the Ethiopian Woman, the black and polluted Gentiles.

13. The true Elisha, that Cures all the Leperous Naamans, and multiplieth the
Widows Oil.

14. The true Elijah, that raises up the dead Child, i. e. the dead Soul: and
that went to Heaven.

15. Our Jonah, that was cast into the Sea of God's Wrath, to make a Calm, that
lay three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth.

16. The true Antitypical Aaron, as you heard before.

17. The Mercy-Seat, from whence God Communes with us.

18. The Altar of Perfame, that presents all our Persons and Prayers,
acceptable unto God the Father.

19. The Antitype of the Slain, and Scapegoat, on whom all our Sins are laid;
and who bears them all away into an unknown Land.

20. The true Antitypical Rock, that was smitten in the Wilderness, that we
might have Water of Life to drink in this Wilderness, until we come to the true
Canaan.

21. The true Passover, that was Sacrificed for us.

22. The true Sin-offering: yea, both Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice.

Lastly, the Antitypical brazen Serpent, that is lifted up to cure all that are
Stung with Sin, that fiery Serpent, Ioh. 3.14.
that look up to him by Faith.

Fifteenthly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach all the Ordinances of Christ, holy
Precepts and Institutions.

Sixteenthly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach all the Promises of Christ, 1 Cor.
1.10.
and all in him, and in him sure to all his Seed; Not Yea, and Nay, but Yea,
and Amen, to the Glory of God the Father.

Ioh. 1.1^.16.
Seventeenthly, To Preach Christ, is to Preach that fullness that is in Christ;
viz.

1. A Soul-fulness, or spiritual Fullness, a Soul enriching fullness, a s^itable
fullness, and seasonable fullness, a necessary fullness, a Soul-satisfying
fullness, an eternal and everlasting fullness.

2. A fullness of Merit and Satisfaction, and of Righteousness.

3. A fullness of Grace.

4. A fullness of Light, and a fullness of Sufficiency, as Mediator of Power,
Wisdom, Knowledge, Love, Mercy, Pardon, Peace, Joy and Glory.

5. A fullness of Efficiency. Tho we are never so empty, Christ can fill us; tho
never so poor, he can enrich us; tho never so weak, he can strengthen us; tho
never so Ignorant, he can give us knowle^ge, tho never so guilty, he can
justify us; though never so naked, he can cloathe us; tho never so sa^^ he can
rejoice our troubled Hearts: In a word, Col. 2.9.
All fullness is in Christ: In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead, Bodily:
Not part of the Godhead, (the Godhead, the distinguished, cannot be divided)
but the whole Godhead dwells in the Son, as in the Father, and in the Holy
Ghost.

Eighteenthly, To Preach Christ, to exalt him, as the Father has I fred him
up* and magnified him, is to abase the Creature; it is to give all the glory of
our Salvation to him, and assume none of it to ourselves. To Preach him only,
not to Preach Moses, nor to take the Law from his Mouth, but from the Mouth of
Christ, or as it is in Christ's hands; not to Preach Morality, as that which
can justify and save us. Not to Preach the Light within all, to be our
Savior: For that is to Preach the Law written in the Heart of Man, it being
the substance of that Law written in the Two Tables of Stone. Not to Preach the
Decrees of general Councils, or National Synods. Nor to mix our inherent
Righteousness, and sincere Obedience; no, nor our Faith with Christ's
Righteousness.

Thus I have showed you how Christ is Exalted, Flivated, and like Jacob's
Ladder lifted up to Heaven: Nay, he is made higher than the Heavens; and that in
his Person, and by his Offices, Heaven and Earth meet together, and God and
Man, in Jesus Christ, are made One, --

I shall Close at this time with a Word of Application:

APPLICATION.
1. We may Infer from hence, that here is wonderful Encouragement for poor
Sinners to come to Christ; believe in him, or to venture up this Spiritual
Ladder.

2. Behold the fullness which is in Christ, and bless God for such a Way, for
such a Ladder that reaches up to Heaven.

3. Inquiry Infer.
But why is there so great a fullness in Christ? Why there is such fullness in
Christ.


1. Because God will Exalt him, and Magnify him: He knew how many would Debase
him, and Disrobe him, of which sort we have too many in these Days.

2. Because he being God, it cannot be otherwise; and this shows he is God:
Would God give this Glory to a mere Creature, it would be Idolatry to give
divine Adoration to Christ, were not he the most high God.

3. It is because there is such an Emptiness in poor Sinners; nay, in
Believers, as in themselves.

4. It is because Christ has so many Vessels, empty Vessels to fill: True, he
has filled Multitudes already, from the beginning of the World; for all that
ever had any Righteousness, any Grace, or Peace; I mean true Grace and Peace,
they had it from Jesus Christ.

But he has many empty Vessels yet to fill, therefore there is need of such a
fullness in him; he fills his Church, nay all his Churches, and has a greater
Vessel yet to fill, when he has emptied it, namely the whole Earth; Isa. 11.9.
For all the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the glory of the Lord.
And he is emptying it in order to this now: Isa. 24.1.2.
He will make the Earth empty, and turn it up*side down. Now it is full of
Wickedness, full of Sin, full of horrid Abominations, of Oaths, of Pride,
Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Cruelty, Divisions, Contentions; nay, of Idolatry,
Superstition, Errors, Heresies, and what not; but he will empty it ever long,
and then fill it, there is a new World very near, look for it, prepare for it,
be ready.

5. Christ is full, because there is no Bread but in this Garner, no Water of
Life for all the World, but in this Well, in this Fountain.

6. Because no Sinner might be discouraged, nor despair of help, succor, and
relief in Christ, nor Believers, because they are God's Children, and have his
Likeness; -- Also;

4. This may Reprove such that cast Contempt upon Jesus Christ. Reproof. ]
Some lay quite aside this chief Cornerstone: What do they less, that trust to
a sober Moral Life? Act. 4.11.
or they that cry up the Light within, as if that was a Ladder that reaches to
Heaven, which is to build on the Covenant of Works. Others degrade him, that
put part of the highest Glory on the Will of Man; and such who mix their own
Faith, sincere Obedience, or Righteousness with Christ's Merits, and make the
Gospel as a mere Law of Obedience, with the sanction of Promises and
Threatenings, rendering our Faith and Obedience the Condition of our Salvation.
This is not to go to Heaven by Jacob's Ladder.

5. Be Exhorted to venture up this Spiritual Ladder, i. e. to believe in
Christ. Exhort. ]


[ Motives.]
1. A mighty Flood of divine Wrath is near; it will certainly come, and it will
overflow all the dwellers on the Earth, or such that dwell below: The Saints,
who are ascended upon this Ladder, Isa. 33.16*
dwell above: Oh climb up quickly, if you would escape the Wrath to come!

2. There is (you have heard) no other way to go to Heaven; Christ is the Way
in which we must walk, the Foundation on which we must build, the Door by which
we must enter, or the Ladder by which we must ascend, even by the Vail; that is
to say, his Flesh, or by the blood of his Cross.

Do not dream of getting to Heaven by your Tears or Prayers, or by your good
Deeds, or good Duties; or by the broken Ladder of Free Will; or by the Light
within all. What, O what will become of them that strive to throw down this
Ladder, and th^nk to be saved some other ways!

3. Tho this Ladder be high, and thy Faith is but weak, yet venture up, set thy
Foot upon the first Round; I told you the last day that many who were weak as
thou art, are gone to Heaven this way; yea, Multitudes that were as heavy laden
as thou art, or can be, ventured up, and found sure and firm Footing.

4. Thy danger, O Sinner! is great, will thou perish in the Flood? O fly to
this Ark, get up this Ladder; Mark, 16 16.
He that believes not shall be Damned.

5. Remember the top reaches to Heaven, it will bring thee to Heaven, and know
also, that in the way, Ioh. 1.51.
there are many Angels, they ascend and descend upon this Ladder: they come
down to fetch some up, and others they lead and conduct, even those that are
ascending upon it: Thou shall, O Sinner, have blessed Support and Supporters in
the way.

Examine. ] Try yourselves, do you exalt Jesus Christ? Certainly if the Father
has exalted him, we ought so to do.

1. Do thou lay the whole stress of thy Salvation on Jesus Christ, and
believe with thy whole Heart?

2. Do thou love him above all things in the world?

3. Do thou deny thy self, and forsake all things for his sake, and take up
thy Cross and follow him?

4. Do thou account all things loss for the excel^ of Jesus Christ?

5. Do thou take none of his Right, nor Glory from him, and ascribe it to
Man, or to the Will of the Creature.

6. Can not thou be satisfied with any thing without him? No, not with
Ordinances, unless thou do meet with him, and enjoyst him in them?

7. Do thou desire before all things to be like unto him, or have his Image?

8. Can not thou endure to grieve nor offend him?

9. Do thou love him in all wheresoever thou see his Image, not because
they are in all things of thy Opinion, but because they are God's Children, and
have his Likeness. -- Also,

6. This may I^form us who are true Ministers, Inform.)
as well as who ^re (...) C^ristians.

1. Not the^ (...) the G^d-head of Christ: No, let the^ (...) lush (...) be
a^hamed^* This discovers that (...) are grand Heretics, and know not Christ.

2. Not such who render God only re^oncilable, or a conditional Savior, not
fully re^onciled in Jesus Christ, according to their Doctrine: Christ is yours,
if you perform the Condition, and what is that? why change your own Hearts, be
Regenerated, or never venture to believe on Christ. Alas, they may as so^n
create a World as do this, Isa. 26.12.
it is Christ's work alone, we are born of God, he works all our works in us:
Regeneration is the effect of Union with Christ.

3. Not such that Preach themselves, 2 Cor. 4, 5.
or that Preach for Gain, or seek their own Glory; We Preach not ourselves, but
Jesus Christ, the Lord.

Consol. Consol.
O know ye Saints, what a happy state you are in, you are mounting up, and
shall ascend on high.

2. Angels guard you, support and guide you, and the holy Spirit also directs
every step you take. Psalm, 37, 23,


3. Nay, God himself takes you by the hand, The steps of a good Man are ordered
by the Lord; and tho he falls, he shall not utterly be cast down, because God
upholdeth him with his Right Hand.

This Ladder brings you to God, God on the top or above the Ladder.
the Lord God is at the top of it.

1. He was the Contriver of this way; he made this Ladder, he prepared it.

2. He is above the Ladder, denoting tho Christ as Cod, is equal with the
Father; yet as Man, or Considered as our Mediator, the Father is above him; My
Father is above all, -- my Father is greater than I.

3. God being also above it, it may denote that he upholds it by his eternal
Counsel, and infinite Power.

4. God is above it also, as an observer of all that are upon it; he sees all
that believe on his Son, and takes notice of them.

5. Moreover, he is above it, to encourage all that are upon it with his
Covenant-Promise, I am the Lord, the God of Abraham, etc. be not afraid, I will
up-hold thee, I will strengthen thee, etc.

6. It may also denote he is at the top of it as an Inviter, to call upon poor
Sinners to behold his blessed Son, the Lamb of God, or to believe on him, and
venture up.

7. Lastly, he is above it also as a Rewarder, or as the end of our Journey:

[ But so much at this time.]

SERMON III.
GENESIS xxviij. xij. xiij. [ -- And behold a Ladder, etc.]


THE last Day we showed you that this Ladder in Jacob's Dream, was wonderfully
Elivated, Lifted up, or Exalted con^^dering the Top of it reached up to Heaven,
from whence we took an occasion to open the wonderderful Honor, Advancement,
Elivation or Exalta^^on of the Lord Jesus Christ, considered as Me^^ator: I
shall now proceed.

Twentieth, A Ladder, true Believers are in Christ, Elivated and Exalted.
the top of which reaches to Heaven, is not only wonderfully Elivated, or
Exalted, but all such Persons who ascend, or climb up upon it, even to the top
thereof, are ^reatly Exalted also, though not by any Power or Skill of their
own, yet are so by means of ^^is Ladder.

So all Believers, who ascend upon this Spiri^^al Ladder, the Antitype of
Jacob's Ladder, Ch^^st Jesus, are hereby Exalted, or raised up o^ high, in
respect of their spiritual State, and Condition, and Frames also.

1. All such who Believe in Jesus Christ, (which is the way to this spiritual
L^d^er) are made the Sons and Daughters of G^^; they a^e all adopte^ Children
of the King o^ He^ven, and Earth* As many as received him to them gave (...)
Power to become the Sons of God; Ioh, 1, 12,
even to the^ that believe on his Name: This of Sonship i^ a very great
Privilege; such are greatly, ye^ wonderfully Elivated, or Advanced to Honor.

First, Consi^^ring from what a State we are raised. Sirs, by our Sins we were
brought as low as Hell, being born Slaves, and Vassals of Sin, and the Devils;
^ph, 2, 3,
or in a state of hellish Bondage, Death and misery; we were Sons of Perdition
or Children of Wrath by Nature, as well as others. David thought it to be no
small honor to be the Son-in-law to an earthly King; (and he none of the best
neither) but, O how much greater i^ this Honor! this Advancement! for God to
make such who were Children of Wrath, nay of the Devil, to be his own Children!
Children of his most chiefest Love and Affection; and Heir^ of Heaven: If
Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joynt-heirs with Christ.

Rom, 8, 17,
Secondly, Nay, my Beloved, they are not only Adopted Sons and Daughters of
God, who believe in Christ; but they are all espoused to Jesus Christ also:
Believers see that their first Husband is dead, viz. the Law, by the body of
Christ; and they also are become dead (...) that; Rom, 7, 4,
Wherefore, my Brethren, ye also are becom^ dead to the Law by the body of
Christ, that y^ should be married to another, even to him that i^ raised from
the dead, that we should bring fort^ Fruit unto God. Jesus Christ espouseth all
true Believers, ^very Soul that rightly ascends up this Ladder; I have espoused
you to one Husband, 2 Cor, 12, 2,
^^at I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Our union with Christ is
commonly expressed in ^^e Scripture, under the notion of a Marriage: Isa, 62,
4, 5.
How to be married to the Prince of Princes, to ^he Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, is a won^erful elivation: Should an earthly Prince set ^is heart upon,
and marry a poor Virgin one ^^at was but a Scullion-maid, or a Beggar, cloath^d
with filthy Rags, what an advancement would this be, for such a one to become a
Queen, and save a Crown of Gold set upon her Head, and be embraced in the Arms
of a great Monarch, or mighty Prince, and to lie in his Bosom, and to have the
attendance of his Servants, or Noble retinue! But alas, what a poor Advancement
is that, Psalm, 49, 12,
to this; Man in honor abides not, but is like ^^e Beasts that Perish: Alas
that Honor may be but for a Day, and besides, to be advanced to earthly
grandeur may prove the ruin of the Soul for ever. Christ is the Heir of both
Worlds, Heir of God, Heir of all things; Rev, 19, 12,
Upon his Head are seven Crowns: Seven is a number of Perfection; elsewhere it
is said, upon his Head, were many Crowns; all earthly Crowns are his, and at
his dispose; but they are little valued by him, he gives them sometimes to his
Enemies, even to the vilest of Men; the Crowns that are on his own Head are
Celestial, loaded and sparkling, and heavenly Jewels, and Diamonds, far
brighter than Ten Thousand Suns, amazing for Glory, and are also Eternal: And
it is likewise said, That as his Saints are clothed in white Raiment, Rev, 4,
4.
so they have on their heads Crowns of Gold; which does denote that state of
Dignity, and Glory which they are advanced unto: Upon his Right Hand did stand
the Queen in Gold of Ophir. On his Right Hand, Psalm, 45, 9.
the most honorable place next the King, as Christ is said to be sat down at
the Father's Right Hand, so the Saints will be set at his Right Hand. Can their
be greater Honor conferred upon them! Sirs, wh^^ would not adventure up this
Ladder, when the^^ is such such Glory? It is indeed the way, the only way to
possess those Crowns of immorta^ Grandeur that are prepared in Heaven.

Thirdly, By this advancement, i.e. by being Espoused, 1 Cor, 3, 22, 23,
and Married to Jesus Christ, all tha^ Christ has is theirs; they have not
Honor only, but much Wealth and riches also.

Rev, 3, 18,
(1.) The Righteousness of Christ is theirs* to Justify them; that is the white
Raiment, o^ glorious Robe with which they are clothed.

(2.) His Graces to adorn them: In Christ are unsearchable Riches; Riches and
Righteousness are with me; Ephesians, 3, 8, Prove, 8.18,
yea, durable Riches and Righteousness.

Hence it is, that the Apostle would have the Saints know the greatness of
their Riches; That ye may know what is the hope of your Calling, Ephesians. 1, 11,
and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. Here is
Riches in this Inheritance: Many have Riches and no Glory; others have Honor
preferred upon them, but have no Riches: Ignoble Spirits scrape a great deal of
Wealth together, in which they place their vain Hope, and Hapiness in; but die
without Honor, like the Beasts that Perish: Alas! their Wealth is but for a
Day, but this is Lasting, Durable, 1 Pet, 5, 4,
Eternal, as is their Honor; the Crown of Glory fades not away; it is in
Heaven, and Saints are a going to it on Jacob's Ladder; it is in their view,
they see it, and therefore climb up, and shall in due time reach it.

Happy are they that are called up this Ladder, to such a hope, Phil, 2, 14,
it is called the high-calling of God, in Christ Jesus.

Fourthly, Ioh, 1, 11, 12, 13,
The Saints are not only the Adop^ed Sons, and the Spouse of Christ, but they
are ^orn of God, they are begotten and born of God; born from above: they that
are thus called, have an heavenly Birth, therefore it is an high-calling, this
gives them meet and fit frames of Spirit, such* which become their noble
Station, and blessed Relation: What would a relative Change signify, without a
real Change, I mean a Change of State, without ^ Change of Heart? Can a carnal
heart see Beauty in Christ, or in heavenly things? Can ^n earthly Spirit, prize
or value spiritual Honor, or Riches? No no, a Swine may as well take delight
in the Glory of a King's Palace: Alas, ^e had far rather be on a Dunghill, or
wallow (...) the Mire.

Moreover, much of the advancement of Believers lies in their heavenly Frames,
and nobleness of their Spirits, Works, Ends, and Aims: In this the Righteous is
more excellent than his Neighbor. Prove, 12, 26.


1. He has a Heavenly, a Humble, a Meek, What a Spirit is in Saints,
a Public, a Merciful, an Enlightened, a Free, a Firm, a Sublime, a
Sanctified, a Raised, an Act^ve, and a Faithful Spirit; and all this proceeds
from that New Birth, which he is passed under, or it is the fruit or effect of
his being born of God, or regenerated by the holy Spirit. These Persons have
other Principles also, Buroughs*
than the rest of Mankind have: Every Life has Principles according to the
Nature of it; a Vegetative Life according to the Nature of it; a Sensitive
Life, according to the Nature of it; and the Rational Life, according to the
Nature of it: So the Life of Grace has Principles according to the Nature of
it. A Saint acts for God, from a principle of Faith, and Love; this make the
ways of God easy, nay sweet, and pleasant to him.

2. These Men have other work also, or employ themselves in other Business than
ungodly Persons do; their New-nature prompts them on to make Religion their
main Business, and they also act freely, voluntarily, and with a great and
strong Propensity in the things of God; others act in such matters, as Men
without heart; they must put a force on themselves if they meddle with heavenly
Duties, and heavenly things, because of the earthly and carnal temper and
frames of their Hearts. But as to heavenly born Souls it is below them to be
continually a digging in the Earth, and loading themselves with thick Clay;
Hab, 2, 6,
or to heap up the dust of the Ground, or to take their chiefest Delight in
eating and drinking, or in pleasing their sensual Lusts: No, they are going as
fast as they can from these things in their Hearts, and Affections, Love, and
Delight, and Desires, they see the Beauty of God and the Excellencies of Jesus
Christ; they pry into the Mysteries of the Gospel, and of that Redemption which
is by Jesus Christ: They mind eternal things.

2 Cor, 4, 18,
3. Moreover, this new Nature which is wrought in them, causes them to have more
noble, high, and sublime Ends and Aims, than all others have: It Is not their
own honor, nor their own profit they seek, but it is the honor and glory of
God they Aim at; God, who is at the Top of the Ladder, ^sal, 73, 25,
as the end of their Journey; (as is said before) God beloved i^ their last
end, it is to reach him, Isa, 40.31,
enjoy him for evermore, they mount up on high.

Fifthly, They are Elivated, or highly Advanced and Exalted, in that they have
such a Sublime, Mystical, and intimate Union with God and Jesus Christ: He that
is Joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. 2 Cor, 6, 17, Charnock p, 1339,
There is, says a Reverend Writer, no stricter Union in the World, than that
of Christ and Believers; it is therefore compared to all sorts of Unions,
Natural, and Political. He is the Head, they the Members; he is the Root, they
the Branches; he the Husband, they the Wife: It Is so firm, so strong a Union
intensively, that Christ and a Regenerate Man becomes one Spirit, as if there
was but one Soul in two Bodies; what the Spirit does in Christ, it does also in
a Believer, ac^ording to the capacity of his Soul; I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in One. Joh. 17.23
This shows it is a wonderful, and mysterious Union, more to be admired, then
it can be explained: -- And the spring of it rises from the hypostatical Union
of our Nature, with the Divine Nature, in the Person of Christ: O how does this
exalt Believers!

Sixthly, They are not only elivated, advanced and lifted up on high by virtue
of this Union; but also, in that they are allowed, and daily have Communion
with the Father, Son, 1 John 1.3.
and holy Spirit: But without Regeneration, or, our Natures being first
changed, this could not be: What Communion can there be between a living God,
and a dead Heart? Or between a holy God, and a filthy and polluted Creature?
God hates Sin, and he loves it: God loves Holiness, Charnock.
and he loathes it: Justification changes our state, that discharged us from
the Guilt of Sins; but Regeneration changes our Nature, and makes us fit to
converse with God: For as God can take no pleasure in us, until his Image is
stamped upon us, so we can take no Delight, nor pleasure in Him: Without this
Change Heaven would be no Paradise or Heaven unto us. But by being Renewed, we
are capable, and do enjoy sweet Fellowship with the Father, and the Son.
Believers walk with God, and God with them: Jesus Christ and Believers set
together, 2 Cor. 6.16
dwell together, (...)
walk together, yea, sup together, and daily visit each other; Christ and they
mind the same things; I^a. 63.^.
the interest of Christ and Believers are one, and the same; Christ
Sympathizeth with his Saints in their Afflictions, and Rejoices with them in
their Consolations; Heb. 7.2^.
such a high Priest became us. But, O what an high Advancement is this! that
such a low, base, and contemptible Creature as Man is, as in himself, should be
allowed to have Communion and Fellowship with the great and most glorious God
of Heaven, and Earth, and with Jesus Christ, the only Potentate, and Prince of
the Kings of the Earth!

Seventhly, The Saints in Christ are so exalted, and lifted up in Grandeur and
Honor, that they are God's choice and precious Jewels, or his chiefest
Treasure; Man. (...)
They shall be mine, says the Lord, in that day I make up my Jewels: They are
the Favorites of Heaven; the Lord says, They that touch them, (...)
touch the Apple of his Eye. No King has such a value of his greatest
Favorites, as God has for his Saints; they are the Persons that the King
delights to Honor: What is it to be honored by poor Mortals to this honor? 2
(...) 2^.
If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor: He honors them here, he gives
them honorable Titles: What are the airy, and empty Titles of Earl, Marquess,
Duke, etc. (that pull up Ambitious Spirits) to those high and honorable Titles
God confers on believers? as Sons of God, (...)
Heirs of God, most excellent, or most magnificent; He has made us Kings, etc.
and Princes. These are high Titles indeed, when conferred upon us by the
eternal God. My Brethren, they are not only h^noured with the highest Titles,
but also beloved with the highest Love; I gave Egypt for thy Ransom, Isa. ^3.^4.
Ethiopia and S^ba for thee; since thou were precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee. He loves them with the love of
Complacency; he rejoices over them, as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride.
I^a. ^2.5.
Nay, he loves them with the same Love wherewith he loves Jesus Christ: And
have loved them, Ioh. (...)
as thou have loved me. And as he loves, and honors them, so he will also
cause all Men, yea, Kings, and such that now hate them, to bow before them;
Isa. 60.14.
The Sons of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and all
that despised thee shall bow themselves at the soles of thy Feet. The Gentiles
shall see their Righteousness, and all Kings their Glory: Thou shall also be a
Crown of Glory in the hand of the Lord, Isa. 62.2.3.
and a royal Diadem in the hand of thy God. Nay, the Lord Jesus himself will
honor them; Luke 12.37.
Verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them sit down to
meat, and will come forth, and serve them.

Eighthly, and Lastly, He honors them with his own glorious Train or Noble
Retinue: He commands his Servants, those glorious Courtiers that attend, and
wait round about his Throne, to wait on them, to administer unto them, and
continually to be a Guard unto them, that love and fear his Name; they ride,
(as I may so say) in his own Chariots; The Chariots of God are twenty thousand,
even thousands of Angels: And these are on this Ladder, Joh. 1.^^.
they ascend and descend upon the Son of Man. But more of this hereafter: They
encamp round about such that fear the Lord; Heb. 1.
and are sent to minister unto them that are heirs of Salvation.

USE.
1. How may this raise the Hearts of Believers? Alas! they little think what
glory God has, in Jesus Christ, conferred upon them: How would they lift up
their Heads, and rejoice, did they contemplate on that great Dignity, they are
raised unto!

2. And what Reproof may this be to the ungodly World, who slight, despise, and
hate these honorable Ones, as if they were the Offscouring of all things, and
not worthy to live on the Earth, when indeed the world is not worthy of them;
These precious Sons of Sion comparable to fine Go^d, are accounted as Earthen
Pitchers. Lam. 4.2.


Moreover, it may reprove those for their horrid Folly, who esteem and value
the vain Honor of Men, above the Honor that comes from God; That had rather
be Great in the Sight of Men than Great and Glorious in the Sight of God.

3. This also may cause us to admire Jesus Christ, who has raised us to suc^
Dignity, and Honor: his Exaltation, Beloved, is our Exaltation, we had never
been raised to this Honor, had not he been Abased, and then highly Ex^lted:
Christ's Exaltation was only a mediatory Exaltation; he was not advanced, in
respect of the essential Glory of his Godhead; for as so he was always
possessed with that, so that their could be no Addition of Glory made to that;
but it was a Glory or Exaltation of his Person, as God-man; Ioh. 1^.5.
the Glory of Christ, as God, is the same from everlasting with the Father;
therefore it was the exaltation of his Person, as Mediator; as he is our head
and blessed Representative, he is Exalted, that we in him may be Exalted also:
As he, Beloved, was raised up from the dead, so were we in him; and as he was
Justifi^d, so were we in him; and as he Ascended up to Heaven, so did we Ascend
in him; and so also assuredly shall all his Elect be raised spiritually from
Sin to a state of Grace here, and in ^o^^y and Soul to an eternal State of
Glory hereafter. If Christ be raised, we shall be raised, because he was raised
as our public Head, and is ascended into Heaven as our Forerunner. Heb. ^.20.


4 This may be also for Trial: By this we may know my Brethren, who they are
that are upon Jacobs Ladder, or in Jesus Christ: see what Spirits, what Hearts,
what Principles, what Ends and Aims you have, and what Li^e^ you live: Do you
dwell on ^igh? yet pray labor to ascend higher, and higher every day; but is
your Conversation in Heaven? Phil. 3.20.
do you mount up as with Eagles Wings? it is thus if you are true Believers:
Earth is behind your backs, Isa. 40.31.
and all the things of the World are little in your sight, if you are elivated
on high.

But to proceed, there is one or two things more concerning this Ladder, that I
must take notice of; Mind well the word [ behold] and [ behold a Ladder] this
as I hinted, is a word that sometimes calls for Observation and Attention;
Behold, Rev. 3.20.
I am at the Door, and knock; sometimes it calls for Commiseration, Behold, is
there any Sorrow like my Sorrow? Sometimes it calls for Imitation, Behold the
perfect Man: Sometimes it calls for Admiration, Behold, 1 Ioh. 3.1.
what manner of love is this! etc. Sometimes it calls for Faith, and
Dependence; Behold, the Lamb of God, etc. I said, behold me, behold me; what is
that but to believe in him? lastly, and sometimes for Consolation. Now the Word
here no doubt calls for Observation, for Admiration, for Faith and Dependence,
and also for Consolation.

Behold, a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top of it reaches to Heaven!
Greenhill, in Ezekiel. vol. 1. p. 104.
Of what a length is this Ladder! Astronomers, according to Reverend Greenhill
observe, it is 160. Millions of Miles from Earth to Heaven; A wonderful thing!
An amazing height! so it is a wonderful thing to behold Christ Jesus, the Way
to Heaven. Behold with Admiration! be Astonished! who could have thought of
such a way, to the Father, to be Saved by a dying Jesus, by a poor Man, hanged
on a Tree; to be Justified by his Righteousness; and by his Death to be
delivered from Hell; this is a marvelous thing! Angels wonder, beholding this
Person: Observe from hence.

DOCT. II. That the way which God has found out to save lost Man, namely Jesus
Christ, ought to be beheld with the greatest Care or utmost Diligence; and with
the greatest Admiration and Wonderment.
1. I shall show wherein, (in speaking to this Proposition,) the wonderfulness
of this spiritual Ladder does consist.

2. How we should behold Jesus Christ.

3. Show you why we should behold him.

4. For what Sinners, should behold Christ, or look to him.

5. Apply it. -- To the first of these.

1. To behold this spiritual Ladder in respect of the Cause, or Motive that
moved God to make, or prepare it.

2. In respect of the Wisdom of God that did prepare it.

3. In respect of the Matter of which it is made, or does consist.

4. In respect of the great and glorious Design of God, in making or preparing
of it.

How we should behold an^ admire (...) Christ* (...) the (...).
First, we may well admire, this spiritual Ladder, Jesus Christ, in respect of
the Motive which moved God to prepare it, which was his infinite Love, Mercy,
and Goodness to Sinners, to show so great Compassi^n toward sinful and
r^bellious Creatures, who deserv^d instead of being raised up to Heaven, to be
immediately cast down to the lowest Hell. What is Man, Ioh. ^
that thou art mindful of him? that thou should magnif^^ him, and set thy
heart upon him?

Sirs, it was the love of God the Father, I say that t^is way was prepared, it
sprang or proceeded from the greatness of his love; God so loved the W^rld;
I^^. 3.^^
if it had not been the product of the Father's Love, it w^^l^ not be to the
praise of (...) Grace; the love of the F^ther in this case, in Moving, was as
great as the (...) in Consenting.

O how did his Bowels work and move in him! O the miraculousness of divine
goodness! by the law we had broke, we were guilty, Charaock.
insolently taking up Arms against our Maker, plunging ourselves into a Sea of
divine Wrath and Vengeance; guilty of Millions of Sins, meritting Millions of
Deaths, yet has love would not let him rest until he had found out a way to
raise us up from the lowest Hell to the highest Heaven. And in making his Son,
his only begotten Son the way, and that by Abasing of him, making him so Poor,
that was so Rich, so Low, that was so High and Glorious; so Cursed, that was so
Blessed, yea Blessedness it self; nay, so miserable for a time; to make our way
to Heaven through the rending his Flesh, and taring his Soul to pieces, and
pouring forth his most precious Blood, and this for such who hated him, and
were cursed Traitors against him; well might the holy Ghost say, Behold, a
ladder! behold, a new and living way, which he has provided, and consecrated
through the Veil, that is to say, the Flesh of his own Son: O my Brethren, the
way to enter into the Holiest, is by the blood of Jesus! H^b. 1^.1^.
Does not God hereby show greater Love and Grace, than if he had saved lost
Sinners on a way of simple Mercy, without the Death of his own Son? Therefore
(as one Observes) God resolv^d to signalize his Love to us, he would have it
re^ch the highest Note; and it could not be screwed up to an higher Peg, than
to Sacrifice his Son for us, (...) ^3.12.
with his own Hand; it pleased the Lord to Praise him: Be astonished, both Men
and Angels! Now may our Meditations swim in this boundless, Romans ^.^^
bottomless bankless Ocean of the Fathers Love! God spared not his own Son.
Brethren, the Love of the Father was the Motive, that moved him to contrive
this way to Heaven; yea and the fullest, the freest, and the most amazing Love
that ever was showed; free to us, but expensive to him; it cost him the Blood
of his Son, more costly than the making of Millions of Worlds; he lay in his
Bosom, and there was none besides him from Eternity, to put up a request; it
was the Result of his own Bowels before the being of any Creature, 'twas the
effect of his Power: Though our Justification, Sanctification, and eternal
Blessedness, be the Fruits and Merits of Christ's Death, yet whatsoever is
Meritted for us by Christ, it is all the Fruits of God's Love: Christ did not
merit the Fathers Love, nor did he merit the Office of being a Mediator; no,
this sprung only from the Love of God to us; Christ did not, I say, dye to
procure the Fathers Love, though thereby he makes us more lovely unto him, by
washing us from our natural Filthiness; and by the fruits of his Death, through
the Spirit, by stamping his Image upon our Souls. Brethren, God could not show
gre^ter Love to us, as Abraham could not to God, than by the Offering up his
own Son Isaac, whom he so d^arly loved.

Christ to be a^mired in resp^^t t^ the Wisdom of God.
Secondly, Admire this Sacred Ladder in respect of the Wisdom of God, in
contriving of this way to Heaven: As it exceeds the Art and Wisdom of Men to
make a Ladder to reach up to Heaven; so it far surpasses the Wisdom of Men or
Angels, to contrive such a way to Heaven, that God may be glorified in all his
Attributes, to the highest Perfections, and yet we Saved, Sin Punished, and yet
the Sinner Justified: Besides, God had lost the glory of his work in making of
Man and this World for his sake, and Satan would have insulted over him, had he
not contrived a way to restore him: (...)
It would have been to the Disparagement of his Wisdom, who pronounced all the
Works he had made to be Good; and when he had made Man very Good, to see
himself so soon disappointed, and his work marred, I mean the noblest part
thereof, all other Creatures being made for Man's use, and so for lower and
baser, and more unworthy ends. Brethren, Christ the way, not in vain called the
Wisdom of God, because in him God displays the highest acts of his divine
Wisdom; the holy Angels are amaz^d at this Wisdom, they pry into this depth,
this profound mystery of God manifested in the Flesh. There is a wonderful
Mystery in our way to Heaven by Jesus Christ, as well as in the Fellowship of
this Mystery, or in the Communication of it; Ephesians. 3.10,
it is called the manifold Wisdom of God; To the intent that now unto the
Principalities and Powers in Heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the
manifold Wisdom of God. The Angels who are said to ascend and descend up this
Ladder, are not a little astonished with the whole Economy of Man's
Redemption, or with this way of raising us to the highest Glory; from hence
Paul speaking of our Redemption through Christ's blood, Ephesians. ^.^
says; Wherein God has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence.
Brethren, God has abounded in all Wisdom toward us in contriving of this way
for us to come to himself, and his Prudence in ordering and disposing the means
consonant thereto. Wisdom (says one) in drawing the Platform, and Prudence in
Digging through all Impediments; and making even the seeming Obstacles serve as
Steps to the Execution of it. Brethren, God has discovered greater Wisdom in
restoring man by Jesus Christ, then in his Creating of him; God's Wisdom
howbeit shines in the works of Creation, and in his works of Providence; in
governing the whole Creation is very great, but his greatest Wisdom appears in
the work of his Redemption, both in respect to the work it self, together with
his design and purpose of God therein; well might it be said, Romans 11.33
Behold a Ladder, etc. Wonder! Oh the depths of the Riches both of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God! It Is called the Riches of God's Wisdom, and the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery; But Woe to such as contemn this Wisdom, slight this Wisdom,
or assert there is nothing in it a Mystery above humane Reason, how for God
thus to love Man, for God to bring his Glory out of the Ashes, wherein it
seemed buried, and to raise Man so high, that by Sin and the Devil was laid so
low; to cause Light to shine out of the thickest Darkness, and to bring Heaven
and Earth together again, is Wisdom to be admired! As reverend Charnock
observes, It is accounted an admirable point of Wisdom among Men, to unite two
Princes at variance, without invading either of their Rights, but entirely
preserving them, and to link them together in Bonds of stronger Peace, than
they were in before they fell out.

By Jesus Christ, Brethren, God's Right is preserved, he loses nothing of his
own Glory, of his own Honor, but it is more enlarged and manifested, than if
Man had never fallen; and Man is restored to a better and more lasting State of
Happiness.

Christ to be admired in respect to his Person.
Thirdly, The way to Heaven by Jacob's Ladder, ought to be beheld with the
greatest Admiration in respect of the Matter of which it is made; all Ladders
(as well as all other things) consist of matter and form, -- But, O what is the
Matter with which this divine Ladder is made! I answer it is the Son of God
made Man, even he that made the Woman, made of a Woman; is not this wonderful,
to see the Ancient of Days, become a Babe of a Day Old? is it not a mavelous
thing, To see him that was in the form of God, Phil. 6.6^
and that thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, to be in the form of a
Servant, and to lie in a Man^er^ To see him that made the Creature, to be trod
underfoot of the Creature, and hel^ in scorn and contempt, and dishonored, to
raise such as we so the highest honor? Is it not an amazing thing, to see
Jesus made a Curse to raise Sinners from under the Curse to eternal
Bl^^^edness? We account that a mavelous thing that is New, a thing that none
ever did, nor could do the like; For the Lord has created a new thi^^ in the
Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. Ier. 31.22
A Child Created, not Begotten, but Created in the Virgin's Womb by the Lord,
is not that a mavelous thing? and above the Reason or Understanding of men,
though of the deepest Judgment, Wisdom, and Knowledge, that ever lived upon the
Earth? But such is the Incarnation of Christ, and the Hypostatical Union of the
Two Natures in that One Person; no man by reason can Comprehend h^w th^s could
be. My ^^^thren, this is a mysterious Ladder, and made of a ^^^derful
Materials: Is it not an amazing thing, that God should give his own Son a
Sacrifice for Rebels, Acts 20, 27.28
such that hated him? and that God should purchase the Church with his own
Blood? Is it not a mavelous thing, that the King upon the Throne should lay
aside his Robes, and dye for c^rsed Traitors, and contemptible Beggars? Is not
that a wonderful thing which Non-plusses all the Wisdom of Men and Angels? Is
it not a wonderful thing that God and Man, or the divine and humane Nature
should be so united to be but one Person? and is it not strange and wonderful
that vile Sinners should be made Righteous by the Righteousness of another? and
that sinful Man should be clothed with a more glorious Robe than any of the
holy Angels of Heaven have? Is it not a mavelous thing, that Death should be
overcome and destroyed by Death? and that a Man should Dye, and yet be capable
to raise himself from the Dead?

Behold this Ladder! is it not made of beaten Gold? Is it not a costly Ladder,
of more Worth than ten thousand Worlds? What are Pearls or Diamonds to this
Pearl? What precious Stones may be compared to this precious tried Stone? This
Ladder is made of one precious Stone, yet so made, that there is firm and sure
Footing in it for all that venture thereon, to carry them to Heaven.

Fourthly, It should be beheld with Admiration, Christ to be be admired in
r^spect to the ^etiga of God.
in respect of the Design of it. O my Brethren, never was a Ladder made on so
high, so sublime, and on so great, and so glorious a Design as this is!

1. For to manifest the Glory of God, or to advance his own Honor in the sight
and view of all his elect ones.

2. To magnify the Law.

3. To destroy the work and design of the Devil.

4. And to raise up poor fallen man into a most happy and glorious State and
Condition for ever.

Certainly, to behold such a Ladder, that is set upon the Earth, and the top of
it reaches up to Heaven, it must needs denote some wonderful and glorious
Design and End of the blessed God. It shows that hereby God would have Jacob
know, and all his true Seed, that man's happiness does not consist in any
earthly Blessings: it is not below, but above, yea that it lies only in hi^
self, and that we must observe the way, know well the way he has prepared for
us, to attain to that true Happiness, and that it is to be had in Union and
Communion with himself: But to proceed.

First, The Design of God the Father in the contriving this way, this glorious
and wonderful Medium, or this spiritual and mystical Ladder, is to magnify and
advance his own Glory, in respect of his own Person, and the Glory of his Son,
and the Glory of the Holy Ghost; for every sacred Person of the blessed
Trinity, shines forth in equal Glory in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
our Salvation by Jesus Christ.

1. The Glory of the Father is manifested in Election; or in Choosing all that
shall be Saved in Christ.

2. The Glory of the Son in Redemption; or in dying to redeem them.

3. The Glory of the Holy Spirit in Sanctification; or in Renewing and
Regenerating of them.

So many the Father Elected, so many the Son Redeemed, and so many the Spirit
Sanctifies. So in Justification, (Christ's Righteousness being called a Robe)
the three Persons are equally Glorified and Exalted.

1. The Father prepared the Matter out of which the Robe of Righteousness is
made; viz. The Body of Christ.

2. The Son wrought it by his own active and passive Obedience.

3. The Holy Ghost puts it upon us, by working Faith in us.

And not only the Glory of God personally considered, but also the Glory of all
the divine Attributes, or Perfections of the blessed Godhead, are Magnified
and Exalted also hereby.

1. The Glory of his infinite Love, Mercy, and Goodness, (which you have heard)
is the grand Motive that moved God the Father, or put him upon this glorious
Contrivance; which is the rise, spring and fountain of all our Happiness.

2. Moreover, the Glory of his infinite Wisdom, Truth, Justice, Power, and
Holiness.

The Glory of his Justice: God is Just; he can as soon cease to be, as cease to
be Just. Dr. Tho. Goodwin
God declared, if Man Sinned he should dye; therefore either he must destroy
Man to preserve his Truth and Justice, and see his Law not violated and turned
upside down, and so conceal his Mercy; or else find out a way to satisfy his
Justice, and preserve his Truth, that his Love and Mercy may appear; therefore
his Wisdom found out a way for the Honor both of Justice and Mercy, by laying
our Sins upon his own Son as our Surety, and to undergo that Wrath and
Punishment, which we must otherwise have undergone for ever.

Here is, Brethren, no changing the Sentence against Sin, but of the Person;
our Sins and Punishment are transferred upon Jesus Christ; and since it was
infinite Justice our Sins had wronged, an infinite Punishment must be Suffered,
which none but one that was God could bear, nor satisfy for: and now the full
Payment or Satisfaction Christ made to divine Justice, put a Bar, or delivered
him from the eternal duration of the Punishment: for the cause why Sinners lie
in Hell, or in Prison for ever, arises from their inability to satisfy or pay
their Debts; but from the worth and dignity of Christ's Person, Justice is
Satisfie^, and he acquitted, and discharged out of Prison, and we in him.
Besides, none but God could be a proper Judge; what could be a suffici^nt
Satisfaction to his vindictive Wrath and Justice, but when God declares that in
his Son he is well pleased, and satisfied? who shall say this could not be a
proper and legal discharge for us? Moreover, this discovers Go^'s infinite
Holiness and hatred of Sin, more than if we had suffered for ever, in his
making his own Son a Sacrifice for our Sins, and not sparing him when he stands
in our Law-place. Here (as one observes) was the Beauty of his Holiness, as
well as the exactness of his Justice, with the vin^^cation of the Honor of his
Law, displaying the Purity of his Nature, by sheathing his Sword with
Indign^^^on in the Bowels of Sin, while he pierced the Heart of his beloved Son.

The like I might speak of all God's other blessed Attributes; his end was to
magnify them hereby, as well as his Wisdom, Love, Mercy, and Justice: But to
proceed,

The Law tendered glorious by Christ's obedience to it.
Secondly, His Design herein also was to magnify the Law, and make it
honorable; the law looses none of it Sanction by Jesus Christ; the law
required Man to keep it, Man to yield perfect Obedience to God therein, and Man
to dye, and bear the Penalty for the breach of it.

But lo! here is a Man, (nay one more then Man, even God-Man, the Son of God,
made Man, made of a Woman, made under the Law) come on purpose to stand in our
Law-place, to honor this Law, to yield active and perfect Obedience unto it,
and to dye for our breach thereof. This is more than the Law could, or did
require; the law has more then it is just Demand, for by Christ's keeping of
it, and dying for our Sin^, he has meritted as well as satisfied; he has
meritted those things of God, which the Law could not have given us; had we
never broke it, that could not have made us so near to God, so great, so
glorious, and so happy for ever, as we are made by the merits, and purchase of
Jesus Christ. But more of that by and by.

Do we make void the law through Faith, God forbid: Romans 3.31.
Yea we establish the law: In that by Christ's Obedience to the Law, or by his
perfect active Obedience, and Death, apprehended by Faith we are Justified, and
the Law for ever silenced: Christ having satisfied the Justice of God, broke
the Thunders of the Law, and dissolved the frame of all its Anathema's: He
being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
he has redeemed us from the curse of the Law: He has abolished the
Obligation of the Moral Law as to its Condemning Power, and has by his blood
sealed another Covenant, a New Covenant, a better Covenant: the first has been
perfectly kept, and the sentence of it has been undergone; Rom, 8, 1.
and its killing power is taken away to all that are in Christ Jesus. And thus,
see how the Law is magnified, lifted up, and made Honorable: i. e. rather then
that shall loose any of its Honor, the Son of God will become Man and answer
all its Demands, in doing, and suffering what we ought to have done, and
suffered, and for our default must have endured for ever.

Thirdly, God's design hereby also was to destroy the Works of the Devil, in
respect of Original Sin, which was Satan's Work, and of all actual Sins, which
are his cursed works also: i. e. such works that he imploys all Men in, and
stirs them up to do, until they are delivered out of his Kingdom: 1 Ioh 3.8.
For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil: Who is the Author of all Sin, and the Worker of all
Iniquity: and as God's design was to destroy Sin, the work of the Devil, so it
was also hereby to destroy Satan's Design likewise, which was to rob God of the
Glory of his own Work and Purpose, in creating of Man; he thought to have
utterly ruined Mankind, and laid him for ever as low as Hell, but God by this
means, by this Spiritual Ladder, shows his purpose is to raise hi^ up to the
highest Heavens. This brings me to the last thing Proposed, as Gods design
hereby.

Fourthly, Gods design hereby was to raise up poor fallen Man into a more happy
and glorious State, than he was in before he fell: Every Believer is made
hereby a Son or Daughter of God, born of God, adopted by the Free Grace of God,
and made an Heir of God; nay, married to the Son of God, and clothed with the
Righteousness of God, or with (...) Righteousness, who is God, and from this
State can never fall. So much as to the First thing proposed i.e In what
respects this Ladder, Jesus Christ, should be b^held.

Secondly, I shall show you how, or in what respect we should behold Jesus
Christ.

Christ to be beheld exclusive of all other objects and things.
First, Exclusively, or by way of opposition to all other Objects or Things: We
should behold Jesus Christ, as our only Savior, exclusive of all other Ways,
Object, or Means of obtaining eternal Life, whatsoever.

1. Exclusively, or in Opposition to the Law, and the Righteousness any can
obtain by their own personal Obedience thereunto, we ought to behold Jesus
Christ: Some, in the Apostles time, expected Justification by their own
Obedience to the moral and ceremonial Law; Romans 9.31.32.
but Israel, that followed after the Law of Righteousness, has not attained to
the Law of R^ghteousness: verse. 31. Wherefore? because they sought it not by
Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law; for they stumbled at that
stumbling-stone. verse. 32. They being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going
about to establish their own Righteousness. have not submitted themselves to
the Righteousness of God. Romans 10 3.
That is, by their personal, and own inherent Righteousness.

2. Exclusive of all our Works, or Righteousness done by us, or wrought in us
as part ^f the matter of our Justification before God; or as any procuring
Cause, or Condition of our Justification and eternal Life. For since all
Boasting is excluded, all Works done by us, and Righteousness wrought in us,
are excluded; but all Boasting is excluded etc. Where is boasting then? it is
excluded, Rom 3 27
by what Law? of Works; nay, but by the Law of Faith.

3. Exclusive of any other Sacrifice for Sin, or Mediators: The Papists look to
their own vain Sacrifices, Offerings and Penance, an^ seek to other Mediators
also, to the detracting from the worth and satisfactory Sacrifice of Christ
once for all; but as there is but one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus; Heb. 9.28.
so there is but one Propiciatory Sacrifice, which he offered up upon the
Cross. 1 Timothy 2.5.


4. Nay, we should behold this Ladder, i.e. Jesus Christ, exclusive of Faith it
self, either as an habit, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
or act, or in respect of its being any Condition, or Cause, procuring our
Justification; Act 13, 29.
or as touching the effects, or fruits of it, or any ways else whatsoever, save
only as an Instrument by which we apprehend or receive Jesus Christ: Act. 4.12.
For it is not Faith which Justifies us, but the Object which it apprehends
and takes hold of; Ioh, 3, 14.
it was not the eye that beheld the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness that
healed those that were stung, but the Brazen Serpent, that was beheld or looked
unto.

Secondly, We must behold Jesus Christ by an eye of Faith, or believe in him,
venture our Souls upon him; Thus it is to behold him.

1. To believe there is no Salvation, but by and through Jesus Christ alone; Act
4, 12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other; for there is no other Name given
under Heaven, whereby we must be saved. No other Savior for Soul or Body, for
Pardon or Peace.

2. To believe, though there is no Salvation in any other, or in nothing else;
yet that there is Salvation in Christ, for all that come unto him, or savingly
believe in him; John. 3.14, 15, 16.
Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish but have everlasting Life. And
indeed, to this end is Christ lifted up (as a Ladder, the top of which reaches
to Heaven: As the Brazen Serpent was lifted up,) that the vilest Sinners who
behold him by an eye of Faith might be saved.

3. To believe in Christ, or thus to behold him, is to lay the whole stress of
our Salvation upon him, and upon his Atonement, upon his Righteousness, or upon
the Merits of his Blood alone.

4. To behold Christ, is to believe that he has made our Peace with God; that
God is satisfied and well pleased in him; that divine Wrath is appeased in him;
Mat. 3.1^. Isa 53, 11.
and that he Dyed for you, or in your stead.

Isa. 27.4.
5. To behold Christ, is to apply his Blood, and plead his Atonement against all
Accusations that may be brought against you.

1 When Satan lays the greatness of our Sins before us, and aggravates them
upon our Consciences, it is then our Duty to repel his Assaults, and Implead
him, Heb. ^ 22. H^b. 1^.24.
by Pleading that Christ's Blood has fully attoned and satisfied for all our
Sins, H^b. ^^.14.
both those Sins we committed before Called, A^ts ^3.39.
and for all our Sins committed after we are Called.

2. When our Consciences acc^se us, it is our Duty and Privilege to Plead the
Blood of Christ; 1 Ioh. 2.^
and look up to him who is our Advocate at the Father's Right-h^nd.

3. When Men accuse us for our Faults and Failings, we must behold Jesus
Christ, and believe the Sufficiency of his Righteousness, and the Virtue and
Merits of his Blood: R^m ^, ^^.34.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? it is God that
Justifies. Who is he that Condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that
is risen again; who is even at the Right Hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. Who can Implead such, or put in any Accusation against
them whom God actually Acquits, Justifies and pronounces Righteous? The
Apostle says; (our late ^nnotators say)that such: one may throw down the
Gauntle^, and challenge all the World; let Conscience, Carnal Reason, Law, Sin
Hell and Devils bring forth a^^ they can say, it will not be sufficientto
Condemnation.

Thirdly, To behold Jesus Christ by Faith, is to go directly to him as your
Savior, and Adv^cate; let your sins be what they will, knowing that he is able
to save you, and that he has b^rn all the punishment due that your sins
deserved; and this without thinking of bringing any thing with you to Commend
you to him: He requires no previous Qualifications of us; Sinners must look to
Christ, come to Christ in their Sins, beholding their loathsome Filth, and
abominable Guilt, feeling and finding that their Wounds bleed, and are corrupt;
and not to think to Wash themselves from their Sins by Repentance, and Tears of
Sorrow for Sin, that they may Believe, but come to him, to be Washed; Believe
in him that they may be Justified and Healed; Faith will produce Repentance;
They shall look to him whom they pierced, and they shall mourn, as a Man mourns
for his only Son; Zech. 12, 10.
and be in bitterness, as a Man is in bitterness for his Firstborn.

Fourthly, We should behold Christ as a Sure way to the Father: This Ladder
will bring us to God, who is at the Top of it, or above it; and as this only is
the Way, so it is a Sure way: No Man comes to the Father but by me: By Christ
we believe in God, Ioh. 14.6.
and come to God, not directly to God, without eyeing of this Medium; no, no,
God out of Christ is an angry God, a consuming ^^ire: Heb, 12. ult.
therefore we must come to God, by Christ as our Mediator, and commit our cause
to him to plead at God's Bar.

Thirdly, Why we should behold this Ladder, or look unto Jesus Christ?

1. Because he is the way to Heaven, Act 4.28.
which infinite Wisdom has found out; nay the result of that glorious Counsel
held between the Father and the Son from eternity: Zech. ^.13. Why we should
behold Christ.
Not to behold this Way, this Ladder, this Mediator, is to cast contempt on
God, in his contrivance of Salvation by Jesus Christ.

2. Because there is so much divine Love, Grace and Goodness showed to us in
Jesus Christ.

3. Because this Sight is so Wonderful a Sight^: Christ Brethren, is the wonder
of both Worlds; O it is an amazing thing, to see such a Way, such a Ladder
prepared for us to go to God!

4. Christ should be beheld because of the Loveliness (as well as the
Wonderfulness) of his Person: There is no such Object to be seen in Heaven, nor
Earth.

5. Because there is in him all Fullness; We beheld his glory, Ioh. 1.4.
as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. The
Word, as one observes, is Emphatical, [ itheasametha,] we beheld, as in a
Theater, as Men behold things presented to them on a Stage, with great
earnestness, and delight; even as the express Image of the Father's Person; it
pleased the Father, C^^ 1.15
that in him all fullness should ^awe^. He received the Spirit of Grace without
measure, and it is in him to be Communicated to all his Elect, or Members of his
mystical Body, as fullness of Sap is in the Root, to supply all the Branches.

6. Because this of beholding, or looking to Jesus Christ, is the way God has
appointed for our Reception, or Participation of all the Benefits and Merits of
his Blood; nor is there any other way, but through believing in him, for any
Adult Persons to be Saved.

7. Because of the absolute necessity Sinners have of him; they are sick, and
he is their Physician, etc.

For what we (...).
Fifthly, For what, or to receive what, should we behold Jesus Christ.

1. For Reco^ciliat^on and Peace with God: All thi^^s are of God, 2 (...) 5.
who reconciled us unto himself (...), (...) 5
To (...), that God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself, not
imputing their Tres^asses unto them; This is the meriter^ous cause of our
Reconciliation: God in Christ, or by his Blood, is Satisfied, and Reconciled;
and all that would have peace with God, must Believe, Rom 5.11
or look to Christ, to receive the Atonement: Christ has received an actual
discharge for Sinners from his Father, and you must come to him for it, and
receive the Benefit and Evidence of it to your own Consciences: All that the
Father has given me, John 6.^^
shall come unto me; and whosoever comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
There is an infallible Connection betwixt Faith and eternal Life; and betwixt
Election and the Collection of special Grace; Act 13.43.
and as Election is first, special Vocation will follow; and as many as were
ordained to eternal Life, believed. For the Father's gift of the Soul to
Christ, and of Grace to believe in him, is no doubt here meant by his giving
them to his Son.

2. therefore you must first look to him for Grace, Zech. ^^ 12.
for Fait^; God pours ou^ the Spirit of Grace and Supplicat^on first, and then
a Sinner looks to him w^om he pierced; that is, then and not till then he will
believe, or savingly behold Jesus Christ.

3. Sinners must behold Christ, look to Christ for Union with him, and to be
espoused to him: Hos. 2.19.20
Look till they Love; behold him, till they fall in Love with him. The holy
Spirit is the bond of this Union, 1 Co^. 1.17.
by which Christ takes hold of us, and Faith is that Grace, by which we take
hold of him.

4. For Justification: Romans 3 1.
Whosoever has Union with Christ, receives their personal Discharge from the
Law-Sentence, that bound them over to Wrath, 2 Cor. 11.1, 2.
and Condemnation; and are actually pronounced Acquitted, and Justified for
ever.

5. For Acceptance with the Father; I^h, ^.6.
who has made us accepted in the beloved, Christ's acceptance by the Father,
is the Spring, or Fountain of our Acceptance, he being accepted for, and in the
behalf of all his Elect: And no sooner is a Sinner in Christ, but he stands
personally Justified, and accepted with the Father; and he being accepted, all
his Duties and Services are accepted also, that he performs in Faith, and by
the assistance of the Spirit of God.

Col. 1.14.
6. For Pardon of Sin; and to have it evidenced unto their Consciences: In whom
we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins.

Isa. 45.24.
7. For Strength: Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I Righteousness, and
Strength, Righteousness to Justify me, and Strength to Support me, and
Assistance to bear all Burdens, resist all Temptations, to strengthen all my
Graces, and to perform all holy Duties.

Phil. 2.1.
8. For all divine Comforts and Consolations: If there be therefore any
Consolations in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, etc. Though many may be in Christ, and find no such Consolations, which
others meet with, yet there are most precious Consolations in him, and we
should look to him for them.

Lastly, We should behold him; look to him for eternal Life: Eternal Life is
purchased by Christ, and it is to be had in Christ, and all that believe h^ve an
undoubted Title thereto.

APPLICATION.
Infer. ]
First, We Infer from hence that great blindness, and ignorance has siezed
upon most of Men, in that they care not to behold Jesus Christ, they can see no
Be^uty in him to desire him, nor do they marvel to behold this sight.

Secondly, Sinner, will you not behold this Christ thy Savior? Let me Exhort
you to behold the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World; and, O cast
a right look unto him!

[ Motives.]

1. It will cause, or work godly Sorrow in you f^r all your Sins; They shall
look unto him, whom they p^ercea, and shall Mourn, etc.

2. It will cause in you Self-loathing, I^b. 42.5.
and Self-abhorrance; I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ears; but now
mine Eyes see thee, therefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes.
When the Prophet saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high, and lifted up, and
his Train filled the Temple, he cried out; I am undone! mine Eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of Hosts! Isa. 6.1 4, 5, 6.


3. It will cause you to behold great Beauty and excellencies in him: To you
that believe, Pet. 2.7. Phil. 3.^.^.
he is precious: Yea, doubtless, I count all things loss for the excellency of
the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, my Lord. C^^t. 5.10 16,
You will say then, that he is the chiefest among ten Thousands, and altogether
Lovely.

4. It will change you into his own Image; this look is of a Soul-transforming
Nature; but we all, 2 Cor. 3, 18.
beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, from glory, to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

5. This beholding of Christ, will cause you to contemn all things here below,
and to account them as nothing, nay worse than nothing in comparison of him;
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, Phil. 3.8.
and do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ. ( Syriac and others, Dog's
Meat, refuse cast to Dogs) Thus do all that behold him, (in point of
Justification) in comparison of Christ; esteem as nothing all good Works, good
Duties flowing from a sanctified Heart; nay all inherit Holiness with Faith it
self, in respect of any Trust, and Confidence therein: So much is the object of
Faith valued by all that thus behold him.

6. It will draw the Souls of all that thus behold him, to him, and after him,
and to follow him whithersoever he goes: When I am lifted up, I will draw all
Men to me: When I am beheld on the Cross, Ioh. 12.3^
dying for them, or in their stead. Lo! we have forsaken all, Mat. 19, ^7.
and have followed thee? They did thus, and presently too, as soon as he called
them: Rev. 1^.4,
-- These are they which follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes; Those who
thus see him, are even sick of Love; Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? Cant 3.3.
etc. Tell him I am sick of love

O Sinners, labor thus to behold him! i.e. pierced for you; ^ying and bleeding
on the Cross for you; offering himself to you, standing at your Doors woing and
entreating you to open to him, to love him, embrace him, and espouse him.

[ Consider by way of Excitation.]

1. Can you behold him entering into a Covenant of Redemption from Eternity for
you, and not love him? Zech. 6.13.
Can you see hi^ strike Hands with the Father, leaving out your Names, an^ only
putting his own Name in that Covenant, as your Surety, to pay all your Debts,
to s^tisfie divine Justice for all your Sins, and dye in your room, and not
love him?

2. Can you see him take your nature upon him, and become Man, born of a poor
Virgin, a Babe laid in a Manger, Heb. 2.14.15.
exp^sed to the rage and malice of Men, John. 1.14.
and Devils and not love him?

3. Can you behold him, and think of that purpose of Grace, Ier. 31.3.
eternal Love, and good Will unto you from e^erlasting, and not love him?

4. Can you behold him Betrayed, left by his own Di^ciples Denied by Peter,
Isa. ^0.^,
Spit upon, Scourged, his Hair Torn from his Beard, and all be sprinkled with
Blood, condemned as a Malefactor, ^ owned with Tho^ns, and not love him?

5 Can you behold him in his bloody Ag^ny, sweating great drops of Blood? Can
you see him Nailed to a Tree, and his Side pierced with a Spear, which run into
his Heart; and all this for you, and not love him?

Thirdly, Reproof. Reproof.
What, vile Wretch do thou do? will thou Wound him again? sight him, grieve
him, and prefer thy Sins and Lusts above him? before thou did never truly
behold him! Shall God t^ us display the glory of his Free grace, and magnify
all his Attributes in our Redemption, by Christ; and do thou ^i^ht and
co^t^mn this glorious Contrivance? and with the Face of Impudence, seek another
way to go ^o ^eaven, by Morality, by the Light within, b^ ^^^^ing something of
thine own, with his (...), an^ ^o think to go to Heaven by a Ladde^ of ^^y o^u
^ev^si^g?

Fourthly, By ^h^ you (...) see; you that are Professors, whet^^^ you did ^ver
Savingly behold the Lord Jesus, or not; have true Faith o^ not.

Fifthly, For Encouragement, to a^^to behold him; Incourag.


1. He is able to save you, though never so vile, Heb. 7.25.
and abominable Sinners; to save you all; to save all, to the uttermost, that
come to God by him; i.e. by this Ladder; by this new and living Way.

2. He is also willing as we^l as able: This appears; (1.) By his Expressions
and Invitations; Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me, all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give you
Rest? How often would I have gathered thy Children together, etc. (2.) By his
Affections. Behold me? behold me? What love has he showed! and what Complaints
of Sorrow and Grief at Sinners Unbelief! (3.) By his Actions; even every w^y:
what Love, greater Love, infinite Love, and willi^gness, can be showed? how
has he manifested his Readiness to save Sinners.

Sixthly, Terror. Terror. Mark, 15 16.
] You must behold him by an eye of Faith, or perish: He that believes not shall
be Damned. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life; and he that
believes not the Son, Ioh. 3 36.
shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him.

Obj.] Perhaps some Sinner will say; Sinners must come to Christ as Sinners and
not think to bring any thing with them.
I dare not believe yet; I am not humbled enough; I am not fitted, and prepared
to come to Christ.

Ans.] Do thou see thy self Sick, here is thy Physician? what is required of
the Sick, before they come for Healing! Do thou see thy self a Sinner? O
then, come? here is thy Savior! Do thou find Guilt to lie upon thy
Conscience? who can take it off but Christ Jesus? Do thou see thy Filthiness?
what can cleanse thee but Christ's Blood? Come as thou art, Isa. 53.1.
to the Fountain: Do thou Thirst after Happiness? it is no where to be found,
but in Christ: though thou have therefore no Money, yet come; thou can not
believe in Christ too soon.

Lastly, By way of Consolation to Believers; you are saved already, have
eternal Life in you; Grace is the Seed of Glory; you have drank of the water of
Life; and that will be a Well of Water in you, Ioh. 4.14. Ioh.5.42. and 10.28.
springing up to everlasting Life: You are going to Heaven on Jacob's Ladder,
and all the Devils, and Powers of Darkness cannot throw you down: You shall
never perish. O bless the Lord! and admire Free Grace! and live to him all your
Days, with Joy, and Thankfulness!

[ But no more now at this time.]

SERMON IV.
GENESIS, xxviij. xij. xiij. And behold, the Angels of God ascending and
descending on it.


Nov. 17. 1695.
I Closed the last Day with the former part of our Text, I shall give you one
short Sermon, God assisting, concerning the holy Angels, whom Jacob in his
Vision saw ascending and descending upon it; that is, Antitypically upon Jesus
Christ. Our blessed Savior alludes, as I told you, Joh. 1. ult.
to this Vision in the Gospel; And he said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, hereafter you shall see the Heavens open, and the Angels of God ascending
and descending upon the Son of Man. Pools Annot on John 1.51.
Our Annotators assert, as their Opinions, That our Lord refers to Jacob's
Vision, Genesis 28.12. which, doubtless puts a great glory on it; it being no
trifle or small thing that was represented unto him, in that Dream and Vision,
but what a sight Nathaniel had afterward of the Angels ascending and
descending upon Christ, the Son of Man, I know not: Some think it might be some
further appearance of Angels (...) their ministration to him, than the
Scripture Records; yet, perhaps, no more is meant hereby, than that Nathaniel,
and other Saints, shall see, or know, that the holy Angels are far inferior to
the Son of Man, and do administer to him: And also, that all that good,
Believers do receive by the ministration of Angels, is alone in and through
Jesus Christ, our Mediator. Moreover, that God does not only make use of the
ministration of Angels, in governing of the World, but also in the
preservation, safety, and good of his Church. The way to Heaven is full of holy
Angels, some going to Heaven for Intelligence, and others coming from Heaven,
either to forward, pro^ect, or comfort the Saints.

1. Angels are but Christ's Messengers, he is the ^ead, and Lord of all
Principalities and Powers.

2. They own themselves to be our Fellow-Ser^ants; I am thy Fellow Servants, and
of thy Brethren. Rev. 19.10


3. They move at his Command, and go and come (...) his Pleasure.

4. And they move at his Word with all Alacrity, ^^ey are speedy and swift in
doing the Will of God.

5. Moreover, they are sent forth to minister unto them that are the Heirs of
Salvation. Observe, Heb. ^.14.


DOCT. That in and through Jesus Christ, the holy Angels minister to Believers,
while in this World.

In speaking unto this Proposition, I shall take this method; viz.

1. I shall speak a little to the nature of Angels.

2. Open their Work and Office.

3. Give you some Reasons, why Christ imploys them to minister to the Saints.
And 4ly, Apply it.

First, They are Creatures, they were created by God, and within the six Days
also: By him were all things Created, whether in Heaven or Earth, visible or
invisible, whether Thrones or Dominions; or Principalities, or Powers, all
things were created by him and for him. The Heavens, and all the Angels which
dwell therein, were created by him; i.e. by the Son of God, ^^a^ 148 5.
Jesus Christ; Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he commanded, and they
were Created: And this was in the Beginning; In the beginning God created the
Heavens and the Earth, etc. If therefore they had been Created before, there
should have been a beginning of time, and work done before that, Lord Lawrance.
or else Angels were from Eternity, and so not Creatures, but none is eternal,
or without beginning but God. Besides, it is said, that God wrought all his
Works in Six Days; but if it be demanded, what day they were created, I answer
in all likelihood on the First Day, See Roberts Key, p. 442.
When the Morning Stars sang together, Job. 3^.7.
and all the Sons of God ^^oued for Joy. Even when God laid the foundation o^
the Earth, when the highest Heavens and first ma^ter was created of Nothing,
out of which other things were formed.

Secondly, These excellent Creatures are true Substances, and do really exist;
contrary to the Opinion of the Sadduces, Lord Lawrence, (...) Treasure of Angel.
who denied Angels and Spirits that is that they thought by the name of Angels
wa^ meant nothing but good or ill Inspirations, or Motions, or else the Wonders
and Apparitions which were wrought of God.

Of the Nature of Angels.
1. They were, I say, created, therefore they are Substances, and not Accidents
in another Subject.

2. They are endowed with Understanding, and Will, by v^rtue of which they were
capable of Sinning, and of departing from the Truth, of obeying or disobeying
of God, until confirmed by an Immutable Head.

3. From their Office this is further evident: They appear before God, they
serve him, and we are commanded to make them our Patterns; they come to us,
admonish us, teach, protect, and comfort us.

4. Because they are said to appear to Men; as to Abraham, Jacob, and many
others, tho not in their own spiritual Form. As so considered, no mortal
Creature, doubtless, could behold them; for that is to render the Invisible
World to be Visible: Sometimes they have appeared in assumption of Bodies, tho
not for the doing of their Work, but to manifest themselves to be familiar with
men. Aquinas adds, That they might manifest the intelligible Society and
Converse, which men expect with them in another Life.

5. Because Christ is said, not to take unto him the nature of Angels, and has
a Name given him above them. And in the Resurrection we shall be like to them.
As to their Nature, they are Spirits incorporate, and immaterial; Psalm. 104.4
Who makes his Angels Spirits: And again it is said, Heb. 1.14.
Are they not all ministering Spirits? Tertullian, and some other ancient
Fathers, asserted they have proper Bodies, tho invisible to us; but yet he
seems to mean no more than a Substance: And as the same Author observes, If
they have any such Composition, as may be called a Body, it is certainly of the
greatest Fineness and Subtilty; a spiritual Body, and therefore not like to be
of that grosness, that either the Air is, or those Heavens that are framed out
of the same Chaos, but nearer the substance of the highest Heavens; which seem
to be made at the same time. Lastly, says he, it will be safe to say, that in
Comparison of God they are Bodies, but in comparison of us, they are pure and
mighty Spirits -- To which let me add, I see not that the Saints, at the
Resurrection, (tho in some things they shall be as the Angels of God) yet not
that their Bodies shall be such bodies as the Angels have; for tho the Saints
be made spiritual Bodies, yet shall be material, i.e. of the same matter they
now consist of, only refined.

Thirdly, Let it be considered, (says he) that as it is God only that is
without beginning, so it belongs only to him to be without any possibility of
change, or shadow of change; and that the Angels, as Creatures, are reducable
to nothing by the same hand that made them, tho not from their own Nature; nor
shall they ever cease to be, no more than the Spirits of all men, yet they are
in God's hand, tho the best pieces of Nature, and if he withdraw his hand, they
all moulder to nothing.

Angels ( says my Author) may properly be called Incorruptible and Immortal,
because they are so by Nature. I speak not, says he, now of the changableness
of their Wills, but of their Nature and Substance: The Reasons are;

First, Because the Angels are not produced out of the power of Matter, or
corporal Substance; as the Souls of Beasts, but only by the word of God; and
therefore as they have internal principles of Being, so they have none of
Dissolution; for there is the same reason of Being, and not Being.

Secondly, Angelical Nature, as the Souls also of Men are not compounded of
Matter and Form, but are simple Forms and Substances, subsisting by themselves:
Now all Corruption, Mortality, and Death, is by the separation of the Form from
the Matter; as when the Soul is separated from the Body, which is Corruption,
or Death, or when the accidental Form is separated from the Subject, as White
from the Wall, or Health from the Man: Now, whatever wants Matter is
corruptible, because there is no Composition, and so no Separation. But the
Scripture concludes this best in assimulating the state of Immortality, in
which we shall be like the Angels.

I shall speak no more now as to the first thing proposed, viz. of the Nature
of Angels.

Secondly, I shall open a little of the Work and Office of the good Angels.

1. The Work and Office of the Angels of God, is to minister unto Christ, or
attend upon his glorious Person, as Mediator; as indeed they did in the days of
his Humiliation. D^. Hert^^
A Reverend Author says upon the place, this ascending and descending of the
Angels upon this Ladder, it does intimate and declare unto us, their special
regard and respect to him, (namely Jesus Christ) which is very eminent in them;
these blessed glorious Spirits are very remarkable in their Observation of
Christ; it is that which we may take notice of in every Mystery and passage
concerning him, how the Angels were still employed about him, and subservient
to him upon all occasions whatsoever.

Which is indeed very clear, from his very Conception to his Ascension: Nay,
the Angels fore-tells to Mary his very Conception; Behold thou shall con^eive
in thy Womb, etc. Also the Angel appeared to Joseph, and said, Joseph thou Son
of David, fear not, to take unto thee Mary thy Wife, etc. Moreover, an Angel
appeared to him again, to fore-warn him of that Herod who sought the Life of
Jesus, and so commanded him to take Mary, and the Child, and to fly into Egypt:
See how careful the Angels were of our Lord, that he might be preserved until
his time was come to be offered up a Sacrifice for our Sins. The Angels
appeared likewise to the Shep^erds, and published to them the birth of our Lord
in a glorious Hymn of Praise; Luke 2.14.
Glory unto God on high, on Earth Peace, good will to Men: Heb. 1.6.
When God brought his only begotten Son into the World, all the Angels of God
worshipped him? The Angels, moreover, were instruments in his Preservation,
when his Life was sought, and they also ministered to him in his bloody Agony,
Luke 22.43,
and comforted him. My Brethren, Jesus Christ was made like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted, therefore might need like Succor, Safety, and
Comfort from the Angels, as we do. Also the An^els ministered to him in his
Temptations in the Wilderness; Mat, 4.11. Luke, 24.4, 5, 6.
and at his Resurrection they rol'^ away the S^one from the Sepulcher, and
brought the tidings of his being risen to the Women: Likewise in his Ascension,
the Angels attended, and assured the Disciples of his second Coming; they also
ascended with him, Acts 1.11.
and shall also descend with him, at his second Appearance: 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8.
He shall be revealed from Heaven with all his mighty Angels. If he be pleased
to descend in his Abasement, the Angels descend with him; if he be pleased to
ascend in his state of Exaltation, then the Angels ascend with him: And thus
they may be said to ascend and descend upon the Son of Man, personally
considered, and this out of that great Affection and Love to him; but not only
so, but also in point of Duty and special Obligation to him, he being their
Lord and Sovereign; He is the head of Principalities, Col 2.10,
and Powers. As Christ is God, Col. 1.16.
they owe to him their very being: For by him were all things Created, that are
in Heaven, and that are on Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers, all things were created by
him, and for him. And by him also the holy Angels are confirmed, and so abide
in a happy and unchangable condition; and hence the more Obliged to adore and
worship him.

The Office of the holy Angels opened.
2. And as the Office and Work of the holy Angels is, to minister, to serve, and
wait upon Christ; so also upon his Spouse, Ephesians 1.20, 21,
and on every Member of his mystical Body. True, they are called Powers,
Mights, Thrones, Dominions, etc. which shows their Glory, Dignity, and
excellent Power, and Authority.

Some think that there are diverse Orders of Angels, and some superior to
others; because we read of Angels and Archangels: there are seven Names given
to them, viz. Sera^^ims, Che^u^^^s, Thrones, Powers, Mights, Domi^^ons,
Princ^p^l^ties, Angels and Archangels: Some add more. But no more of this; we
know but little of the invi^i^^e World: But let their Dignity and Glory be what
it will, as to their Office, they are all mi^^string Spirits; none of them, no,
not the mighty A^gel^, who excel in strength, do think it too much, or below
them, for to attend upon the meane^^ Saint: Heb. 1.14.
Are they not all (...) Spirits, sent forth to minist^r unto them that s^all be
heirs of s^lvation? Which words [ (...) be] denote that they are sent forth to
protect, preserve, and keep such that are not yet ^^eirs; or to the Elect not
yet called and converted, but shall be Children begotten, and adopted of God in
due time, Romans 8.17.
and so be Heirs of Salvation: Which shows God's great Love to, and Care of his
Elect before Grace, or whilst in their Sins and Unbelief.

3. They all wait upon God, and behold his Face and Glory; they are round about
his Thr^ne; they all worship, and fall down before their blessed Lord, and
attend on him as Servants of their most glorious and blessed Master, their most
high and exalted Sovereign: I saw also the Lord sitting upon a (...), Isa. 6.1,
2, 3.
high, and lifted up, and his Train fi^^^d the Templ^, verse 1. And above it
stood the S^ra^hims: and one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is
the Lord of Host^, etc. Called Scrap^ims, signifying fire, or burning: (1.)
Denoting their Nature is bright and glorious, subtle and pure. (2.) Their
Property; full of zeal, and fervent. (3.) Their Once, which here was to execute
God's vengeance upon the Jews, and to burn them up, and consume them as dross.

Some assert, that the highest Angels do not minister to the Saints, but only,
and immediately wait upon God himself, and on our Lord Jesus Christ. But this
cannot be true, D^n. ^^.1. Luke 1.1^, 2^.
because the Angel Gabriel, who stands before the Presence of God, was sent to
Daniel, and to Zacharias, and to Blessed Mary.

4. They declare the Glory of Almighty God, and also ascribe equal Glory to all
the Three Persons: which, as I conceive, is hinted in that Text, (...). 6.1.
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts: ^oly is the Father, Holy is the Son,
and Holy is the H^ly Spirit; and yet, as Moses says, Hear, O (...), De^^. 6.^.
the Lord our God is but one Lord, i. e. one in Esse^^e, etc. yet Three Persons.

5. They hearken to God's Commands, and do his Will with all imaginable
cheerfulness, love, delight, al^crity, and swiftness: Hence said to have the
face of an Eagle, the swiftest of Fowls; and also to have Wings. (...)
Tertullian says every Spirit is winged; they can fly in a moment into any
part of the World, and that swiftly. And yet Mr. Greenhill says, as
Astronomers observe, That from the Center of the Earth (which is Three thousand
to the Surface) up to the Sun, is above Four Millions of Miles; to the
Firmament, where the sixed Stars are, above Fourscore Millions of Miles; and
from thence to the place of the blessed Saints and Angels, are more Millions
than from the Earth to the Firmament; so that, according to their Account, it
must be many Millions of Miles from Heaven to Earth. O then, what was the
height or length of this Ladder in my Text! the Foot stood upon the Earth, and
the To^ re^^hed to Heaven! And O what is the swiftness of an Angel that can
come from Heaven to the Earth in a moment. Reverend Green^ill notes, That a
^ullet ^ut of a Musket flies swiftly; i. e. it h^ts the Lord or Mark before the
Report is heard, and will fly 180 Miles in one hour, according to its motion:
The Sun moves swifter, 160000 Miles in one hour: The fixed Stars about the
Equinoctial 42 Millions each hour; and yet, says he, the Motion of an Angel is
swifter, being a Spirit, and passing through the Air without opposition:
Greenhill on Ezekiel. 1 Vol. page 104.
No Creature in Heaven and Earth moves faster than an Angel. Thus Greenhill.

6. Angels are endowed with much Wisdom and Knowledge, as the Woman of Tekoah
intimated to David, touching his great Wisdom: 2 Samuel 14.17, 20.
For as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King. My Lord is wise, according to
the Wisdom of an Angel of God, To know all things that are in the Earth. They
have, no doubt, great understanding. Hence said to have the face of a Man. The
face of a Man, Ezekiel. 1.6.


(1.) Signifies, according to Greenhill, and diverse others, that the
Administration of the Angels is with Knowledge and Equity: The face of a Man
(says he) is put to show the Excellency of Reason, which must have the
introduction into, Greenhill, 1 Vol. p. 94.
and the management of all Actions, else they are not Humane, nor Angelical.

(2.) By the face of a Man, is noted their Humanity, and Love to Mankind:
Angels are of a loving Nature, and most careful of Men, especially of
Believers, or such that are actually espoused to their great Master, Jesus
Christ.

7. Angels are very strong and courageous; and hence said every one to have the
face of a L^on, a Creature of great courage and strength: (...). 14.1^.
What is stronger than a Lion?

8. They are also very faithful, and unwearied in their work, and mighty
patient Creatures: hence said to have the face of an Ox^; a patient, faithful
(and an unwearied) Servant to their Master.

9. And tho Angels are Creatures of great Glory and Dignity, yet are very
humble; never thinking any thing to be too mean or t^o low for them to do, when
commanded to do it; no, tho it be to wait upon a poor Beggar, as Lazarus, while
he lived, and to carry his Soul to Heaven when he died.

10. And they always wait for their Commission, will not do any thing without
God's Command: hence said to wait f^r his Word. These are they whom the Lord
has sent to walk to and fro through the Earth: Zech. 1.10.
Therefore are they set before us as our pattern, that the Will of God may be
done on Earth by us, as it is done in heaven by them.

Quest. (...) service are the holy Angels employed in (...) Almig^^y?

What (...).
1. God uses them in the Government of the World, as it may be seen in Ezekiel.
1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. The Jews thought that the Angels only governed
Jerusalem; and that neither God nor his Angels did appear ^r rule any-where
else: But to take away this conceit, God appears to Ezekiel in Babyl^^, to
convince him that he and his Angels do govern there, and man quarters of the
World, as well as in Sio^. And that tho God rules the World, is granted; yet
the Angels under him are employed in this Work, is evident. I argue thus: It is
plain that God gives or admits the Evil Angels to rule as a Prince; the Devil
is called the Prince of the Power of the A^^, Ephesians. ^ 2.
that now wor^eth in the hearts of the Child^^^ of disobedience: The Devil
(says Reve^^^d Greenhill) has great power in the Air to ^aise Winds, to cause
Storms, Thunder and Lightning. Now if the Evil Angels be as Gods and Princes in
this World, have Power in the Air, and Hearts of wicked Men; then it must needs
follow, that the Good Angels are as Gods and Princes, and have as much power in
the World, and Hearts of good Men; otherwise the Devils should gain by their
fall more than ever they had by their standing. And it is not credible that
wicked and damned Spirits should have more honorable Titles, and larger Power,
than the good are employed in.

2. More particularly they are employed to inform us of God's Will, nay, and
God of our Ways; tho, it is true, he knows all things, and need not that they
tell him, no more than he does need that we acquaint him with our evil hearts,
and many wants; yet he will hear how Matters are from them, and from us also.

They acquaint us with the Mind and Will of God: Genesis 18.19.
Angels told Abraham and Lot what God would do with Sodom; 2 King. 1.3.
and Angels told Eli^ah what to say to the Messengers of the King of Samaria;
also an Angel told the Apostles, Act. 1.11. Rev. 22.16.
that Christ should return in the same manner as they saw him go up to Heaven,
and sent an Angel to testify those things in the Churches. Also an Angel told
Daniel what things should come to pass in the World, even to the end thereof;
Dan. 9.22.
and also gave him Wisdom, Skill and Understanding.

And an Angel informed Joseph of the Mind of God touching Mary. Moreover, the
Angels go up the Ladder, as well as down; in and by Christ they ascend to God,
as well as descend to Men: they beheld all the Earth sat still, and was at
rest: Thus God for his honor, not of necessity, imployeth Angels.

3. They are employed to withstand and oppose the Enemies of Christ and his
Church: Greenhill, p. 88.
And hence it appears they meddle with Kings and Kingdoms, and in the great
Affairs thereof; and as their Power is great, so they sometimes exercise it in
the destruction of wicked Men: Know thou whether I come unto thee? and now
will I return and fight with the King of Persia. And this Angel Gabriel opposed
(as my Author notes) the cruel Edict of Cambyses King of Persia, who labored
to keep the Jews in Captivity longer, and to oppress them sorer than others had
done. Rev. 12.^.
Moreover it is said, that Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon and
his Angels.

4. To execute Judgment upon the Wicked: they destroyed Sodom; Exodus 12.23.
and the Firstborn of Egypt is said to be done by a destroying Angel; the
destroying Angel smote the People with the Pestilence in David's time: 2 Samuel
24.17.
Also an Angel smote of the Assyrians in one night 185000; it was an An^el that
smote Herod, Isa. 37.36. Act. 12.23.
so that he was eaten of Worms.

5. The Angels are employed to defend the godly Brethren; the Ladder goes
through Satan's Territories; and tho they cannot come upon it, yet they strive
to throw us down, if possible: but know, the Good Angels have as great power to
defend us, as the Evil Angels have to annoy us: The Angels are our guard to
deliver us, to aid and assist us when assaulted by the Powers of Darkness, and
from the hurt and mischief which those Millions of wicked Spirits that swarm
about us would do us: Psalm. 34.^.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him; they are God's
Hosts, as Jacob calls them, and a mighty Host they are; the King of A^^^^^ sent
a great Host with Chariots and Horsemen, and they came by night and encompassed
the City about: And now Elisha^s Servant cries out, Alas, my Master (...) shall
we do? 2 Kings 6.15. And he answered, 2 Kin^ (...) 15.
Fear not: for they that are with us, are more than (...) that be against us,
verse 1^. And El^s^a prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, open his eyes, that
(...). And the Lord opened the eyes (...) the young man, and he saw: and
behold, the Mount^^n was (...) and Chario^ of pre round (...).

6. They, no doubt, suggest good thoughts into the minds of God's People: Can
any think that the evil Angels have more power to suggest evil thoughts into
our minds, than the good Angel^ have to suggest good thoughts? We have not only
the holy Spirit of God to do this, but the good Ang^l^ also.

7. They are employed to guide and lead us along on this Ladder, that so we may
not fa^^: (...)
He will send his Angel before thee, and (...) hold (says God) my Angel sh^^
(...). Angel was to lead him all the way (...) they lead us all the way to
^^aven, even (...) we step the last step of the Ladder.

8. God, in governing the World, and his People in it, makes use of Angels;
they lead s^metimes a poor Soul, perhaps, into a godly Family, or (...) the
Company of a gracious Person; and so he, by that means, is converted, and his
Feet set upon the Ladder, or brought to believe on Jesus Christ; or Persons are
by their Ministration perhaps brought into a Meeting or an Assembly of God's
People unexpectedly, which proves their Conversion: Or may be an Angel may
smite a notorious Sin^^ with Sickness, at God's Command, to awaken others with
sudden Death.

9. They are to keep the Godly in all their ways, or rather in God's ways, to
keep our feet on the Ladder lest they Lip; Psalm. ^1.11, 12.
For he shall give his Angels tha^ ^e over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways,
they shall bear thee up in their hands, or sustain thee and uphold thee in all
thy goings; as we do a Child or weak person, especially in times of danger, as
a Nurse bears the Child in her Arms. But take heed of going out of God's way,
lest you fall, and the evil Angels have power over you, as he had over a godly
Man's daughter, who going to a Playhouse, was possessed by the Devil, and a
godly Minister pleading with God, said, Lord, why did thou suffer Satan to
possess such a man's Chil^? The Devil presently said in her (as I remember the
passage) What did ^^e then upon my ground? The good Angels, Brethren, have a
charge only of us while in his way; a Saint may step out of it, tho not out of
Christ, yet out of his ways O take heed of that.

10. Angels are employed to comfort God's People: Luke 1.3^.
Fear not, Mary: thou have sound favor with God. Angels know us by name: An
Angel appeared to Da^iel, D^n. 1^, 11, 12.
and said, O Daniel, a Man greatly beloved, understand the words I speak unto
thee. Angels know who are most beloved of Jesus Christ: An Angel appeared to
Cornel^us, and said, Thy Prayers and thy Alms are come up as a Memorial before
God. As^. 10.4.


11. They also (as Mr. Greenhill observes) are to look to the Souls of
Believers, that they fall not into the hands of Devils at death, (for they all
go to Heaven through his Territories the Air: For, says he, if the Devil durst
contend with Michael for the Body of Mo^e^, much more f^r the Souls of the
Saints. Lazar^^'s Soul was carried by the Angels into Abraham's ^o^om; before
Men carried the Body to the Grave, the Angels carried his Soul to Glory.

Moreover, Matt. 2^.21. Matt. 13.41, 42.
they are the Reaper^ of the Harvest of the World, and shall gather t^gether
all the Elect* at the last day; they must blow the terrible Trumpet to raise
the Dead at the last day.

12. The Angels have work in the Church; they attend the Assemblies of the
Saints: 1 Cor. 11.1^.
For th^s cause ought the Woman to have power o^ her Head, because of the
Angels; Why W^m^n should c^^er th^^r He^d, because of the Angels.
or to have her Head, viz. her Fa^e covered: the thing signified is here put
for the sign; she is under the power of her Husband, signified by covering her
Head.

Quest. But why must she be covered, because of the Angels?


Ans. There are diverse Opinions about this.

1. Some think the Apostle means the evil Angels, who watch to take advantage
to tempt Men by the sight of some beautiful Object: But certainly, as our
A^^o^^ors observe, the Apostle would not have spoken of D^vils under this
n^tion*

2. Others think he means the Ministers or O^^^cers of the Church, who are
called Angels: ^ut, as Calvin observes, the word Angel is never appropriated to
Ministers without some addition, as to the Angel of the Church of Ep^^st^^, etc.

3. Most understand by An^els here, the good Angels; they have a charge of our
Churches, as Peter Martyr observes, as well as they had of the Jews: Dan. 12.
Michael the Prince stood up for the Children of thy People. The Angels take
good notice of every person's behavior in our Assemblies, how they demean
themselves with piety, modesty, and sobriety: If any let their Eyes wander or
rove ab^ut, they observe them. Hence it is thought the Women should cover their
Faces, especially in Prayer, because of the Observation the Angels make of them
and others, whilst in God's holy Worship in his Church: Brethren, like a^ the
Devils attend our Churches, to hinder us in our profiting under the Word; so
the good Angels are there also to resist them, and to further our profiting.
Satan (as one observes) is first and last at the meetings of God's People, and
he has many ways to obstruct the Souls of Men from hearing with attention; may
be lu^^s them asleep, or fills their minds with prejudice against the Preacher,
or against the Word he preaches, or to confuse their thoughts, causing them to
think of their worldly Business, perhaps of their Debts, what they owe, or what
is owing to them; or of Injuries sustained, and how to seek revenge; or else
cause them to fix their Eyes upon one beautiful Object or another, thereby to
divert them from what they should mind: But we may conclude the good Angels
have as many ways to help us, as the evil have to hinder us. Observe my Text,
An^els are upon the Ladder, or in our way to Heaven. Now Prayer and Hearing the
Word, etc. are our way to Heaven, i. e. means of Grace to fit us for it.


Quest. Has every Saint a particular Angel to attend him?


Ans. I Answer: This is asserted by some worthy Writers, In his Treatise of
Communion with Angels, p. 19.
and by others denied. My Lord Lawrence, a very pious and learned Man, says,
That the Doctrine of the Angel-Guardians has been exceeding ancient, and not
among Christians only. That a multitude of Angels do guard the Saints, Whether
every Saint has a particular Angel to wait upon him or (...).
is denied by none; but whether every Elect person has a particular Angel
deputed for him, or whether all indifferently do attend upon all the Saints. In
his Judgment, probably, every Elect person has his particular Angel; For in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father.

Mat. 18.10.
Some also think the Angel-Guardian begins his Charge when the Child is born,
others not until his Baptism; my Author rather thinks as soon as the Soul is
infused. But I find Reverend Green^^ll does question this, and thinks it is a
mistake, that every Elect person has a particular Angel, etc. and answers that
Text about Peter's Angel. I see no advantage this could be to us to have but
one Angel particularly to take the Charge of us more than a multitude: (1.)
Because of their faithfulness generally. (2.) Because it is far greater honor
to a Prince to have mighty Hosts of honorable Persons to be his Retinue, than
one noble Person only. I shall therefore say no more to this, but proceed to
the next general Head.

Thirdly, Why the holy Angels do minister to the Sai^^s.
Why does Christ employ the holy Angels to minister to his Saints?

1. Because of that great love Jesus Christ has to his Saints, seeing they
have such a multitude of evil Angels to annoy them; therefore he sends them
Hosts of good Angels to defend them.

2. To greaten his own Glory; the greater and more glorious the Retinue of a
Prince is, which he sends as a guard to his Favorites, the more it sets forth
his own Greatness and Grandeur; and since one Angel has such mighty power, and
is so glorious, that the Earth is said to be enlightened with it; (I know that
is not a proper Angel, yet it shows the glory of an Angel is very great) What
is the glory then of an innumerable Host of them? and yet they are all but
Christ's Servants, and poor Nothings in comparison of him.

3. My Author says, God does it to preserve that Eutaxy, that good Order which
he has put into things: As thicker Bodies and more inferior are managed by
more subtle and powerful; so the bodies of Beasts by a spirit of life, and
irrational Spirits by rational. As Men govern Beasts, so by the same reason of
proportion the Angels, which are invisible Spirits, and are all Spirits, have
an influence upon Men, which are partly Spirits, and partly Bodies.

4. It may be to show what Honor he is pleased to confer upon his Saints, he
will spare them his own Courtiers out of Heaven; they shall ride in his own
Chariots. This he may do to honor his People, to raise their Glory. Sirs,
could the ungodly but see what an Host of Angels does attend upon the poorest
Saint as he passes along, they would say, Who is this? what noble and
honorable Person is this that has such a Guard, such a Retinue? The greatest
Monarch in the World has no such Attendance as the poorest and meanest Saint
has.

5. Another reason why God uses the Angels for the good of his People, or to
attend on them and minister unto them, may be, because they are the Spouse of
Christ, the Lamb's Bride: Certainly great Honor of right belongs to the Queen,
considering her near relation to the King. And hence she has the like noble
Retinue, her Lifeguard as well as he; and so upon the same foot of account,
Angels may be the Attendants of the Saints, their Guard and Retinue. Joh. 3.29.
2 Cor. 11.1, 2.
Believers are the Bride, they are the friends of the Bridegroom, and of his
noble Consort the Church: Rev.21.9.
Certainly in this the honor of the Saints does exceed the honor of the holy
Angels; as Christ took our Nature upon him, and not theirs; and in that his
Church is his Spouse, his Wife, and not they, the glory conferred on us seems
to excel, tho in respect to their Nature, Wisdom and ^nowledg, they may excel
the Saints.

6. God may do it f^r the safety of his Saints. Some obs^rve, that were it not
for the good Angels, the Devils would even tear the very Bodies of the Saints
into pieces: such is their ma^ice and rage against them.

7. That there may be much love and acquaintance grow between us and the holy
Angels, Matt. 22.30. Luk.2^.36.
with whom we must live for ever, and whom we shall be made like unto. Now Love
grows by mutual Offices, as it is seen in the love of Mothers to their
Children, which increases by fostering and tending them. O how happy is every
Saint of God in having the tutelage of holy Angels! This honor have all
Believers, and none else; for the wicked have no Angels to look to them, to
care for them; the Angels of Christ are enemies to God's enemies, and friends
to Christ's friends. May be, as God is good to all, so the wicked may be under
the general Charge of the holy Angels; but the Saints are under their special
and peculiar Charge; they are properly Guardians and ministering Spirits to the
Saints, who are the heirs of Salvation.


Application.
THis reproves or reprehends those that think it is below them to stoop to obey
some of the Commands of Christ. Sirs, First Reproof.
see what glorious Creatures the Angels are; and yet they stoop so low, as to
minister to the poorest Saints on Earth. Michael despised David in her heart
for dancing before the Ark of God. But did he value that? No, 1 Chr. 15.29.
no; if that he seemed vile, he would be more vile: I will (says he) speak
also of thy Statutes before Kings, and will not be ashamed. Psalm. 119.46.


2. It reproves also such who are ashamed to own a poor Child of God; they can
call a Rich man Brother; but O! it is hard to own, and to call a Poor man so, a
man in a Leather-coat, or in a poor garb, before others. Alas, the Angels are
not ashamed to take care of and own poor Lazarus, full of Sores, at the Rich
Man's gate, tho he begged for the Crumbs that fell from his Table, and the Dogs
came and licked his sores. Luke 16.20.
But let such look to it, lest Christ one day be ashamed of them.

Use of Instruction.
Secondly, It may be for instruction to us how to do the Will of God, even as
the Angels do it.

1. That we do it in Love to God; Love is the great Principle from whence the
Holy Angels do all their Service to God, so ought we to serve and worship God
in Love to him, not for Self-profit, or Honor or Applause; If ye love me, keep
my Commandments. Joh. 15.15.
Simon Son of Jona, love thou me* Yea, Joh. 21.
Lord: feed my Sheep. I will leave this Charge with none else, (as if he should
so say) but such that love me; they that love not Christ, will not love his
Saints.

2. To hearken to Christ's Commands: the Angels wait to hear what Service God
will put them upon; but many Professors make the Word to wait for them, they
come not early to the Assembly to wait for the Word.

Psalm. 11^.60.
3. To do the Will of God with speed and all alacrity; Isa. ^.2.
Angels are swift to do God's Will, they are said to have Wings; so we should
get upon the Wings of Faith.

4. To do it cheerfully, and with utmost Zeal; the Angels are like a Flame of
Fire, all filled with burning Zeal and Fervor.

5. Also to do the Will of God universally, to leave no Precept undone; and
then we shall with David not be ashamed, even when we have respect to all God's
Commandments. Psalm. 11^.6.


6. To do God's Will continually, never to faint nor be weary; for thus the
Angels do God's Commands, Psalm. 11^.112.
they obey always; and thus did David, I have inclined mine Heart to perform
thy Statutes always to the end. Psalm. 119.44.
Again he says, So shall I keep thy Law continually for ever and ever.

Use of Te^ror to the Wicked.
Thirdly, This may administer Terror to the Wicked; the holy Angels are against
you. As they mark the Saints for Preservation, so they have Commission
oft-times to destroy the Ungodly: Slay utterly Old and Young, Ezekiel. 9.^.
etc. and begin at my Sanctuary.

Fourthly, It may be of use, Use of E^^itation.
by way of Exhortation,

1. To walk so as Christians and Members of Churches, that the Angels may
rejoice and discharge their Work with Joy, and not with Grief.

Walk reverently in respect of the Angels, even (as one observes) in your
Bed-Chambers: the Thoughts of the Presence of the Angels should hinder us from
doing that which is a shame or dishonor to us, but much more the Thoughts of
God's Presence.

2. Bless God for the Ministration of Angels: O! see what Love he has to his
own People, and what Honor he has conferred upon them.

3. Have a reverend Esteem and Respect for the Angels, and strive to converse
with them, and be like to them.

Object. But say some, What do you leave to Christ and the Holy Spirit to do,
if Angels do ^o much for us?


Answ. 1. What will you leave to the Angels to do, (says one) if they do not
Teach, Guide, The Lord Lawrence.
Protect and Minister unto us?

2. What the Angels do, Christ does; they are his Servants, he uses them as
Instruments in his Hand.

3. We leave to Christ to do all by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, yet he
makes use of the Angels of the Churches, as well as the Angels of Heaven.


Object. But you may say, Christ needs not the Ministration of Angels.


Answ. No more does he need the Ministration of M^n, nor the Use of Ordinances,
yet he is pleased to make use of both for the Good of his Church.

Use of Con^^lation.
Fifthly, This may administer much Comfort to Believers. Reprobates, tho Princes
on Earth, have no such Guards to attend them as you have: Are they not all
Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14.
sent forth to min^ster to them that shall be Heirs of Salvation?

O! what a Glorious Retinue have you? Your Way is full of Angels, who go to and
fro therein. The Wicked are left to the wide World, but Christ is pleased to
give his Saints Tutors, Governors and Guardians to Preserve, Protect and Wait
upon them; the Holy Angels wel^ know their Charge who they are to keep and b^ar
up in their Hands, and save from danger.

2. See how dear and precious you are to God; yea, how honorable in his Sight
every Elect Person is: He has his Guard. Multitudes of Angels to attend him at
all times; for your sakes they have r^ceived their Charge, their Commission; He
has given his Angels charge over thee. You are weak, but they are strong; you
sleep sometimes, but they are always awake and sleep not: Sirs, God sends his
own Guards to watch over you, to protect and keep you; he knows what a
Multitude of Devils would gladly destroy you, and therefore (as you have heard)
he has sent a Multitude of Angels to defend and save you; you have not only
Ministers on Earth, the Angels of the Churches, but the Angels of Heaven to be
your Servants.

And the End why God sends them and imploys them is expressed; not that we
should worship them, (no, no, they disclaim this utterly: Rev. 19.1^.
See thou do it not (says the Angel) I am thy Fellow Servants, and of thy
Brethren the Prophets, that have the Testimony of Jesus, Worship God;) it is to
keep us in all his Ways, and they exactly and diligently observe their Charge:
Psalm. 91.11.
They shall bear thee up in their Hands, lest at any time thou dash thy Foot
against a Stone. These, O Child of God, accompany thee, minister unto thee,
incamp round about thee, go before thee, and wait upon thee; but take heed you
go not out of God's Ways, it is in all his Ways they are to keep thee, do not
venture on the Devil's Ground; the Angels are always upon this Ladder that
reaches to Heaven, which goes through Satan's Territories, the Air, where
there are Multitudes of Devils, who strive to push thee down as thou climbest
up; but these do boldly resist them, and defend thee continually against those
Evil Spirits.

Admiration. Do Angels minister to us? Use of Admiration.
then ye Saints wonder! Behold the Angels of God ascending and descending: O
what has Christ done to procure such Guardians, such Helps, such Guides for us
poor feeble Travelers? Never fear, tho the Ladder be high, Angels have Wings,
they can soon be with us; they descend to bring them up that are given to
Christ, and they ascend with such that are going up. You must fly by Faith and
Prayer up with them from Step to Step, from Faith to Faith, from Strength to
Strength, from Glory to Glory, until you come to the end of your Journey.

O ye Darlings of Heaven! Tho others regard you not, but reproach you, slight
you, despise you, yet matter it not; the mighty Angels have you by the Hand;
they love you, they know you are the Spouse of their Sovereign, his blessed
Bride whom they serve, and therefore they honor you: O what a degree of Glory,
ye Princely Ones, are you raised to!

Moreover, What Love is this? what Grandeur is here conferred upon vile sinful
Creatures as we are? The Saints ride in Chris^'s own C^^^ri^ts.
Have we such a Guard? Does Christ's chief Courtiers above, wait upon us below?
Must we ride in the King's own Chariot to Heaven? Do Angels wait on the Heirs
of Salvation, Heirs of Glory?

Come then, ye Holy and Highborn Nobles, and take state upon you, and say, We
are not for dunghill Earth, not base slaves of Sin, nor of this World, nor of
the Devil: We are Princes nobly descended, born from above, and have the Guard
of the King of Kings to attend upon us: O! we must live as such who are so
born, so honored, and also as so guarded.

And now, O ye Earthly Muckworms, ye Dunghil-Rakers! what signify your Silks
and Sattins, your Golden Chains, your Bags of Money and great Possessions!
What, alas! are Crowns and Scepters, or the Guards of haughty Monarchs! What Is
their Majesty's, their Highnesses, their Excellencies! The meanest Saint is
higher and greater than you all, and has a more glorious Attendance. But to
return to Believers;

Psalm. 16.^.
Prize your Privileges, ye Saints, ye the most excellent ones in all the Earth;
1 C^r. ^.9.
that are more honorable than your Brethren, Prove. 1^. 26.
more excellent than your Neighbors. Angels administer to you at Christ's
Command. Are you ignorant of your Honor and blessed Safety? or will you still
hang down your heads and go drooping, because you are poor, afflicted and
despised? O this grieves Christ, grieves the Spirit, and grieves the Holy
Angels! Consider, you are not at home, you are a going into your own Country,
to be crowned; you are not yet come to Age; but, as Heirs of Glory, God cares
for you, succors you, defends and keeps you; you have a Host, a mighty Host to
fight for you, mighty and skilful Guides to lead you, a most noble Guard to
watch over you, and minister to you, and Chariots beyond those of beaten Gold
to carry you; the mighty God is your defense, and his Angels are a Wall of Fire
round about you; no Devils can hurt you; no utter ruin can come upon you; get
the World therefore under your Feet. Your Souls are justified; all your Sins
pardoned, and you are sanctified, and shall for ever be saved* God is your
Father, Christ is your Bridegroom, the Spirit is your Sanctifier, the Saints
are your Companions, the Angels your Guard, and Heaven is your Inheritance. O
be humble, and lie at Christ's feet: What has he done for such unworthy
Creatures? Let us love God, honor Him, worship Him in and by Christ, and
through the Holy Spirit. To whom be Praise, and Honor, and Glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.


An Hymn of Praise.
MOunt up, ye Saints; O, still ascend;
O, soar on High, and sing;
Ye Darlings of the Lord above,
Sing Praise to your Great King.
See, see, what Honor God confers!
How Angels do attend,
And wait on you continually,
And will until the End.
See how the Cherubs do rejoice
In all the Work they do;
O learn of them, lift up your Voice,
Mount, and sing as you go.
Our Life should be a Life of Praise,
Who are redeemed from Earth;
Lord, let us exalt Thee all our Days,
And set thy Glory forth.
Thy Servants which do wait on Thee
In thy High Court above,
Are sent to wait on such as we:
This shows thy Matchless Love
To us below, who nothing are:
What is Man! what are we,
That thou such Honor should confe^,
And wilt to Eternity.
FINIS.

