A Particular ACCOUNT FROM Colonel KIRK, OF THE State of Londonderry. And
INISKILLING.
Licensed,

J. F.
July 25. 1689.


LAst Night arrived an Express from the North of Ireland, with Letters of the
Fifteenth Instant from Coll. Kirk, and Coll. Stewart: The Account it brings is
this:

That the latter being gone, as we heard, to the Island of Inch, in Lough
Swilly, and having there Fortified himself, great Numbers of Protestants
flocked in unto him, which he presently armed; so as in three days time he made
up a thousand Men, which proved a no less acceptable Succor to him, as it was
seasonable to the starving People: For on the Twelfth a considerable Party of
Irish attacked him, and began a brisk Engagement; but his Men as valiantly
received them, and totally defeated them; however, it was not thought advisable
to pursue them into their own Quarters. They have here constant Intelligence
from the Men of Enniskilling, who are in very good Heart, and are Twenty Seven
Companies of Foot, Seventeen Troops of Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons; so
that they have already fixed the time when they intend to come up and join
Coll. Stewart, and Coll. Kirk, in order to relieve the Town of Londonderry,
and raise the Siege.

This Express does also confirm the great Booty the Men of Enniskilling took of
Money and Provisions that was going to the Army. Also that they had received
those 3000 Arms, sent them by Sir James Golwell, from Coll. Kirk.

From Col Kirk we hear, that he has often Intelligence with the Town by means
of a brave stout Fellow in a fine blew Coat all Laced, (...) passes to and fro
unsuspected. They are in good Heart, and are stored with Provisions to the end
of this Month, by which time they hope to be Relieved. And whereas the Colonel
intended to lie in the Lough till more Forces joined him, he has now changed
his Resolution* and when this Express came away, was sailing with his Men out
of Lough Foil into Lough-Swilly, to join Col. Stewart and the Innis^^^ling Men
when they come up.

We have great hopes of the Success of this Design; for whereas the Irish
expected only to be attaqued by the River, and had accordingly fortified
themselves to receive any Assaults, they have left themselves quite naked
behind, as not expecting any such thing; so that they will not have time to
prepare themselves or to throw up Batteries, or make any Opposition.

We have it also confirmed, that the Irish finding what Treatment their
Countrymen were like to have from the Town of Londonderry, in case they had
let the poor Protestants stay and starve before the Walls, they had even let
them disperse and retire where they pleased; however their Inhumanity was such,
as by not Relieving them, some dyed before they got home.

We hear, that there were three French Men of War went with those handful of
Irish into Scotland, one whereof had Forty Guns, the rest were but small. But
we hope that the Antelope, and another Man of War or two that are about
Liverpool, may hinder their Return.

FINIS.
London: Printed for J. Wilson, at Charing Cross. 1689.


