Vmbra viri facies haec, est Surgentis in altum
Effigiem melius pagina culta dabit,
Ingentes animae superant virtutibus
Artem Vostermanne tuam, vel, Titiane tuam.
portrait of Richard Kirby (?)

PILLVLAE PESTILENTIALES: OR A SPIRITUAL RECEIPT for Cure of The Plague.

Delivered in a Sermon Preached in St. Paul's Church LONDON, in the midst of
our late Sore VISITATION.

By Rich. Kingston M. A. and Preacher at St. James Clerken-well.

Numb. 16.46. There is wrath gone out from the Lord, and the Plague is begun.
Numb. 16.48. And Aaron stood between the Living and the Dead, and the Plague
was stayed. LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Edw. Brewster at the Crane in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1665.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN KEELING Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief
Justice of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
WHen I lift mine Eyes from the low and humble valley of my obscure fortunes,
to that bright shining and Eminent hill of Honor, on which the Favor of His
Majesty, the Nobleness of Birth, and your many Excellent Virtues have seated
you; I cannot but lay a sharp and rigorous Censure upon my own Presumption,
that I, so much a stranger to your Lordship, should thus boldly adventure to
press into your presence, and to crave your Honorable Patronage of so mean a
Work; but when your Honor is pleased to consider that Divine Truth's are
Subjects worthy of acceptance, though presented in an Earthen Vessel; and
David's comfort (in rescuing his Wives, and recovering the spoils from the
Amalekites) was no whit the smaller, although a young man of Egypt made way for
the discovery. I hope to obtain (what I humbly beg) your Honors Pardon.

My Lord, this Sermon was Composed and Preached in the very height of our late
dreadful Visitation, when Thousands died on our right hand, and Ten Thousand on
our left; at which time my employment by day was visiting the Sick, and by
night burying the Dead; having no time allowed for study but what I extracted
from my natural rest which may make this Tract more guilty of failings than at
another time; my humble request therefore to your Lordship is, that you would
be pleased to lay the finger of a charitable construction upon the Scar of my
imperfection, and favorably accept this first fruit of my labors. So in all
humility imploring the God of Majesty and Mercy to Sanctify your Heart,
Rectify your Hand, Justify your Soul, and lastly Crown your Head with eternal
Glory; I take the honor to Subscribe my self,

Your Lordships daily Orator Rich. Kingston.

To the Right Worshipful Joseph Ayloff and George Walsh Esquires, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex. And to the
Worshipful Henry Dacres and William Cole Esquires; as also to his much
respected friend Mr. Henry Knight, R. K. wishes the dew of Heaven and the
fatness of the Earth.
Right Worshipful,
TUtelar Angels are a controverted Theme amongst Schoolmen, but the favorable
influence of a just defense from your Worships, has been an unquestionable
matter of my experience: which transcendent favors, if buried in Oblivion,
would be an high impeachment of veracity; and not to acknowledge them, having
this occasion, could plead for no distance, from downright sordidness and
plain Ingratitude.

The Work is too small, and the Author too mean to equalize your worth, or
merit your Patronage; only it is the height of my Ambition to let the world know
that your favors (which as far excel my deserts as my power to retaliate) have
not been bestowed on an ungrateful Servant. I am not ignorant, that cunning
Bezaliahs and Aholiahs may carve and pollish the Temple, yet I am glad that I
can but lay one little stone: though men of brighter Souls bring their Gold and
Jewels to it, yet I hope God will accept of my young Pigeons and Turtle Doves.
I may say with St. Peter, Silver and Gold have I none, but what I have I give
you; in all humility beseeching you to consider my years, which are but few,
and the time I had, which was but short, and my many other sad occasions,
wherewith in the mean time I was interrupted; and then accept of this for
trial, as if it were the extract of some purer and better wit. The Lord prosper
your days, direct your hearts, and bless all your undertakings, to the glory of
his Name, and your own eternal felicity: So ever Prays

Your Worships in all Duty and Service Rich. Kingston.

To the Churchwardens of the Parish of St. James Clerken-Well for the time
being, and to the rest of the Officers and Inhabitants of the same Parish: R.
K. Wishes health and happiness in this life, and Eternal blessedness in that
to come.
Loving Friends,
IT pleased the wise Disposer of all things, to cast my lot among you in one of
the most dreadful Visitations that ever England knew, when the black Horse of
the Pestilence, with Pale Death on his back, pranc'd our Streets at Noon day,
and Midnight; at which dreadful (and never to be forgotten) time our sense of
Seeing was well-nigh glutted with beholding the sight of our Diseased and
Deceased Friends, enough to have extinguished the optic faculty.

No Papers then over our Doors were set
With Chambers ready furnished to be Let;
But a sad Lord have mercy upon us, and
A Bloody Cross, as fatal marks did stand
Presaging the noisome Pestilence within,
Was come to take revenge of us for Sin.
And as our Eyes might well be dimmed so might our Ears be deaf'd with the
doleful cries of the Poor, for Food to keep them from Starving; of the Sick,
for Physic to keep them from Dying; and of them that were Marked, for
Spiritual helps to preserve them from Perishing.

We well might hear of Death there was such plenty,
One Bell at once, was fain to Ring for twenty:
No Clocks were heard to strike upon their Bells,
Cause nothing Rung, but Death-lamenting knells.
Which dreadful noises so terrified some, and affrighted all, that men knew not
what course to steer to preserve themselves from this wounding shaft.

Some by their fear to go to Church deburr'd,
Anon are carried Dead into the Yard:
And Churches new with too much Burial fed,
Feared they should have no meeting but of Dead*
This Poisoned Arrow of the Pestilence (especially when it was first foot among
us) wounded so suddenly and sharply, that we could scarce be resolved whether
'twas Sickness or Death it self that assaulted us; for many lying down to
repose in the Evening, made their sleep true kin to Death, by dying before the
Morning.

-- Ah who would then defer
A preparation for this messenger!
But not to detain you longer with a large Epistle to a little Book, be pleased
to accept thereof as a Testimony of my sincere love to you, which shall always
be accompanied with my hearty Prayers for you, that our merciful God would be
pleased to withdraw his Sin-revenging Scourge, which is still amongst us, and
charge his Angels to guard your persons from future dangers; and give you his
holy Spirit to guide your Souls in the Path of Holiness here, and bring you to
the Palace of Happiness hereafter.

So prays The earnest desirer of your Souls welfare Rich. Kingston.
From my Study at St. James Clerkenwell. October. the 18. 1665.
PILLULAE PESTILENTIALES.
2 Chronicles. cap. 7. v. 13, 14. -- If I send Pestilence among my people.

If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray,
and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: Then will I hear from heaven
and will forgive their Sin, and will heal their Land.


GOD, that from all Eternity was happy in himself, created the World and Man
the most glorious part of it, not out of necessity, but a diffusive Goodness,
by which he would have some Beeings represent his Supremacy, and receive the
Style of the Sons of the most High. Other Artificers either out of Ambition or
Profit, transmit to the World their Skill and Knowledge, only He (induced by a
charity proportionable to his own Nature) resolved to bring light out of
darkness, and constitute a Lieutenant upon Earth that should largely speak the
grandeur of his Maker. Thus Adam sprung bright and glorious out of the Chaos,
imbued with those perfections which We (his posterity) since his transgression
can never hope for. His Patrimony was large, and he might have left it to his
Heirs, who now by sad experience find, that he not only became bankrupt
himself, but entayled his misery upon them. He came into the World its Lord and
Master, and left his children Peasants and Vassals; and the truth is, with so
much unhappy fertility they have improved his Crime, that being but one at
first, the Eating the forbidden Fruit, it is now become infinite, and able to
puzzle the Arithmetic of Angels. Upon this score one might justly wonder that
God should say, IF I send the Pestilence amongst my People. If is a Word of
Uncertainty, and argues an irresolution: One would rather have expected the
Lord should have sworn by himself, that since this Darling, this Pe^^^ker of
his divine Excellencies, will ever be abasing them, and choose rather the
Livery of the Devil, than that beautiful Vest of Innocence, with which he came
clothed into Paradise, that therefore he would send his Plenipotentiary the
Plague, and without compassion cut off his Favorite. But by this doubtful way
of Expression, we are taught how unwilling he is to give his justice a full
draught, which he will and must do where Impenitency stops the Progress of his
Mercy. The Heathen could say, Val. Max.
Lento gradu ad vindictam sui divina procedit ira, tarditatemque supplicii
gravitate compensat. We shall find this Truth clear, if we consider the Series
of his proceedings against Sin. Adam no sooner sins, but is whipped out of
Eden. Cain kills his brother, and becoms a Fugitive. Sodom grows luxurious and
burns with un-natural Lusts, and fire descends from heaven to extinguish those
hellish flames. Jerusalem, a City graced with more privileges than any in the
World, as being the place in which God would have his name in a more particular
manner called upon; the Seat of the Temple, and the Metropolis of that Nation
which he owned above all others; Jerusalem, I say, that heard the Prophets, yea
Christ himself preach, and saw his Miracles, is now, for her Sins nothing but a
heap of Rubbish; and as Adrichomius observes, One may seek Jerusalem in
Jerusalem and not find her. The Eastern Church, whose couragrous Martyrs, whose
General Councels, whose Prelates (those burning and shining lights) are so
highly celebrated, is now for her Arrian Heresy and other Sins with which she
abounded, enslaved under the Turkish Yoke, and hourly tormented with the
Impieties of the Impostor Mahomet. Neither can We of the Latin-Church here in
Europe, say our Sins have been hid, and Divine Justice as it were asleep during
their Committing. In what a field of Miseries has the whole German Empire been
this last Century? Nay, if we have a mind to look nigher home, what a
calamitous Scene can Great Britain and Ireland show you for twenty years, where
fullness of Bread and a long Peace, begot stiff Necks and obdurate hearts; and
these pulled down the former, and this present destruction: so that We may well
conclude, that there is no Nation or Country so graced with privileges, so
crowned with blessings, and so beloved by God, but Sin will beget a deadly
quarrel between them, and cause the Subversion of the most flourishing States
and Empires. Let the Epicure ascribe the alterations unto Fortune; the Stoic
to Fate; Plato and Pythagoras, with the learned Statesman Bodin, to Number;
Aristotle to a Symmetry or Disproportion; Copernicus to the Motion of the
Center; and Cardane, with the Generality of Astrologers, to the Malignant
Influence of the Errattick Stars. We that have bin otherwise built up in the
most Holy Faith, are taught by the Divine Oracles that Sin only causes this
Controversy between God and Man, and therefore whilst they (like Ixion in the
Fable) embrace only a Cloud of palbable darkness instead of the Juno of bright
and clear Truth, let us, since we know the True cause of Gods wrath, endeavor
to avoid it by newness of life, which is holiness in the Inward Man. And indeed
it is but fit if we will offend, that God should right himself.

-- Nec enim Lex aequior ulla est,
Quam necis Artifices Art perire sua.
We have Sinned, and God justly strikes our heads with giddiness, draws
paleness on our faces, and dies our Skins with purple. The Prophet Amos says,
C. 4. v. 10.
God sent the Pestilence among the Israelites after the manner of Egypt, and
he has now sent the Plague amongst the English after the manner of Israel.
Israel's Calamity in the time of King David, is England's Case in the Reign of
King Charles.

-- Facta est narratio de te
Anglia mutato nomine cum numero.
Change but the Names of the Country with the Circuit, together with the time
that Plague lasted, and the number of peo- it consumed in that space, and we
are parallel; Repentance was their only Balsam, and it must be ours, for as the
great Bishop of Hippo says, St. August.
Mutet vitam qui vult accipere vitam. We must by resolution of better
obedience, blunt the Edge of that Sword that causes so great a Mortality
amongst us.

And thus I come to the words of my Text, If I send the Pestilence amongst my
people. In which Words we have a Gracious promise of God unto his Church, or a
direct Answer to Solomon's Prayer which he made at the finishing of the Temple,
assuring Penitent Souls, that if they turn from the Evil of their ways, he will
turn from the Evil of his wrath, and free them from destruction; I will hear
from heaven and forgive their Sins. Where we may observe four particulars;

First, a Disease, the Pestilence; si misero Pestilentiam in Populum meum.

Secondly, The Cause of the Disease, Sin; employed in these words, and turn from
their wicked ways.

Thirdly, The Medicine to be used, which is Compounded of three Ingredients.

1. Humility. 2. Prayer. 3. Repentance.
Fourthly, The Physician prescribing this Medicine, God. I will hear from
heaven, etc.

I begin with the Disease, of which I need say but little, since it speaks so
much for it self. But something I must say, lest I seem to pass that over that
passes by few in a house or City where it comes. The word is sometimes rendered
Pestilence, and sometimes Plague; from the Latin word Plaga, which signifies a
Stroke: but by reason of the Streightness of our English Tongue, they are
promiscuously taken. The Plague in other Languages extends further, and notes
any extraordinary Stroke that comes from God; the Prophets under that Word
contain these four, Famine, Pestilence, Wild Beasts, and the Sword; which per
eminentiam, are called the four plagues of God. It Is true, God creates every
thing, both light and darkness, Isa 45.7.
good and evil, as the Prophet speaks; but because Strokes, if they be private,
particular, or ordinary, have no great operation on us; we observe their
second, and not their first causes, and so we neither reverence God's Justice,
nor discern his hand, nor fear his power: Upon this Score, when men's sins cry
aloud, and (peircing the Heavens) mount to the very throne of God; it is fit
likewise that God's loud Justice should pierce the heavens, Heb. 1.21.
descend upon man, and like the voice of Sinai, make poor mortals quake and
fear. The plague is a Stroke able to extort from any man the confession of
Pharaoh's Enchanters, Ex. 8.19.
This is the Finger of God; It Is an Arrow of his own shooting, 2 Samuel 24.15.
and may better be called Morbus Sacer, then the Falling Sickness. And
therefore in our Language we style the Pestilence the Visitation of God, and
the Tokens thereof God's Marks, and upon our Doors write LORD HAVE MERCY UPON
US: By which we clearly confess, whilst the Angel executes divine wrath, we
all stand at God's Mercy.

And thus I come from the Disease it self to the Cause of it, which is God's
anger, enflamed by Sin. I know there are some, that following the Sentiments of
Physicians, will needs ascribe it to the Infection of the Air, to gross and
unwholesome Diet, or to the predominancy of corrupt humors: But Physicians may
be excused if they say something when they see an Angel. As I will not deny but
in all Diseases there may be something of natural, so I may likewise affirm,
there is in this something divine and above nature.

1. For the natural part.

First, The Infected Air may contribute very much, and therefore we read that
by casting the Ashes of the Furnace toward heaven, Ex. 9.8.
the Air became Infected, and the plague of Botches and Blains spread it self
over Egypt.

Secondly, Corrupt humors may do the like, for to them does King David ascribe
the cause of his Malady, when he complains that his Moisture in him was
corrupt, Psalm. 32.4.
dried up and turned into the drought of Summer.

Thirdly, The contagion comeing from the Sick. Thus we see by the Jewish Law,
the Leprous person for fear of Infecting others was commanded to cry aloud
Unclean, Lev. 13.45, 46, 52.
Unclean; by which he gave the Sound warning they should not approach nigh for
fear of Contagion. He was besides to have his dwelling alone; and the garments
he wore, were to be washed, and if the plague was spread in them, the Priest
was to burn them. Yea, the very house walls in which the Leper dwelt were to be
scraped, and in some cases the house it self to be pulled down.

The Learned Fernelius more judiciously confesses this Disease has a hidden
beginning, some secret principle that occultly wounds; and we may assure our
selves, that though things ab extra contribute to its progression, yet the real
cause is the latent Corruption within us.

Sir Tho. More Epigr.
Nugamur mortemque procul, procul, esse putamus,
At mediis latet haec abdita visceribus.
But let us come to the supernatural Cause of this Disease, and that will not
require a Physician so much as a Divine: And I suppose many of them think it a
difficult point, that they go into the Country to study it, and by their
absence expound S. Paul's words thus, We preach not our selves, i. e. our
Curates (or who else will) preach for us. But to the supernatural Cause, the
Scripture observes it as a crime in King Asa, that in the time of his Sickness
he looked more after the Physician than after God. He did not consider the
Infirmity of his Soul was to be healed as well as that of his body, and
therefore looked for natural remedies only. But if we would avoid his fault, we
must acknowledge the hand of God in this Sickness, and something above nature.
For if we observe the way of inflicting it, we shall find it oftentimes done by
Spirits: Thus we see an Angel, a destroying Angel in the plague of Egypt,
Exodus 12.13. Another in the plague that destroyed the host of the Assyrians
under Senacherib: We find a third in the plague at Jerusalem under King David,
and St. John in the Revelations brings in a fourth pouring his Vial upon Earth,
Rev. 16.2.
and there fell a noisome plague upon Man and Beast. So that God is the great
Agent in this Calamity. But how? Not willingly, his anger must first be
enkindled by our Sin; for as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 106.
They provoked him to anger with their Inventions, and then the plague brake in
amongst them. Thus Deuteronomy. 28.21. God says, Because of the wickedness of thy
doing, whereby thou have forsaken me, the Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave
unto thee. And Hosea cries, Hos. 14.6.
O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine Iniquity!
The perdidit te in the Prophet does not proceed from neighbors become Enemies,
or from the Locust, Caterpiller, Mildews, and such other things, as cause
Famine and Pestilence; but from the corruption and Sin hatched in these
Israelites; and therefore in the second verse he counsels them as the only way
to recover their former happiness, to Take with them words and turn to the
Lord, and say unto him, take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously. So
that sin which is the plague of the Soul, begets the Plague of the Body. This
viperous Mother brings forth a child so like it self, that it is hard to know
the one for the other. I shall show you in a few particulars their Similitude
and Agreement.

First, They are alike in Nature: The Corporeal Pestilence aims not at the more
ignoble parts of the body, but at the very Source of Life, the vital Spirits,
and by its contagious quality oppresses them: The like does Sin by its secret
Malignancy to the Soul. It blinds the understanding, corrupts the Will, and so
poisons all our Intellectual faculties that we cannot see the light of Faith,
or ardently love God, or do any other Act that may speak us living Christians,
and in a State of Grace.

Secondly, They are alike in their Infection; The reason why we shut people up
that are Infected, and avoid their Company, is, because they easily communicate
their Disease, to those that are in health; it is so with sin, it insensibly
creeps upon us. The often seeing wicked men repeat their crimes, first takes
from us the hatred we should bear them, and afterward by undiscerned
progressions so far work on us, that we begin to love and commit the same. The
Historian observes, That Augustus soon perceived the Inclination of his two
Daughters by the Company they kept: The one affected none but the grave
Senators and worthy personages of Rome; and the Other none but the loose and
debauched Gallants. We cannot touch pitch but we must be defiled; and we cannot
converse with wicked men, but we shall be tainted with their Impurities.

Thirdly, They are alike diffusive. Thucidides in his Description of the Plague
of Athens, tells us it began in Africa; marched from Aethiopia into Egypt, and
so took its course for Athens, which was a vast progress. And has not Sin done
the like? Has not the Sin of Adam in Paradise spread it self over the whole
World, and so seized upon the mass of Mankind, that we must all confess we are
Unclean, and there is none of us righteous, no not one.

Fourthly, They are both terrible. What a dismal sight is it to see an Army
enter by force into a pleasant City, and there in a moment by the licentious
fury of the Soldiers, view those streets floating with the blood of the
Inhabitants, which in time of Peace used to be strewed with flowers? Yet when
heat of blood is over, some mercy is usually hoped for, and many times
obtained. But the Plague, like another Attila, the Scourge of God, sweeps all
before it, and seldom gives Quarter. Sin does the like, yea, in a more terrible
manner, for it erects its Trophies upon the ruin of Souls: The destruction of
the body is but a momentary pain, but that of the Soul is commensurate to the
duration of it, which is to all Eternity. How much reason have we therefore to
pray to be delivered from this Executioner, that like another Nero loves to
perpetuate misery, and strikes a wretch, ut sentiat se mori.

Fifthly, They are alike in their Symptoms. When a man begins to feel some
distemper in his head, stomach, belly, or other parts, though we apprehend some
danger, yet we think him not past the benefit of Physic, and a possibility of
Recovery; but if once his body begin to be purpled, and the plague spots
discover their dismal hue, we then quit all hopes, and think nothing less than
a miracle can recover him: Sin also has her spots, and they are as ill boading
to the Soul as the other to the body; V. 23.
and therefore St. Jude in his General Epistle styles wicked men (...) spots in
their feasts of Charity.

Lastly, They are both of a quick dispatch. Other Diseases seem to give us some
warning that we may set our house in order, and by repentance blot out the
Score of our sins prodigality; but the pestilential sword, like the Italian
Stilletto, carries death upon the point, and at its first entrance, summons the
wounded to his Funeral; so that we may now sing in a mournful Dirge Our
pleasures cease, our joys are flying,
Death is alive, but Life is dying.
Hence it is that Galen calls it (...) because of its Mortal quality; and
Hippocrates (...) because of its spreading nature. This deadly disease, we see,
lays heaps upon heaps, and if the Almighty power puts not a stop to its violent
proceedings, it will in a short time scarce leave living enough to bury the
dead. Where God gives it a Commission it runs like fire in a Corn field. That
passage in Samuel is very remarkable, 2 Samuel 24.15.
where it is said, So the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel from the Morning
even to the time appointed. Some think this appointed time was six hours, and
of this opinion is St. Super Psalm. 37.
Ambrose; quaest. 37
Theodoret, and the Jewish Historian Josephus: Others think this appointed time
was until night, and that at the beginning of the Evening Sacrifice it ceased,
which St. Hierome follows: V. Casp. Sanctium in^l.
Others (with Tostatus Abulensis) think it lasted three days. However all
agree that it was but a short space, in which this Tragedy was acted, although
the quamdiu is not certain. Upon this account the Septuagint reads the Words
(...), If I send Death amongst my people; to signify, other diseases by
Medical herbs and the skill of Physicians may be Cured, but this is an
infallible Executioner, as sure as death it self. And does not Sin do the same
with the Soul? Genesis 2.17.
In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye; not a year after, but in the
very day thou breakest my Commandment thy sin will prove deadly. So Annanias
and Sapphyra no sooner lied to the holy Ghost, but at St. Peter's Examination
their Consciences became their condemning Jury, and their Sentence a sudden
Death.

We have now seen their agreement: I shall only say there is this happy
dissimilitude, that whereas the Cure of the Bodily plague is uncertain, that of
the Soul plague is infallible, if we fly to Christ with a due sense of our
misery, and seek from his Merits that Alexipharmacon, that is, an Antidote
against the greatest Crimes.

But I shall desist from speaking any longer indefinitely of Sin, and come to
those particular ones that in so high a degree have drawn this plague upon us.

First then, The sin that leads the van is our Sabbath-breaking. How loud does
this cry in the Ears of God! A sin more frequent, impudent, and unpunished,
than in those late black days when the greatest were justified by a Law. This
blessed day is now as much mangled and broken as once the Lord of it was: And
as the Poet, deriding the immoderate dress of a wanton Girl, told her that she
was minima pars sui; so is this day so divided, that it is now become the least
part of it self, and you may seek for a Sabbath in a Sabbath and not find it.
And whereas it ought to be the greatest Festival and holy Rest, now other days
are more innocent then this. Those we spend upon our Callings, and this (the
more is our shame) on our sins. In the Primitive times sanctifying the Lords
Day was an eminent Character that Christians lived in the purity of their
profession. When the Question was asked, Servasti Dominicam? The Answer
returned was, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum; I am a Christian, and
may not do otherwise. How are we fallen from our first love? by profaning the
Sabbath either through Schismatical Petulancy, or Idleness and Security,
snorting on a Bed, or walking in the fields, forgetting that he which on this
day gathered sticks was paid home with stones. Considering therefore the
judgment of God that hangs over our head for this particular sin, it is
Christian Prudence to pray, Lord have Mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to
keep this Law.

Secondly, Another Sin that pulls down God's vengeance on us, is that of Pride.
Boethius says excellently well, Cum omnia vitia fugiant a Deo, sola Superbia se
Deo opponit; When all Vices fly from God, Pride alone opposes it self to God.
In other vices men seek some imaginary good, but in this they endeavor to
dethrone God: it is an opposition to his very Being, as he is Alpha and Omega
the first Efficient and last End; no wonder therefore if he blasts the persons
and designs of those that harbor this Monster, which beginning first in heaven
will never forget its old Attempt. And therefore St. Prosper in his Excellent
Epistle to the Noble Virgin Demetrias, says finely, Cum aliae cupiditates ea
tantum bona quibus adversantur imminuant; haec dum omnia ad se trahit, simul
universa corrumpit; That whereas other Lusts waste only that Good and Virtue to
which they are contrary, Pride whilst it arrogates all to it self, corrupts
all at once. God therefore scatters the Proud, he makes them like Smoke (to
speak with the Psalmist) which perishes in ascending, and vanishes in
dilating of it self. I shall not need to tell you how he has punished it in
Wicked men, as in Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, and Antiochus; for he will not allow
it in his own people. And therefore if Corah, Dathan, and Abiram will be holier
than Moses and Aaron, and tempt the Jewish Congregation to a Contempt of their
Superiors, he will presently open the Earth, and bury them alive. They were
ante Sepulti, quam Mortui, as the African Father (Optatus) speaks. If David out
of pride will number the People, (and sure it was so, for the Text says, 1
Chr. 21.14.
his heart was lift up to number the People) God will send his Plague and sweep
away seventy thousand of them.

3. A third sin is that Cursed one of Swearing so much in Practice. Because of
Oaths (says the Prophet) the Land Mourns: Jer. 3.10.
And how can we but expect that God will send the lightning of his judgments
from heaven, when we do so thunder out Oaths on Earth. This is a Reigning Sin,
not only amongst the Basest, but those that would be thought the Ornaments of
the Age, as if Gentility consisted in belching out blasphemy.

If the King be spoken against, it is high treason, and deservedly punished
with Death; if a Noble man be traduced or slandered, it is punishable by the
Statute of Scandalum Magnatum; yea, a private man in cases of Obloquy has his
remedy by Action: only the name of God, though dear to him, is not so tenderly
regarded, but is most grievously rent and torn by this common and Soul-ruining
Sin of Swearing. But let me advise the black mouthed Swearer, to have a care of
swearing in jest (as men are apt to pretend) lest he go to Hell in earnest; for
every Oath he swears, gives his Soul a wound, and that wound will be vocal
enough to pierce heaven, and call for vengeance on the Swearer. Have not many
of us uncharitably and blasphemously wished, that the Plague of God would light
upon our Brethren? How justly now has it overtaken us. Curses and Execrations
have proceeded from us like Arrows shot against heaven, and now they are
returned back upon our own heads.

Fourthly, I must name that of Incharitableness to one another, upon occasions
that should rather administer grounds of Repentance then of Malice. The Apostle
tells us Charity covers a multitude of Sins, but we (as if we were true
Children of Noah) delight in our Relations Nakedness. What heart-burnings are
between us upon small differences of Judgment? The Turk cannot hate a
Christian with a more Vatinian hatred then we persecute one another, though
baptized into the same Faith, and equally professors of the same Gospel. Is
not the Plague come upon us, that our Lord foretold, that Father should be
against Son, and Son against Father? will an Independent endure a Presbyterian,
or the Anabaptist and Fifth Monarchist one of the Episcopal persuasion? No, no,
we have known to our grief what blood has been shed upon this account, and
that their mutual animosities have boiled to as great a height as those at
present between Turk and Persian. Constantine the Great, when he summoned the
first General Council at Nice, to extinguish the Arrian Heresy, concerning the
(...) of Christ with his Father, caused all the private Contentions and Strifes
that were enflamed amongst the Bishops themselves to be drawn up into a
Compendium of Articles, before they should deliberate about that grand Affair,
which being done, he sealed them up with his own Royal Signet, and kept them in
his bosom for a while as a Secret; afterward in his Speech, exhorting them to
unity of Spirit, and a serious discussion of those things that concerned the
Cause of Christ, he burnt all those envious Libells together, Car. in Nice.
Conc. Appar. page 45. in 16.
Ne innotesceret ulli odium and sugillatio Sacerdotum, as Caranza informs me.
Let us that serve at the Altar, imitate this Pious Prince, and if there be any
unchristian, uncharitable fends amongst us, bury them in Eternal Oblivion, left
they hinder us in the prosecution of the Cause of God, and not only prove our
shame, but a stumbling block of Offense to the Enemies of the Faith. Our Lord
and Savior at his departure left us this New Commandment, that we should love
one another, but we have so affronted this Injunction, that it is no marvel if
he says he is come not to send Peace but a Sword; a Sword that shall draw out
our vitals, and render us the victims of his fury.

Fifthly, That Rebellious murmuring humor with which we have outraged Prince
and Priest. The Sacred Scripture never gives us an Account of Murmurers, but it
tells us likewise their Punishment; Pharaoh murmured at the Israelites, and God
entombed him and his host in the Red Sea. Joseph's Brethren murmured at him,
and their reward was vassalage, they became his Servants. Saul murmured at
David's ten thousands, and God left him to be his own Executioner. Judas
murmured at the Box of Oil that was poured on his Masters head, and what was
his reward? he hanged himself. And is not this our Case? When King Charles the
first lived, (though we may say of him as Homer said of Greece, that it was
(...) the Pap and Dug of the Earth, He the Cream and Excellentest of Princes)
how did our ungodly and malicious humors load him with all those Obloquies and
Reproaches which St. Paul would not have flung even at Nero himself. And what I
pray was the Issue of this? These discontented murmurings begot a Rebellion,
and that Rebellion, though it occasioned the Ruin of the most blessed Prince,
yet by God's just judgment disgorged its Venom upon our own heads: from being
free Subjects to a King of a Glorious Race, it made us vassals to one of low
degree, and took from us the felicity they enjoy, whose King is the Son of
Nobles; The same we may affirm of the Church of England: When was it so
flourishing as in the aforenamed Prince's Time? Yet either our discontentedness
at his Fatherly Indulgence to it, or our Avaritious designs to engross its
Patrimony, brought us to that Insolence, that we must needs make her the Young
Whore of Babylon; and under pretense of correcting her Errors, not only commit
the greatest Sacriledges and Rapes upon her, but fling down all her Fences,
that the Wild Bore of Schism and Heresy might root her up. And God knows at
this very day, the dismal Effects of murmuring are too too visible, although
our now Gracious Prince, endeavors to his utmost the extinguishing these
unhappy differences, that like so many Phaetons if not stopped in their Motion
will burn both Church and State.

An hour is too short a time to discourse of the Sins that swarm in this Land.
What Mercy do we show to our Poor? does not the Extortioner take damnable
Interest, and the Oppressor use violence? Do they not eat like a canker into
the Reversions of the Poor? The Italians proverbially say of the Viceroyes of
Naples and Milan, that the one fleeces and the other fleas the Subject. I am
afraid we have too many amongst us that put this in practice, and make it their
only study to be Ingenious in oppressing and ruining their poor neighbors.

What temperance do we practice in the use of the creatures? How many are there
that study to be nothing more then accurate Gluttons? They cannot dine or sup
except they rob the Air of its rarest foul, and the Rivers and Seas of its
most exquisite Fish; and yet will scarce afford the Poor, those living Temples
of the Holy Ghost, a Morsel of Bread to keep them from Starving; they can
swallow down whole flaggons of the richest Wines, and yet have scarce a thimble
full of cold water for their thirsty neighbor. And indeed, if ever drunkenness
had an impunity, it is in these days; although it be a most detestable Sin, and
so prolifical that it begets a thousand others, yet it is now so much in vogue,
that I am afraid reeling in the Streets will be al'a mode, and this Vice which
metamorphoseth a Man into a Beast, rather be the Subject of Mirth then
detestation. But let these bon-companions know there was a curse long ago
pronounced against those that are strong to drink, and that God is now putting
it in Execution. Since with their Teeth they will be digging their own graves,
and pour down into their Throats like sluices, floods of Liquor to drown their
Souls, it is but Just the Pestilence should save them a labor and give them a
quick dispatch.

And as with Excess in Eating and Drinking we have provoked God; so likewise in
our Apparel and Clothes. The Garments which God made our first Parents, were to
hide their shame, but ours are so fantastically shaped, that instead of
covering they discover it. In a word, There is nothing We have endeavored so
much as the advancement of the Kingdom of Satan. Our Eyes have wholly been
employed upon lustful Objects, and lewd Women: Infelicissimae publicarum
libidinum victimae, those unhappy Sacrifices of common Lust, as Tertullian
speaks, more grateful to us than virtuous Company: The debauchery of Unclean
Songs and vilanous discourse, have been more acceptable to our Ears than a good
Sermon, or wholesome admonitions. Our Smell has been caressed with effeminate
perfumes; Our Taste with luxurious Viands and Sauces, made to heighten an
Appetite beyond the Necessity of Nature. And lastly, Our Touch has been
tainted with Lasciviousness. With so little care have we guarded these
Cinque Ports of our Soul, yea rather left them as so many open avenues free for
Sin to enter: That it is no wonder if death tread upon the Heels of Sin, and
snatches us away in the flagrant fact.

Object. But you will say, Since God is all goodness, and cannot be the Author
of Evil, how comes it to pass that he so severely punishes Sin, and sends
such plagues amongst men for it.

Answ. To this I answer with the Learned Bishop of Marseilles Salvianus in his
8 Book de Providentia, where he says, A Deo quippe punimus sed ipsi facimus.
Cui dubium est quin ipsi nos nostris criminibus puniamus; vim Deo facimus
iniquitatibus nostris, and ipsi in nos Iram Dei armamus. God indeed punishes
us, but we cause, and after a sort force him to do it. God inflicteth stripes,
but we deserve them. God strikes, but we provoke. God pours out the Vials of
his wrath, but we fill them up to the brim, by our overflowing Iniquities. If
we have any thing that is good in us it is from God; but in a true sense we
make him just even by our Injustice; for if we were not unjust in Sinning, he
could not be just in punishing; neither would he desire any way to exalt his
glory by the ruin of his Creature. Mic. 7.18.
Mercy is his delight, and goodness is his Nature. He therefore never sends
Evil upon us, before we have it in us; he never fills a Cup of Red wine before
the measure of our Crimson sin is full. Let us therefore lay the blame upon our
selves, and with mournful Jerusalem say, The Lord is righteous, but we have
rebelled against him: Let us in flying to his Mercy, yet still adore his
justice; and let the consideration of his unwillingness to punish us, so work
upon us, that hereafter we may not force him to it. For he is slow to anger and
of great Compassion.

And thus from the Disease we pass to the Remedy, which consists of three
Ingredients; 1. Humility. 2. Prayer. 3. Repentance.


If my People that are called by my name, do humble themselves, and pray, and
seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear, etc.

1. If my People humble themselves. It seems God will have humility be the
first Ingredient in this Plague-Antidote. Lofty Spirits are like wheels, St.
Basil. in Ascet. (...) 4.
in St. Basil's phrase, (...) They move not to any Spiritual height, but run a
vain Circle and endless round. They are so far from attaining any good end,
that they embar all the passages to it. The old Marquess of Worcester being
asked in Queen Elizabeth's Time, how he continued Favorite to three Princes of
such different humors? Answered, He was made of a Willow not of an Oak, and
had learned the Art of Submission. But proud men make it their business to
withstand Thunderbolts, and had rather perish then not attempt. Had they fully
known what the meaning of that passage is, God resists the proud and gives
grace unto the humble, they would easily have understood, that the only way to
avoid the fury of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, is to lay prostrate before
him; not to contend, but yield the buckler to him, that never kills persons
disarmed of their Sins, and humbly begging quarter. The Royal Prophet says, A
broken heart and a contrite Spirit, oh God! thou will not despise. The
Ninivites found the Truth of this upon the pronouncing of that fatal Sentence
against them, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. What? did they
fortify their City? did they frame of their old men a Council of War, and of
their youth raise a puissant Army? did they send for the help of their Allies,
and provide for a long Siege? No, they understood a better method of disarming
divine wrath, they clothed themselves with Sackcloth and sat in Ashes; they
humbled themselves before the Lord, and by this holy policy brought the Lord to
repent of the Evil he intended against them. Here it is worth observing, that
humble Submission, is more prevalent with God, than our fellow Creature.
Niniveh humbles it self, and God repents of the designed ruin: But Jonah grows
angry, and thinks he does well to be so. This humility must not be like that
which the Prophet complains of, a holding down our head like a hulrush: We must
have a deep sense of our unworthiness, that has caused this fire to go out
against us, and having truly considered the greatness of that Majesty we have
offended, cry out in confusion of face, that we are but dust, and cannot endure
everlasting burnings.

And that we may the better do thus, let us first consider the Justness of the
Act. If we have offended a temporal Prince, we spare no labor, leave no stone
unturned to find out this Courtier, that Favorite, yea at the very expense of
our Estates to mediate with him our reconciliation; when many times it is to no
purpose: And shall we be less sedulous in appeasing the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, by a due acknowledging our own vileness and the enormity of our
Actions that have provoked his just displeasure? Had he demanded the fruit of
our body, our Estates, or our Lives, by way of Expiation, and after all this
left us in an uncertainty, whether he would pardon, whether he would heal us or
no, the Case had been hard; but when he that is Truth it self assures us our
humble Submission shall make amends, surely we must be the most wretched people
in the World if we want a heart and a knee to appease his fury.

Secondly, It is the most advantageous Act to our selves; and this will appear
three ways.

First, It prevents Substraction of Grace, and falling into grievous Sins.
Without this gracious frame of Spirit even the greatest Saints have fallen into
horrid sins: We may observe this in St. Peter himself, in a vain glorious
humor he began to tell Christ, Master though all the world forsake thee, I
will not; yet when his Lord and Master was seized by the Jews, upon the
accusation of a silly Damsel, he was the first that not only denied his
Master, but forsware him too: Had he been as low and humble in his own Conceit
when the Maid said unto him, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee, Mat. 26.69.
as he was immediately after his denial, when he went out and wept bitterly,
his Lord would not have suffered him so foully to fall; And therefore his
fellow Apostle St. Paul tells us of a Thorn in his flesh, or a buffetting
Satan to keep him humble and in a due sense of his nothingness, lest (says he)
I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of Revelations. Sup.
Cant. Sermon. 52.
St. Bernard observes, that sometimes grace is subtracted, not for Pride which
already is, but which would be, if it were not subtracted. Here St. Augustine
in his Book de Civitate Dei; C. 14. c. 13
Audio dicere superbis utile esse cadere in aliquod apertum manifestumque
peccatum unde sibi displiceant qui jam sibi placendo ceciderunt, i. e. I dare
boldly affirm, That it is requisite for the Proud to fall into some open and
heinous Sin, that so at last they may fall out of Conceit with themselves, that
fell by standing in their own Conceit. It is humility then that shuts up all
the passages to Sin, and is as St. Bazil speaks, (...), The Magazine of Virtues.

Secondly, It is the characteristical note of our Christianity, it is a virtue
peculiar to it. Learn of me for I am meek and lowly, is a Doctrine which Christ
first taught, and Doctor humilitatis in St. Augustin's opinion is his proper
Style; His whole Life and Actions were the great Examples of it. Humility is a
piece of that Celestial Philosophy the Gentiles never knew, it is much above
their Ethics; for though amongst them a (...), a Moderation to know and keep
our measures, be commended for virtue, yet that this should be performed in
humble dependence on God, by Grace derived from him in our Redeemer, was above
their Learning: And therefore Clemens of Alexandria said well, That Natural men
may do the same good that a good Christian, (...). i. e. But not from the same
cause, nor with the same Intention, for they make not God in Christ either
their beginning or end. So that the acting Virtues in a supernatural power, and
referring them primarily, to his honor in Christ (which is the Quintessence of
humility) is above the reach of Philosophical Speculation.

Thirdly, It is the readiest way to saving knowledge. The humble thou will
teach thy way, says the royal Prophet. Proud persons will never make good
Scholars in Christ's School; he will never put the new wine of his Grace into
their old musty bottles; the reason is, they are so full with their own airy
Conceptions, with the bubbles of their own blowing, that there is no room for
solid and real Truths, with which the Holy Ghost ever fills humble Souls. On
the contrary, the humble person that considers the vileness of his natural
condition, and how poor and naked he is, places all his hopes of strength and
knowledge only in God, and by that resignation of himself, eafiler receives
those divine examinations of Truth, that can make him wise to Salvation: The
great end of Christianity (to use the Words of Hierocles concerning the
Pythagorean discipline) is, (...)^ That we may be made all wing for the pursuit
of Divine things; but Pride puts weights of Lead upon the Soul, that She cannot
soar into the Region of Divine Truth; and so muffles her with self-conceit,
that like hooded Hawks if she could fly, yet she would want an eye to pursue
her game. Let us therefore, if we would be taught by this great Schoolmaster,
approach him with all humility, and he will not only teach us those things
which are of Eternal Import, but cure the Wounds which Sin has made in our
Souls, in our Bodies, in the Church, in the State. And so I come to the second
Ingredient, which is Prayer. If my People pray, and seek my face, etc.

First then, Being to speak of Prayer, it will not be amiss to enquire in the
first place, what Prayer is? L. 3. de Fide c. 4.
St. John Damascen answers the Question, and says, It is the Elevation of the
mind to God. And St. Austin, In Ps. 85.
Your Prayer is a speaking to God. When you read, God speaks to you; when you
pray, you speak to God; therefore Prayer is the Souls Colloquy and conversation
with God. So that when we pray, we Elevate our spirit to God, and familiarly
(yet with all reverence) communicate our Condition unto him with a greater
confidence than any Child can do to his Mother: To him we unbowel our selves,
and lay before him what is most dear unto us, and what most oppresses us in our
Spiritual combats; our failings and our desires, the temporal blessings we
would have, and the Evils we would eschew, as one friend does to another in
whom he most confides. And this is that which the Divine Writ terms a pouring
forth the heart like water before the Lord; the Text does not say like Oil,
some of which will ever be sticking to the vessel that contained it; but like
Water, to signify, That all our thoughts, our whole heart, must go out of it
self and ascend to God. And truly (if ever) now we have need to make this
self-examination; for, when our Souls have (as it were) quitted their Mansion,
and traveled to the throne of Grace to beg Mercy, and a ceasing of Judgments,
we may be confident, Plagues will be crippled, and not suffered to infect our
clayie tenements in our spiritual absence: For the truth of this we have our
Lord and Saviors own Word, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you; ye
shall ask what ye will and it shall be done unto you. So powerful is fervent
prayer with God, that it binds his hands, and (to speak with reverence, as it
were) fetters the Omnipotent one. We see it likewise in the case of the
Israelites, Moses was gone up to the Mount to receive the Law, and his stay
being longer than the peoples expectation, they gather themselves together, and
will needs have Aaron make them new Gods; He, out of their golden Earings, to
gratify their importunity, made them a Calf. This accursed piece of Idolatry,
God (resolving to punish) says unto Moses, Now therefore let me alone, that my
wrath may wax hot against them, etc. whilst thou prayest thou bindest me; do
not thus manacle me, let my hands be at liberty, that I may cut off this stiff
necked generation. Suitably to this, Salvianus commenting upon Psalm. 33.18.
Oculi Domini super justos, and Aures ejus in preces eorum; says, when the
Scripture affirms the Ears of the Lord to be always on the prayers of the just;
not only his readiness to hear, but a kind of Obedience in God is pointed at,
as if God were so ready to hear the prayers of his faithful ones, that he seems
willing, not only to hear, but to Obey; not only to grant what they desire, but
ready to perform what they command. Thus, though the Sun comes forth like a
Giant and rejoices to run his race, yet He, and his fellow Luminary the Moon,
the bright Mistress of the night, by the force of Prayer, are arrested and made
to stand still till Joshuah and the Israelites had avenged themselves upon
their Enemies, Josh. 10.12. Yea, at the prayer of Hezekiah, attended with the
Divine Rhethorick of Tears, the same Sun must recoyle back. It might have been
enough for Hezekiah's faith, to believe the words of Isaiah without any Sign:
But God, to let us see how much he was pleased with the King's earnest Address,
stops the very course of Nature, and by no less than a miracle declares, That
he had heard and accepted the voice of those Royal Tears; for behold, I will
bring again the Shadow of the degrees which is gone down in the Sun-Dial of
Ahaz ten degrees backward. Isa. 38.8. And as Prayer has a power to invert the
Course of Nature, so likewise can it make Nature act contrary to its own self.
For fire which naturally towers upward, at the Prayer of Elijah descended
downward, and consumed a Captain and fifty men, 2 Kings 1.12. Neither is Prayer
the weapon with which we only wound our Enemies, but it is (to speak with St.
Ambrose) telum quo vulneramus Cor Dei, a weapon with which God himself is
wounded, as the Spouse in the Canticles speaks, Charitate vulneror; no other
Artillery but this can batter the Citadel of the great King. This is a Truth
so evident, that the dim light of Nature taught the very Heathens it, and
therefore (as Clemens Alexandrinus tells us) they called their God (...), In
Protr.
from (...), as if one should say, a God who delights in the humble Prayers
of hearty Petitioners. So that we may well say with Luther, Oration hominis res
est potentissima; It overth ows Armies, turns the course of Nature, obtains the
greatest blessings, averts the greatest Evils, and even conquers God himself.
Let us therefore offer this incense offering, this Spirituale thymiama. In
Matthew.
Carthusian (to its honor) observes, That the Style of Incense is attributed
to no other Theological virtue, so truly as to Prayer. Nulla justitia
thymiamati comparatur nisi sola Oration; for as Incense fired in the Censor
mounts in perfumed Curls, and casts a grateful odor about the Altar; so our
Prayers proceeding from hearts fired with holy Zeal, ascend to the throne of
God, and make a sweet smell in his nosthrils: But to speak more particularly,
since prayer is of such a power;

First, Let us pray, that we may show our selves Christians. Tertullian calls
Christians, the Candidates of the Celestial Kingdom: He alludes to the custom
of those Roman Senators that stood for the Consulship, who ever visited such as
had any votes in their Election, and by fair entreaties endeavored to win them
to their Side. The same we do by Prayer, we acknowledge the Supremacy that
Christ has over us, and that all our felicity depends upon his only Vote. Now
as among the Gentiles some were called Platonists, others Aristotelians, and
from the Masters, they acknowledged their Instructors; so by practicing this
excellentest of virtues, we justly wear the name of him that taught it us.

Secondly, Let us pray, That we may not only show our selves Christians, but
good and pious Christians. How many are there in the World that pass from month
to month, yea, from year to year that scarce ever pray! as if there were
neither a God to reward, nor a Devil to be his Executioner; and yet, if you
tell them they are not Christians, they will esteem you the most injurious
persons in the world. But we must not be content with the bare name of
Christianity, and think it is enough that our Parents brought us to the Font,
and that there we received our Christian Livery: We must come up to the life of
christianity, which is Prayer; it is that in the Soul which Springs are in
Clocks and Watches, if they be broke, the motion of all the Wheels ceases; and
if we devote not our selves to prayer, all our Theological virtues are idle,
and as it were pinnion'd in us; and therefore St. Chrysostom says excellently,
Tom. 1. de fide.
as, when a Queen enters a city, not only a great Retinue, but an amass of
Wealth comes along with her; so likewise, when the Soul is enflamed with a love
of prayer, all other virtues crowd and throng in upon her: Of Men it makes us
the Temples of Christ. Now as gold and precious stones, and the richest Marbles
constitute the Palaces of Princes; so Prayer builds up these Temples of the Son
of God, that he may dwell in our hearts as in a Sanctum Sanctorum, the noblest
Seat of his Residence. That we may therefore pray aright and like good
christians, that God may cease the plague and heal our wounds, I shall show you
what qualifications are necessary.

First then, Our Prayer must fervent Prayer, it is St. James his character, The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much; indeed, it peirceth
heaven, and is Clavis Coeli as St. Bernard speaks, the Key that unlocks the
Treasuries of heaven, that it may shower down its blessings upon us. We may
learn the Nature of this effectual Prayer from the Royal Prophet, when he says,
Ps. 141.2.
Dirigatur Oration mea sicut incensum in conspectu tuo: Let my prayer be set
before thee as Incense; in which words, he briefly comprehends all the
requisites of a fervent prayer by comparing it to Incense.

First, In the Incense was Frankincense, Onyx, Galbanum, Oil of Cinnamond, or
Myrrh and Mastich; so our Prayer, if it be effectually fervent, must be mingled
with Faith, Humility, Charity, Confidence in God, and Patience; these, as
lesser Stars, must wait upon this Queen and Mother of virtues, this Breviary of
the Gospel.

Secondly, This Incense was appropriated to the Temples, and lodged in the Holy
of Holies; so likewise the Soul of Man is the Temple and House of God, as St.
Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of the Holy Ghost? we therefore must burn
this Incense of Prayer in the inward'st and purest part of this Temple.

Thirdly, This Incense was to be offered by none but the High Priest; so
likewise all our prayers must be offered up by our High Priest Christ Jesus, if
we hope they shall prevail; for upon this account the Church teaches us to
conclude all our prayers with this clause, Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Fourthly, This Incense was to be fired, before its grateful perfume could be
sented: If the High Priest flung never so many handfuls of it on dead coals
there came forth no odor; so our Prayers are altogether frigid and no way
pleasing until kindled by the flames of the Spirit: where heat and fervor is
wanting in him that prays, the very Soul of prayer is absent.

Fifthly, (says David) Dirigatur Oration mea, etc. let it mount, let it tend
toward thee; he that will pray fervently and effectually, must have a good
end, a sincere intention, and a constant attention; he must not pray like
Pharisees to be seen of men, that he may purchase the Repute of Religious and
holy; he must make God and his interest his ultimate end; and therefore our
Lord the Great Master of Prayer, says, When thou prayest enter into thy closet,
and when thou have shut thy door pray to thy Father which is in Secret: By
which he would teach us rather to acquit our selves to God than Man, God only
being able to reward our Integrity with better blessings than vulgar applause
can afford.

Secondly, But in the second earnest and fervent, so it must be without
ceasing: If we would have a Truce with God's judgments, it is an argument of an
evil heart to proportion our Prayers to the increase or decrease of Judgments;
for though the rule in Philosophy be, That Oration is quantitas discreta, yet in
Divinity it is most certain, That Oration ought to be quantitas continua,
according to the Apostle's Maxim, Pray continually; and indeed now, 1 Ephesians.
5.17.
if ever, we had need to be constant in Prayer, when thousands dye in a week,
and every parish, yea every street is the fatal Theater of so many sad
Tragedies. Is not this a time of trouble, when the rich and abler sort are
fled, cite, long, tarde, and the poorer through necessity are obliged to
tarry, notwithstanding infinite dangers surround them, their Servants, and
their poor children! Is it not a time of trouble, when Tradesmen become poor,
and poverty enforces beggary, and that unhappy profession cannot keep them from
Starving! Is it not a time of trouble, when trade in general is so Dead that
the Sexton and the Grave-maker have the most Employment in the parish! Surely
this is a time of trouble, and this time is our time. O therefore! let us take
up holy David's Resolution, and give neither sleep to our eyes nor slumber to
our Eyelids, till the Lintells of our dore-posts are anointed with the blood
of sprinkling, that the destroying Angel may pass over our habitations. Ask
(and give not over) till you find, seek (and leave not) till you find, knock
(and cease not) till a door of Salvation be opened unto you.

3. But thirdly, We must lift up pure hearts and holy hands unto God in Prayer.
It is the work of the Seraphims to be continually crying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God of Sabbath, to express the ardent affection in them, and the ready
adoration of the Holiness so repeated by them, it being that noble attribute
that indeed is only proper to God. Now if we would take a part in this
Seraphick Consort, we must endeavor to have holiness and purity in our hearts
and hands, and then our addresses will be musical in God's Ears. To this
purpose the Schoolman Victorinus observes, That a reasonable Soul is the chief
and principal glass wherein to see God: Ric. Victor. lib. de Patriar.
This the Israel of God must continually hold, wipe, look on; hold, lest
falling down it sink to the Earth in love; wipe, lest it be sullied with the
dust of vain thoughts; look on, that it divert not the eye and intention to
vain studies. Can we hope that that Man's prayer should be acceptable to God,
whose heart in stead of being lifted up to the throne of Grace, is sunk into
the Earth by the love of Terrene pleasures? No, we must have hearts purified
with the fire of Divine love, and hands washed in innocence before we can be
acceptable. Under the Law the burnt offerings were to be flayed, and cut in
pieces, and their Legs and Inwards were to be washed: Upon which Saint Cyril of
Alexandria says, (...) The fleaing off the Skin was a riddle of naked
discovery, Hom. Pasc. 22. p. 240.
for nothing at all in us is hid or veiled from the Divine and pure eyes of
God. We must not be content with the superficies and outside of a good life,
but we must flea our Sacrifices and look to the Integrity of our inwards; we
must as it were cut our selves in pieces by a strict examination of the
particular actions of our whole life; whatever belongs to us, our desires, our
thoughts, all must be purified, if we would have our Sacrifice Grateful. How
many are there in the World that make long prayers, yet devour Widows houses?
How many that have nothing in their mouths but Gospel light, and the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, yet, do but flea them, and you shall find
them full of Avarice, Pride, Faction, and the greatest uncharitableness.
Godfrey of Bulloine being asked by the Ambassador of a Sarazen Prince how he
had his hands, tam doctas ad praeliandum, so able to fight? returned this
answer, Quia manus semper habui puras ab impuris contractibus peccati; Because
I never defiled my hands with any notorious Sin. Our Prayers will never be
prevalent with God until we first combat and foil our own Sins. (...).
Plato defines Purity a Separation of the worse from the better. We must in a
good sense be Separatists, and come out of Babylon, before we can be fit
company for the Lamb; and when we have once done this, we may confidently hope
a relaxation of our miseries, and that God will hear from heaven, forgive our
Sins, and heal our Land.

And so I come to the third Ingredient in the Text, Repentance: If my people
humble themselves, and pray, and turn from their evil ways, then will I hear
from heaven, and will forgive their Sin, and will heal their Land. In the
Pythian and Olympic Games, the Contenders for honor and renown had their way
chalked out with two white Lists, out of which they were not to salley; so it
was with Adam in Paradise, his via morum was rayled in with Innocence, as well
as his via pedum adorned with Flowers and other delightful Objects; but he
having leaped over the pale, by eating the forbidden fruit, took upon him the
Trade of wandering into bypath, and his children (like so many Gypsies) have
ever since exercised the same Profession. I have heard of some that they have
been so much in love with the wandering humor, that though they have been heirs
to good fortunes, yet they have consorted themselves with the begging Crew,
only to have the Liberty of roving up and down: And thus it is with man
generally as to his Spiritual condition; though God has elevated us to the
dignity of Sons-ship, and Christ accepted the Title of our elder Brother, yet
we have strayed away from his blessed Company, and that heavenly inheritance he
purchased for us with his blood: We have taken more delight in the meanders of
Sin and folly, that can afford us nothing of sollid worth, than in those
durable and eternal riches of Grace and Holiness. Upon this score it is that
the Text says, If my people turn from their evil ways, (which implies they
were out of the way of God, and altogether journying the Mazes of Idolatry and
Sin) that God would heal and redress the miseries that for such deviations were
come upon them. But because I will speak more distinctly of Repentance, I shall
consider it in its three parts; 1. Compunction: or Contrition for Sin. 2.
Confession of Sin. 3. Conversion from Sin to God.


First, Compunction or Contrition: And now how happy should I be, if my
discourse to you at this time could have the same operation on your hearts that
St. Peter's Sermon had upon his Auditors, as St. Luke describes it in the
second of the Acts and the 37. verse. where it is said, Now when they heard this
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do? A true and holy Sorrow, like so
many Needles, peirced them thorough; as Eupolis recounts of Pericles's Oration
to the People of Athens; Cicero de Clar. Orat.
In animis auditorum aculeos reliquit, it left stings in his Auditors minds.
Now that we may a little consider the phrase, we must make a difference between
spiritus compunctionis, and compunctio spiritus, (...) and (...) a Spirit of
Compunction, which St. Paul complains of in the unbelieving Romans 11.8.
believing Jews, and Compunction of Spirit or of the heart, mentioned in this
place of the Acts, St. Paul says, God has given them a Spirit of Slumber, eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear unto this day; as
if he would say, they are possessed with a Spirit of stupidity and obstinacy in
Sin, that slash and wound them never so, yet they will not be sensible; but
this compunction or pricking of the heart, which St. Peter's Auditors endured,
was a godly Sorrow for their Sins, and sight of their miserable Condition. Now
Lorinus affords us a ternary of reasons why godly Sorrow for Sin is called
compunction of the heart. Act. C. 2.


1. Quia vel aperitur Cordis apostema. 2. Vel quia vulneratur Cor amore Dei. 3.
Vel quia demon dolor and invidia sauciatur.
Either because the corruption of the heart is discovered, as an Aposteme or
Ulcer is opened by the prick of a Lance.

Or because the heart is wounded with the love of God, as the Spouse in the
Canticles cries out, I am sick of Love.

Or because thereby the Devil is wounded with Indignation and Envy, as knowing
the ruin of his Interest and Kingdom must needs be caused, when Sinners
return to God, the Center of their happiness, from which they recoyled. But if
any one ask me the reason why they were thus pricked, thus wounded at the
heart, the 23. and 24. Verses of the second of the Acts will tell us, him,
being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledg of God, Ye have
taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. It was high time for the
Jews to be touched to the quick that had put to death the Lord of Life, their
Messiah, and Savior of the World. And truly, if we reflect aright upon our
selves, we shall find it high time for us to be thus wounded, if we consider
that the Jews did but once crucify him; but We, by the committal of fresh sins
and Impieties, crucify him every day, and grieve his holy Spirit. It is
therefore infinitely necessary we should have this due sense, this holy wounding
of heart, if we expect God should repent of the evil done unto us and heal our
Land.

2. The second branch of Repentance is Confession.

As we must be sorrowful for sin, so we must make a true confession of sin: Now
in confession we must observe these Rules;

First, Our confession must be humble and self-accusing, Non vis ut ille
damnet? Tu damna. Vis ut ille ignoscat? Tu agnosce. Would thou not that God
should Condemn thee? condemn thy self. Say with the Publican, Lord have mercy
upon me a sinner. Would thou have God pardon? Do thou cry guilty. We must
not imitate our Grandfather Adam, that cried, The Woman thou gave me
presented me the fruit, and I did eat. We must take the sins we have committed
upon our selves; it being altogether unjust we should file that Evil on
another score of which we have been the Authors. How many are there in these
days that when they are accused of any Uncleanness, lay the fault upon Nature,
as St. Austin complains, many in his time did, and consequently accuse God
himself. We ought rather, with the Prophet David, to cry out, Lord, it is I
that have done this Great Wickedness; and, with Jeremiah, confess our ways and
our Evil doings have brought all these miseries upon us.

Secondly, We must not put our sins to the Devil's Account. He may tempt us,
but he cannot force us to sin. The Devil might have offered Eve a thousand of
those beautiful Apples without prevailing, had she not been as willing to taste
that forbidden fruit as he ready to persuade her it was good. If he could force
us to sin, we might justly lay the fault at his door, and make the very
necessity of sinning our Apology. But the Apostle St. James bids us resist the
Devil and he will fly from us: to teach us we have a power to combat, and
through Grace baffle his pernicious temptations.

Thirdly, Neither must we make God the Author of our sins: He is a God of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity; and what blasphemy would it be in us when we have
committed sins (that even some natural men would abhor) to father them upon
God, the source of all purity and goodness. The Psalmist steers another course,
when he says, I will confess my sins unto the Lord; Psalm. 32.
He does not say he will accuse God as the author of his Lust to the Wife of
Vriah, or of his Pride in numbering the people; no, but I will confess to him
against my self, he is righteous, and I have done wickedly. God cannot be
tempted to evil, neither tempts he any man, it is a principle of corruption
within us, that brings forth this viperous brood, and we must wholly
acknowledge God righteous when he punishes for Sin.

Fourthly, Our Confession must be Integra and perfecta. There are many that
will be ready to acknowledge those Sins which they see the best of Men are
obnoxious to; but their Dallilah's, their darling Sins, like the true name of
Rome, they keep concealed. But this is not the Confession that will do our
work; a lame half-confession is no more acceptable to God, than if we should
offer him half our heart, when he requires the whole; Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart; which he can never truly be said to do that leaves
some Sins unconfess'd, and as it were hid in the inward recesses of his Soul;
because God being a professed enemy to every Sin, such a concealment is a
taking part with that which he most hates.

Thirdly, The third part of Repentance is Conversion: Now there is a twofold
Conversion.

1. A Turning and total Conversion of a Sinner from Sin to God, and in this
Signification is comprehended the whole work of Grace, Psalm. 51.14. And Sinners
shall be converted unto thee; this is passive Conversion, wherein God is the
Chief Agent, but our selves by our natural power work nothing, unless it be to
hinder the work of Grace.

2. There is a turning from some particular Sin or Sins, whereby we have
offended God or Man; Luke 22.32. When thou art converted; and Jer. 31.18.
Convert thou me and I shall be converted: This is an active Conversion
performed by men, who being already renewed by Grace, do work together with
this Grace. Now this conversion is a turning of the heart unto God, whereby we
contract a perfect aversion to those things which we formerly delighted in, and
have such an alteration in our will and affections, that we desire nothing, and
affect nothing but what we find agreeable to his blessed will. It is not a
turning of the Brain, an alteration of this or that opinion; that is Vertigo
Capitis, not Conversio Cordis: but it is a mere alteration and turning of (...)
of our hearts. So that the perfection of this conversion consists in the
turning of the whole heart. This true turning is a thing no way pleasing to the
Devil. If he could, he would not have us turn at all, he sowes pillows under
our Elbows, and persuades us we are in a blessed condition: but if we will
needs turn, he will persuade us to Turn any whether, rather than unto God. If
he cannot effect this, yet his Artifice and cunning is to make us leave our
hearts behind. Now if that will not do, but we will Turn with our heart in
Cord, yet he labors all he can it may not be in toto: he would have us have
some private ends, some Lusts to gratify; he would have our affections broken,
and not entirely subservient to the Divine Will. But (Beloved) if we would
remove these judgments that lie heavy upon us, we must not divide our hearts
between God and the Devil, but must turn to God with our whole hearts for he is
the great Physician that only can heal our diseased Souls.

And thus I come to the fourth and last Branch of the Text, the Physician
prescribing the Medicine, GOD; in these words, I will hear from heaven, and
will forgive their Sin, and will heal their Land. St. Chrysostom tells us,
that Christ the second person of the Trinity, ((...)) by his death became
Physician of the Dead; in his very humility and state of Exinanition he baffled
Sin, and Death, and the Balsam of his Blood shed upon the Cross, closed up the
Serpentine wound received in Paradise. If this be true of Christ (as without
doubt it is) whilst he was in the form of a Servant, we ought not to question
the performance of the promise made us in my Text by the whole Trinity. I will
hear from heaven, etc. I, God the Father, I, God the Son, I, God the Holy
Ghost; I one, yet three, at whose presence the Angels veil their faces, by
whose only Fiat the Chaos was un-masked, and to whose bounty all the several
species of creatures owe their Being: I will hear from heaven; forgive, and
heal your Land. Other Physicians, either out of hope of gain, or to buoy up
their credits and repute in the World, promise those cures which they can never
perform: But here is one whose Word is his Deed, that Archetypal verity, who
having the Issues of Life and Death in his hand, when he promises Life cannot
be guilty of a Lie, and when he threatens death upon impenitency will surely
inflict it. So then, here is a Conjunction of the whole Trinity in the Cure
promised, the perfection of which will appear in three particulars.

1. God will cure us corporally. When he sent his beloved Son to preach the
Gospel of Eternal Life, many heard him, but were little moved with the
Excellency of his Embassy; but when he came to those sensitive and ocular
demonstrations of his power, the healing of the Sick, and feeding the Multitude
by miracle, many then were induced to believe in him: S. Matthew tells us, that
he healed all that were Sick. At his word the Blind found eyes, the lame flung
away their Crutches, the Paralytick and such as were troubled with an effusion
of Blood, found that virtue proceeding from him which effected their cure. If
the touch of his garment were so balsamical, that of his voice had a greater
power; for Lazarus though rotting four days in his grave, at Christ's first
call quitted his cold Mansion, and conquered Death surrendered his Prisoner, at
the Command of this great Prince. The Platonist say, Lumen est Vmbra Dei, Light
is but the shadow of God; and I may very well affirm, that the Learned
Physicians are but shadows of this Sun of righteousness, when he appears with
healing in his wings. Have we the plague spots upon us? If God will be our
Physician their very redness shall serve for a blush to confess their impotency
when he bids them vanish. Does a Fever burn us, or a Dropsy drown us? One
word of his mouth will prove a Julip to cool our veins, and a Sluice to let out
that Lake of humors which would engulph us. If we be once penitentially
quallified, He will hear us, He will heal us. Let us therefore look upon this
Visitation with a Spiritual eye; Let us, that God yet spares, learn to be
better, lest those Princes of Peru in America (mere Heathens) at the day of
Judgment, rise up against us, who accounted Sickness, Nuncios coeli quibus se
ad Deos acciri dicebant, God's Messengers by which he would draw them to
himself, (as Nierembergius reports) He brings us into the School of Affliction,
Hist. Not.
that we might learn Wisdom. And as he will heal us, so he will the diseases
in the creatures that contribute to the maintenance of our Lives. Is the Air
infected? He will purge it. Is the fruit blasted? He will stop Mildews, and
what ever hinders a plentiful Vegitation. Does the Murrain consume Cattle? That
shall likewise cease. In a word, whatever impleads our temporal enjoyments,
upon our Repentance, like Dust, shall be driven away before the Wind.

2. God will cure us Spiritully. The wounds of the Soul are infinitely more
considerable than those of the Body, and therefore David, who (as St.
Chrysostom speaks, was (...), One that lived as strictly in his Kingly Palace,
as in a Cloister) cries out, Ps. 41.4.
Heal my Soul for I have sinned against thee. And indeed, he had great reason
to do so, for he that had victoriously encountered the Lion, the Bear, Goliath
and an host of Men, was now broken by a feminine temptation, and become guilty
of those Soul-wounding Sins, Adultery and Murder. Now as David made his
Address to God, the only Soul-Physician, so let us, for he can certainly
restore and heal.

This Soul-cure he will perform.

First, By healing our irregular affections, which can by no less powerful
means be effected, than the communication of his Grace. For if Adam in
Paradise, richly furnished with supernatural gifts, continued but a poor while
in that purity and excellent condition; how much less can nature, wounded with
Sin, without the assistance of supernatural endowments, recover her former
purity? I shall not deny, but a vigorous reason may help a man to acquire those
virtuous habits which may cause a promptitude in the affections to virtuous
actions, yet those Acts of virtue will be so poor and imperfect, that they can
never bring him to eternal felicity. Actions that spring from Grace, do as far
excel those that are the Issue of Nature (though never so morallized) as fruits
that are ripened in the woods and fields by the beams of the Sun, do those that
are brought forth by artificial fires. Grace changes the affections powerfully,
and renders them as it were new affections, according to St. Paul, If a Man be
in Christ he is a new creature. Not that our affections in this life are
totally healed by grace, there will be lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit,
in the most gracious persons; but those Insurrections and Tumults are rather
suffered by God as a Trial, than a destruction to his children. Inordinate
affections shall be so healed in this life, that they shall lose their Empire,
though not their Being; when they begin to rebel, Grace will be able to subdue
and triumph over them.

Secondly, By healing our Understanding. At first, when man enjoyed his
Integrity, the Understanding did naturally apprehend truth with the greatest
facility; and as when our eye looks upon some curious piece of Painting,
Sculpture, or any other beautiful object, it is highly pleased; so the
Understanding, when it looked upon Truth, received great Satisfaction, and the
more sublime and excellent the Truths were, the nobler caresses she found in
the contemplation of them. But now alas! a dismal chaos has invelop'd the
Understanding, yea that Science, that was so brisk and sparkling in our first
Parents (and should have been the inheritance of all their posterity) is
utterly lost. Our ignorance is such, that we are not able to judge of
supernatural Truths, and therefore God will cure this defect in us by Divine
Illumination. He will set up in our Souls the bright Tapers of his grace,
whereby the fogs and mists of Infidelity shall be dispelled, and such a
certainty wrought in us, as is essential to true Faith.

Thirdly, By healing our Wills. The Phylosopher's Maxim is here true, Corruption
Optimi est pessima: The Will being the supreme faculty of the Soul, had once a
natural power to love God, but being now wounded by Sin, the wounds in it are
of a deadlier nature than those of the other faculties. Thus Sins of Malice are
deeper wounds than those of Infirmity or Ignorance, and therefore one
excellently said, That nothing fri'd so much in Hell as the perverse wills of
Men. God will heal this wounded part also by his supernatural Grace; for Grace
has fire for the Will, as well as light for the Understanding. His Grace shall
so inflame our Wills, that whereas we formerly affected nothing more than the
Transitory and earthly fruitions of this life, Riches, Honors, and Pleasures;
now we shall love nothing, desire nothing so much as God in Christ, and with
St. Paul, account all things but dross and dung in comparison of them.

Fourthly, By healing our consciences. I will hear and forgive, etc. In
Scripture Language healing of Sin and forgiving of Sin, are aequipollent terms.
So Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your back
slidings. Now God, when he says in my Text, I will forgive, speaks to the
conscience a healing word. Grace may heal the spots and stain of Sin, but it
cannot heal the guilt. It is forgiveness of Sin, must take away the guilt of
Sin, and then the Obligation to punishment ceases. Those fears, which (like so
many furies) continually tormented us, shall lose their sting, and be turned
into gladness, when he says, I will forgive. It is the saying of wise K.
Solomon, That the Spirit of a Man may bear his Infirmity, but a wounded spirit
who can bear? which words, though in the garb of a Question, yet are to be
filled in the number of those (...) (to use the Philosopher's phrase) questions
which have the energy of affirmative and negative propositions; so that the
Sense is, No man can bear a wounded Spirit. And indeed, if we consider the
unspeakable tortures that they suffer, whose conscience is troubled and
tempestuous, we must needs acknowledge it an insupportable burden. What great
comfort then have we in this promise, that God will forgive? that is, not only
efface and blot out the stain, but pardon the guilt of Sin, which so often
anticipates Doomsday, and begets a Hell on Earth.

3. But thirdly and lastly, God will heal us Politically. When Sin has so
highly distempered a Nation, that it is come to the very brink of destruction,
then God many times comes with healing in his wings, he will make Good that of
his Prophet, Jer. 30.17
They that spoil thee, shall be a spoil, for I will restore health unto thee,
and heal thee of thy wounds; he that could make the Assyrians level their
Swords at one another Breasts, can make us Englishmen (that have been too
much in this Case Assyrians) sheath our Swords and run into mutual embraces. He
said, By me Kings Reign, and it is as true, by me Kings fall. When he has a
mind to punish a Nation for Sin, he many times takes away excellent Princes, as
he did Josiah and glorious CHARLES the First. And when he intends to heal a
Nation, he makes those animosities that begot the first troubles, the ground of
the ensuing Peace. For though the Devil's Maxim be, Divide and impera, yet God
can make use of it to serve his most holy intentions. In the Building of Babel
he made confusion of Languages the ruin of the work; and in the Restoration
of King CHARLES the Second, he made those of different opinions and judgments
in Religion, draw in the same Yoke, and as subservient Instruments, cause that
Serenity which we now enjoy. I do not speak this, as if we were now as well
disciplined in the School of Christ as we should be: For the truth is, whatever
secular happiness we enjoy, yet if we do but reflect on the malicious designs
that are menaged at present by those that profess Christ, and the peaceable
temper which he commanded all good Christians to use, when he said, My Peace I
leave with you; we shall find the Kingdom is very sick, and stands in need of
this Physician; who can with one word of his Mouth rebuke the madness of the
people; who can teach Prince, Nobility, Clergy, and Commons, their true
Interest, who can make the most inveterat hatreds end in a vigorous friendship;
and who out of the leaves of that Tree of Life, that has twelve manner of
fruits, can make a Balsam for the healing of the Nations. Upon our Repentance
he has promised our Cure, and he both can and will be as good as his Word.

To sum up all: Let every one of us here present clap his hand upon his
heart, and not only cry, I have sinned: But by a serious amendment of Life, and
humble walking before him, endeavor as much as we can to be capable of his
healing Influence; for he that has promised is God, all knowledge that cannot
err, and God all truth that cannot Lie, and we ought to believe him, when he
says, If my People which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: Then will I hear from
heaven, and will forgive their Sins, and will heal their Land.

FINIS.

