THE ORDER OF THE INSTALLATION OF Prince George of Denmark, CHARLES Duke of
SOMERSET, AND GEORGE Duke of NORTHVMBERLAND. KNIGHTS and COMPANIONS Of the most
Noble Order OF THE GARTER.

In the Royal Chapel of St. GEORGE AT WINDSOR, APRIL the 8th. 1684.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

THE ORDER OF THE INSTALLATION OF Prince George of Denmark, Charles, Duke of
Somerset, and George, Duke of Northumberland, Knights and Companions of the
most Noble Order of the Garter.
CHAP. I.
Of the Election and Investiture of the three New Knights at White Hall.
THERE being three Stalls vacant, by the Death of three Knights and Companions
of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, scil. the Stall of his Highness Prince
Rupert, who deceased November. the 29th. 1682. The Stall of the Earl of
Salisbury, who died about the 11th. of June 1683. And the Stall of the Earl of
St. Albans, who died Jan. 2d. 1683. At a Chapter of the said Most Noble Order,
held at White Hall in the presence of the Sovereign of the said Order, on the
First of January last, scil. 1683/4. The most Illustrious Prince George,
Brother to the present King of Denmark (having upon the 28th. of July last,
married the Lady Anne, younger Daughter to his Royal Highness, the Duke of
York, and Niece to our present Sovereign, King Charles the Second) was elected
a Knight-Companion of the said most Noble Order, being first Knighted by His
Majesty, Sovereign of the said Order, and then invested with the two Principal
Ensigns of the Order, scil. the Garter and George. The usual Admonitions or
Significations upon the said Investiture being pronounced,

First, Upon buckling on the Garter about the Prince's Leg, this following
Admonition, viz.

To the Land and Honor of Almighty God, his immaculate Mother, and St. George
the Holy Martyr, tie, or gird your Leg with this Noble Garter, wearing it to
the increase of your Honor, and in Token and Remembrance of this most Noble
Order; remembering that thereby your being admonished and encouraged in all just
Battles and Wars, which only you shall take in hand, both strongly to fight,
valiantly to stand, and honorably to have the Victory. Secondly, Upon putting
on the George pendant at a Sky-colored Ribband about the Prince's Neck, the
Admonition ensuing was read to him, viz.

To the Increase of your Honor, and in Token of the Honorable Order you have
received, take this Ribband about your Neck, with the Image of the Holy Martyr,
and Christ's Knight, St. George, by whose Aid you being defended, may pass
through the Prosperities and Adversities of the this World, that having here
the Victory as well of your Ghostly as Bodily Enemies, you may not only receive
the Glory and Renown of Temporal Chivalry, but also at last the endless and
everlasting Reward of Victory. At another Chapter of the said Order, held at
White Hall the 10th. day of the said month of January, for filling up the two
other vacant Stalls, the High and Mighty Princes, Charles Seymour, Duke of
Somerset, and George Fitz-Roy, Duke of Northumberland were in like manner
elected Knights-Companions of the said most noble Order; the former whereof,
viz. the Duke of Somerset was at the same time invested with the said two
Principal Ensigns of the said Order, viz. the Garter and George, the
forementioned Significations or Admonitions being then likewise pronounced, and
read unto him upon the said Investiture. But the Duke of Northumberland being
then in France; from whence being sent for by His Majesty, he arrived not till
about the second of March last; shortly after which being invested with the
George and Garter in manner aforesaid. And His Majesty and the Court being
returned from Newmarket, the day for the Installation was appointed the 8th. of
this Instant April, 1684.

CHAP. II.
Of the Installation of the said three Knights, at the Castle of Windsor; and
first of their Proceedings to the Chapter House.
HIS Majesty, and the whole Court being removed from White Hall to Windsor, and
the three Knights Elect, viz. Prince George, the Duke of Somerset, and Duke of
Northumberland being also arrived there, together with the Dukes of Albemarl
and Beaufort, who were the two Knights Companions of the said Order,
Commissioned by his Majesty to perform the said Installation; and being all
five habited after the usual manner, in their Doublets, and Trunck Hose, of
Cloth of Silver, with white Gloves, Shoes and Stockins, Garters and Roses, etc.
They met about nine of the Clock in the Morning the said 8th. day of April, at
the Lodgings of the Bishop of Rochester, who is Dean of Windsor, and Register
of the said most Noble Order, being a little to the Eastward of the Chapel of
St. George. And the Robes, and other things to be used at the Installation of
the said three Knights, being laid in readiness at the lower end of the Table
in the Chapter House, by Sir Will. Dugdale, Garter, who is the Principal King
of Arms, and a peculiar Officer of the said Order, viz. for each of them, a
Surcoat of Crimson-Velvet, or Purple, lined with white; a Sword and Belt; a
Mantle of Sky colored Velvet lined with white, with a Velvet Hood thereto
belonging; a great Collar and George, consisting of 26 Garters of Gold,
Enameled and Interlaced with as many Knots, with the Figure of St. George
appendant thereat, enricht with Diamonds; a Velvet Cap, the Band enriched with
Diamonds, and adorned with a great Jewel before, and a large Plume of White
Feathers, with one black Tuft in the middle; and lastly, a Book of the Statutes
of the said most Noble Order, richly bound.

The poor Knights and Prebends belonging to the said College of Windsor, being
in their proper Habits [ viz. the Poor Knights in Gowns of Blew Cloth, with an
Escutcheon of the Arms of St. George, viz. a red Cross in a White Field on the
Shoulder, and the Prebends in Mantles of Crimson, or Purple Silk, with a little
Cross in a Circle] and having placed themselves in order in the Cloisters,
between the said Deans Lodgings, and the Chapel of St. George: And the other
Kings, Heralds, and Pursivants of Arms, having habited themselves in the Dean's
Hall, with His Majesty's Coats of Arms richly embroidered according to their
several Degrees. The Proceeding to the said Chapel was as follows.

First the poor Knights, two and two, the Junior first.

Next, the Prebends two and two, the Junior first.

Then the Officers of Arms two and two, the Pursivants first.

Then the Knights Elect, habited only in their Doublets and Hose of Cloth of
Silvers, as before is said, single one after another, the Junior first, viz.

The Duke of Northumberland, The Duke of Somerset, Prince George.
Then the Officers of the Order, habited in their Mantles of Crimson-Sattin,
Lined with White, viz. Dr. Turner, Bishop of Rochester Register of the Order,
wearing the Badge of his Office, viz. a Book embellisht, with a Garter, and two
Pens across.

Sir William Dugdale, Garter King of Arms, bearing the Commission for the
Installation, and wearing the Badge of his Office hanging in a Gold Chain.

Sir Thomas Duppa, Usher of the said Order, wearing the peculiar Badge of his
Office, hanging likewise in a Gold Chain.

Then the Duke of Albemarle, and the Duke of Beaufort, Commissioners for the
said Installation, in their under Suits of Cloth of Silver, and Mantles of Blew
Velvet, with their Caps and Feathers on their Heads.

Being entered the Chapel, the three Knights Elect, turning to the left Hand,
reposed themselves on three Chairs, placed at the Back of the Quire, the Prince
sitting in the middle, while the two Knights Commissioners went into the
Chapter House, which is just at the entering the Chapel on the Right Hand; the
Officers of the Order going in before them.

CHAP. III.
The Ceremonies in the Chapter House.
THE two Knights Commissioners, and the three Officers of the Order being thus
entered into the Chapter House, Garter, King of Arms, with three Reverences
presented the Sovereign's Commission for the Installing of the said three Elect
Knights, to the senior Knight Commissioner, who delivering it to the Register,
the Register forthwith read the same and then returned it to the said Knights
Commissioners, who thereupon delivered it again to the said Register, to be
entered on Record in the Register-book of the said Order.

Then Garter, King of Arms, being commanded by the Knights Commissioners, to
bring in Prince George of Denmark, came out of the Chapter House, and having
made his Obeysances to the said Prince (who sat all this while at the Back of
the Quire) conducted him into the said Chapter House, where the Prince having
made his Reverence, the senior Knight Commissioner declared the Sovereign's
great Favor toward him, in a full Admittance into this Honorable Society;
which the Prince humbly acknowledging, the said Commissioners, with Garter's
Assistance, invested him with the Surcoat beforementioned, and girt the Sword
about him over his Surcoat, while the Register pronounced the Admonition
following.

Take this Robe of Purple to the Increase of your Honor, and in Token or Sign
of the most Honorable Order you have received; wherewith you being defended,
may he bold, not only strongly to fight, but also to offer your self to shed
your Blood for Christ's Faith, the Liberties of the Church, and the just and
necessary Defense of them that be oppressed and needy. The Prince being thus
invested with the Surcoat, and girt with the Sword, remained in the
Chapter House with the Knights Commissioners, whilst Garter having received the
like Command to bring in the next elect Knight, viz. the Duke of Somerset,
introduced him into the Chapter House in like manner; where being invested, and
all other Ceremonies performed, as they were to the Prince, Garter was sent out
again for the youngest Knight Elect, scilt. the Duke of Northumberland; to whom
all things were performed in like manner.

CHAP. IV.
The Proceeding into the Quire.
THE three Knights Elect being thus invested with part of the Habit of the said
Noble Order, reposed themselves in the Chapter House, while the Knights
Commissioners, and Officers of the Order, etc. proceeded into the Choire from
the said Chapter House, through the North Isle, and in at the West Door of the
Choire under the Organ in this manner.

First, The poor Knights, two and two, the Junior first.

Next, the Prebends, two and two, the Junior first.

Then the Officers of Arms, two and two, the Pursivants first.

Then the three Officers of the Order beforementioned, the Register in the
Middle.

Then the Knights Commissioners with their Caps and Feathers on their Heads
until they came to the Quire.

Being entered the Choire, the Poor Knights (making their Obeysances in the
middle of the Quire, first to the Altar, and then to the Sovereign's Stall)
ascended to the Steps before the Altar, and there divided themselves to the
right and left.

Next, the Prebends having made the like Obeysances, took their Seats or
Stalls, only two of them were conducted up by a Virger to the Altar, to receive
the Achievements, etc.

Then the Officers of Arms having made the like Obeysances, ascended likewise
to the Steps before the Altar, and dividing themselves to the right and left,
stood before the poor Knights.

Then the three Officers of the Order, having made the like Obeysances, came
and stood before their own Seat or Form, on the Right Hand the Quire, a little
before the Sovereign's Stall.

Lastly, the two Knights Commissioners, after the like Obeysances, came and
stood in the Choire, under their respective Banners or Achievements, which
Achievements, by the Sovereign's particular Warrant had been removed higher
into their proper places the Day before, to the end the Achievements of the
two New Elect Knights-Subjects might be set up over the two lowest Stalls.

CHAP. V.
The Offering of the Achievements of the three defunct Knights.
THE Achievements of the said three defunct Knights, scilt. Prince Rupert, the
Earl of St. Albans, and the Earl of Salisbury, being taken down, and made
clean, and placed in readiness, directly under each defunct Knight's Stall,
Garter came from his Seat, and having made his usual Obeysances to the Altar
and Sovereign's Stall, and also to the Knights Commissioners, conducted them to
the place where the Achievements of Prince Rupert, the eldest defunct Knight,
were laid.

Then the two Kings of Arms, called Clarenceux and Norroy, came down from the
Steps of the Altar to the Body of the Choire, and having made their usual
Reverences to the Altar, and Sovereign's Stall, and also to the Knights
Commissioners, disposed themselves a little before the said Knights
Commissioners on either side.

Which done, the two Knights Commissioners having received from Garter the
Banner of the said Prince Rupert half rolled up, made their double Obeysances;
and (being preceded by the said Kings of Arms) passed up toward the Altar,
bearing the lower end of the Staff foremost; and making another double
Reverence at the first Haut pas, the two Kings of Arms, after an humble
Obeisance, divided themselves, to make way for the Knights Commissioners, who
being come to the upper Haut pas, made a single Reverence to the Altar, and
raising the Point of the Banner upwards, presented it with a Bow to the two
Canons or Prebends beforementioned, who deposited it upon Cushions laid before
the Altar.

Which done, the said Kings of Arms having conducted the aforesaid Knights
Commissioners back into the Choire, returned unto their places; whereupon the
two Senior Heralds came down, and making their double Reverences, as also to
the said Knights Commissioners, to whom Garter delivered the Sword of the said
Defunct Knight ( Prince Rupert) with the Pommel or Hilt upwards, conducted them
up to the Altar, where, after the usual Reverences, it was offered as
aforesaid. Then returning again, Garter delivered them the Helm and Crest of
the said Defunct Knight; which they offered in like manner, the two next
Heralds preceding before them.

In like sort the Achievements, viz. the Banner, Sword, and Helm and Crest, of
the next Defunct Knight, scil. the Earl of St. Albans were offered up by the
said Knights Commissioners, conducted by two Officers of Arms.

Lastly, The Achievements of the third Defunct Knight ( scil. the Earl of
Sarum) were offered up in like manner.

Which being performed, the knights Commissioners making their usual
Obeysances, returned, and stood under their respective Banners, and the
Officers of Arms returned to their Stations at the Steps before the Altar.

CHAP. VI.
The Installation of the Three Elect Knights, and first, the introducing the
Senior Knight Elect to his Stall.
THE Achievements thus offered, the poor Knights came down from the Steps
before the Altar (the Junior first) into the middle of the Choire; where making
their double Reverences, they proceeded out of the Chapel toward the
Chapter House; and next to them, the Officers of Arms in like Order, as also
the three Officers of the Order, and the two Knights Commissioners.

Being come into the North Isle, the Poor Knights divided themselves to the
Right and left, and the Heralds passing between them, nearer to the
Chapter House Door, divided themselves in like manner, while the Officers of
the Order and Knights Commissioners passing through them, entered the
Chapter House, where the three Knights Elect still remained.

Whence after a short stay, the Knights Commissioners bringing the Senior
Knight Elect ( scil. Prince George) they proceeded toward the Quire in form
aforesaid, that is to say, first, the poor Knights, next, the Officers of Arms;
then the three Officers of the Order, Garter going in the middle betwixt the
Register and Usher of the Order) bearing on a Purple or Crimson Velvet Cushion,
the Mantle, Hood, great Collar, and Book of Statutes before him. Then the
Prince, or Senior Knight Elect, bare-headed, with his Cap and Feather in his
Hand betwixt the two Knights Commissioners, who wore their Caps and Feathers
till the Entrance into the Quire.

Thus entering the Quire, the poor Knights, and Officers of Arms, making their
usual Obeysances, went up to their former Station at the Steps before the
Altar, while the Officers of the Order making the like Reverences, came before
the Stall designed for the senior Knight Elect, being the Fourth Stall on the
Side called the Prince's Side; the three Superior Stalls on that Side being
those of the King of Sweden, the Duke of York, and the Prince Elector of
Brandenburgh: And Garter having orderly disposed the Mantle, Hood, Collar, etc.
before the Stall designed for the said Prince, came and stood in the Quire,
with the other two Officers just before the said Stall.

Then the Knights Commissioners making the like Reverences, came into the lower
or middle Row of Stalls directly under the designed Stall of the said Prince or
senior Knight Elect, whom they introduced between them into the said lower
Space or Row opposite to his Stall, where being placed, the Register of the
said Order standing in the Quire before him, read his Oath to him, Garter
holding the Book; the Form of which Oath is as follows.

You being chosen to be one of the Honorable Company of this most Noble Order
of the Garter, shall promise and swear by the Holy Evangelists, by you here
touched, that wittingly or willingly you shall not break any Statute of the
said Order, or any Articles in them contained; the same being agreeable and not
repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God, and the Laws of this Realm, as far forth
as to you belongs and appertains; so God help you and his Holy Word. The
Oath being thus administered, and the said Elect Knight having kissed the Book,
he was led by the Knights Commissioners up to the Stall appointed for him,
through the middle Entrance, and by them placed before it.

CHAP. VII.
The Installation of Prince George, being the Senior Knight Elect.
THE Prince thus standing in his Stall (which, as is said before, was the
Fourth on the Princes Side) Garter advanced into the lower Row of Stalls to the
place where the Prince took his Oath, and with an Obeisance to the Knights
Commissioners, presented to them the Mantle wherewith they invested the Prince,
and put on the Hood upon his Right Shoulder over the Mantle, bringing the
Tippet athwart his Breast, and tucking it under his Belt or Girdle, in the
doing whereof the Register read unto him the Admonition following.

Take this Mantle of Heavenly Color, in sign and token of the most Honorable
Order you have received, and to the increase of your Honor, signed and marked
as you see with a Red Escotcheon of our Lord's Cross, to the Intent that you
being always defended by the virtue and strength thereof, may pass through your
Enemies, and them also overcome and vanquish, so that at the last, for your
worthy and approved Acts, you may after this Temporal Chivalry, come to Eternal
Triumphant Joys in Heaven. Then the Knights Commissioners put on the great
Collar of the Order about his Shoulders, tying it at each Shoulder over his
Mantle and Hood, while the Register read to him the Admonition ensuing.

To the Increase of your Honor, and in Token of the Honorable Order you have
received, take this Collar about your Neck, with the Image of the Holy Martyr,
and Christ's Knight St. George, by whose Aid you being defended, may pass
through the Prosperities and Adversities of this World, that having here the
Victory as well of your Ghostly as Bodily Enemies, you may not only receive the
Glory and Renown of Temporal Chivalry; but also at the last, the endless and
everlasting Reward of Victory. After this the said Knights Commissioners
presented the new Invested Knight (the Prince) with the Book of Statutes; and
having put the black Velvet Cap, adorned with Plumes of white Feathers upon his
Head, the Prince standing all this while before his Stall, made his double
Obeysances, first toward the High Altar, and then toward the Sovereign's
Stall, whereupon the Knights Commissioners embracing him as their Fellow and
Companion, place him, or set him down uncovered in his assigned Stall; and from
this last Action the whole Ceremony is denominated an INSTALLATION.

Which being performed, the Knights Commissioners making their Obeysances came
down into the Quire, and stood under their respective Banners.

CHAP. VIII.
The Installation of the Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland, being the two
Elect Knight-Subjects.
THE Duke of Somerset being next to be Installed, the poor Knights and Officers
of Arms, came down from the Steps before the Altar, and making their usual
Obeysances, proceeded out of the Quire, the Officers of the Order, and Knights
Commissioners following them, and thence to the Chapter House again, as they
did when they went to fetch in the Prince, Chap. 6. whence they conducted the
next Elect Knight, scil. the Duke of Somerset, in the same Order as before,
into the lower Space before his designed Stall, being the lowest Stall on the
Sovereign's Side; where having taken the Oath before recited, the Knights
Commissioners conducted him up to his proper Stall, and invested him with the
Mantle, Hood and Great Collar, the Register reading unto him the several
Admonitions before recited; after which they presented him with the Book of
Statutes; and having put on his Velvet Cap with Feathers, placed him in his
Stall, all things being performed in the same manner, as before for Prince
George.

Lastly, the poor Knights, Officers of Arms, and Officers of the Order, conduct
the Knights Commissioners out of the Quire again to the Chapter House in the
same manner as before, whence they brought betwixt them the third, or youngest
Knight Elect, scil. the Duke of Northumberland, and installed him in the lowest
Stall on the Prince's Side, performing all things as before for the first and
second Knights.

All the three Knights being thus installed, the Officers of the Order
conducted the Knights Commissioners to their respective Stalls, and making
their usual Obeysances, went to their own Seat.

Then the Officers of Arms came down from the Altar into the Choire, to hear
Divine Service; the Kings of Arms first, and after them the poor Knights to
their Seats, the Eldest first.

CHAP. IX.
The Offering of Gold and Silver.
THen Divine Service began, and the Communion, or Second Service being
performed as far as to the Offertory, at the Words, Let your Light so shine
before Men, etc. The poor Knights making their Obeysances, ascended to their
Station at the Steps before the Altar, the Junior first, and after them the
Heralds in like manner, flanking the said Poor Knights.

Then Garter came from his Form to the middle of the Choire, where making his
usual Obeysances, he summmoned down from their Stalls the two Junior new
Installed Knights, viz. the Dukes of Northumberland and Somerset, who made
their double Reverences in the Quire, and then placed themselves just under
their respective Banners.

Next he summoned down the Junior Knight Commissioner, the Duke of Beaufort,
and after him the senior Knight Commissioner, the Duke of Albemarle, and lastly
the Prince, who severally making their Obeysances, placed themselves in like
manner under their respective Banners.

The five Knights standing thus under their several Banners, the two Kings of
Arms, called Clarenceux and Norroy came down into the Choire, and having made
their double Reverences, as also their Obeisance to the Eldest Installed
Knight, Prince George, they conducted him up toward the Altar, and he having
made his usual Reverences both in the Quire and at the first step, or Hautpas,
kneeled down on one Knee at the upper step (a Velvet Cushion being laid for
that purpose) and offered Gold and Silver, two of the Prebends holding a large
Gilt Basin in which they received it, making their Reverence to the said Knight
Companion.

Having offered, the said Kings of Arms making their usual Obeysances conducted
him to the East end, or Passage into the Companions Stalls of the Prince's side
where he made his Obeysances, and so passing through the Stalls, went up to his
proper Seat or Stall, where he repeated the usual Obeysances and rested himself.

Then the two Senior Heralds conducted up the Senior Knight, Commissioner, the
Duke of Albemarle, who offered in like manner and returned to his Stall by the
same way or passage as the Prince did to his, the Princes being the 4th. and
His the 7th. on that side.

Then the two next Heralds conducted up the Junior Knight Commissioner, the
Duke of Beaufort who offered Gold and Silver in like manner, and returned to
his Stall being the Eighth Stall on the Sovereign side by the East Passage or
Entrance on that side, making the like Reverences.

Lastly two other Heralds or Officers of Arms making their accustomed
Reverences Conducted up the two Junior Installed Knights together (being Pairs
or Fellows to each other, which the Commssioners were not) who making their
usual Obeysances offered Gold and Silver in manner as aforesaid, and returned
to their Respective Stalls, the Duke of Somerset to the 13th. or lowest Stall
on the Sovereign side, and the Duke of Northumberland to the 13th. or lowest
Stall on the Princes side, each being conducted thither by one Officer of Arms.

CHAP. X.
The Conclusion.
THE Offering thus performed, and the Knights remaining in their Respective
Stalls, the Officers of the Order at their peculiar Seat or Form, and the
Officers of Arms and Poor Knights at the Steps before the Altar flanking on
each side, Divine Service proceeded, and ending with particular Prayers for the
Sovereign and Knights Companions the Benediction was pronounced.

Whereupon a Virger Reverently conducted down the two Prebends from the Altar
to their own Seats among their Fellows in the Quire. Which done, Garter coming
from his Form and making his Reverences in the Choir, Summoned down all the
Five Knights Companions, viz. the two Junior first, and then the three other
one after another, who after their accustomed Reverences came and stood in the
Quire under their Respective Banners.

Then the poor Knights descended from the Steps before the Altar by two and two
the Junior first, and making their joint double Reverences in the middle of the
Quire, proceeded out of the Chapel; then the Prebends descending from their
Seats or Stalls into the middle of the Choir, made the like double Reverences
jointly, and going out two by two the Junior first, followed the Poor Knights;
Next to them the Heralds descended from the Steps before the Altar, and making
the like double Reverences jointly in the middle of the Quire, followed the
Brebends by two and two, the Pursivants first, then the three Officers of the
Order making the like Reverences followed the Officers of Arms, the Register in
the middle, Garter on the Right Hand and the Usher on the Left, lastly the five
Knights Companions in order followed the said Officers after having made their
respective Obeisance, viz. the Duke of Northumberland and Duke of Somerset
together being Fellows; Next the Duke of Beaufort, then the Duke of Albemale,
and lastly Prince George of Denmark.

Thus passing out of the Quire at the great West Door under the Organ, they
proceeded through the North Isle and so through the Cloisters, where the Poor
Knights and Prebends falling back to the Right and Left, the Officers of Arms,
and Officers of the Order conducted the said Knights to the Deans Lodgings,
their Trains being held up by the Quiristers.

And thus the Ceremony ended.

To which only it is thought fit to add the Styles of the three New Installed
Knights as they are Engraven in French on their Plates set up at the Back of
their respective Stalls, together with a Scheme of the 26 Stalls as they now
stand filled up by that present Installation.

The Style or Titles of Prince George of Denmark.
Du Tres-haut, Tres-puissant et Illustre Prince George, Prince Hereditaire de
Danemarc (Friar unique du Tres-haut, Tres-puissant et Tres-excellent-Prince
Christian cinquieme du Nom, par la Grace de Dieu, Roy de Danemarc Norvegue
etc.) et Chevalier du Tres-Noble Order de la Jartiere, Enstalle au Chasteau de
Windesor le VIII. Jour d' Auril. M.DCLXXXIIII.

In English thus.

The most High, most mighty and Illustrious Prince George, Hereditary Prince of
Denmark (only Brother to the most High, most mighty and most Excellent Prince
Christian the fifth of that Name, by the Grace of God King of Denmark, Norway,
etc.) and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garder. Installed at the Castle
of Windsor the 8th day of April. 1684.

The Arms and Quarterings, etc. are the same as his Brother the King of
Denmark's whose Stall is the 2d. Stall on the Sovereigns side, only
distinguished with a Label of three points Ermine, and ensigned with a Coronet
of Leaves and Pearls with one Arch.

The Style or Titles of the Duke of Somerset.
Du Tres-haut, puissant et Tres-noble Prince Charles Due de Somerset, Comte de
Hertford, Vicomte Beauchamp de Hache Baron Seymour de Troubridge et Chevalier
du Tres-noble Order de la Jartiere Enstalle au Chasteau de Windesor le huitieme
Jour d' Avril l'an MD.CLXXXIV.

In English thus.

The most high mighty and most Noble Prince Charles Duke of Somerset, Earl of
Hertford Vicount Beauchamp of Hache and Baron Seymour of Troubridge and Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter. Installed at the Castle of Windesor the
8th day of April in the year 1684.

The Banner and Plate consist of 6. Quarterings, viz. 1st the Augmentation, 2d.
Seymour, 3d. Sturmy, 4th. Beauchamp of Hache, 5th. Fitz-Williams, 6th. Prinne.

The Style or Titles of the Duke of Northumberland.
Du Tres-haut, Puissant et Tres-Noble Prince George Fitz-Roy Due et Comte de
Northumberland, Vicomte Falmouth et Baron de Pontfract, et Chevalier du
Tres-Noble Order de la Jartiere: Enstalle au Chasteau de Windesor le huitieme
Jour d' Avril l'an. MD.LXXXIV.

In English thus.

The most High, mighty and most Noble Prince George, Fitz-Roy Duke and Earl of
Northumberland, Vicount Falmouth and Baron of Pontfract, and Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter; Installed at the Castle of Windesor the 8th. day of
April in the year. 1684.

The Arms and Quarterings on the Banner and Plate are the Royal Arms with a
Battoon sinister Golone or Compone of 6 pieces Ermine and Azure.

FINIS.
A Scheme of the Stalls at WINDSOR, as they were filled up April the 8th. 1684.
2. 1. 1. 2. The King of Denmark. The Sovereign of the Order. The King of
Sweden. The Duke of York. 3 The Prince of Orange. The Prince Elector of
Brandenburgh. 3 4 The Prince Elector Palatine. Prince George of Denmark. 4 5
The Duke of Ormond. The Duke of Buckingham. 5 6 The Earl of Oxford. The Earl of
Strafford. 6 7 The Duke of Monmouth. The Duke of Albemarl. 7 8 The Duke of
Beaufort. The Earl of Bedford. 8 9 The Earl of Arlington. The Duke of
Southampton. 9 10 The Earl of Mulgrave. The Duke of Newcastle. 10 11 The Earl
of Danby. The Duke of Graston. 11 12 The Duke of Richmond. The Duke of
Hamilton. 12 13 The Duke of Somerset. The Duke of Northumberland. 13


