THE KINGS LETTER Intercepted coming from OXFORD. WITH A Joyful and true
Relation of th(...) Great victory obtained by Sir THOMAS FAIREAX, Sir William
Brereton, and Sir William Fairfax, against the Irish, at the raising of the
siege at Nantwich On Friday last January 26. 1643.

Delivered in a message to the Parliament. Wherein, Was slain

2 Lieutenant Col: 4 Captains. 200 Soldiers in the right wing, and many in the
left surprised.

6 pieces of Ordnance.

20 Carriages, wherein was great store of good plunder. 1700 Foot.

Taken prisoner:

1 Sergeant Mayor general.

8 Colonels.

14 Captains.

19 Lieutenants.

20 ensigns.

264 Gentlemen and other officers.

120 hoorse

4 Canoneers.

40 Popsh Priests.

126 Irish whors with long knives.

With another victory obtained by Colonel Massey at Gloucester who has surprised
1 Lieutenant Colonel and 8 Captains, besides other Officers and Common
Soldiers and a bark brought in to him laden with Arms and Ammunition.

LONDON (...)

Carolus Rex.
RIght trusty and right well beloved cousin, We greet you well by Our
Proclamation, which herewith we send you, you see our resolution, and the
grounds of that Our resolution, to advise with the members of both our houses
of Parliament, for the restoring of this Kingdom to its former peace and
happiness: At least We doubt not it will appear to all the world, and to
posterity, that there has not been such a concurrence in the bringing these
miseries upon it, or in completing that, by the invitation of this foreign
invasion, as is imagined: We shall therefore desire you that you will by no
means fail of giving your attendance at the time and place accordingly which in
respect of the high concernment of our service and the good of the whole
Kingdom, We shall not doubt of: And so We bid you heartily farewell.

A FULL RELATION Of the defeat given to the Cavalliers, in the siege before
Gloucester.
THE Enemy with great forces marched again toward Gloucester, and surrounded
the town, to stop provision from coming in, but Colonel Massey issuing out of
the town, fell upon their quarters; and slew many of them, and took prisoners.

One Lieutenant Colonel, eight Captains, and other officers and soldiers,
with their bag and baggage, and put the rest to flight: Colonel Massey has
also surprised a Bark laden with Arms and Ammunition, intended for the
Cavalliers, which will do him good service, especially, because his own
Ammunition is not yet come to him.

A JOYFVLL RELATION OF THE HAPPY SVCcesse of the PARLIAMENTS Forces at the
raising of the Siege from Nantwich, Jan. 26. 1643.
SIr Thomas Fairfax and Sir William Fairfax, being at Nottingham, marched from
thence unto Hinkley and there quartered; and from thence the next day they
marched to Bosworth, and so to Tamworth, where they quartered one night: from
whence they marched the next day to Stafford, and there joined with Sir William
Brewerton, with whom they marched to relieve Nantwitch, which was besieged by
the Irish Forces from Westchester, and Shrousbury, and raised the siege. The
Enemies being fled to their quarters, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir William
marched from Nantwich to Manchester, and there gathered a body of foot out of
Manchester and other parts in Lancashire, and caused a Fast to be kept for two
days, for the Enemy were of great strength, and the resiege was feared; The
Enemies cruelty did much grieve the Country, and accordingly as it was feared
the Enemy returned again to Nantwich, and laid close siege before it; and did
attempt to scale the works three several times, and shot almost 100 fiery hot
bullets, with a kind of fire balls to burn the Town. But blessed be God,
there was none of them that did any considerable hurt: the greatest harm the
Town sustained by those bals, was by one which light upon a stack of wood, and
fired part of it; which was quenched without doing any further mischief.

Captain Booth the Governor of Nantwich, a young man of about 21 years of age,
but of a valiant spirit, behaved himself bravely; his Soldiers consisting of
about 1200 in number, who withstood the Enemy bravely, and did good execution
upon them, and slew Lieutenant Colonel Boughton, and 4 Captains more: amongst
which, Captain Stamford is one, and kept the Town in despite of them Cap.
Booth still encouraging the soldiers, and promising unto them that he would
loose his life in their defense before he would yield up the town to such
traitorous Irish Rebels.

Yet Sir William Brewerton was in great fear of loosing the Town; and indeed
had not God wrought wonderfully for us it had been lost.

Sir Thomas Fairfax returning again from Manchester marched to Stafford again,
and joined with Sir William Brewerton; who joining their forces together
marched from thence again to relieve Nantwich, on Friday January the 26. with
about 6000 horse and foot, the enemy consisting of about 8000.

When our forces came near the Enemies quarters, they discovering our Forces,
came out of their trenches into the plain, and gave us battle; wherein our
Forces charged so hot on their right wing, that they caused the Lord Byron with
all their horse to run away, leaving only the foot to stand to it: By this
time there were slain of the right wing about 200, besides those that were in
the left wing, and the Foot were left to the mercy of our Forces: And their
horse hasted so fast away, that they threw away their Pistols, and fled for
their lives. The Lord Byron himself being one of the first that fled.

There were also a fort of Irish women, that were in the Enemies Camp: whose
office was to rob, and plunder, our men that fell: and with long knives which
they had hanging by their sides, to cut the throats of those that they found
not quite dead.

C. Booth with eight hundred issued out of Namptwich, and fell upon the back of
them, and so our forces surprised them all, with all their bag, and baggage: of
which here follows an exact list according to the copy, by the Scout brought
to the Parliament.

(...)the Prisoners taken at the raising (...)e siege from Namptwich, Ian. 26.
1644.
SEjeant-Major-Generall Gibson. Sir Michael Earnly, Colonel. Sir Richard
Fleetwood, Colonel. Colonel Monks. Sir Ralph Dewes Colonel. Colonel
Warren. Sir Francis Butler, Lieutenant-Colonell. Lieutenant-Colonell Gibs.
Major Hamond.
14. Captains.
ATkins. Lidington. Tinch. Disney. Fisher. Cook. Ward. Deane. Incas. Ledcote.
Deetes. Shotterwood. Bawbridge. Willis.
19. Lieutenants.
LOng. Norton. Row. Pawlet. Goodwin. Kinerstone. Dulaton. Pate. Mo^gell.
Strange. Shipworth. Ancars. Billingley. Cuftelion. Milliner. Bradshaw. Lionnes.
Golden. Smith.
26. Ensigns.
Brown. Brereton. Batch. Ihnes. Wright. Dampell. Southwood. Addise. Smith.
Vahan. Reise. Doreworth. Musgrave. Pennicocks. Danstermile. Elliard. Itlack.
Philips. Hewde. Thomas. Mo^gan. Jews. Goodfellow. Busbey. Terringham. Withers.
Ordnance 6 Pieces, Wom^n with long Common Soldiers 1700, Gentlemen of C(...)
20. Sergeants 41. Drums 40. Corporals 63. (...) 40. Horse 120. Coroners 2.
Quartermasters ^^ Canoniers 4. Carriages 20. Wherein was good s^^^ of rich
plunder.

A List of those that were slain.
Lieutenant Colonel Vain, Lieut Colonel Boughton, Captain Stamford, and 3
Captains more, 200 on the right Wing and many more on the left.

This Relation is justified to be true by the bearer hereof,

Richard Hunt.
To all Post-masters whom it may concern.
These are to require you forthwith upon the sight hereof to furnish the bearer
hereof, Richard Hunt, with two good sufficient Posthorses for the present
service of the Parliament. Hereof fail not. Given under my hand this 31 of
January 1643.

SAM. LVKE.
This is Published according to Order.

FINIS.

