A SERMON Preached the 30th of January at White Hall, 1664. Being the
Anniversary Commemoration of K. Charles the I, Martyred on that Day.

By Henry King Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Lower walk of the New-Exchange. 1665.

A SERMON Preached the 30th. of January at White Hall. 1664.
2 Chronicles. 35. Verse. 24, 25. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the Singing-men and the
Singing-women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this Day, and made them
an Ordinance in Israel; and behold they are written in the Lamentations.


WE are met in the House of Mourning, and I wish that Text of the Preacher, It
is better to enter into it than the Eccles. 7. 3.
House of Mirth, may prove as acceptable to you, as it is proper to the
occasion.

In compliance wherewith, my Text, in every part of it from Top to Bottom, is
hung about with Blacks to suit the just and solemn Mourning of this Day; A Day
wherein the Lord has called for Esa. 2. 12.
Weeping, and Mourning, and Girding with Sackcloth.

Yet not long since, This very Day, recorded in bloody Letters, was reckoned
the first Day in our unhappy Calendar: A Day of Liberty and Restoration to the
whole Kingdom.

Behold Joy and Gladness, (as it follows in the Prophet) slaying Oxen, and
killing Ver. 13.
Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine, in their large Thanksgiving Dinners,
and Solemn Feasts. What Liberty, no Man could tell, unless a Liberty to the
Sword, Jer. 34. 17.
to Rapine, and to Plunder. A liberty to profess all Religions except the
Right, and exercise any Law but That which was Prescribed.

May I not too truly apply to This Day, the words of Hezekiah? This is a Day of
Trouble, of Rebuke, and of Blasphemy: Esa. 37. 3.
Trouble to the whole Nation, Eternal Rebuke to the Actors, Blasphemy and
Reproach to the Protestant Religion, so stained by the Fact wrought on it, that
all the Waters which environ our Island can never wash it out: For where was it
ever known, that such a King was Murdered by the Sword of Justice, and
Pretense of Religion gave aim to the Assasinates Blow? when Those, who by their
Office were to Preach Peace, became the Trumpets of Rebellion; when every
Pulpit was made a Sconse, from whence no Platform shot more frequent Fire than
their Tongues did bitter Words, against the Church, and Psalm. 64. 3.
against Him who was the Nursing Father of It.

For this Cause, so much of our Sorrow as can be spared from our greater
Obsequies, may be allowed to lament this Scandal to the best Reformed Church of
England, when we find those Men acting by their sharp Principles, who desired
to be accounted most opposite to Them: Both assuming the Title of Sacerdotes
Pap. Massovius vit. Pauli 4t^.
Reformati, Reformed and Reforming Priests.

Yet need we not much wonder, since in all Ages no Rebellion brake out, which
had not the stamp of Religion to make it current. Florus tells us, the Civil
Disturbances of Rome borrowed from hence their Color, and had their Flamens
(who were their Priests) to blow them up. In our own Kingdom, Wat Tyler and
Jack Straw had one Ball a Priest, to plead for their Rising, in the Pulpit.

And Littestar, the Dyar of Norwich, who took upon Him the Title of King of
Commons (Suppressed and Hanged by Spenser the noble Bishop there) had his
Chaplains too.

The French History tells us the furious Cries of Boucher, Guarren, Fruardent,
with others, (Thirteen in number) All Chaplains to the Duke of Guise, in all
their Pulpits termed Charles the Ninth, their King, a Tyrant, and Favourer of
Heretics: Insomuch that the seduced Parisians changed their wonted
Acclamations of God save the King, to God save the Guise, Head of the Catholic
League, and Patron of Religion: The Tragical issue whereof was the Massacre of
so many Protestants, and shortly after, the Death of the King. A sad Glass to
show the Rise of our late Distempers here; where praying for the King was
prohibited by Order: And, (I speak upon knowledge) in some places, none
admitted to the Communion but those who fought against Him.

Not to trouble you further, John Knox, and others, were Chaplains in the
Scottish Rebellion, in which the Archbishop was murdered, the Churches
demolished, and the Queen forced to fly.

And if any doubt who were the Chaplains to make our People stumble in their
Duties, to solicit our own and the Churches troubles; If nothing appears under
Smictymnus his Mask, Archer and Lemuel Tuke (who acted open faced without their
Vizors) may sufficiently declare: The one whereof Preached it lawful to resist
the King; The other to kill Him.

These, and many more like these, were the Prologue to that cruel Tragedy on
this Day acted: And Chaplains to that general Mischief which the whole Kingdom
then groaned under.

And I dare boldly affirm, upon what Clod of Earth, in what Field soever, the
sharp Battles were fought, the Sparring Blows were made in the Pulpit.

If this Repetition be unpleasing, I beg pardon; it so little pleases me, That
from my Soul I wish there never had been cause to give it mention, or make it
any part in the luckless Subject of our History.

Yet since our Savior excused the Ointment expended on Him by the Woman, Mat.
26. 12, 13.
and would not have it forgot, as being done, to bury Him; I hope I may have
leave to reflect a little upon those Dead flies, whose only aim was to corrupt
the sweet Ointment of our Josiah's Name, which is like Ointment poured out,
perfuming all places, with the Example and Memory of his Virtues.

For what the Woman did to Christ in Piety, they did in Malice, to bury Him
too, at least to. Antidate his Funeral, by burying His precious Fame, his good
Name, before the fatal Stroke which brought his Body to the Grave.

Our Text's Subject is Josiah's Funeneral, 1.
They mourned for Josiah.

Where you have the general Train of 2.
Mourners, All Judah and Jerusalem.

Then the Particular, The Prophet Jeremiah 3.
lamented for Josiah: The Singing-men, and Singing-women spoke of Josiah in
their Lamentations to this Day.

The perpetuation of this solemn 4.
Mourning; And made them an Ordinance in Israel.

The Record kept of Them: Behold 5.
they are written in the Lamentations.

When we mention Josiah, we mention 1 Subject. Josiah.
the best Prince that ever sat upon the Throne of Judah: One who did 2 Kings
22. 2.
right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his Father.

One not less zealous for the House of the Lord, than for the Service in it:
For he caused the Temple to be Repaired, and the Law of God diligently to be
cap. 22. 3.
Read in it.

Yea, so great was His desire to restore the Temple to its former Luster, That
he took down all those Houses joining to 2 Kings 23. 7.
the House of God, which either Defiled, or Defamed it, by their Neighborhood.

But that Josiah is not my scope.

My Scene must here change from Judaea to Great Britain; from Judah's King to
our Own, who fell under worse hands than Pharaoh Necho. Verse. 21.


He fairly warned Josiah, and persuaded him to decline the Fight, wherein 2 Chronicles. 33. 20, 21.
God's Ordinance, which sent him against Euphrates, made his Arm too strong to
be resisted.

But our Pharaoh Necho, and his Accomplices, did all they could, by false Oaths
and Flatteries, to bring their Master within the Reach of their Blow, and take
the Anointed of the Lord in their Pits. Lament. 4 20.


A Fact so horrid, that it is easier to bewail in Tears, than utter in Words.

Indeed, the grateful Duty to a Dead Master, and the Allegiance to such a King,
make all expressions I can use, too narrow for the Argument; upbraiding my
Inabilities with that practical truth: Nihil difficilius quam magno dolori
paria Seneca Con sol. ad Polyb. cap. 22.
verba invenire. Nothing is more difficult than to match so great a Sorrow with
Language equal to it.

So that with Nazianzen, upon an occasion somewhat like this, I might wish
another Jeremy in my stead, (...) Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 21. in Laud. Athanas.
(...), who only was able to frame a Lamentation proportionable to the cause,
and invent a Threne, worthy of his excellent Pen, and of the Subject.

The Piety of our Josiah being not Inferior to that Elder Josiah, and his
Moral virtues every way equal.

So great and meritorious a Person as Josiah, is not to be narrowed by the
common Expressions of a bewailing Tongue, nor will any Rhetoric suffice,
unless assisted and supplied, where Words fall short, by the number of the
Mourners, 2. General Train of Mourners.
as here it was;

All Judah, Jerusalem, etc.

Nothing is so Natural as to Lament the Dead Man goes to his long home, and
the Mourners go about the Streets. Eccles. 12. 5.
-- Moesta phalanx Teucrique sequuntur.


The Stoics indeed, by their rigid precepts, Virgil, Aeneid. 11.
labored to seal up the fountains of our Eyes, pronouncing it unmanly for our
Sex to melt in Tears. Ennius was of the same humor: Nemo me lachymis decoret,
nec funera faxit; He would have no weeping at his Grave, nor Funeral solemnity:
Nay, Ludovicus Cortusius, Patavinus by his last Will, forbad Mourning Drexel.
Prodrom: Cap. 1.
for him, and because he would have no show of a Funeral, he ordered, that the
Black Monks, habited like Mourners, should not be invited to his Burial. But
Solon, wiser than all three, thought his Memory disparaged, if he deserved so
little of Lacedaemon, that none were found to bewail his Loss: His words were
(...) He did expect some Tears dropped over his Hearse, and some Train of
Mourners to attend him to his Funeral Pile.

They are miserable Men, who go out of the World, as it were in the Dark,
neither missed nor bewailed by any.

Josiah you see had many, All Judah All Judah and Jerusalem.
and Jerusalem. A less proportion of Mourners would not suit his Funeral.

When Masters of private Families Dye, those in the Household are Mourners by
Custom. But when the Pater Patriae, the common Father of the Kingdom, the Lord
Paramont, and Master of us all Dies, the whole Confluence of the People, by an
universal Summons, are called together as sharers in the Solemnity.

When our Savior was Born, there was Luke 2. 1.
a general Tax went from Augustus to be levied through the World.

Which Tax was but a concurrent shadow of the universal Homage, due to the New
Born King, whose Empire extended not over Judaea only, but the whole World,
as King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

And sure, when soever his great Vicegerents leave the World, it is fit, that
their Death, which is (as one calls it) Fatalis Nativitas, a Fatal Birth,
should be Solemnized by a Tribute of Tears levied upon the whole Kingdom.

If that Tyrant John Basiliwick, D. of Muscovy, exacted Phialas sudore plenas,
a Tribute of Sweat wiped from his Subjects brows, and kept in Glasses and
Bottles for him to see; sure a good Prince dying may expect a Subsidy of Tears
Bottl'd up, and Sorrow kept in store, to weep bitterly for such a Loss.

It is held an usual Duty at the King's Coronation, to bring Contributary wood
to make a Bonfire: It Is then (Ratione Contrariorum) an equal Duty, when He is
un-crowned by Death, to bring some Contributary water falling from our eyes, to
Quench that fire again.

Nicephorus Gregoras writes, that in their Naemia, those mournful Exequies for
the Lib. 10.
Emperor, the People wished the whole River of Nilus drawn up into their Eyes,
that so they might raise a Mourning proportionable to the Loss. And at the
Burial of Titus the Mourning was so general, That omnes tanquam in propria
doluerunt Eutropius in Tito.
orbitate, as Eutropius expresses it; All sorts of men thought themselves
concerned in that Precious Loss, Lamenting as disconsolate Orphans deprived of
their Father.

Nay Barbarians themselves who had been conquered by the Sword of Germanicus
did bear their share in the sorrow for his Death.

I know Buchanan whose study was to Buchanan dejure Regni apud Scotos.
diminish Princes and contract their Grandeur, tells us, that a King, though he
be better and greater than any particular Subject, yet He is less than the
whole Aggregate and Multitude of His Subjects.

But a Text more authentic than his tells us, in the Person of King David,

Thou art better than ten Thousands of us, which you must not take for a
confined 2 Samuel 18. 3.
number of so many, but Indefinite, nay Infinite the Original is (...).

So here you see the King set in skale with the whole Kingdom, for All Judah
and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

Which transcendent Lamentation grew into a Proverb, Like the mourning of Zach.
12. 11.
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo.

Where give me leave to tell you, Though Abulensis thought this Hadadrimmon a
person then King of Syria, in whose assistance Josiah engaged against Pharaoh
Necho, who therefore in gratitude bewailed his death so excessively, that it
became Proverbiall; Yet Baronius will have Hadadrimmon to be only the place
where Josiah fell. Baron Annal


This Rite of mourning had Josiah, And though our own Josiah deserved no less
then He, and had it from all that understood His value; yet at the time of his
cutting off, it was reputed so great a crime to express any show of sorrow for
Him, that a mourning suit was looked on as the Livery of a Malignant and an
affront to the State, may Libell upon the Murderers.

My self knew some assaulted merely for their Habit, and hardly escaping with
life.

By which you see the misery of Judaea, under his Captivity, translated to
England, where Ne fletus quidem gratuitus, It Hieron in Sophoniam.
was dangerous to mourn, and men were forced to fine for their sorrow expressed
at the murder of our unparalleled Josiah.

The Large and numerous Train which attend the Funeral show the Greatness of
the Person, but the Quality of the Mourners speak his Virtue and Merit: 3. The
Prophet Jeremiah lamented, etc.
It did so here when the Prophet Jeremiah lamented for Josiah.

The better the Persons are that attend, the greater is the honor done to the
Dead.

When Christ wept at the Grave of John 11. 63.
Lazarus, the Jews looked on it as a special Evidence of his affection, See how
he loved him. And though Saul deserved not such an honor from Samuel, having
so often revolted from the command of God sent by that Great Prophet, yet was it
the demonstration of a scarcely paralleled Love, that Samuel mourned for Saul
all his Days, and this before his Death.

That the Prophet Jeremiah did no less for Josiah, the Threnes and Lamentations
by him left to Posterity show, diverse whereof were particularly applicable to
him, telling the World how well this excellent Prince deserved, Like 2 King.
15. 25.
whom there never was any before, neither succeeded any to equal him.

That the Subject of our Funeral this Day solemnized was as meritorious as
Josiah, I speak not in the custom of those who in their funeral Sermons often
times belly the Dead, atributing Virtues to them whereof, whilst they lived,
they were not guilty. But my own knowledge, confirmed by an attendance upon him
for many years, makes me confidently rise to this Superlative.

The Hebrews make Jeremiah Chief Mourner; Maxim lugebat: which was partly out
of Pity, for that he ran upon a Danger whereof he was forewarned, Justin
Martyr.
indeed forbidden to encounter Pharaoh Necho, as Justin Martyr infers. But
especially in remembrance of His Virtue and Piety: His singular love to Gods
Service and care of the Temple, both in adorning it, and ordering the Provision
for the Priests.

That our Gracious Josiah took as great care to preserve the Churches
Patrimony, and protect the Priestly Office, against those Sacrilegious Harpies
who made the spoil of both their aim, let the charge given to his Treators at
Uxbridge testify, with several other expressions in his Declarations.

Therefore Jeremiah, and the Schools of the Prophets had reason to lament.
Discipulorum inter jubeo plorare catervos,

And the House of Levi had cause to Zach. 12. 14.
Mourn Apart.

And Plorent Sacerdotes, Let the Priests weep betwixt the Porch and the Joel. 2
17.
Altar.

Many whereof, when He was cut off had neither maintenance from the Altar at
which they served, nor so much as a Porch to shelter their unhoused heads from
the injury of the weather.

The loss of such a Patron might justly cause the whole Church to Lament, To
turn the Songs of the Temple into Howlings, Amos 8. 3
to change our Anthems into Dirges and Ditties of Lamentation, as it did in
verse. 10.
Josiah's days, when the Singing Men and Singing Women spoke of Josiah in
their Lamentations. The Singing Men and Singing Women made mention of Him.
spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations.


What strange Contrarieties does Nature and Custom, put betwixt our Beginning
and our End.

When we come into the World Tears and Lamentation are our Prologue.

The first Voice I uttered, was Crying as all others use. But at our going
hence, Music Wisd 7. 3.
Ushers us to our Grave. When I consider the truth of that saying, Musica in
luctu importuna, Music in a time of mourning is an importunity both unwelcome
and unseasonable,

May I not justly wonder what use the Singing Men and Singing Women had at
Funerals?

Might we not say, as God does, Take Amos 5. 23.
from me the noise of your Songs, I will not hear the Melody, etc.

Sure those who feel the weight, and know the apprehension of a just grief,
raised from a deserving Cause, need no Helpers to improve it.

And yet in all Ages, and in all places, there have been such.

The Romans had their Praeficas (Tanquam in hoc ipsum Praefectas says one) who
like Counterverse led to the Chorus in their Dirges for the Dead. And Jeremy
the Prophet bids Call for the Mourning Jerem. 9. 17:
Women Skilful to Lament.

It Is true, Threnodiae primum a Simonide inventae. Their Funeral Songs were
first invented by Symonides in Greece. But besides these, they had (...),
Instruments used at Funerals according to the Scaliger.
Quality of the Person who dyed. For meaner People Iibias, Pipes; for the
Noble, Trumpets.

When Jairus his Daughter lay dead, the Text tells you, there were Minstrels,
Math. 9. 23.
who were put out by our Savior. The Reason given by the Jews for coming to
those places was, that by their sad Tones they might work upon the Affections
and increase the Mourning. We in our practice have none but Bells for the
Common sort, and Trumpets for the Prince.

And surely it is not merely conceit, that though they are the same Bells,
which Ring at a Coronation, and at a Funeral, yet our Passion, intent upon the
Subject, believes they sound more sad and heavy for this Last than for the
first.

It Is just so in the Trumpet, whose shril and Lofty Sounds give spirit to a
Triumph, but at their Masters Hearse their dull and hoarser Accents plainly
seem to groan.

Yet this is not all: However the Hebrew reads the Singing Men and Singing
Women, the Greek has it (...), The Nobles of either Sex. And justly might they
so do.

Ammianus Marcellinus, bewailing the death of the Emperor, says, Post cujus
Lachrimosum interitum, unius exitio quisque imaginem Ammianus Marcellinus.
periculi sui considerans, documento recenti similia formidabat. His Fall did
warn all those who were in the next station of honor below him, That Their
condition He was shaken, could not be long secure, Ululat Abies quia cecidit
Cedrus, Well Zach. 11. 2.
might the Firr-tree Lament being of lower growth, when the Lofty Cedar fell.
It was a Prophetic warning given by our excellent Josiah, when He found some
of His Nobles cool and staggered in their Duty toward Him, They themselves
would one day find the mischief, nor must look to retain their Luster long,
when He their Great Luminary was Eclipsed, Per quem Nobiles Nobiliores facti;
As when the Fountain of Honor was diminished, the Streams derived from it must
needs fail.

He, I say, gave them This Prophetic warning, and some of them found it
verified.

For when the proud Levellers of that time took the confidence to invite the
Peers to quit their Station, and sit with them in the House of Commons,

Upon a Contest betwixt a very mean Person and a great Peer, one of the most
Insolent of the Party, to whom Complaint was made, scornfully answered, He
hoped to see the time That a faithful blue Apron should be as good as a Blue
Ribbon.

Therefore most justly Plorent Proceres, Let the Peers mourn no less than the
Priests. Both which have Reason to speak of Josiah to this Day in their
Lamentations.

To perpetuate the Memory of which Solemn Lamentation, That neither the Person
nor the occasion should be unremembred,

They made them an Ordinance in Israel. 4. And made them an Ordinance, etc.


We have known many Ordinances in our late wicked Times to carry on the War
and prosecute the Life of our Josiah.

It Is well we have here one Ordinance to bewail the Facts, and Repent our
selves.

The Prophet David calls the Grave the Land of forgetfulness, where we forget
and are forgotten. Psalm. 88. 12.


And elsewhere He Complains, I am forgot as a Dead man out of mind. Psalm. 31.
21.


But Josiah found a Preservative to keep his memory alive after Death.

As the Daughters of Israel by an established Judge. 11. 40.
custom yearly bewailed the Daughter of Jephtha, so did the surviving
Israelites Lament Josiah, and so we our late Martyred Sovereign. The Children
Zach. 7. 3.
of the Captivity had their solemn weeping in the fifth month; we have ours in
the first.

It was the Old fashion at Funerals, when they committed the Body to the Earth,
to Salute and take their sad farewell of the Deceased Party at once; we shall
not need to do that, nor yet bespeak our Incomparable Josiah, as Virgil did the
Brave and Noble Pallas, Salve aeternum mihi maxim Palla-Aeternumque vale. O
thou who were as eminent for thy goodness, as great in thy Titles, Receive our
last Valediction in the Tears of us who are left behind.

Here is an Ordinance to keep Thee Fresher, than all the spices which Embalm
thy Body.

Nicephorus writes that in Chabda, a City in India, when the Husband dyed, the
wife Niceph. Calixto Lib. 8. Cap. 38.
was a perpetual Mourner at his Grave.

Should we follow the Son of Syrachs rule, to Weep for our Loss as he is
worthy, we should never give over, never be out of Mourning. But truly say,
Vigilant quod me i sine fine dolores.

A story tells us, that at Zeilan in Asia, the Inhabitants believe Adam and Eve
to have Purchase Pilgrims Asia. lib. 5. cap. 17.
wept three hundred years for their Murdered Son Abel; from whose Tears a puri
fying water sprang wherein Pilgrims washed.

I dare not say what a Torrent shall grow from our Sorrow for so Inexpressible
a Loss; but the Duration of it shall, if the World lasts so long, Treble this
Account of Time.

The Apostle says, Abel, though Dead, speaks yet: so does our Dead Sovereign
Heb. 11. 4.
speak this Day from every Pulpit, nor will the Voice of his Blood be silenced
whilst there is a Tongue to proclaim or Memory to retain it.

And as the famous Egyptian Synophanes, having lost his Son, Statuam dolori
consecravit, Consecrated to Sorrow a Pillar to stand as his Monument: so in our
Ordinance, for the perpetuating of this day (though other Tomb or Statute He
has none) we raise a Column to the memory of his Precious Name, which malice
cannot stain, or Time decay.

And for an Inscription upon this Pillar the sighs of a whole Land shall be
Recorded, and the Lamentation of a people never worthy of such a Prince.
Turkish History p. 476.


Bajazet these cond, in token of his Sorrow for his Son, wrote his Letters in
Black Paper with white Characters.

We need not put our grief into such Fantastic Dress as he did, seeing our
Loss is more nobly writ in Mourning Hearts and Thoughts suitable to the
Occasion: All which endorsed upon our Looks, and bound together, are sufficient
to make a Volume large as Ezekiels Ezekiel. 2. 10.
written within and without with Lamentations and Mournings and Woe.

Unto these the Last clause in the Text seems to refer you.

Behold, they are written in the Lamentations. 5. Written in the Lamentations.


What Lamentations for Josiah these are I dispute not: Some believe They were
not those extant in the end of Jeremies Prophecy, at least not all of them, but
framed purposely for him, though lost by the injury of Time, or neglect of such
who ought to have preserved them.

Sure I am we can never want matter of Lamentation for our unparalled Josiah:
Our Annual Sorrow, not apt to grow barren by continuance, will prompt us to New
forms suitable to their Argument.

First, whilst we consider the Person, Endowed with all the Virtues and
perfections which might adorn a Prince.

Secondly, when we reflect not only upon his Loss, but upon the manner of it,
and the Circumstances of his Death, sufficient to wring out Tears from Marble.

Whilst we consider his Virtues, I may truly pronounce, Never did any sit
upon the English Throne, who could in all perfections match Him,

As Niceph. Gregoras of the Emperor, so may I of Him; (...), I cannot recount
all his Virtues, and without praevarication I dare omit none which I know.

His Religion was so constant in the practice of it, That not all the Glories
of the Court, exhibited in their most solemn Revels and Masks, could divert,
nor His Journies of Recreation, when He came home wet and weary, could
interrupt it: I am able to give signal instances in both.

His Temperance never stained by any excess of Meat or Drink

His Chastity never tempted to those Wanderings which Beauty invites.

Let his profession made to some of his Royal Branches, the Night before his
Jan. 29. 1648.
Death, witness that.

His strength of Reason and Acuteness of Judgment the Conference in the I Will of
Wight testifies, which was managed Chiefly by himself against all the Knot of
Divines (so they are called) there combined to oppose him; who, when They
neither had Ingenuity to submit to his Reasons, nor any Arguments of their own
to convince Him, Those weak Opponents left Him with this Complement, -- That
they wished such a Pen, in the hand of such Abilities, might ever be employed
in a Subject worthy of it.

The same was evidenced before in his Intercourse at New Castle with Mr.
Hinderson; who of an Antagonist in Dispute proved a Convert, and upon His
Deathbed, not only confessed the rare Endowments of his Royal Master, but left
it as a Legatory Charge to his Contrymen, That they should value Him as a
Jewel whose worth they hitherto understood not. Withal professing, That he
believed him no whit inferior to the Best of all the Kings in Judah.

Nay, I dare be bold to affirm, without Partiality or Assentation, That all the
virtues which singly adorned Every one of them were United and Conjoined in
Him. -- Sparguntur in Omnes, Claudian.

In te mista fluunt.


For the Excellency of His Pen, let me refer any to the Declarations sent to
the Parliament, and his Answers to theirs; which whosoever judicially weighs,
will find his wrote by so Masterly a Hand, that in respect of theirs, they
looked like Tintarits or Holbens Pieces compared to a Painter of Signs.

Odi istam quadrante dignam Eloquentiam: Hieron.
so little weight did Those pension'd Scriblers hold, compared to him.

And truly that Cardinal of France did not Him more Right, or himself Honor,
in any thing, than in that Emblem (said to be his) wherein a single hand was
deciphered holding a Great Pen, and an infinite Number of lesser Pens held up
against it; which verified in Him the old saying which you shall find mentioned
in Aullus Gellius, Unus Cato mihi pro centum Millibus, et Plato instar omnium:
One like him might stand against an hundred thousand Peruse his Cabbinet, for
the opening whereof a Commitee of Picklocks was appointed; who, after a
Studious Search, and long sumbling about it, discovered nothing, but what was
visible to the whole Kingdom, His Resolution to adhere to the Protestant
Religion, and constant affection to His Royal Consort, That Excellent Lady! Who
never refused Trouble Abroad, nor feared Danger at Home, when she might any way
assist Him in his Distress.

Which was plainly seen, when at one Time her Return from Holland was welcomed
by a Bullet shot from the mouth of a Cannon: And at another time putting to
Sea, She had a Chase Piece sent after Her for a farewell.

All which Hazards then, and Afflictions since, when exiled from Her Own, she
suffered, like that Undaunted Queen Zenobia, with so much Magnanimity and such
high Resolution, as became the Daughter of Her Great Father Henry the fourth.

And I heartily wish, Her Story may be particularly transmitted to Posterity,
that the Example of so Peerless a Wife, and the Barbarous usage she underwent,
may never be forgot.

Where give we leave to say, Though the Rifling this Cabbinet proved one of the
highest Honors as well to the Owner as to Her, yet was it by Those (whose
Valor was always less than their Spite) intended a Brand of Eternal
Defamation. Nor ever can the Actors acquit Themselves from the baseness of the
Action, whereof a Noble Enemy Would never have been Guilty.

When there was hot war betwixt Philip King of Macedon, and the Thebanes, whose
Scouts had intercepted some Letters which passed betwixt the King and his Queen
Olympia, Mother to Alexander the Great, without Violating the seals They sent
them back, holding it an unmanly insolence to pry into the written passages
betwixt Man and Wife.

But why do I mention the demeanor of a Noble Enemy, compared to those who in
all their Actings (I say in all) declared, that They never understood the Rules
either of humanity or Honor.

And as they used the Cabbinet, so did they that Incomparable Jewel found in it
too, Our Blessed Kings Portraiture, Which those infamous Raylours, whom the
Proud Faction kept in pay, went about to persuade the world was none of His.
Did not the Papers, all writ by his own hand, refute that Libel, Look upon the
Matter, and you may Conclude, None but the Heart of a King Enlarged by God
could Indite It; And if you consider the Style, Loquela prodit, No Pen I ever
knew, either then, or since, but His own, could write it.

One of them, and indeed the most Malicious in the Pack, who calls himself
Iconoclastes, so shamelessly rails, That as St. Paul said to Simon Magnus, so
might I to him, Thou art in the Gall of Bitterness: And as the Apostle charged
Act. 8. 23.
Elymas the Sorcerer for Mischief and perverting the Truth; so it is very
memorable Act. 13. 10.
This Wretch had the fate of Elymas, Struck with Blindness to his Death.

There is mentioned in the Prophet Scriptura Ezekiae; The writing of Hezekiah:
Esa. 38. 9.
What this was I will not dispute. But sure I am, Our Hezekiah has left the
written Account of His Solitude and Sufferings upon so firm a Record, that the
Incomparable Author needs no Monument but his Book. That is in Nazianzen's
Phrase (...), a Living column. Gregor Nazianz. Orat in Laudem Basilii.


Nor needs he any sheet of Lead to enwrap Him: His own precious Sheets will
preserve Him, And cause admiring Posterity to look upon Him as a Second
Ecclesiastes, sadly preaching to the world the Misery of Mankind, and the
vanity of all humane Glories, verified in the Greatest of Men, and in the Best
of Princes.

If the Loss of so Excellent a Person as this may justly raise our Lamentation:
The Manner and Circumstance which brought Him to His End must needs increase it.

To parallel which unhappy Passages, I never found any History Divine or
Humane, excepting only the History of His Great Masters sufferings under the
Jews.

In his Meditations upon Death at Carisbrook He tells the world, As he had
leisure enough, so cause more than enough, to Meditate and prepare for Death,
knowing there were but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes.

And els-where He professes it his Greatest Comfort, That he had the Honor to
imitate his Saviors Example in suffering for Righteousness, though obscured by
the fowlest charges of Tyronny and Injustice. page 146.
How did he Rejoice and bless God on that very day, which was to Him his last
on Earth, when from that worthy Praelate^ who had leave then to attend him, he
understood that Chapter of Matthew the Seven and Twentieth, which is the History
of our Saviors passion, was not chosen by him to suit his purpose, but was the
proper Lesson appointed by the Rubriok and order of the Church for the Morning
Service? I say, how did he rejoice, That his own sufferings held such
Conformity with his Saviors, unto whom in very, few hours he was ready to
resign Himself!

Indeed, whilst I recount the steps and passages which carried Him to His
Grave, There is scarcely any Circumstance of our Blessed Saviors Passion, with
Humility and Duty be it spoken) unto which his carried not some resemblance.

The Clamor of the Jews upon the First (Away with him) and the Tumultuous Luke
23. 18.
Exclamations of an enraged People upon the Last.

Caiaphas Prophecy upon the First, Joh. 18. 14.
That One must dye for the People;

And Cromwells Profession heard to fall from him at Childerly, near Cambridge,
when he was in the Armies Power, against the Last; It was not fit that Man
should live.

The Tampering with Judas to Betray him, I draw not into the Parallel, I must
not say he was Betrayed, but Parted with He was.

And yet the High Price set upon him carries this Excuse; perhaps as those who
expose Land to Sale ina very high demand, unto which they believe the purchaser
would not rise, do in effect deny the Sale; so I hope this Price, which they
could not expect might be easily laid down, showed a desire to Keep Him still
Themselves.

Yet when this was done, and His implacable Enemies had his Person in their
power, Though they wanted not Will to Destroy him, They wanted a color for
their Murtherous Purpose.

When Christ was brought to Pilate by the Jews, and He plainly told them he
found no fault in him, They replied they Luke 23. 4, 14.
had a Law, and by That Law, he was to Die.

But in this case Our Jews had no Law: The Law was yet to make, and the Heads
of the proud Faction laid together resolved to erect anew, One of Cassius
Mensuraque Juris Vis erat.
his Tribunals, and write the Law thereby enacted like Dracoes, in Blood; I
mean their High Court of Justice.

Whose Character the Psalmist gives Psalm. 94. 20, 21.
you; They imagine mischief as a Law. They gather them together against the
Soul of the Righteous, and condemn the Innocent Blood.

But this brought not their design to effect. Quomodo te torques, O Malitia? O
Malice, how do thou torture thy brain! Now they have invented a Law, They
cannot find a Judge to Execute It.

The Office is tendered to all the Robe here left behind. Amongst whom (I speak
it to their Reputation, and the Counterballance of many errors which might be
imputed during the distempers) not one was found to accept the Office; All of
them leaving it to the Lawmakers themselves, and saying in effect (as Pilate
to the Jews) Take ye him, and Joh. 18. 31.
Judge him according to your own Law.

Until a Man at last appeared, capacitated only by his Ignorance and
Impudence: This wretch Commissioned by them, as Doeg the Edomite was by Saul 1.
Sam. 22. 18.
for the Murder of Ahimelech, Fall thou upon him, undertook the cruel Task.

And truly in the Manage of that foul Business, Pilate showed himself the more
Civil Person; Indeed, the Better Christian.

Pilate, upon the Evidence given in by the Jews (to show that nothing alleged
by them convinced his Judgment) Took Water and washed his hands, Mat. 27. 24.
professing he was Guiltless of the Blood of that Just Person.

But that Purple Radamanth professed Nothing should satisfy him, But to wash his
hands in His Sovereign's Blood.

Besides, when Our Savior stood silent amidst the Clamorous Accusations Joh.
19. 10.
of the Jews, Pilate invited the Prisoner to speak, Answerest thou nothing?
Marc. 15. 4.
etc.

But this Barbarous Wretch, who sat in Pilate's place, denied his Sovereign
the Liberty of answering for himself; Sir, I must interrupt you, you may not be
permitted to speak of Law or Reason: (Alas, these were not the Rules of their
proceeding.) The Authority of the People is Superior here, and (whatever God
says to the Contrary), you are now Subordinate and Subject to Them.

This was the sense of that Reverend Praesidents speech in this Case, though
contrary to Pilate's, who was the Praesident and Prefect of Judaea.

Let me proceed in my Parallel; If the Mocks and Derisions of the Soldiers
Mat. 27. 29.
added to the sufferings of Christ, Ours did the same to Their King, using Acts
of the highest Scorn, even to the Interrupting his private Devotions, and words
(if possible) worse than their Actions;

Spitting in his face, as in His Masters, from rotten unwholesome mouths not
Mat. 26. 67.
worthy to be named here.

Nay, upon the Day when that fatal Sentence was pronounced, To sever the Wisest
and Best Head in His Three Kingdoms from His Body, a wretched miscreant, whose
best education was from the Dray-cart, then sitting as one of the Judges (in
which ungratious Pack there were few of better breeding) had the Impudence to
say unto him, Now Stroaker cure thy self: Alluding to those Miraculous Cures
performed by the Regal-Touch, which mock was equivalent to that of the Jews:

He saved others Himself He could not Mat. 27. 42. Luke 23. 33.
save.

I have but one more, Their Obstinacy and Impenitence for the Murder
committed; which appears, when it was moved in the House wherein they sat,
that the Names of all those Regicides, who had the confidence to condemn their
Sovereign, might in all places for which They served be engraven in Plates of
Brass, that Posterity might never forget such renowned Patriotts. Poor deceived
Men! As if that sinful Act of theirs were not, like the Sin of Judah, engraven
with a Pen of Iron, to be recorded Jer. 17. 1.
at their Final Account.

I beseech you now judge, what does this Impudence of Theirs differ from the
Cry of the Impoenitent Jews, His Blood be upon us, and upon our Children. Mat.
27. 25.


And truly, I speak it with much Christian Sorrow; It has been observed, That
not One of those Men who Murdered Him, at the time of his Execution did
express the least poenitent Remorse for the Bloody Fact by Them committed.

Whether then our Jewish Sanedrim, Our High Court of Justice, did not in all
particulars, at least match the Jews, if not exceed them, Let the World judge.

Nor indeed know I any thing which might conclude them Not Jews, But that They
wanted the Seal of their Cursed Covenant, I mean That Circumcission, which the
Law of Moses and the Law of the Land appoints for such horrid Murderers.

Think not, I beseech you, That I come to whet the Sword of Justice, or sharpen
the Ax, my Office is rather to blunt it.

My intent of coming to this place is to invite Mourners fit for such a
Funeral; as all Judah and Jerusalem for the first Josiah, so The whole Kingdom
and the City, for the Celebration of our Own Josiah's exequies.

For All are involved in the misery of this Day; In one kind or other all were
Contributors unto it, Not only Those who voted in the Cursed sentence, But
Those who voted their Commission to Sit. All Those who by their Raised Forces
abetted the Bloody Fact; All Those who approved it when it was Done; All Those
who did not endeavor to hinder it, if they had Power: Lastly, All Those who do
not heartily detest the Bloody Fact, and bewail the Person taken from us, with
a Lamentation worthy so Irreparable a Loss.

Well may I say to the whole Kingdom, as Christ to the Women who followed Him
Lamenting to his Cross, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for
your selves. So may I bid Luke 23. 28.
the Sons and Daughters of our Jerusalem, weep, not so much for Him, as for
your selves and for your Children; Who All, more or less, were instrumental in
the Tragedy of this Day.

All Ages, Old and Young: With sorrow must we remember the time when Old men,
who needed a Staff to under prop them, Tied to their Swords, with feeble Knees
knocking one against the other faster than the Drum beat, to show their good
will to the Cause, went tottering about the Streets: Nay, Young Boys, as if
they had been taught to suck in Their Parents Rebellion with their Milk,
marched up and down in a warlike manner.

All Conditions and Professions, whether of Law or Gospel: What the First did
too many can well remember: And what the Last did, This whole City yet rings
of. Nay, in that Sphere where I am placed, I dare affirm, no Romance yields
Example of more Lunatic prancks than some played, who transformed themselves
from Ministers to Captains and Colonels.

A strange Metamorphosis! We read in Esaias of Swords converted into Plow-Shares
Esa. 2. 4.
and Spears into Sithes: But, till of late, never heard of Ink-horns converted
into Bandileres, and Pens into Pistols.

And as all Conditions, so all Sexes, concurred in the production of this
mischief.

We had a Maiden Troop raised and maintained by their Contribution who went
under that Style: Nay, in that City which my self have best reason to know, A
Band of Women led by One, who took upon Her the Office and Title of a Captain,
with Drums beating, and Colors flying, marched daily through the Streets.

And to show, This Sex is almost as good for Fortification as for Fight, at
that time when in These very Streets the Drum, by a Ridiculous and Scandalous
Beat, called together Men of the Spade and Mattock, to go dig in the Works cast
up to keep out their King; some Ladies, to express their Zeal to the Cause,
appeared upon the Ramparts, and set their hands, not accustomed to such Tasks,
unto the Spade.

That virtuous Woman, whom Solomon in his Character describes, deals in Prove.
31. 13. 19.
Wool and Flax, not Iron; And lays Her hand to the Distaff, not the Spade.

Wherefore upon this occasion I cannot but remember, that when our Late Master
was told diverse Ladies wished ill to his Cause; He replied, He was confident no
Woman of Virtue and Honor would be against Him.

I do not summon These Daughters of Jerusalem to weep at this Funeral; Tears
Dropped from such Eyes upon this Glorious Dust would dishonor it: Nor am I so
skilful an Herald as to tell where, to Rank these Ladies for the Cause, unless
with the Chaplains for the Covenant: Let them weep together, and lament the
several Scandals, by either of them brought, by the One upon Their Sex, by the
Other upon their Function.

I come hither (in the Prophet Zephanies Zephaniah 3. 18.
Phrase) To gather them that are Sorrowful for the Solemn Assemblies, The Fasts
and long winded Exercises intended only to draw on That Mischief which we This
Day bewail, And unto whom the Reproach of these Transactions is a Burden. Ibid.


Such as These whom I have mentioned have work enough To weep for Themselves.
As indeed we all have, and To Cover the Altar with our Tears. Mal. 2. 23.


Nor is it our Duty to weep only, but to Pray.

The Prophet bids us come with weeping and Supplications. Jer. 31. 9.


In the first to Lament our own Sins which were contributors to this
Irreparable Loss: In the Last to Deprecate the future Miseries which, upon the
Account of His Blood, hang over this Nation.

When the Lamenter cries The Lam. 5. 16.
Crown is Fallen, He goes on, Woe unto us for we have Sinned.

It Is True that, sometimes Plectuntur Achivi, The People are punished for the
Princes fault: As at David's Numbering the People, The Sheep died for the
Shepherds Offense: Quid Oves istae? cries David.

But Samuel tells Israel, when God 1. Sam. 12. 14.
had given them a King, If they continued in Their Obedience, not rebelling
against his Command, They should Enjoy their King: But if ye shall do wickedly,
Verse. 25.
ye shall be consumed both ye and your King.

I can therefore impute to None but our selves, The Loss of Our King. For Those
many Crying Sins of the Land, was Our Glorious Sun Darkened at the Height of His
Life's Noon, and His Spreading Beams quenched in His own Blood. According to
that Threat from God by His Prophet Amos: I will cause the Sun to go down at
Noon, and Amos 8. 9.
Darken the Earth in the Clear Day.

We have therefore Just Cause to Pray, that the Happy Light sprang from the
Loins of our Late Buried Sun may long continue His Luster, not lessened by our
unthankfulness, nor darkened by Our Sins.

That, according to the Example of so unparalled a Parent, He may continue a
Patron of the Protestant Religion, and Protector of the Liberties of His
Subjects; As, Blessed be God, He does.

Lastly, That as He happily Inherits His Kingdoms, so He may Inherit His
Virtues too: But that those Virtues may never be put to that Cruel Bloody Test
unto which the Piety and Patience of His Martyred Father were, this Day sixteen
years, Put:

That God, who has Power to grant, and Will to assent, when He is faithfully
supplicated, Accept our humble Supplications, for His Beloved Son's sake our
Gracious Intercessour.

AMEN.

