A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the R' Reverend Father in God BRYAN, Lord
Bp. of WINCHESTER. At the Abbey Church in Westminster. April 24. 1662.

By HENRY L. Bp. of Chichester.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Lower Walk in the New Exchange. 1662.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the Right Reverend Father in God BRYAN,
Lord Bp. of Winchester.
At the Abbey Church in Westminster, April 24. 1662.
Precious in the Sight of the Lord is the Death of His Saints. Psalm. 116.15
I Need not tell you the occasion of our Meeting; The sad Object lying before
your Ey declares that. And though He who is gone be principally concerned in
drawing you to this House of Mourning, yet must ye not repute your selves
wholly unconcerned, The benefit will redound to you, who Eccl s. 7 3.
who know by whom ye are told how good it is to enter into it; I wish ye may
think so too.

I read of one Philoromus Galata who was so much in love with Death, he lived
some years in a Tomb to prepare Himself for it

This Spectacle, and this Discourse tends to this Preparation; So that I hope
ye will not repent an hours stay here with me.

The Grave is commonly as powerful an Orator as the Pulpit, and by presenting
the fears of an III Death instructs us in the Rules of a Good Life: My
assurance, is that as the winding Sheet fits every Body by dilating or
contracting it self to each ones size, so my discourse will suit it self to
every Hearer. Like Philipp's Boy, it holds out to Youth a Skull, to Age, a
Coffin.

Who next amongst us is likely to fall into this low Center may be doubtful;
It Is sure at one time or other we all must: And probably we shall not all of us
a few days hence meet here again.

Therefore wheresoever that final Lot may chance to fall, whether on some
Hearer, or on the Speaker, You will allow this Text a pious remembrancer to
Those who stay behind, and an antidated valediction to those who next go hence.
So then as St. Paul told the Corinthians; Whether it be I or You, so I Preach,
1 Cor. 15 11.
and so Ye justly must believe, That happy shall their condition be in the
Next world, who after a Religious life dye well in This.

For Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of His Saints.

I trouble you not with any Curious but a Plain Division. Division
The First Joint whereof is (that which disjoins Nature, 1. Death.
and must Divide us from One another, Yea makes a Division of us from Our
selves by Disuniting Soul and Body, and taking asunder those Essential Parts by
which we subsist) Death.

Then follows the Subject of our Funeral, 2. Saints.
Sancti All are concluded under the Necessity of Dying, Men, the Best of Men,
Saints.

Yet Thirdly there is a mixture of Comfort to sweeten the Meditation of Death,
3. Precious.
It is Mors Pretiosa, Precious.

1 In that it puts an end to all Calamity. 2. Precious for that Their Memory
survives when They are gone. 3. Precious in the Sight of Men, as being Honored
in their Exequies.
Lastly it is Pretiosa in conspectu Dei. 4 In the s^ght of the Lord.


Not Precious only in the Ey and Estimation of the world, But Precious in the
Sight of the Lord. He who sees all things is a Spectator of the Death of his
Servants, and shows how dearly he values Them.

1. By Avenging their Blood, if shed by violence in this world. 2. By Rewarding
Them in the Next.
This is the Frame on which my ensuing Discourse is carried; whose Foundation
you see is laid as low as the Grave.

I begin there where all must end, 1. Patt. Death.
with Death; The full Period and Close of Nature. A Subject better defined by
silence, than speech, and sounds more pathetically from a Tomb than a Pulpit.
The Arguments of this place are (or should be God and His Works, But amidst
the whole Catalogue of those works of His we find not Death: A thing of so
unblest a Being It cannot derive it self from His Hand and Facture who made All
other things.

Light was his Creature, Struck out and Kindled by His Fiat Lux, Genesis 1.3.
Let there be Light: And Life was inspired by His Powerful Breath who breathed
Spiraculum vitae into Man. Genesis 2.7.
But Darkness and Death are Children of other Parentage. God made no Privations
to Smother His Works, No Extinguishers of Light or Nature; No Sickness to
supplant Health, nor Infirmity to dissolve Strength; Wis. 1.14
The Generations of the World were healthful, and there was no Poison of
destruction amongst them. Darkness is but a defect of Light, and Death a
Privation of Life, therefore none of His, ver. 13
For God has not made Death, neither has He pleasure in the destruction of
the living.

If you would have Death's Pedigree, search not in God's Book of Creatures,
amongst the Records of Life, but see the Annals of Sin. That and Sin were Twins
nursed up together, engendered of two accursed Parents, the Serpent's Active
Malice, and Man's Disobedience. From hence do we derive this Monster, This
Enemy to Nature, and Opposite to God: For so it is.

This demolisheth what He Builds, The goodly frame of Mankind is by Death
ruined and laid in Farth; This Reverseth what He enacted, Marrs and unmakes all
that He made before.

You see at what Breach Death entered, The breach of God's Covenant. There the
Inundation ran in, whose furious torrent will not be stopped until it has
overwhelmed and covered the Universe.

From Adam did this Tyrant begin his dangerous Reign: On his Fall was Death's
Throne crected; his Body became the first Stair of the Ascent, since which time
he has still raised that fatal Mound by heaping on it all the Bodies of his
Children, For in Adam we all dye; 1 Cor. 15.22.
His Fall maimed and Creepled Posterity, which has ever since complained of
that bruise; The Earth yet groans under the barren Curse thrown upon it for
Adam's sake; Romans 8.22.
And Every Creature groans with us also travailing in pain unto this present.

Thus as Ashur was the Rod of Gods vengeance to scourge the rebellious
Israelites, Esaias 10.5.
so Death became God's scourge to punish the Sin of Man: Aug. Ser. 21. in Mat.
Neseis quia poena est, necesse esse ut moriamur?

Here then you see, though Death were none of God's works, Yet is it over All
His works: This Thing of No being, this Privation, this Nothing, devours All
things; For what is free from this Gangrene? what Plant does not this Worm
strike? what Elementary Body Animate or Inanimate is not subject to Corruption?
Templa, Saxa, Marmora, Aug. Ser. 17.
Ferro plumboque consolidata tamen cadunt, Miserable experience shows that
Temples are not privileged from ruin; Those sheets of Lead wherein the Dead
sleep taste of Corruption.

-- Sunt et sua fata sepulchris,

Tombs themselves have their Dying day, And those Marble Quarryes which stand
over Princes moulder to dust as do the Bodies lying under them

If then an inevitable Necessity of Death or some decay like it lies upon
Metals and those solid Bodies which scarcely retain a Cause of Putrefaction
within them, Certainly Man whose complexion is not Stone, nor his Ribbs Brass,
must be better acquainted with Dust and Rottenness: Job 17.14.
Say to Corruption thou art my Father, and to the worm Thou art my Mother and
my Sister. Yea so far is He unable to bear off by any Armor he can buckle on,
the assaults of Death, That not the Armor of the Apostle, of more curious
Temper and better proof than Steel, Ephesians. 6.16.
The Shield of Faith and Brestplate of Righteousness, which are able to resist
the fiery Darts of Satan, can guard him from Death's Dart; For even the Best of
Men, Gods dearest Servants and Saints are the subject of Deaths triumph, 2. Of
Saints.
It is Mors Sanctorum, the Death of Saints.

That Nolite tangere Christos meos, Psalm. 105.
Touch not mine Anointed, which encircles God's Servants, and like a Charm
Exorcises all other dangers, cannot guard Them from this Fiend, Death. Moses
his Body found a Champion to defend It from the Devil. Jud. epist. ver. 9.
He found no Champion to fight for Him against Death; The Decree is past and
not to be reversed, Deuteronomy. 34.5.
He must up to Mount Nebo and there Dye.

There is no Gluttony like Death; The greatest Practitioners in the School of
Riot have at length met a Surfeit which has done that, nor Sea nor Land
(Granges too narrow to serve their excess) could ever do, Choked their
boundless Appetite: But Death is a Glutton unacquainted with Surfeit or Satiety,
Of whom I may say as the Scithian Ambassador once did to Alexander, Q. Curt.
Vnus es omnium qui satietate parasti famem, Satiety to Thee only serves to
beget Hunger. Not all the Gross Meals, the Grand Feasts which War or
Pestilence have dressed, could make Him say It is Enough: Not all those Messes in
the Revelation, Revel. 19.18.
The Flesh of Kings and Captains, the flesh of Bond or Freemen, Small and
Great, (Provision sufficient for all the Vultures invited to that Supper) could
make a Competent Meal for Death. ver. 17.
Not all the Rarities of Nature, the choicest fruits the world affords, Youth
gathered in the Bud, and Beauty cropp'd in the flower, could satisfy Deaths
Palate. But after all these services, He must have a Feast of Saints cooked in
all the barbarous fashious Tyranny and Cruel invention could devise, They were
Stoned, were saw'n in sunder, Hebr. 11.37.
Roasted in the Fire, Broyl'd on Grid-irons, Flead, Torn in pieces, Brayed in
Mortars; I have not memory nor language to recite this horrid Bill of Fare,
Search the Histories of the Church and see it upon Record.

We should not grudge at this large Allowance made to Death, did He feed on
Those that would not be missed amongst us, Lucan.
Vulgares Animas, trivial Souls and -- Frustra peritura cadavera, Those
unusefull burchens of the Earth who only walk about and talk out their Time,
having no profession but that of the Athenians, to Hear and Telt News. Act.
17.21.


Well were it for the world, did Death remove such unprofitable things as
These, who like the fruitless Tree in the Gospel only cumber the Earth; Did He
only exenterate Nature which at first hatched this devouring Cokatrice, and did
not also eat through the Bowels of the Church, destroying those Holy Births
which lie within her Womb.

To our grief we must remember those heavy Strokes have fallen thick upon us.
You had one Famous Light, Dr. Fern. Bp. of West Chester.
whose Learning and Exemplary Life shone brightly in the Orb of our English
Church extinguished very lately; And when that Earth which covered Him is
scarcely made up, behold here Another worthy follows, ready to take his final
Lodging in the same Dust.

Thus does this Tyrant double His Blow, depriving us of Two such incomparable
Persons, that though you search Their whole Order and Run through our
Jerusalem with Lanterns (as once the Prophet did) you shall not match again.

Tune duos una saevissima vipera caena, Juven^l.
Tune Duos? --

Let me play the Satyrist with Death: Cruel Viper as thou art, Could not One
suffice thy ravenous appetite, but thou must have Two to gorge upon? I need not
stay for the answer, I find it ready made there -- Septem, Septem, si forte
fuissent, were it possible to find out Seven more like Them, His dart is lifted
up, as ready now to strike as He was then.

We have cause (God knows) too much to lament these great Losses in such a
barren Time as ours which produces very few Saints, And where Good men are
thinly found, Like the shaking of the Olive Tree which amongst many Leaves
yield perhaps here and there a Berry. Knowing that Ten Righteous Persons (if so
many may be found) are able to bear off a Shower of Vengeance and Fire nor less
violent than that which fell on Sodom and Gomorrah. G^n. 1^ 91.
Nay One Aaron is authorized to stand in the Gapp betwixt an Offended God and a
Sinful People.

Indeed the World is now in it is Dotage Creepled and Bedridden, In the last and
worst Age: So that had it not some few sound Crutches to support it, some few
Pillars not eaten in by the vices of the Time, nor Cankered by those Opinions
which madly fly about, not only to the disfiguring our Churches Decency and
Order; but the shaking and undermining even Her Fundamental Truths, It could
not subsist. Whenever then a Good man dies a Shore of the declining world is
taken away, and a Pillar of the Church, (...), Greg. Nazi anz. ora. (...) Land.
Pa^ris.
threatening a Ruin to that part where the Stay was broken out.

It is our best Course therefore to strengthen our remaining Stays by our
Prayers; Knowing that the Devil's malice is ever planted against our Best
Fortifications, assaulting Those most hotly who stand in the Breach.

For he does not wound us blindly or by chance, but by Election and Judgment.
So does his Agent Death cull out the Best, Garbling the Race of Men, and
Commonly leave the refuse, Moes optima rapit, deterrima relinquit; Making us
know to our grief that of Hieron: to be most true, Peccatores terrae
habitatores, Justi peregrini Sinners are the proper Inhabitants here, Saints
only sojourn in the world, I am a Stranger, Psalm. 39.13.
and a Sojourner as all my Fathers were.

They who justly consider how many Hundreds of Men yield one Saint, How many
years Religiously spent are required for His probation, and How many Virtues go
to the Making up of a Saint: They who Corsider again how hard a thing it is to
Pair and fellow Goodness when Death has mis-matched it, and how unequally the
successions of Virtue are preserved amongst us, who seldom ^nherit any thing
of our Forefathers worth, but only their Imperfections and ^nfirmities: They I
say who in all these unfortunate consequences justly apprehend the loss of Good
men, will not blame us to set that value upon their Death at which Sorrow and
Affection deservedly prizes Them, Confessing that Sanctorum Mors Pretiosa.
Their death is Precious.

Precious indeed: 3. Precious.
For how ill soever the bargain proves on our parts, it is good to Them, as in
a hard Purchase what the Buyer loses, the Seller gets. It Is Mors pretiosa to
Them in an other Capacity, That gainful sense the Apostle means, Mors Lucrum,
Death is their Advantage, Phil. 1.21.
whereby They gain an end to those Miseries Life exposed and the Worlds
converse cast upon Them, and may seal their valediction to both in those words
of the Poet,

-- Finitis gaude tot mihi Morte malis. Ovid. lib. 3. trist. El. 3.
Hear how St. Bernard exalts Death's Market, and raises the Price of it.
Pretiosa plane tanquam finis Laborum, Bernard.
tanquam Victoriae consummatio, tanquam vitae Janua, tanquam perfectae
Securitatis ingressus; It is Precious, as being an Antidote against all
Infirmity; Though the Potion has some bitterness, Ecclus 41.1.
O Mors quam amara! The effect is sweet. He who takes it down, in that draught
takes his everlasting Quietus Though the infected Air spreads new diseases over
the World, that infection pierces not so low as the Grave, such an Armor of
proof are five feet of Earth: It is a Precious Receipt for Sleep beyond all the
Opiate or Mandragoras Physic can prescribe: He who is lodged in Earth lies in
an Inner Chamber which Noise cannot disturb: The wars of the Elements are not
heard in that Quarter, The Wind contesting with the Wave, Nor the Breach of
Waters, Nor the Tongue of Thunder, None of these can dispossess them of that
slumber which only the Archangel's Trump shall waken, Nor any other way disturb
their quiet habitation, upon whose door the Characters of Eternal Peace are
engraven: Revel. 14.13.
Write, Blessed are Those that die in the Lord (so says the Spirit) for they
finally rest from their Labors.

How Precious the death of Saints is, all from hence must grant, who from the
sense of Pain can understand the benefit of Ease, Or from the miseries of war
are instructed in the Blessings of Peace, And from the Worlds perpetual
disquiet have learnt what price they ought to set upon an endless Rest: This
merely concerns Themselves.

There be other differences which continue Their value unto us when They are
gone. First, the Honor due to their Memory after Death, which distinguishes
Persons of Desert from Those of no Consideration.

The whole circumference of natural Being meets in one Center. Eccles. 3.19.
That which befalls the sons of Men befalls Beasts, as the one dies so
dies the other (says the Preacher) And Wise Men Die as well as Fools. Psalm.
49.10.
But yet in this Fatal Heraldry there are differences to discriminate the Elder
and the Younger house; Tacitus will tell you Mortem ex Natura omnibus aequalem
oblivione apud posteros vel gloria distingui, Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.
Death which is equal to all is distinguished by the honor showed to the
Deceased, or the neglect to them when gone. Thus did the Romans distinguish
their Two Emperors Augustus and Tiberius the Successor in his Empire though
not in his Virtues: Augustus They Deified, but their hate to Tiberius was such,
They would have His Memory survive no where unless in Hell: Sueton. in Tiberie.
Deos Manes rogarunt, ut mortuo sedem nullam nisi inter impios darent. Such is
the fate of wicked ones to be forgotten, Psalm. 149.9.
and such honor have the Saints to Live in their Posterities remembrance.

Which Honor is by a Second evidence demonstrated in their Exequies. Datur
hoc illustrium virorum posteritati ut Exequiis a promiscua sepultura
separentur. Tacitus.
The Prophet could not threaten a greater Curse than to be cast out as unworthy
of the Rites of Burial; Paricides and Traitors, Murderers of Parents or
Murderers of Princes who are our Civil Parents of the whole Kingdom were thus
used amongst the Heathen. (...), let them ly unburied, And (...), let Dogs eat
their Flesh upon earth as they did Jezabel's, and Fowls of Prey devour their
Carcasses when hanging in the Air. So God tells the King of Babylon, Esai.
15.19, 20.
Thou art cast out like an abominable Branch, Thou shall not be joined with
them in Burial.

True it is that Heraclitus is Charged by Origin, Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 3.
That He did think a Dead Body not worth a Grave or Rites of Burial, but to be
cast out to the Frost of the Night and Heat of the Day as a contemptible Relick
eternally lost in it is separation from the Soul.

So Hieron: Hieron. lib. 3. contra Vigilant.
charge Vigilantius as one wedded to the superstition of the Samaritan and
Jew, who reputed the Bodies of the Dead unclean Things, reproaching the
Coemeteries and Consecrated Ground wherein they are laid, as follies to be
laughed at, and terming Those who Buried Them, Cinerarios and Idololatras qui
mortuorum ossa venerantur, Traders in dust and Idolaters of Dead Men's Bones.

The Brownists in their Apology come as near These I have named as may be,
Against the Oxford answer 1602 ^o the Ministers Petition.
Affirming Burial to be no Ecclesiastical Action, because not named by Timothy
amongst the Ministerial duties.

Barrow and Greenwood take it at b^wnd from Them, Vid. Their Answer to Gifford.
1591.
and ask where it was made an Ecclesiastical duty, or why to be performed in
Hallowed Ground? as if we had no Fields. They forgot (it seems) Devout men
carried Stephen to His Burial. Act. 3.2.


And I must tell you, our Preciser sort of late have run in the same line; They
would by no means endure the Body to come within the Church, but it must be
left without in the Churchyard; Nor would They use in Committing the Corpse to
Earth any word or Ceremony, but put it into the Ground as one would bury the
meanest Creature that lay Dead; Let me ask without offense, what does this
differ from that Curse denounced by the Prophet against Jehojakim, Jer. 26.19.
The Burial of an Ass?

S. Augustine teaches Them more Civility if They would learn; Aug. de Civ. Del
lib. 11. c. 13.
Non contemnenda sunt and abjicienda Corpora Defunctorum, The Bodies of Dead
Christians are not to be thus slightly and Contemptibly cast into the Earth.
Mat. 23.24.


Tender and soft Conscienc'd men as They are, who strain at Gnats and swallow
Camels. They made no scruple to Preach up the Highest Rebellion in the State,
and Fowl^st Disorder in the Church, that any Age ever knew; Yet their
umbrageous Fantasies startle now at any thing of Decency and Order. As if
Popery were obtruded in that Sign which has no other meaning but to signify to
the world that we are not ashamed of the Cross of Christ crucified, ^iturgy in
Public Bap^ism.
Or Antichrist lurked under that Innocent habit used in the Ministerial Office.

But I am upon a Theme of Burial due to Christians, and in Christian Charity I
would Bury these weaknesses too, if They be so, or not rather Obstinacies; only
putting Them in mind, There cannot be too much Dignity given to the Body when
Dead, which Living was a Temple of the Holy Ghost; That Body which Christ
assumed when He took our Flesh; That Body In which and For which He Died,
paying the price of his unvaluable Blood to redeem it; Lastly, That Body which
He will hereafter Glorify and make it Like unto His own Glorious and
Incorruptible Body. Philip. 3.1.


Sure if the Prophet tells you with sorrow That it pitty'd all Eyes to see the
ruins of decayed Sion, and that the dust and rubbish of it was prized and
favored by them, Psalm. 102.14.
Let none disvalue the Bodies of Saints demolished by Death, which are more
Considerable than the Stones of Sion in her greatest beauty. But rather let it
be a motive in the Honor of their Funeral Rites to declare how Precious their
Death is in the sight of Men, when the Text assures you that it is Precious in
the sight of God. 4. In the sight sight of God.


Should man's ingratitude lose the Remembrance of Those who in their time have
best deserved in the World, Yet God is not as Man to forget His Servants; They
need no Monument to preserve, nor Epitaphe to innoble them who live in God's
Remembrance; The Memorial and Name of the wicked Men perishes like the Dung,
Psalm. 9.5.
and rotts faster than their Corrupted Bodies, but the Just shall be had in
everlasting Memory. Psalm. 111.6


There can be no greater motive for Christians to live well, than to think Deus
videt, Senec.
God is a spectator of all their Actions whilst They live here; Nor can there
be a greater terror to any who by Violence deprive them of that life, Than to
consider He is the Avenger of His Servants and Saints. So the Price He puts
upon Them is in Rewarding Them in the next world, and Avenging Their Blood in
This.

Yet I must tell you, 1. He Avengeth.
this speculation of God's Vengeance upon their Destroyers, if taken by our own
Perspective, may deceive us. As God does not always at first Call hear our
Prayers when we Invoke His Mercy, but takes His own Time to perform what we
desire; So He does not ever when we implore His Justice let loose His Thunder
to strike Those Men of Blood to whom His severest vengeance is due. Thou God to
whom vengeance belongs show Thy self, Psalm. 93.2.
is the Prophets excitation of Him; And yet for all this Cry He tells you in
another place God makes as if he heard not; Yea though he has pronounced that
the Blood-thirsty and deceitful should not live out half their days, Psalm.
55.23.
we have seen the Gray-hair'd Murderer finish a large Account of Time and
number many years, Nay dye in his Bed; when Those who deserved to be Canonized
for Saints and Martyrs have died upon the Scaffold.

If These men die the Common death of all men, Number. 16.29
then the Lord has not sent me (says Moses) with some indignation in the case
of Korah and his fellow Conspirators.

O Beloved! Ye must neither misdoubt us who preach the Certainty of God's
Judgments, If in Your Ey these Judgments fall not on Them so soon or so severe
as you expect: Much less must you misjudge God Himself either from the delay of
His Vengeance or by permitting them to enjoy Augustus his (...), Suetor.
a quiet and Calm Death.

We are no competent Judges of God's motion to Revenge, no more than of the
Means by which He does accomplish it.

God says Their foot shall slide in due time, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
But then he asks who shall appoint Me the time? Jer. 50.44.
If He strikes not presently we must not think Him slow or forgetful, 2 Pet.
3.9.
The Lord is not slack as some men count Slackness.

Or if He permits any notorious Offenders to finish their days by a Natural
Death in their Bed, do we know Qualem in conscientia sustinent Gehennam? what
hard contests, what sharp Conflicts, what Hell their Consciences endure?

When God threatens He will cast Jesabel upon a Bed, Rev. 2.22.
Think you this done in favor of Her, who seduced His servants to commit
Fornication? No, but to revenge Her Adulteries upon the very Bed whereon she
committed them.

So when He suffers the fowlest Assasinates to die in their Bed, it is not
always Mercy, but rather as if He Hanged Them at their Own Door, making those
very Beds on which they proudly stretched themselves, Amos 6.4.
and where They contrived their Hellish Machinations, the Place of Execution
and Torment to Them.

For my part, I shall ever reckon these inverted forms of Justice among the
Prodigies which Christ predicted of the Last and worst Times, When the Stars
should fall from Heaven, Mat. 24.29.
the Sun be darkened, the Moon turned to Blood.

How many Stars in the Sphere of the Church (for those Lights are Stars in the
Spirit's compellation) have since these unhappy times been darkened? Rev. 1.20.
How many Nobles have been struck off by violent Death? who are Stars in the
Orb of the Kingdom: How has the Moon languished under Her Eclipse, Queens
mourned in Widdowhood and Exile? Nay (which is a Portent greater than that) how
has the most Glorious Sun which ever shone in the Firmament of our English
Throne been turned to Blood?

It was a Bloody Time wherein we lived of late; and sure it was believed the
New Modeled State could not thrive unless, like the Vine, Blood were powered at
the Root of it. Tertullian tells us the Heathen Persecutions gave the
President; who if the Seasons proved unkindly, or the Aspect of Heaven frowned
on them in ill weather, If they suffered Famine or Pestilence, If their Designs
miscarried by Land, or their Adventures by Sea, they ran down to the
Amphitheater, crying, Christiani ad Leones, Tertui. Apologet.
Some Christians must be sacrifized to the Teeth of Beasts to mend those
Mischiefs.

You may remember how some Seduced People were incited to run down with
Tumultuous Petitions, and Confused Clamours for Justice upon Delinquents;
Alleging their Trade was improsperous for lack of execution done upon
Delinquents.

When they had prevayl'd, and by Gross prevarication ( Law and no Law, Laws
made for that purpose, then Abrogated when the Turn was served;) when (I say)
by these Juggles they had got off some of the wisest Heads in the State, and
Highest in the Church; Nay when they had struck the Vena Basilica, emptying the
Blood of the Principal Veyn which gave Life and Spirit to the whole Kingdom,
how well those abused People have thrived, and the Trades improved, Themselves
feel to their utter undoing, and we all see.

God grant this Unvaluable, this Guiltless, this yet unexpiated Blood, with
many Thousands besides shed since the last eruption of our Civil War, be not
charged upon the Heads of every one of us who survive.

It is the Positive Law of God, Genesis 9 6.
He who sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. And I know not
what Power upon Earth can dispense with it. If there be any who frame excuse,
or by Sophistry and False Reason endeavor to Palliate the Crime, let them take
heed lest they pluck down the Guilt upon Themselves.

This Loud crying Sin will not easily be silenced: The Tongue of Blood is never
hoarce by long crying; Gen 4.10.
I have heard the Voice of thy Brother Abel's Blood crying to me from the
Ground (says God,) And This Blood (though shed so many hundred years past)
Cries still. Heb. 11.4.
Indeed how can it be otherwise? Psalm. 56.8.
He who Bottles every Tear shed in sorrow or contrition, and who numbers every
drop of water distilled from the Eyes of His servants, shall He not much more
keep a Tale of every Drop of Blood? Certainly He will, and in His Calculation
each Drop has its just value, to bring a fearful recompense upon the Heads of
all their Murderers.

Surely I have seen yesterday the Blood of Naboth, and the Blood of His sons, 3
King 9 26
and I will Requite Thee (says the Lord.) It Is an Asseveration; He sees to
Pity It, and He sees to Revenge it upon all the House of Ahab. It is ever in
Conspectu ejus, In his sight. So precious is the death of His Saints. He puts a
price upon Their Loss in His Revenge, and He puts a price upon Their Virtues in
His Reward.

You see how God looks down upon His servants, 2 Reward.
with what Aspect He beholds their Sufferings here; They must now look up to
Him from whence comes their Salvation. Psalm. 121.1.
The Apostle directs their Eye, Hell. 12.2.
Looking up to Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy set
before Him endured the Cross, etc.

There needs no better Reward, than to be in Conspectu Domini, Psalm. 16.11.
In Gods sight; In Thy sight, and in Thy Presence there is fullness of Joy for
evermore. The Pain of the Cross was eased to that poor dying Man Hanging upon
it in the promise of his Savior, Luke 23.43.
Hodie mecum eris, Thou shall be where I am. Those who can sum up the Sorrows
of a Miserable Life, may best collect the Blessings of the Life to come.

It were a vain thing for us on Earth to attempt the defining of those Joys in
Heaven which be (...) and (...), Eye has not seen, nor Tongue can utter, nor
Heart conceive Them.

This only is the dictate of our Faith and best Evidence of Those unseen
Joys, That the Beatifica Visio, The Sight of God, will both recompense all the
Crosses laid on us, and supply all the Comforts which we wanted upon Earth;
That Blessed Vision whereby we shall see God, not under the Dim Cloud of His
Promises, but in the Clear Light, the Performance of His Reward.

We must know for all this, Luke 16.26.
there is (...), A great Gulf betwixt our expected Bliss and us; Deuteronomy. 1.19.
Perhaps A Red Sea, and a Terrible Wilderness are enterpos'd, and must be
passed through before we can arrive at the Land of Promise. Happy shall Those
be who are nor afraid to wade through a Red Sea discolored by their own Blood,
if God's Honor or His Cause require it; nor faint in the apprehension of a
Wild Great Desert, if He think good to lay that tedious probation upon their
Patience; Let this assurance Cheer both Their and Our dejected Spirits, we
shall undoubtedly receive the Reward, if we Faint not, Heb. 12.3.
And what contempt soever we endure in the Eyes of Men, we shall find a full
Reparation In the Sight of God.

I Have done with the Text. And now according to the Custom of a Funeral, You
will expect I should say somewhat concerning the Subject of it.

I confess My self an ill Herald, and unversed in These Displayes, It being the
first time which brought me to perform this Office for the Dead; And if God so
pleased, I wish from my Soul I might have missed it now.

I cannot but remember at this Time was a Twelvemonth in the Highest Celebrity
which our English Court can Boast, the Solemn Feast of St. George held at
Windsor, His Infirmity Forced Him, by Particular License and Approbation of His
Sovereign, to Depute me unto That Office, which in That place properly belonged
to Him.

I little thought that in a Mournful Solemnity where Himself became the
Subject, I should the following Year, and the very next Day after that Triumph,
be Deputed to this Last Service at His Grave.

But thus You see how Joys and Sorrows by course exercise their several
Jurisdictions over us, And how the Greatest Triumph Earth affords is attended
at the Heels by such a Ghastly follower as Death.

That I heartily Loved, and from the converse of many younger years Valued the
Owner of that Dead Relick lying before me, is a real Truth: For that cause Ye
therefore must not expect any large Panegyricks from me, lest happily Ye might
think He needed them.

Though Praise be a fit Gloss set upon Desert, there is danger, at least
suspicion in the excess: As unskilful Painters by laying on too much Varnish
dead the Colors and mar the Piece they would set off. Indeed in any Mournful
Arguments, Invention is commonly most free, where with least interest and
Concern it looks upon the Object. Passion or Affection mingling with them,
render it too serious for any Rhetoric but Sorrow. This I profess to be my
Case; And if it would not betray more of the weaker Sex than is fit for me to
own, I could make good the words of St. Augustine, Potius libet flere quam
aliquid dicere, My Eyes could easily prove more fluent than my Tongue.

Yet lest Ye fail of all Ye look for, As the Evening Sun immediately before his
Set Unites, and in some short flashes casts forth his Beams before he bury them
in that Cloud wherein he Sets, I will briefly sum up the Passages of His Life
even from his Youth, which was His Sunrise, unto the Declination of His Age,
which brought Him to this Bed of Darkness.

He was Born of Worthy and Virtuous Parents.

His Education was in This Famous School, In This very College where He was
admitted a Kings Scholar of that Noble Foundation, which has sent out so many
excellent Proficients in Learning to each University. For Both those Fair
Rivers does this Spring by contributing some Supplies to Them annually feed.

Here He had the greatest Dignity which the School could afford put upon Him,
to be the Paedonomus at Christmas, Lord of His Fellow-Scholars: Which Title was
a pledge and presage that from a Lord in Jest, He should in His riper Age
become One in Earnest.

From Hence He was translated by Election to Christs-Church in Oxford: where
having run through some Offices in the College conferred both as Rewards and
Trials upon the best Deservers, He was removed to All Souls; and when His
Degree and Time made Him capable of Public Employment, Chosen Proctour of the
University.

After the taking His Degree of Doctor, in some few years He was by His Royal
Master (whose Chaplain He had been) made Dean of Christ-Church, so becoming
Head of that College into which He was first admitted Student.

The more Public Office of Vicechancellour was then cast upon Him by that
Martyred Archbishop, who well understood the Universities advantage from so
deserving a Substitute.

These Offices he supplied with such Ability and Integrity, That His Gracicious
Master thought Him worthy to receive the Greatest Trust He possibly Could plant
in Him, To be the Tutour and Educator of our Sovereign in His Minority,
together with His Princely Brother.

This Trust brought on Him the Honor of a Bishopric for His Reward, first
Chichester, then Salisbury. Thus being lifted up Two Ascents by the bounty of
His Old Master, He was easily raised to the Third by His Present Sovereign, The
Bishopric of Winchester, in which He became Ex Officio Prelate of the Garter.
That Honor being always annexed to This Office He so well Became, That None
before Him Did, nor Any who follow can Better. For He was every way Qualified,
both in the Comeliness of His Person, and the Gracefulness of His Deportment,
and the Excellency of His Parts: All which Capacities rendered Him worthy the
service of a Court, and every way fit to stand before Princes. Prove. 2^. ^9.


He had this happiness, That from the very First Relation to those Tender years
of His Gracious Sovereign during His Care and Tuition of Him, He held the same
Degree and Station in His Favor, which never abated in the least measure, but
continued to His Death.

And as He was ever acceptable to the Presence of His Master whilst able to
make His approaches to the Court: So when Infirmity (which confined Him to His
Chamber) rendered Him fit only to be visited, He wanted not those Royal Visits
made to Him by His Lord. Who though He could not say, as Christ to the
Centurion imploring His Goodness to His sick servant, Ego veniens sanabo, I
will come in presence to perform His Cure; Yet He performed the First part, Ego
veniens, He came, not seldom neither, both to see Him in His weakness, and to
comfort Him amidst His Pains.

I must not omit to tell you, As once the King of Israel came to see the Dying
Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 13.14.
that he might take his Farewell, and with that Farewell a Blessing from One he
never should see again: So did a Better King than He, the King of our Israel,
repair to This dying Prelate a few hours before His Expiration, not only to
See, but to require a Benediction from Him at Parting; which in the lowest
Posture of Humility He besought. And let me tell you (not to Flatter Him)
amongst His other Virtues, never was there a more affable Sweetness, or less
Pride in so great a Prince. Both which He fairly expressed, when Kneeling down
at the Bedside He begged His last Blessing, which He like Jacob on His
Deathbed (and now as Dim-sighted as Jacob) with one Hand laid upon His Masters
Head, Genesis 48.10.
and the other lifted up to Heaven, He with a most Passionate Zeal Bestowed.
And I Hope and Pray that, like the Last Blessing of Old Jacob pronounced over
His Princely Son Judah, It shall remain in all Glorious Successes confirmed to
Him. Genesis 49.10.
That unto Him the People may be Gathered in all Loyalty, never seduced again
to Run after the Seditious Trumpet of Those Sons of Bichri, 2 Samuel 20.1.
who in these late Years usurped His Scepter. That His Hand may be upon the
Neck of His implacable Enemies, Gen 49 Verse 8.
whom no Acts of favor or Indulgent Clemency can Reconcile: And lastly, that
the Scepter may not depart from Him and from His Royal Tribe until Shiloh
come. Verse 9.


I have very little more to say, Only tell you in addition to His former
Honor, He was dignified with the Office of High Almoner, being entrusted with
the bestowing His Majesty's Charity; which like a faithful Steward He so justly
dispensed, That in evidence of His Integrity He Copied out that Office in his
own Practice; Not only in His Legagacies to Christ-Church in Oxford and to
Alsoules, to the Churches of Salisbury, of Chichester, and Winchester, But to a
Famous Almehouse erected at His peculiar charge in Richmond, the place of His
retirement, whch stands a Conspicuous Monument and Memorial of Him whilst the
World lasts. It Is well when our Good deeds follow us, but much better when they
go before. In works of Charity performed whilst we live here we are God's
immediate Almoners, what is done when we are Gone is more properly Our
Executors than Ours. They are happy who by any hand bestow their Alms, but it
is more honor and better sarisfaction when Our Charity needs no Executor but
the Doners Hand to dispense, nor overseer but His own Eye.

From His Charity you will easily Calculate His other Virtues. His Bounty was
always eminent according to His ability; And when He came to be owner of a
large and full Fortune He so well practiced St. Paul's Lesson, 1 Timothy 3.2.
A Bishop must be given to Hospitality, that in His generous way of living, to
His own, and the Honor of His whole Order, He demonstrated That his Heart was
no way undersiz'd or too Narrow for His Fortune; Nor did He since His
Advancement study the sordid Art of Gain, but rather how He might nobly Spend
and Lay out what He got.

His Disposition was most free and open, His Heart without close Angles or
oblique Corners: And in His long Relation to the Court had never studied that
first Principle of the Court Grammar, Erasmus ^gust.
To speak one way and mean Another: Vbique sentires Illum hoc assici quod
loquebatur, As Erasmus said of St. Augustine.

His Learning was Great and General, and as Nicephorus Gregoras said of One, He
was (...). A walking Library: His Gifts in Preaching elegant and very
excellent, yet not intended to delight the Ear, but to inform the Conscience.
And I heartily wish Those elaborate Pieces of Devotion may not die with Him,
but in their Publication remain amongst His other Legacyes bequeathed to the
World.

I may apply to Him that Eulogy which Nazianzen bestows upon His Father,
Gregor. N^ziarz^^ Orat. in Landem Patris
(...) he was always so faithful to God in the service of His Church wherein
He lived, that He never receded from His first Principles in any slackness
either toward Her Doctrine or Her Discipline. Insomuch that His Sacred Majesty
desirous to preserve the Succession of His English Church, and sensible of His
Bishops Decay, Most whereof were Dead, and Those Few who remaind not likely to
last long, was pleased to commit this Trust principally to His Solicitation. In
discharge whereof how industrious He was, some who yet live know, and none
better than My self, who was His only associate in several travels undertaken
to bring it to effect.

It Is true, diverse ways were propounded, yet all found dangerous, Under the
Inquisition we then lived, both to the Undertakers and the Actors.

His Majesty therefore at last thought of a safer and more certain Expedient,
to call over to Him Two of the remaining Bishops, Bp. ^^^^hall now L. Primate
of Armach.
who joined to a worthy Praelate residing with Him in His Exile might
Canonically Consecrate some of Those eminently deserving Divines who then
attended Him; Thus Preserving the Order in a Few, until God gave opportunity
to fill up the Other Vacancies.

This desire was by a trusty Messenger sent over by His Majesty communicated
only to Five; Romans 11.31.
whereof (I shall not Magnify my Office to say) My self was One, who in the
integrity of my Conscience can profess that in the willing acceptance of this
Summons I never declined any hazard when I might do the King my Master or the
Church Service. But great Age and greater Infirmity denying the concurrence of
any One of the Rest (though otherwise most ready) that design fell: And God
has in the Miraculous Restoration of His Sacred Majesty Restored the Church to
that Luster wherein (blessed be His Name) you now see it.

He in whose presence I here stand bears me record, I mention not these
Circumstances to any other End than my Sovereign's Honor; For it is not fit so
meritorious an Act should be concealed and smothered, but that all might take
notice how Careful He was to Preserve and Support the Church, at that Time
when in His Exiled condition He could not well Support Himself.

To conclude; This worthy Person now gone before us, often professed to Me,
that He desired only Two Blessings in this World, and then He should cheerfully
sing His Nunc Dimittis, Depart in Peace; To see the King His Gracious Masters
Return unto His Throne, And the Churches happy Restitution to Her Rights.

God gave Him the desire of His Lips: He lived to see Both, And, in a good old
Age, full of Days, having completed Seaventy and three years, Psalm. 90.10
(which is above the Standard of Humane Life in Moses his Calculation,) with
some few days over. He exchanged His Painful Life for an everlasting Rest.
Leaving His Virtues to be Imitated by Those that can, And His Loss to be
Lamented by All who are left behind.

God for his Mercies sake grant, Our Death may be so Precious in His sight,
That when the Eyes which see us now, must see us no more, We may with These
Eyes of Ours Aeternally see Our Redeemer in His Kingdom. Amen.

FINIS.

