VIVAT REX.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Worshipful THE MAYOR, ALDERMEN, Council and
Citizens of BRISTOL: Upon the Discovery of the Late Treasonable Phanatick Plot.

At St. James's Church, July 25. 1683. being Sunday in the Fair-Week.

By R. KINGSTON, M.A. One of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

1 Samuel xv. 23. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as
Iniquity and Idolatry. LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his
Royal Highness, at the Black Bull in Cornhill, against the Royal Exchange.
1683.

To the Right Worshipful THOMAS ESTON, Esquire Mayor: And to the Right and
Worshipful Sir Robert Ganne, Knight and Baronet; Sir Robert Yeomans, Knight and
Baronet; Sir Richard Crump, Knight; Sir John Knight, jun. Knight; John Lawford,
Esquire John Hicks, Esquire Ralph Olliffe, Esquire Aldermen. To Mr. George Heart, and Mr.
John Combs, Sheriffs: And to all the rest of the Loyal Aldermen,
Common Council and Citizens of BRISTOL.
Right Worshipful,
THOUGH I am too conscious of my own weakness and inability to perform any thing
worthy of your Acceptance: who are blessed with many Learned and Loyal
Clergymen, that entertain you with more polite Discourses; yet I dare not say
but that I did most cheerfully comply with the Commands of many Considerable
Persons, for publishing this Discourse; not only because it will be a Testimony
of your Respects to so mean an Orator: but because it will be an Evidence of
this Cities Duty and Affection to the King, of which no City in England has
given more cheerful and ample demonstrations.

It is but a while since (as your Worships all sorrowfully remember) that Loyal
and Conscientious Subjects, had like to have been overborn by the inundation of
Popular Clamours, and the rancorous breaths of the Factious Mobile: but though
this Disease had spread its Contagion into too many great Bodies of this
Kingdom, and the Tide of Rebellion grew very high and threatening in this City
also; yet did your Extraordinary Care and Vigilance Antitode the Infection,
Stem the impetuous Torrent, and maugre all the Designs of an Antimonarchical
Faction, preserve this City in Loyalty and Obedience. Which that you may always
do, to the Honor of God that Commands it, to the Safety of the King that
Deserves it, and your own Eternal Felicity that Endeavor it, is the Prayer of

Right Worshipful, Your most humble Servant, Richard Kingston.
July, 26. 1683.
A SERMON ON 1 SAMUEL X. 24. And all the People shouted, and said, God Save the
King.
WHen the dumb Son of Craesus saw an Assassin about to Murder his Father, though
he never spoke before, opened his Mouth with this passionate Expression, (...)
O wretched Man, do not Kill my Father. Now if the Murder of a Natural Parent,
was a Crime of that horrid nature, and strange resentment, as to work a Miracle
for its prevention; then certainly the Murder of a King, (...).
who is Pater Patriae (a) the Father of his Country, has so much of Horror
and Villainy in it, that if we should hold our Tongues, from a detestation of
the Impious Fact: and imploring the Aid of Heaven for our Sovereign's
Preservation, the stones of the Street would cry out against such an
Irreligious Silence.

Tim. iii. 1, 3, 4.
St. Paul tells us that in the last days perilous times should come; the men
whose endeavors should contribute to make them such, were persons whose
character was made up of the following vices (viz:) lovers of themselves,
covetous, proud, boasters, blasphemers, without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, dispisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high minded, etc. and if our lot be fallen in an Age, which exactly agrees with
the Character of the last; we must make no disingenious reflections on the
providence of God, but lay it at their doors: who by copying out the faults of
the worst men, provoke the Almighty, to make their lives somewhat more then the
transcript of their miseries.

And that we do live in such days, and among such persons, as trully deserves
the aggravating Epithits of unnatural, heady, high minded, Traitors; needs no
further proof than the discovery of the late damnable and hellish Plot, aginst
the life of our Sovereign: the subversion of our Laws, and the destruction of
Loyal Subjects.

A Plot that would have extinguished the light of our Israel! Stopped the breath
of our Nostrils: murdered the Lords Anointed, and given a bloody Bill of
Exclusion to both root and branch of a glorious Monarchy! a Plot that would
have turned our Streets into shambles, and filled our houses with Bloody
Tragedies? a Plot wherein transcendent villainy, has left no room for pardon;
but cries aloud to heaven for Vengance, and calls his Majesty's Loyal Subjects
to fall on their Knees in prayer, Saying, God save the King.

And Since I am for many weighty reasons confirmed in my belief, that no sort
of people question the truth of this damnable conspiracy: but such whose
interests obliges them to stifle it, or want demonstration from the accursed
deed; (from which good Lord deliver us) and that the great discourse is, what
should cause such men, from whom all the world might expect better, to conspire
against the Life of their Sovereign: and to involve the Kingdom in blood and
ruin? I hope it will be thought no impertinent digression, to assign three
things as the cause thereof. The first of which is, that men of unstable heads
but strong passions, are subject to believe, that a good End does legitimate
and sanctify the worst means; and now being secured of the goodness and
worthiness of their End, their thoughts are always in such a hurry about it:
their minds so intent upon it, and they are so violently hot and eager in the
prosecution of it, that they will not allow themselves leisure and patience, to
consider the Lawfulness and Expediency of the means, they use for the
compassing of it, and by this means court their own Ruin, and by doing Evil
that Good may come thereby, assert the justice of their condemnation. 1 Samuel
xv. 22.
Or else it is for that reason given by the Prophet Samuel, That Rebellion is
as the Sin of Witchcraft, as well in its facination as in its guilt; for none
but men under the power of so great a delusion, could be guilty of so barbarous
an impiety: unless men had offered violence to themselves, martyred their own
Consciences, chased all remains of honesty and compassion out of their own
breasts: they could not have entered into such an Hellish Conspiracy, and cease
wholly to be Men, that they might commence Devils! hence then I say is the
cause of this infatuation, that men lying under the Enchantment of Rebellion,
want the genuine exercise of their Reason, and must return to their Allegiance,
(and so be converted from Beasts to Men) before they can be Masters of their
Wit and Senses.

inhuman miscarriages, I know not what to collect, unless it be that of the
Prophet Isaiah, The Leaders of this People cause them to Err, Qui devoratur a
malis Pastoribus. St. Jerome.
for where does this Gangrene so mortally spread? and from whence does the
Plague of Sedition, Privy-Conspiracy and Rebellion, disperse its contagion? but
from the Conventicles? which are the Schools wherein Malcontents are
disciplined for public mischief; it is in those Unlawful Assemblies, that the
Sons of Bichry, and Belial, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalec, blow the Trumpets of
Rebellion, disclaim their right in David, and persuade others, that they have
no inheritance in the King. It Is there the deluded Mobile are Taught, that the
just and equitable Restraints of Authority, are Encroachments upon their
Birthright; and it is there they are Instructed to Obey for Wrath, and Disobey
for Conscience Sake.

Doctrines big with Rebellion and Confusion, Nullum malum majus aut infeliciter
fe^^cius quam inobedientia. Senec.
whose teeming wombs bring forth no other issue, than Blood and Fire, and
Pillars of Smoke.

Now have they unridled the mystery of their Nonconformity; they would not
come to Church: because that Holy-Ground could not be Desecrated by such
impious Consultations. They would not Pray with us: well knowing we could not
consent with them to injure the Lord's Anointed! and therefore must find out
such lurking holes, and secret places, as correspond with such black Designs.

Honest dealing dares look the Sun in the Face; only Treasonable Purposes, must
be mantled in the horrid shades of Obscurity! Genesis xlix. 6.
O my Soul come not thou into their Secrets, nor unto such Assemblies be your
honors united: for in their Anger they slew an excellent King, and in their
Self-will dug down the Walls of the best Government in the World. Now that
they may not run into the same Extremities, nor reduce us to such repeated
Confusions, Let us Pray, God Save the King.

Which words are the same with those in 1 Kings, i. 34. (...) and with that in
Psalm. xx. 9. Psalm. xx. 9.
rendered by the Septuagint (...). O Lord save the King and hear us, a form of
words used by the Jews at their Feast of Tabernacles, and Coronation of their
Kings: and sounds as much as Vivat Rex, Ita vulg. Lat. and Vatabl. Him. Annot.
Psalm. xx.
or, Let the King Live; wherein we do in one word, wish the King Prosperity,
and Peace, Long Life, and Health; Victory over his Enemies, and Everlasting
Happiness: matters of so great consequence, and so aptly expressed, that our
Church has appointed it to be one of the versieles in her Public Devotions: O
Lord save the King, and mercifully hear us (whose Peace is linck'd with his
Prosperity) when we call upon Thee.

Prayer is commonly divided into two parts, (...) or Supplicatory, for the
Blessings and Favors we want; and (...) or Gratulatory for the Mercies and
Benefits we have already received; and these words, Vivat Rex, Let the King
Live, or, God save the King, are both; but I shall Treat of them only as they
are a Prayer and Supplication. Wherein we have four particulars: 1. The
Supplicants, All the People. 2. The Person Supplicated for, The King. 3. The
Person Supplicated to, God. 4. The matter of the Supplication, That the King
might be Saved and Preserved. And all the People shouted, and said, God save
the King.


The first particular that offers it self to our consideration, and immitation;
is that Unity among Brethren, so much commended by the Royal Psalmist, Psa.
cxxxiii. 1.
and so much desired among all true Christians. The Israelites were not broken
into Parties, and consequently not divided in their Judgments, and Affections;
but were at Unity and Agreement among themselves: All the People shouted, and
said, God Save the King. Their Hearts stood bent the same way, they had the
same inclinations and desires; not the least appearance of any variance or
repugnancy: the Thoughts of their hearts, (as we may guess by the Agreement of
their Tongues that spoke from them) were in all the same; those many Bodies
seemed (as they ought to be) but so many members of the same Body, which were
animated, and influenced, by one Soul. This is that Agreement and Consent, that
the Policy of Heathens did recommend, and the Religion of Christians has since
more powerfully enjoined, as the way to preserve us in the Fear of God and the
King: and then none of us would consent to any Treason in our hearts, attempt
no Mischief with our hands, nor by our Schisms and Factions, provoke God to
Scourge us with the Rod of another Civil-War.

It was, the breach of Unity, and neglect of Religion, that exposed us to all
the miseries and and mischiefs of Forty one: If they had not divided us in our
judgments, they could never have made us a prey to their Teeth: and if we had
not been careless in the exercise of Religion and Devotion; God would not have
removed from us his watchful Care and Providence. Look in elder days and you
will find the goodness of God to this Kingdom; and that he never forsook it
whilst we kept inviolate his judgments and statutes. Prosperity attended the
long Reign of Queen Elizabeth, although the enemies of our Church were more
numerous then, and as busy and active, as they are now, The peaceable bringing
in our King James almost to a miracle, was a demonstration of the kindness
which God had for a unanimous People (for then neither Popery no Phanaticism
were tolerated). All the time he reigned both Church and State were in a
prosperous condition; but as soon as ever extravigent spirits, began to Teach
that the very genious of Religion was Separation; and make it their business to
set men at an infinite distance from the Solemn Service of almighty God; then
did God righteously break the bond of Peace: which that we may prevent for the
future, let there be no divisions amongst us, but with one mind and one mouth
let us say, Vivat Rex.

The next particular is Rex, the King; and this melech in the Hebrew and Rex in
the Latin tongue come from verbs which signify to Rule and Reign; Romans xiii.
1, 2
all powers have their original from God, and among all the powers that be
ordained of God, the Regal is highest: being Superior to all, Communitas nihil
sui confert Regibus. Spalat. Tom. II. 529.
but inferior to no man or community of men whatsoever. Now his Kingly dignity
deriues its excellency

From the Author or institutor thereof, God; Summum Imperium nunquam fuiste
populo de mandatum.
is not a derivation or collection of humane power scattered among many, and
gathered into one head; but a participation of Gods own omnipotency, which he
never did communicate to any but crowned heads: Meriander.
who are (...) the living Images of God, and derives their power from him. And
this I could prove from the consent of most Authors both ancient, and modern,
but St Chrysostom has said enough alone in these words: Romans xiii.
(...); which may be Englished out of St. Paul, the Powers that be are ordained
of God: to which also Tertullian bears witness: a Christian (says he) is no
man's enemy, much less the Emperors, whom he knows to be appointed by his God.
Psalm. xlvii. 9.
The shields of the earth are the Lords: they bear his arms and inscription,
and he holds them up over all the world. The Kingdom is the Lords, Psalm. xxii.
28.
and he is the governor among all Nations. And this truth is the grand
supporter of Monarchs Thrones: by me Kings Reign; Divisim imperium cum Jove
Caesar habet.
which per denotes not a bare permission, but by his commission; not by Gods
sufferance only, but by his ordinance also; their Charter is granted from
heaven, and may not be revoked at the peoples pleasure.

Magnificent Titles, triumphant Arches, honorable Attendants, Crowns, Thrones
and Scepters, are all requisite, and suitable to the grandeur of a King: and
apt to beget awe and reverence in the hearts of the Vulgar; but Alas this is
but the outside and Ceremony of the Sacred Majesty, whose representative the
King is; this is that which renders him truly sacred to all religious and
judicious men and minds; that he is placed in the throne to rule and govern us,
by the appointment of God, whose King he is, and whose judgment he pronounces.

Away then with that dangerous Tenent, that so frequently and maliciously falls
from the mouths and pens of the seditious Rabble, that all Power is from the
people, interpreting dei Minister the peoples Servant: and if he comply not
with their giddy humors, (which in Prudence and Conscience he is not bound to
do), then they may assert their native right, and reassume the trust reposed
in him! this monstrous opinion flies in the face of God Almighty, by pretending
to a law of nature, for the violation of all the laws both of God and man: And
reproacheth the wisdom of the most high, for appointing no better government
over them. And to their other objection I answer that sovereign powers have
their employment from God, and by his Authority; and so are his servants only:
and the end of their employment is to be beneficial to the good of others, but
not in Subjection to their powers. Now this truth rightly improved, will be
matter of Comfort to us: that the government we live under, is of Gods
Institution, and that God may bless his own ordinance, and continue it in the
right Line: to the glory of his Name, and the good of this Nation; Let us pray
God save the King, the Queen, the Illustrious Prince James Duke of York, and
all the Royal Family.

The excellency of Kingly dignity appears in this, Jus Sangain nullo Jure
d^rimi potest.
that even God himself has among his own honorary titles, taken to himself the
name of King; his title runs thus: King of Kings and Lord of Lords; and his
government over the whole world is Monarchical; for though there be three persons
in the sacred Trinity, yet there is but one God, and confequently but one King
everlasting. Let then those Scriblers and Pamphlereers, who of late have
scattered their poison through the Nation to the disparagement of Kingly
government, and ruin of unwary Subjects: Let them (I say) blush for shame, and
tremble to consider, how through the side of their lawful Sovereign, they have
struck at God's own Monarchy over the world, as far as their power or malice
could extend.

Supremacy, which is the most express character of himself, which God can put
upon a man: 1 Pet. ii. 13.
and such a supremacy St. Peter tells us is only in God and the King; for God
is the supreme ruler of Kings, and Kings are the supreme rulers of men;
therefore God himself the better to oblige our obedience to them, Psalm. lxxxii.
7.
as well as to himself, styles them Gods. That God who by an omnipotent fiat,
first called the passible world into act, and has ever since laid out the same
power for preserving what he first created: (...).
has endued Kings with Prerogative more than humane; for though they be
shrouded under the Veil of mortality, yet their power bears no small
Resemblance with the Deity; and to make the Supreme power, accountable to any
Inferior Jurisdiction, or the will of the people; were to set up an authority
over him, to whom our subjection is due; Illa dicitur summa potestas cujus
actus alterius juri non s^beunt, ita ut alterius voluntatis humanae arbitrio
irriti possint reddi. Grotius.
which is a down right contradiction in terms. For Supreme power is not, nor
cannot be subject to another law; and this great truth all good subjects are
obliged to defend with their lives and fortunes: For yield up the enemy but
this one flower the Kings Prerogative, and their incroaching fingers will be
reaching after all! their malice being so unreasonable, that a dear-bought
experience has told us; It is easier to deny them all, than having gratified
them in part to prescribe them a measure.

And now methinks I hear our Antimonarchists say, the doctrine of the Kings
Supremacy is urged by none but those that by Court-flattery seek their own
preferment, and promote Arbitrary Government. To which I Answer, If to preach
obedience to Authority does brand men with the name of flatterers; they cannot
excuse God almighty, the blessed Jesus, the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles,
Saints, and Martyrs, from being guilty of it. For this is the Doctrine of the
Bible, and the language of good men in all ages; and if this be a scandal, God
grant that all the Sons of the Church of England, may live under this disgrace,
and dye under this Ignominy.

Neither is this the way to promote arbitrary government, but the contrary; for
the Kings Supremacy is the Subjects safety, it is that Palladium which whilst
preserved Inviolable, stands as a bulwark about the Nation, to protect us in
our rights, both Civil and Religious; For by this Trust reposed in the Prince,
Each single Person is fortified with the strength of a Nation. And this is
attested by the every days Experience of all our fellow Subjects who live
quiet, obedient, and peaceable Lives; and opposed by none but those that think
his Majesty's Guards a grievance, his Laws an oppression, and the benefit of
his Life and Reign, a check to their disobedience and rebellions.

God; and indeed to whom should Persons address their Prayers for their King,
but unto their God: who is King of Kings, who has both Authority to make, and
Power to preserve them: and by all demonstration of Kindness, watches over
them for good? Nay so jealous is God Almighty in this particular, that he will
not allow any mortal man, or thing, to have the honor of rescuing them from
danger: nor give the glory of their Preservation to any other than himself; it
is God that gives Salvation unto Kings, and delivers David from the hurtful
Sword. It is not the Wisdom of his Counselors, the Care of his Magistrates,
the Fidelity of his Servants, nor the Courage of his Soldiers, that preserve a
King; (though all these act commendably in their Stations) for unless the Lord
watch over Them as well as their Cities, the Watchman waketh but in vain. Nor
can the Love of his Subjects lengthen his days, the best Office they can do
him, is but like the People in the Text, to pray for his Health; it is God only
that can give him Help in the time of Trouble; be Rebels never so rebellious
and outrageous, he that stilleth the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the
Multitude, can so charm the unruliness of a Seditious People, as to bring them
to Submission or Confusion. Now God's special care and providence over his
Anointed Ones, is shown in Scripture, by a threefold injunction, laid by
Himself upon their Subjects, under very severe and heavy penalties.

God does not allow any Subject to harbor in his breast an ill Thought against
his Sovereign: Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts, Eccles. x. 20.
for the birds of the Air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings
shall tell the matter. By which some Commentators understand a Power given by
God to the Tutelary Angels of Kings and Governors, to understand the
traiterous thoughts of all such as bear disloyal and treacherous hearts against
their Princes. That the Sin of Rebellion might never be brought forth, God does
stifle it in the Womb, nip it in the bud, and destroy it in the very thoughts;
that it may never come to do further mischief. And greater Reason is there for
our observance of this Prohibition, since the first entertainments of Sin, are
oftentimes of dangerous consequence; while the Enemy is without doors, it is an
easy matter to keep him there, but when he has entered the house, he is not
expulsed without trouble and difficulty; therefore God Almighty, who always
designs the good of his People, that we might not inure our Tongues to speak
Evil of Dignities, nor stretch forth our Hands against the Lords Anointed, will
not permit us to lodge a disloyal thought in the most secret recesses of our
bosoms.

Pride formed men into Disobedience, but the next step they take is by
Reproaches to ruin the reputation of the government, and impede the
accomplishment of righteous designs. Reputation being to actions, what Feathers
are to Arrows, making them fly the better and pierce the deeper: they endeavor
to deprive their governors of this advantage. If there be any fallings in their
conversation, they are sure to be represented in the blackest Color: And by
all the advantages of art, improved into a Condemnation of the whole
constitution: These were the wretched methods that first begat, and also
continue the feeds of rebellion among us. Let the King say what he will, they
read it backwards; and make the best of his actions speak nothing but Arbitrary
Government, and Persecution. When the King declares he will govern by the known
Laws: they remonstrate that he does not, and suggest by their groundless and
unreasonable faers and jealousy that he will not! and by carping at his
proceedings and misrepresenting his actions, so deflower the beauty of his
Crown with Satirical invectives that he becomes less able to serve those great
ends for which government was instituted! if therefore you desire to approve
your selves good Subjects, and good Christians; invent not evil stories of him
whom God has set over you, falsely, believe them not easily, report them not
disloyally, aggravate them not spitefully, scatter them not industriously; but
aprrehend such disloyal thieves whom you take a pillaging your Princes good
name; the forward receiver of an evil report, being as bad as he that brings
it; always remembering that railing against Kings was a Capital crime in David's
judgment who commanded Solomon to put Shimei to death for it.

Not to lift up a finger to their prejudice; for Touch not mine Anointed, says
the Psalmist, and wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand against the
Lords Anointed? says David to the wicked Amalekite, that slew King Saul; in
all times has God manifested his vengeance against such Rebels as have risen
up against them: witness Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed up
quick, and became at once both their Sexton and their grave. Witness Zimri
burnt to ashes in that very palace, whence he had driven his Lord and
Sovereign; and so notable a vengeance indeed it was, that wicked Jezabel took
special notice of it: for had Zimri Peace (said she) that slew his Master? I
might here be infinite, if I should add to these instances all those dreadful
Examples of God's Vengeance against such as have been Rebels against their
Kings; which I could fetch you both from Ecclesiastical and Secular Histories;
but I shall at present ease my self and you of that Trouble, since what has
already been said, does sufficiently demonstrate, that God has a most special
and particular Care in the Preservation of Kings; and therefore to none so
fitly may the People address themselves for the Life and Safety of their
Sovereign, as unto God, and more comprehensive words we cannot use, than what
is prescribed in the Text, God save the King.

The last particular is the matter of the Supplication, That the King might be
Saved and Preserved, and all the People shouted, and said, God save the King.
And we are encouraged to a cheerful performance of this duty, because God does
usually grant it, and because the King needs it more than ordinary persons do.
The King's duty is more difficult, his abundance exposes him to more
temptations, and his height to more dangers than any of his People, and his
preservation is far more necessary, and of universal concernment, for he is
worth ten thousand of us; and we had need pray heartily to God to Save him, who
does defend us all: the King stands in need of more wisdom to direct him, more
power to protect him, more care to preserve him, than other men. For as the
King does not Live Sibi sed Populo, so neither does he Dye to his own, but to
our disadvantage: a thousand others may steal out of the World and no body mind
or miss them, but the loss of a King would soon be felt; therefore says the
Apostle, I Exhort that first of all Supplications and Prayers be made for all
men, for Kings, and all that are in Authority: and (however the Author of the
Life of Julian raking up some passionate Expressions in one of the Fathers,
has falsely, maliciously and scandalously, represented the whole) this is
agreeable to the Practice of the Primitive Christians, as we may read in
Tertullian: Oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, Imperium
securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem
quietum, and quaecunque hominis, and Caesaris vota sunt. We pray for a long
Life, for our Emperors, a secure Empire, a safe House, valiant Armies, a
faithful Senate, a good People, a quiet World, and whatsoever Caesar or any man
can wish for or desire.

Thus have I showed you that it is the duty of all good Christians and all good
Subjects to Pray for the Safety and Preservation of the King. I come to the
reasons enforcing this duty, and the first is, we have need to pray for the
King.

1. Because his Safety is fiercely opposed, and his Life in danger upon the
account of Policy, and under the pretense of Religion. Upon the account of
Policy Monarchy it self is undermined by the Republicans, to lay a foundation
for such an Anarchy as they are pleased to call a Commonwealth: but this being
wholly out of my Sphere, I shall not invade the States-man's Province any
further, than to tell you, besides being Subjects to the King in our Parents
Loins, and so under Obligations to Obedience by the Law of Nature, we are in
the bonds of Religion and Conscience, tied to Subjection, by many solemn Oaths,
wherein we have lifted up our hands to the most high, and sworn not to
endeavor any alteration and change in the Government. And I hope we are none
of us so fond of a Common Woe as to go to the Devil by wilful Perjury, to set
up the Tyranny of our Fellow Subjects, and for your fuller Satisfaction, give
me leave to repeat the words of the Learned Bishop Sanderson, whose single
judgment is of greater value, than the whole rout of those that would unhinge
our Government. Lib. de Oblig. Consc. p. 350.
I think (says he) an Hereditary Kingdom may not lawfully be changed for an
Elective nor for any other sort of Government, either by the People alone, nor
by the People and Nobles jointly, nor by the whole Body of the People in their
greatest latitude, that is, the People, Nobles, and the King consenting
together: unless perhaps the whole Royal Progeny should so totally fail that
there is not one surviving who may claim it as his due by Right of Inheritance;
all which considered, it amounts to this; That unless we will violate the Law
of Nature, and Religion, and incur the heavy guilt of Perjury, we must behave
our selves like dutiful and obedient Subjects, praying always, God Save the
King.

Again, the Safety of Kings is impugned under the pretense of Religion, by the
several sorts of Dissenters, whom I cannot being under one denomination, unless
it be in calling them all Amalekites; and truly it will concern them to
consider, if they do not deserve the Name, and I pray God give them grace to
consider, whether the Curse of Amaleck be not justly their portion.

I say this Truth is opposed by the Rebellious and Bloody Tenants of the
Jesuits, Anabaptists, and Presbyterians; I rank them all together, for though
like Sampson's Foxes their heads part, yet their tails are joined to put the
Kingdom in a Combustion.

It is the constant Tenent of the Jesuits, that King-killing is not only
Lawful, but Meritorious, if he be an Heretical King; that is to say, if he be
not a Roman Catholic. And to this devilish Doctrine are they so wedded,
(however some of their Church are pleased to obscure it) that they leave no
ways unattempted to put 'em into practice; as the woeful Tragedies they have
Acted on the Theater of the World is too sad a proof. And that these are their
Principles, I refer you to Azor, Bellarmine, and Mariana, who have wrote,
printed, and published to the world, Tracts of the Lawfulness of Regicide; of
whom I shall add no more here, Cause and Cure of Scandal. Page 11.
having done it fully in another Treatise.

Independents, Anabaptists, and Fift-Monarchists: for what else were the
public Preachments of all these men in our late days of Rebellion, but what
tended to the ruin of our Monarchy, Evangelium Armatum. page 26.
as you may read in the Parliamentary Sermons of Burton, Marshal, Nigh, Caryl,
Bridges, Saltmarsh, etc. And of the same stamp were the harangues of Muncer in
Germany, as you may read at large in the first of Sleidan's Commentaries. God
that cannot lie (says he) has warned me face to face, to attempt the Change
of the Government, by killing the Magistrates: and Phipher (his Brother in
Iniquity) did but dream of Killing Rats, and Mice, and Expounds his Dream of
Murdering the Nobles; and did not those Fift-Monarchists, the English Rebels
in Venner's Rebellion (having laid their Accursed Designs the Sunday before in
their Conventicle in Coleman-street) proceed in the same manner, and justify
their Principles with their Arms, till the hand of Justice overtook them. It
was an Observation of old, -- Regnabit Sanguine multo,
Ad Regnum quisquis venit ab Exilio.
The King that returns after Exile, will Reign for the future in Blood and
Revenge: but our Gracious Sovereign, resembling God in one of his noblest
Attributes, that of his Mercy, had at the same instant given Life to them who
were endeavoring to take away his. Odiorum causae acriores, quia iniquiores.
Their Hatred was the sharper because it was the unjuster, and so stained
themselves with the black Guilt not only of Rebellion, but of an ungrateful
Rebellion! whereas an ordinary stock of Ingenuity and Religion, upon the
receipt of so great a Mercy as Pardon and Property, would have silenced their
Murmurings, and made them loud in Applauses and Thanks for the felicity of his
Reign; but on the contrary, we see that when men are inclined to Mischief upon
the account of their Religion, they prove the greatest Villains in the world:
and notwithstanding all obligations that Heaven and Earth can bestow upon them,
Hell gets the upper hand.

Presbyterian Kirk less opposed the safety and welfare of Kings, by those
dangerous positions they have published to the world! Doctrines that will make
you blush, sweat, and tremble, if you have any fear of God or any honor for
the King. And that I may not be supposed to do them wrong, I will Cite their
Names, and Books, from whence I have collected them.

Page 30.
Goodman says in his Book of Obedience, That it is unlawful in any case to
resist the Superior pnwers, is a dangerous Doctrine, taught by some by the
Permission of God for our Sins.

And again page 53. says, that the reasons that moved the Pope to despose Kings
was good and just, and meet to be received and Executed by the body of every
Common wealth.

Apel. Page 26.
Knox the Scottish Presbyter says, it is blasphemy to say we must obey Kings
whether they be good or evil. And asserts (...).

Page 26.
Buchanan in his Book de jure Regni apud Scotos, among other things of
dangerous consequence to crowned heads says, populus rege est prastantior and
melior: Page 38.
The People are more excellent than the King: And this he avoucheth with the
greatest confidence imaginable, though the Holy Scripture says plainly, that
the King is worth ten thousand of the people.

The same Author says that the People have the same power over the King, that
the King has over any one man and that Ministers may Excommunicate him: and
then draws this damnable conclusion, that he who by Excommnication is cast into
hell is not worthy to live upon earth. Thus has the Scotch Rebel like that
Italian Tyrant taught Sbjects how at one blow they may kill both the Body and
Soul of their Prince.

But as if this were not bad enough yet, Pag^ 40.
the wretched Presbyter adds, that it were very good that rewards were
appointed by the people for such as should kill Tyrants, (and such they account
all those Kings that will not submit their necks to the yoke of their
discipline,) as there be sallaries allowed for those qui lupos aut ursos
occiderunt aut catulos eorum deprehenderunt; Who have killed Wolves or Bears or
have destroyed their brood.

And who that hears these Doctrines more bloody than Popery or Paganism, will
doubt that it is the leaders of these people, that dipping their pens in Gall
make way for the sword to glut it self with the Blood of Kings.

Nor were our English Presbyters and Independents much behind their holy
brethren the Scots in wicked confederacy and against their King, and like the
Priests and Praeco's of Mars in scattering Firebrarnds through the Nation.

Book of the Covenant, in Evangel. Armat. page 42.
Mr. Case calls the late Rebellion the Holy War, the Cause of God, and Saints
all that engaged in it, the Scotch Covenant he calls Christ's marriage-contract;
and says to act against it was to despite the Holy Ghost.

Zach. Crofton's Answ. to Bp. Gauden. Edit. 3. Page 22.
Crofton says that all Acts of Parliament made against it were damnable, and
that Parents ought to baptize their Children into the Scotch Covenant.

Spirit of Popery. 7. 26. 42. Calamy's Ser. before the Lords. Dec. 25. 1644.
Jenkin's Humble Pet. Oct. 15. 1657.
Mr. Calamy and Mr. Jenkins said, that the Parliament without the King were the
Supreme power of the Nation, and that they were assisted by the special
direction of God; And that none could do such things ( viz Rebelling against
the King and Butchering his Subjects) except God were with them.

Mr. Love in his Sermon at the Treaty at Vxbridge Says, that the Sword not
Arguments must end that Controversy.

Evangel. Armat. vid. First and Second Part of the History of Separation.
Mr. Baxter has said enough in his Holy Commonwealth and other writings, to
prove him the Bell-weather of Sedition, and a man of blood and he that would
see further let him view the first and second part of the Dissenters sayings,
collected from their works, and besides this, Rebellion against and deposing of
Princes, is warranted in above twenty places in the Assemblies Annotations, and
of the same Complexion is Mr. Pool's Critics. Vid. Hist. Athaliah.


Thus have you seen the Devil of Rebellion transforming himself into an Angel
of Reformation, Icon Bisil.
and those that should have been Ambassadors of Peace, the fomenters of an
unnatural and bloody War: And all under the pretense of Religion. The true
Religion prevailed upon the world by Purity of Doctrine and Innocence of Life,
but these men's principles having (in this particular) a nearer affinity to the
Laws of the Impostor Mahomet, -pudet haec opprobr a nobis and dici potuisle and
non potuisle refelli.
than the precepts of the Holy Jesus (a) took the same method for the
Establishment thereof as he did, who enjoined his worshipers by a Law, Alcor.
page 125.
to persevere in Killing Christians till they was rooted out of the earth. So
that if Rebellion be Religion, then the Papists, Mahumetans, and Presbyterians,
are the only true Protestants in the world: if the Second murder of a King,
and utter ex^irpa^ion of the Royal Family, the way to promote Gods Glory, then
are Dissenters the only Champion for the Government! and to say worse of them,
than that they are Seditious and Rebellious, upon the account of their
Religious Principles, were to cast I^k upon the face of an Ethiopian.

You have now heard some of those Monstrous Doctrines that in defiance to the
Laws of God and Man, encourage the Resistance, and consequently the ruin of
Kings. But that they are as opposite to truth as Light is to Darkness, is the
next particular wherewith I shall Exercise your patience and this I will do, by
proving that Religion does not exempt us from the Authority and Power of Kings
and rulers, though they be infidels and Heathens and not only strangers but
Enemies to true Religion and the professors of it.

It is not objecting Enormities in the Religion Life or Government of a King
that can absolve their subjects from Obedience; for the ties and bonds of duty
and subjection to them, are Sacred and inviolable: Dominion and sovereignty are
the Ordinances of God, not as he is the Author of grace, and redeemer of his
Church: But as he is the Author of mankind, and Governor of the world.
Dominium temporale non fundatur in gratia. Supernatural grace is not that which
constitutes Kingdoms, nor is the calling of Magistrates a Mystery of the Gospel
but an appointment of God by his universal providence. The duty of Children to
Parents, of Servants to Masters, of Subjects to Princes, is not a consequence
of Christianity; but a principle of Nature and unalterable, by Religon a
Christian Child cannot abandon his duty to his Parents, tho they be Heathens or
Infidels; a Christian Servant cannot shake off the yoke of Subjection, because
his Master is an Unbeliever, 1 Timothy vi. 1.
nor Christian Subjects deny their allegiance to their Lawful Sovereign, tho
Heathen and Infidells: And he must be a stranger to the Sacred records, and the
practice of good men in all ages that asserts the contrary. But that I may give
you one Example for all, in a case that directly agrees with all that the
Enemies of Monarchy can object against our obedience, see it in the Prophet
Daniels behavior toward King Darius.

Now this Darius was a Heathen Prince, one that kept the Church and people of
God in cruel bondage and captivity, Dan. iii.
one that by cruel artifices pr^^o^ed Idolatry and persecuted the people of God
with the Fiery furnace, and Sentenced the Prophet Daniel to be Devoured of
Lions: And yet we find the good Prophet so far from upbraiding him with
Tyranny, or threatening him with vengeance and Judgments from God: that he owns
his Sovereignty and Rightful Power over him, and prays for his Health,
Prosperity, and Eternal felicity, in these words O King live for ever. Dan. vi.
21.


The next Example I shall urge is that of the Holy and blessed Jesus, John xix.
^^.
who acknowledges Subjection to Pilate and that his power over him was from
Heaven: Gloriosum est sequi dominum.
and though he had the whole host of Angels at his command, neither made
Resistance himself, nor would permit it in his followers.

And St. Paul also who lived in the times of Heathen persecutors enjoins every
Soul to be subject to them though they were Heathens: For Christianity is so
far from giving immunity from Obedience, that it inforceth the duty from our
Obligations to God, whose Authority they bare; and from which divine commission
it is directly consequent, that he makes any violent Resistance, or opposition
to the supreme Magistrate, to be an affront offered to God himself; In talibus
non obedientes, mortaliter peccant. nisi foret illud quod praecipitur, contra
praeceptum dei, vel in Salutis dispendium. Angel. Sum. verb. obed.
for which they shall receive that punishment which belongs to so Sacrilegious
a contumacy, Eternal Damnation.

St. Peter likewise preaches the same Doctrine, and urges our Obedience to
Claudius, or Nero, upon the account of giving Credit and Reputation to our
Religion: Obedience to Authority being one of the prime characteristicks,
whereby a Christian is to be known; and when Subjects are Rebellious, although
they are so to Heathen Magistrates, they draw disgrace upon the Gospel, and
tempt the Infidels to believe, that men are the worse for being Christians,
that the Doctrine of Christ is corruptive of Principles as well as Manners; and
Christian Liberty but a Cloak for Rebellious Practices. Now to Antidote this
Venom, and to wipe off this Disparagement, St. Peter Commands us to submit to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords Sake, 1 Pet. ii. 13.
for so is the will of God, that by well-doing ye put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men. And having thus from plain Scripture showed, that no pretense
whatsoever can warrant disobedience to our Lawful Sovereign, it will
necessarily follow; that either the Texts alleged are not Scripture, or the
men that taught the contrary are not Christians; but such a generation of men,
Non opus vos habere civem qui parere nesciret. Marc. Cur.
as give the Princes of the world a just occasion to be jealous of them; and to
root those Principles out of their Dominions; for what Prince can be Safe,
whilst such men abide and multiply in their Territories, that profess it to be
a Principle of their Religion, to make Resistance against them.

And agreeable to this Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus, which secured Obedience
to the worst of Kings, was the Practice of the Primitive Christians toward
their Persecuting Emperors, Propter dominum aeternum domino temporali
Serviebant. Aug. Psalm. cxxiv.
that spilt their Blood, and made havoc of them; for though they were able to
wage War with their Emperors, yet Conscience and Christianity forbad them to
resist, but commanded them to Pray for them. And since (thanks be to God) our
Case is otherwise, and we have a Merciful and Gracious King, Animatam Dei
^maginem. Cypr,
who is our lawful natural liege Lord, a just possessor of his Crown, a
worshipper of the Living God, a defender of the true Ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, a maker of good Laws, and an Executor of the same; I hope all
true Israelites, in whose mouths are no Guile, in whose hearts is no Privy
Conspiracy, nor in whose hands there is no Rebellion, will never forget in
their public and private Devotion to say, God save the King.

And for vindicating our holy and excellent Religion, from any imputation of
being accessory to Treasonable conspiracies, I shall most readily grant; that
were it any way chargeable with these practices, there needed no other thing to
be pleaded against it, this alone would bar all its pretenses of being
Christians for ever: and therefore there cannot be a greater mischief done to
it, than to give any just cause to suspect it, for it must then never expect
Kings to be its Nursing fathers more, but rather that they should all combine
to banish it out of the world now, as they did to prevent its coming into it at
first, upon the same prejudice. But it always was the honor of Christian
Religion, that it cleared it self fully of all these unjust imputations and
commended it self to Kings and became dear to them, was nursed in their royal
breasts, and was adopted into their laws as being the greatest security of
their Government, and of Subjection to them; and what ever Religion does
contrary to this, is by that only argument, detected to be perfectly
Antichristian.

I confess that few Rebellions have been raised, but by the warmth of a
pretended zeal for Religion, which Fears and Jealousies have animated and given
growth and strength to; but it was only the Pretense; Religion was made a mask
to hide the ugly face of Rebellion, which without so fine a Cover, would have
affrighted those deluded souls, that were cheated with the beautiful paint,
that was laid over horrid designs! consider beloved, what has Religion to do
in designs of this black nature! Religion is made up of purity, piety, peace,
and holiness; and there is nothing of these, in cruel treacheries, in bloody
Massacres, and tragical murders.

What Religion can there be in men's pursuing violent paths, on the pretense of
Gods glory, in a direct opposition to his holy Laws? if the Ark of the Lord be
shaken, and our Religion in danger, yet we must not support it by forbiden
methods: for it never proves well, when men forsake Gods directions to follow
their own devices. Religion desires none to be its Champions till first they
are its disciples. Let us therefore study to be quiet, and do our own business:
practice the duties of Religion, and God Almighty will assert its interest.

It Is not Religion then is the cause of these bloody attempts, but the men
whose preaching is of Cursing and lies, to whom we owe all our miseries in this
kind; and indeed what else can be expected, but that such as have cast off
obedience to Laws should put themselves under the Devils yoke. And if their
former actions, are the best interpreters of their present designs, what can we
expect from these Amalekites, but ruin and Confusion? look backwards as far as
the days of their first entrance among us: and you will find them to be men
made up of the worst of all Extremities, Peevish without Reason! Rebellious
without Cause! and Troublesome without End! and therefore if we will not fall
into the same miseries, let us have a care of the Men and the Methods that
brought them about.

King, is, because in so doing we do but Pray for our selves; and seek our own
good in endeavoring his Majesty's Safety.

Loyalty is the Interest as well as Duty of Englishmen, and their being true
to Monarchy is their Happiness as well as Honor; past experiences have
demonstrated, how Happy we have been under it, and how Miserable without it;
and I cannot but congratulate the happiness of the English genius in this; for
it is the just honor and prelation of Monarchy, that its Safety consists in
the wealth and happiness of its Subjects, when few instances can be given of
any Commonwealths that have flourished much longer, than while Necessity and
Poverty, were their Ligatures and Cements; and it is the good hap of a People,
to be so naturally inclined to that which is much their Interest, and their
Felicity.

In prudence and interest (I say) we are obliged to pray for the King's safety,
to the wisdom of whose Government under God we owe the correction of our Evil
Fate; to whose Care we are indebted, That under it we may live quiet and
peaceable Lives; to whose Authority it must be thanfully referred, that we are
restrained from that Violence and Evil, whereby we are naturally prone to
ruinate our own, and our Neighbors Felicity, to make our selves and others
miserable. It is the great concern of all good Subjects, that the Supreme Power
should be always Vigorous and Safe, Prosperous and abounding in all Plenty,
that he may be a Terror to his Enemies, and a Defense to his Loyal Subjects. In
his Majesty's Safety are we Safe, his Health, and Wealth, enable him to secure
us in our Liberty, and Religion, our Properties and our Peace; and thus our own
interest may move us, earnestly to intercede with God for the Safety of our
Sovereign, for the benefit is ours more than his, whilst we are not troubled
with the Cares, and yet enjoy the Blessed Fruit of Government.

We must pray for the Kings Safety, that we may not be exposed to the Cruelties
of those, that if there were no King in Israel, would do what was right in
their own Eyes. 'Twas the Custom of the Ancient Heathen, when they Besieged a
City, in the first place to endeavor to entice out the Guardian Deity, by
alleging the injustice of the Inhabitants, and inviting it to reside with a
more holy People, -- ut habeat te Vrbs melior acceptiorque holding it
impossible to prevail against the Outworks, when the divine inward Strength
stood firm. Whilst our Monarch is Safe and Prosperous, and our Laws Executed
according to justice and equity, the blessings of Peace, and a happy Agreement
between the King and the People, cannot be charmed out of our Coasts; but if
once, either through Envy or Avarice, Ill Nature or Disobedience, we suffer his
Power to be Eclipsed, his Prerogative to be curtailed, and the Glory of his
Crown to be sullyed; we are then undermining the Safety of the whole Kingdom,
and make way for those that would Rob God of his Honor, the King of his
Diadem, and Subjects of their Peace. Tyranny is infinitely more tolerable than
an unbridled Liberty, for that like a Tempest might throw down some fruitful
Trees; but Arming the giddy Multitude with a Power to do what they please,
would ruin all before it: Confusion is worse than the hardest Subjection, and
a corrupt Government better than a Civil-War, Melius est sub his esse, sub
quibus nihil licet, quam sub quibus omnia. And therefore the want of a King, to
gag the mouths of Blasphemers, to bound the Extravagancies of a lawless
Liberty, and to manacle the hands of Plunderers, must be a complicated
mischief; and we cannot expect more miseries, than will infallibly invade us;
nor fewer than befell us in those days, when we had no King in Israel: and were
scourged by the Rods and Scorpions of those that did what was right in their
own Eyes. Which that we may prevent for the future, let us pray, God save the
King.

And inde^ed we are more concerned in the last place, to this duty, because the
same Men, are tracing the same Methods for the destruction of the Son, by which
they brought about the Murder of his Father: and shall our Land (not
sufficiently purged from the Blood of one King) incur the Guilt of another
Kings Blood, by giving way to the Sons of Violence to accomplish their hellish
designs? To be guilty of this repeated Villainy, does strangely aggravate the
Nations Sins: for we sin against Light and Knowledge, and Fair Warning given
us, and late Experience already had of such doings. Many (I suppose) that had a
hand in the late War, did not foresee or dream, that the fair pretenses that
began it, would have ended in such a bloody Tragedy! but if we permit the same
Amalekites, to trepan us again into the same Crimes: and make us serve to the
same evil purposes again; we then make our Ruin, our own Guilt, as well as our
misery, and must perish as unpittyed Fools for ever.

Let me entreat you to look a little behind you, that you may not be again
surprised. Did not all the mischiefs our Late Troubles produced, owe their
Original to Schism and Faction? did not the Dissenters of those times seduce
the People, by making them believe, That the Church of England was forsaking
her Doctrine, and embracing the Errors and Superstitions of Rome? did not they
carry on their designs against the Government, by publishing Libels, and making
People believe the Late King (of blessed memory) was either a Papist or
Popishly-Affected? were not Fears and Jealousies the main Engines used by those
bloody miscreants, to serve their turns? and is their not plain demonstration
that the same things are endeavored by the same sort of Men, to be acted over
again? is it not daily inculcated that Popery is bringing in amongst us, and if
we do not submit to it, our Throats must all be cut, by the French that invaded
Purbeck, or a vast Army of Spanish Pilgrims? are we not told many a dreadful
Story of Slavery, Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary Government, and God knows
what? only to Affright us out of our Religion and Allegiance, into a sordid
compliance with men of Anti-Monarchical and Anti-Episcopal Principles.

For God's sake tell me why we should give credence to the Pretenses of such
men, as have once already subverted a Flourishing Kingdom, and overthrown both
Religion and Property? I rather think if these things were well considered we
should not so easily be cajoled by them; for though their Cry be for Liberty,
they mean nothing less than to bring in such an Anarchy as would introduce
Confusion, and the greatest Slavery on this side Hell: and while they Cry out
against Popery they mean Episcopacy, and do but amuse us with the Romish Wolf,
that we may be made a prey to the Northern-Bear.

Were not the late instances of Tumultuary Proposals and Applications, Tricks
of the Old Trade? Addresses in the nature of Remonstrances, Arbitrary Orders
for Imprisoning Subjects, and Votes suspending Penal Statutes, and rendering the
King incapable of making use of his Own Revenue for the Public Safety: and
putting him into a worse condition than the meanest of his Subjects? did not
they court the King to have the Militia, and all Offices and Places of Trust at
their disposal? and were not these the very things that begat the War, and
ruined us all.

Did not the Parliament in Forty One, etc. Protest their Duty and Allegiance to
his Majesty in the fairest terms imaginable, and confirmed the same by Oaths
and Covenants, that they had no intentions to offer Violence to his Majesty's
Person, to Hurt his Power, or Destroy his Monarchy? and yet did not the same
Persons, against their own Remonstrances, Declarations, Protestations,
Promises, Vows, and Oaths, in cold Blood Murder their Lawful Sovereign?

Did they not in a Declaration published in 42. say they intended nothing but a
Reformation of some Abuses crept into the Church? and yet did not the same men
pull down Churches to set up an Enthusiastic Devotion, seize the Churches
Patrimony to enrich themselves; and at last abolish its Government, to gratify
the Phanatick Zeal of a distracted multitude? and shall we be ruined by them a
second time? God forbid!

One would think there needed no other Argument amongst us against Rebillion,
or Sedition in the State, or against Schism or Division in the Church, than the
bare remembrance of what this Nation has already suffered by them: we have
felt to our Costs what it was to want our Lawful Government, and what was the
Effect of resisting Authority; for our Enemies having (by a vast Expense of
Blood and Treasute,) wrested the Power into their own hands, they threw down
the Nobles from their Honors and Estates, and set up the very Scum and Dregs
of the People: in stead of One King of a Glorious Race, we had a whole Army of
Usurpers, who sent their Horses to Church, and went themselves to Conventicles!
and a great part of their Devotion there, was to Curse Loyal Subjects under the
Name of Meroz, and contrive to Murder their King in the Name of Jesus.

Two things they promised the abused Nation, viz. Religion and Liberty, and
made good their promises by bringing in all the Religons in the world, except
the Orthodox! and to be of that, was to be an Enemy to the Gate; men might pray
without sense, so they prayed without a Book! but to say the Lords Prayer, was
to be called a Malignant, and to pray for the King, was to be accounted a
Traitor.

And as they dealt with us in the affairs of Religion, so did they in respect
of our Priveledgs; allowing no other share to us than what might confirm our
Vassalage, and uphold there Tyranny! they had the Liberty to Plunder and
Oppress, and we had the Liberty to Beg or Starve; they had the Liberty to be
Cruel and Savage, and we had Liberty to be Dishonest, or be Hanged, which I
think is sufficient to persuade us, by all lawful means to prevent the designs
of those persons, which but lately, were so mischievous, and deadly, to the
King and his three Kingdoms.

But say some, is it not unreasonable, and unjust, to charge the sins of the
former Age upon this?

No, but on the contrary, it is both rational and equitable so to do, since the
same principles will upon the same occasion, eternally act the same things;
unless prevented by the greatest care and circumspection. And for those who are
displeased at the rehearsal of former Wickedness, if they would lay aside their
Prejudice, have cause to thank us; for our design is to Reform, and not Ruin
them; to show them the Danger, and not draw them into the Snare; and to tell
them the naked truth of things, which they hear not at all in Conventi^l^s: or
else are represented to them under more favorable Expressions, than they ought
be: for who that sees Rebellion in its ugly hue, and Murder in its own shape,
would not fly from it with Horror and Amazement? and therefore has it been a
man Artifice amongst the Nonconformist Preachers, to disuade their Admirers
from frequenting those places, where the Doctrine of Obedience is Taught: lest
their Eyes should be opened, and their Consciences convinced, and they lose
both their Pension and their Pro^^l^te.

And therefore if there be any in this great Congregation who have frequented
such Pla^^s, where People are alienated from their Duty to God and the King:
let me entreat them by a Religious Conformity to the Laws Ecclesiastical and
Civil, to seek their own Peace and Safety; and by a true Repentance, prevent
the Ruin of Soul and Body: For they that Resist Lawful Authority, shall
receive to themselves Damnation. To which give me leave to add the Advice of a
great Lawyer. Peruse all Books, Records and Histories, and you shall find a
Principle in Law, a Rule in Reason, and a Trial in Experience, that Treason
does ever produce fatal and final destruction to the offender, and never
attains the desired End; (two incidents inseparable thereunto) and therefore
let all Men abandon it as the Poisonous Bait of the Devil; and follow the
Precept in Holy Scripture, Serve God, and Honor the King, and have no Company
with the Seditious.

Lastly, Pro quibus orandum pro it is laborandum. Let an honest endeavor enforce
your Prayers, and Seeing we Live among those that are Enemies to Peace: a Race
of Cruel and Blood-Thirsty Men; let it be your greatest Care to Discover and
Prevent their Treacherous Designs, that we may have no more Rebellions hatched
among us. Suffer not Ambitious Men to purchase their own Advancement, with the
Price of your Blood and Treasure; for they may Contrive with their H^ads till
they drop from their Shoulders, unless they have more Hands to Assist them. And
since I have the Honor to speak to the Magistracy of this Famous City, (of
whose Fidelity to the King, I come not to Doubt but rather Congratulate) Suffer
me to entreat you, not to let any Man or Thing divide you from his Majesty, for
none can do it but with a design to destroy you. The Safety of the King is in
the Welfare of his People, and the Prosperity of this City depends upon the
King's Safety; and if Men would look into the Truth of things, they would soon
perceive that their Interests are complicated, and indeed the same; for it is
true in Experience as well as Speculation: and whoever will trace either the
Ruin of the Late King (of Blessed Memory,) or the subsequent Misery of this
City, to their first Origins, will soon find the Artifice of some Men in
Separating them from each other, effected both.

But my assurance that I speak to many of those Prudent and Loyal Magistrates,
and Citizens, whose early Abhorrence of Rebellious Associations, and many other
demonstrations of their Duty and Allegiance to his Majesty, and Submission to
his Laws, are an unquestionable Evidence that they understand their Interest,
as well as Duty; I shall wave all Discourses on that Subject, and with begging
pardon for this digression, take leave only to show you by what Methods you may
demonstrate your Care of the public Safety, and this I do not as an Imperious
Dictator, but as an humble Remembrancer.

First, By having a watchful Eye over those Amal^kites, that by Sowing Sedition
amongst you make way for all kinds of Mischief; and this besides your Duty and
Allegiance, you have Provocations too from your own Danger: Since some that
have been Obliged to this City for their Bread, like Ungrateful Villains, would
have made it the Theater for Bloody Tragedies! and is all their Pretenses come
to this? are these the men that were so fearful of Popery, cried so loud
against Arbitrary-Power, and called themselves the only true Protestants? did
the several Factions of the City and Country, Club, Pray, and Drink together,
for no better purposes than the Murder of a gracious King, and the ruin of a
Flourishing Kingdom? I need make no Answer, their Flying from the Face of
Justice has done it for me, and confirmed the Saying of a Learned Statesman,
That the biggest part of Dissenters are criminally Disobedient. I Confess that
Charity commands me to believe, that some Dissenters are more peaceably minded,
but these may be easily differenced from the rest, by their meekness, Patience,
and readiness to be informed; but for those that have Brazen Brows, and Iron
Necks, I can never believe them to have Tender Consciences. Therefore if there
be any under your Government that will do nothing but what is Right in their
own Eyes, let them undergo what is Just in Yours: for you are more bound in
Conscience to Execute Righteous Laws, than they can be to break them.

When the Rabble have a mind to Rebel, every thing they would have introduced
or altered, is their Conscience; when it is only a Pretense that they may Desie
the Laws, Outface Authority, and Advance themselves; against whose Cruelties
the Execution of the Laws can only defend us; and if this were done in all
places, our Peace would not be disturbed, we should either have No Plots, or
None Prosper, and have frequent occasion to bless the Name of God for the
Security of Laws, and Magistrates, the Suppression of Treasons and
Conspiracies, and the Continuance of Peace and Plenty.

Si Religio tollitur, nulla nobis ratio cum Caelo est. Lactant. instit. lib. 3.
c. 10.
if we do not Reform our Lives: There is no Peace to the Wicked says God, and
while we make a Mock at Religion, what can we expect but that God should Laugh
at our Calamities.

All the Miseries of England may be dated from the time that Men began to wax
Wanton in their Religion: for then did they become Immoral, Loose, and
Debauched in their Lives: Heresy, Schism and Factions in the Church; and
Sedition, Privy-Conspiracy in the State, are but Gemini Fratres, which come
into the World at one and the same time. And till Sin and Wickedness,
Debauchery and Profaneness, be suppressed, which makes the Heavens look so Black
over us? we cannot expect the Face of God to Shine upon us with a happy Peace
and Tranquillity.

(...).
Good Men always make the Best Subjects, and they that out of a Pure Conscience
give unto God the things that are Gods, will never be wanting to give Caesar
his Due, and you cannot any better way Serve the King and the Government, than
by restraining Impiety, and promoting among all his People the Fear of God, and
a due Sense of Religion: And that your Endeavors may not be ineffectual,
remember to strengthen them with your fervent Prayers, saying, God Save the
King: Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, for the sake of our dearest Lord
and Savior, to whom with thee O Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all Glory and
Praise for Evermore.

Amen.
FINIS

