A GROAN AT THE FUNERAL of that incomparable and Glorious MONARCH, CHARLES
THE FIRST, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.

On whose Sacred Person was acted that execrable, horrid, and prodigious
Murder, by a traiterous Crew and bloody Combination at WESTMINSTER, Janury the
30. 1648.

Written by I. B.

Printed in the Year, M.D.C.XL.IX.

A GROAN.
TO speak our Griefs at full over Thy Tomb
(Great Soul) we should be Thunderstruck, and dumb.
The trivial Offerings of our bubling eyes
Are but fair Libels at such Obsequies.
When Grief bleeds inward, not to sense, it is deep;
We Have lost so much, that 'twere a sin to weep,
The wretched Bankrupt counts not up his sums
When his inevitable ruin comes.
Our loss is finite when we can compute;
But that strikes speechless, which is past recruit.
We Are sunk to sense; and on the Ruin gaze,
As on a curled Comets fiery blaze:
As Earthquakes fright us, when the teeming earth
Rends open her bowels for a fatal birth:
As Inundations seize our trembling eyes
Whose rolling billows over Kingdoms rise.
Alas! our Ruins are cast up, and sped
In that black total -- CHARLES is Murdered.
Rebellious Giant hands have broake that Pole,
On which our Orb did long in Glory roll.
That Roman Monsters wish in Act we see, Caligula.

Three Kingdoms necks have felt the Axe in Thee.
The Butchery is such, as when by Caine,
The fourh Division of the world was slain.
The mangled Church is on the shambles laid,
Her Massacre is on thy Block displayed.
Thine is Thy peoples epidemicke Tomb:
Thy Sacrifice a numerous Hecatombe.
The Powder-min's now fired: we were not freed,
But respited by Traitors thus to bleed.
Novembers plots are brewed and broach't in worse,
And January now compleats the Curse.
Our Lives, Estates, Laws, and Religion, All
Lie crushed, and gasping at this dismal fall.
Accursed Day that blotted'st out our light!
May Thou be ever muffled up in Night.
At Thy return may sables hang the sky;
And tears, not beams, distill from Heavens Eye.
Cursed be that smile that guilds a Face on Thee,
The Mother of prodigious Villainy,
Let not a breath be wafted, but in moanes;
And all our words be but articulate groans.
May all Thy Rubric be this dismal Brand;
Now comes the miscreant Doomes-day of the Land.
Good Friday wretchedly transcribed; and such
As Horror brings alike, though not so much.
May Dread still fill Thy minutes, and we sit
Frighted to think, what others durst commit.
A Fact that copies Angels when they fell,
And justly might create another Hell,
Above the scale of Crimes; Treason sublimed,
That cannot by a parallel be rim'd.
Raviliack's was but under-graduate sin,
And Gourney here a Pupil Assassin.
Infidel wickedness, without the Pale!
Yet such as justifies the Canniball.
Riot Apochryphall, of Legend breed;
Above the Canon of a Jesuits Creed.
Spirits-of-witch-craft! quintessentiall guilt!
Hels Pyramid! another Babell built!
Monstrous in bulk! above our Fancies span!
A Behemoth! a Crime Leviathan!
So desperately damnable, that here
Even Wild smells Treason, and will not appear.
That Murdering piece of the new Tyrant-State,
By whom't has Shot black Destinies of late;
He that belched forth the Loyal Burleighs doom,
Rocoyles at this so dreadful Martyrdom.
What depth of Terror lies in that Offense,
That thus can grind a seared Conscience!
Hellish Complotment! which a League renewes,
Less with the men then th'Actions of the Jews.
Such was their Bedlam Rabble, and the Cry
Of Justice now, amongst them was Crucify:
Pilates Consent is Bradshaws Sentence here;
The Judgement-hall's removed to Westminster.
Hayle to the Reeden Scepter; The Head, and knee
A^to'r aga^^e that Cursed Pageantrie.
The (...) ^rew in solemn pomp guard on
(...) Maj^^^ as not to th'Block, but Throne:
The Belch agrees of those envenomed Lies;
There a Blaspemer, here a Murderer dies.
If that go first in horror, this comes next,
A pregnant Comment on that ghastly Text.
The Heavens never saw, but in that Tragic hour,
Slaughtered so great an Innocence and Power.
Bloodthirsty Tygars I could no stream suffice
T'allay that Hell within your Breasts but This?
Must you needs swill in Cleopatra's Cup,
And drink the price of Kingdoms in a sup?
Cisterns of Loyalty have deeply bled,
And now you have damm'd the Royal Fountain Head.
Cruel Phlebotomie! at once to draine
The Median, and the rich Basilick vein!
The tinctures great that popular murder brings,
It Is scarlet-deep, that is died in blood of Kings.
But what! could Israel find no other way
To their wished Canaan than through This Red Sea?
Must God have here his leading Fire and Cloud,
And He be th'Guide to this outrageous Crowd?
Shall the black Conclave counterfeit His hand,
And superscribe Their Guilt, Divine Command?
Does th'ugly Fiend usurp a Saint-like grace?
And Holy Water wash the Devils face!
Shall Dagons Temple the mocked Arc enclose?
Can Esau's hands agree with Jacob's voice?
Must Molech's Fire now on the Altar burn?
And Abel's blood to Expiation turn?
Is Righteousness so lewd a Bawd? and can
The Bibles Cover serve the Alcoran?
Thus when Hel's meant, Religion's bid to shine;
So Faux his Lantern lights him to his Mine.
Here, here is sins non ultra, when one Lie
Kills This, and stabs at Higher Majesty.
And though His sleepy Arm suspend the scourge,
Nor does loud Blood in winged Vengeance urge:
Though the soft hours a while in pleasures fly,
And conquering Treason sing her Lullabie.
The guilt at length in fury he will inroule
With barbed Arrows on the trayt'rous Soul.
Time may be when that John-a Leyden King
His Quarters to this Tomb an Offering bring,
And that Be-Munster'd Rabble may have eyes
To read the Price of their dear Buttcheries.
Yet if just Providence reprieve the Fate,
The Judgment will be deeper, though it be late.
and Aftertimes shall feel the curse enhanc'd,
By how much They Have the sin bequeathed advanced.
Mean time (most blessed shade) the Loyal eye
Shall pay her Tribute to Thy Memory.
Thy Aromatic Name shall feast our sense,
'Bove Balmie Spiknard's fragrant Redolence*
Whilst on Thy loathsome Murderers shall dwell
A plague sore-blast, and rotten ulcers smell.
Wonder of Men and Goodness! stamped to be
The Pride, and Flourish of all History.
Thou have undone the Annals, and engrossed
All the Heroes Glory which the Earth e're lost.
Thy Privilege it is only to commence
Laureate in Sufferings, and in Patience.
Thy wrongs were 'bove all Sweetness to digest;
And yet thy Sweetness conquered the sharp test:
Both so immense, and infinitely vast,
The first could not be reached, but by the last.
Mean Massacres are but in death begun;
But Thou have Lived an Execution.
Close conffin'd up in a deceased Life;
Had Orphan Children, and a Widow-Wife.
Friends not t'approach, or comfort, but to mourn
And weep their unheard plaints, as at Thy Urne?
Such black Attendants Colonied Thy Cell,
But for thy Presence, Car'sbrooke had been Hell.
Thus basely to be Dungeon'd, would enrage
Great Bajazet beyond an Iron Cage.
That deep indignity might yet have layne
Something the lighter from a Tamerlaine.
But here Sidonian Slaves usurp the Reins,
And lock the Scepter-bearing Arms in chains.
The spew'd-up surfeit of this glut'nous Land;
Honored by Scorn, and clean beneath all brand.
For such a Varlot-brood to tear all down,
And make a common Football of the Crown;
T'insult on wounded Majesty, and broach
The blood of Honor by their vile reproach.
What Royal Eye but Thine could sober see,
Bowing so Low, yet bearing up so high?
What an unbroken sweetness graced Thy Soul,
Beyond the Worlds proud conquest, or control!
Maugre grim cruelty, thou kept'st Thy Hold;
Thy Thorny Crown was still a Crown of Gold.
Chaste Honor Might enraged could never defloure,
Though others the Use, Thou claim'dst the Right of Power.
The brave Athenian thus (with lopp'd-off Hands)
A stop to swelling sails by's mouth commands. Cynegirus.

New Vigor roused Thee still in Thy Embroyles,
Antaeus-like, recruiting from Thy Foyles.
Victorious fury could not terror bring,
Enough to quell a captivated King.
So did that Roman Miracle withstand Horatius. Cocles.

Hetrurian shoales, but with a single hand.
The Church in Thee had still her Armies; thus
The World once fought with Athanasius.
The Gantlet thus upheld; It is decreed,
(No safety else for Treason) CHARLES must bleed.
Traitor and Sovereign now inverted meet;
The wealthy Olive's dragged to the Brambles feet.
The Throne is metamorphiz'd to the Bar,
And despicable Batts the Eagle dare.
Astonishment! yet still we must admire
Thy courage growing with Thy conflicts high'r.
No palsied hands or trembling knees betray
That Cause, on which Thy Soul sure bottomed lay.
So free and undisturbed flew thy Breath,
Not as condemned, but purchasing a death.
Those early Martyrs in their funeral pile,
Embraced their Flames with such a quiet smile.
Brave Coeur-de-Lyon Soul, that would not veil
In one base syllable to beg Thy Bail!
How did Thou blush to live at such a price,
As asked thy People for a sacrifice!
The Athenian Prince in such a pitch of zeal, Codrus.

Redeemed his destined Host, and Commonweal;
Who bribed his cheated Enemies to kill,
And both their Conquest, and their Conqu^erour fell.
Thus Thou our Martyr died'st: but Oh! we stand
A Ransom for another CHARLES his Hand.
One that will write Thy Chronicle in Red,
And dip His Pen in what Thy Foes have bled.
Shall Treas'nous Heads in purple Caldrons drench,
And with such veins the Flames of Kingdoms quench.
Then Thou at least at Westminster shal't be
Filled in the Pompous List of Majesty.
Thy Mausoloeum shall in Glory rise,
And Tears and wonder force from Nephews Eyes.
Till when (though black-mouthed Miscreants engrave
No Epitaph, but Tyrant upon Thy Grave.)
A Vault of Loyalty shall keep Thy Name,
An orient, and bright Olibian flame.
On which, when time succeeding foot shall tread,
Such Characters as these shall there be read.
Here CHARLES the best of Monarchs butchered lies;
The Glory of all Martyrologies.
Bulwark of Law; the Churches Cittadell;
In whom they triumphed once, with whom they fell:
An English Solomon, a Constantine;
Pandect of Knowledge, Humane and Divine.
Meek even to wonder, yet of stoutest Grace,
To sweeten Majesty, but not debase.
So whole made up of Clemency, the Throne
And Mercy-seat, to Him were always one.
Inviting Treason with a pardoning look,
Instead of Gratitude, a Stab He took.
With passion loved, that when He murd'red lay,
Heaven conquered seemed, and Hell to bear the sway.
A Prince so richly good, so blessed a Reign.
The World n're saw but once, nor can again.
Scilicet, Humano generi Natura benigna
Nil dedit, aut tribuet moderato hoc Principe majus
In quo vera Dei, vivensque eluxit Imago:
Hunc quoniam scelerata cohors vi^lavit, acerbas
Sacrilego Deus ipse petet de Sanguine poenas
Contemptumque sui Simulachri haud linquet inultum.
Parodia ex Buchanani Geneth. Jacobi sexti.
FINIS.

