A LETTER FROM Major General KIRK in IRELAND, To his Friend here in LONDON.
From His Majesty's Camp near Dublin, July the 4th. 1690.
WHen a Man Dates his Letter so near Dublin, you ought to expect a long
Relation how we came thither, which I Will tell you as short as I can, and that
we must have Success when so brave a Man Leads us as our Master, who was the
first Man hurt in his Army, with a Cannon Bullet, which frighted every body but
himself; who after he was Dressed, Rid round the Army, viewed all the Passes,
in order to our Attacquing them the next day: I Will also tell you how we came to
be so far advanced as Drogheda; His Majesty Landing at Carrickfergus, went to
Belfast, from whence he sent his Orders for all the Troops to advance to our
Frontiers, the Enemy being possessed of all the Passes, and so strongly
Encamped near Dundalk, which they had very well Fortified, that if they had not
been the least of Men, would have put us to a great deal of trouble to have
passed the Mountains; but they Retired to Drogheda, where they stayed Encamped,
with the River Boyne before them, that is but Fordable in three places, and two
of them but at low Water: We put our selves in Battle, which sight frighted
them, though they had the Impudence to come to the Waterside and call us all the
Rogues, Rebels, etc. that the French Tongue affords. That Evening was spent in
Cannonading, and the next morning his Majesty was resolved to Attacque them,
and force their Camp, which certainly was as bold a thing as ever was done; in
order to which, he sent the Right Wing of Horse, and three Brigades of Foot,
with some small Fieldpieces, to a Pass some 4 Miles from our Camp, which Pass
they were Masters of: They seeing us March, went with the best part of the Army
toward the Pass, and left in the Camp Lieutenant General Hamilton, and several
Battalians, and a good number of Horse, before their Camp, to keep that Pass.
As soon as his Majesty had Notice that our Horse had taken the Pass upon the
Right, the Enemy making but a slender resistance, for King James had already
made his way toward Dublin, Commanded the rest of the Army to Attacque the
Camp; his Dutch Guards, with Count Solmes, Marched first, who were to pass the
Ford by a Retrenchment and Old Houses, that were lined with 400 of the Enemy,
notwithstanding they passed over the three Battalians of Guards, who were
Saluted with a great deal of Fire from the 400 Men Entrenched, so left the
Intrenchment; and then the Enemy Marched down with 7 great and good Battalians;
the Guards received all their fire, and immediately the Enemies Horse Charged
them both Front and Rear; Colonel Collimot's and Ducambones Regiments in the
Rear of the Guard, having no Pikes, were a little ill used by the Enemies Horse;
Colonel Collimot Shot through the Thigh and Arm, but I hope he will live; the
poor Old Duke was Killed by an unfortunate Shot through the Neck from one of
the French Regiments, being mingled with the Enemy, and had received two Cuts
by their Horse in the Head. I March over with Sir John Hanmores Regiment,
Tiffin St. John's, and two Dutch, who were no sooner over, but the Horse Guards
of King James Charged, and so well, that several of our Officers were Cut with
their Swords, and theirs Killed with our Officers Pikes. By this time the
Prince of Wertenburg passed the other Ford up to the Neck in Water, with the
Danes; the 7 Battalians Retired in very good Order, being sustained by their
Horse, who did not fail to Charge our Foot as they drew up. Our Horse past
next, and you may believe the Enemy Run, when I tell you our brave King (for so
must all the world call him) Charged at the Head of the Inis-killing Horse, his
Lame Hand holding the Bridle, and his Sword in the left Hand; no Armor but his
Blue Ribbon above his Coat: In the Pursuit we took Lieutenant General Hamilton,
and several Officers; a great many of their best Officers were Killed, and
above 1000 Men; and, to give then their due, they made so good a Retreat, and
so fast, that we could do them no hurt, but frightning them, which is to that
degree, that they have lef(...) Dublin, most of their Baggage, all their
Ammunition and Stores of Provision, a Country full of Furrage, of all sorts; and
I believe there is not 1000 Men left together with Monsieur de Louson. King
James we hear has left the Army, and is gone wit^ some 3 People with him,
toward Waterford, I wis(...) him a good Journey, our Fleet good Success.

Drogheda is Surrendered upon Discretion; th(...) Duke of Ormond is gone last
Night into Dublin, t(...) take Possession; we March to Morrow.

FINIS.
Printed for J. M. in Little-Brittain. 1690.


