A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL On the 29th. of May, Being the Happy Day of
His Majesty's Inauguration and Birth. By HENRY L. Bp. of CHICHESTER.

Published by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Lower Walk in the New Exchange. 1661.

A SERMON Preached at Whitehall On the 29 of May, Being the Happy Day of His
Majesty's Inauguration and Birth.
EZEKIEL. 21. 27. I will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn it, and it shall be no more,
until he come whose Right it is, and I will give it him.
YOU will easily judge Thunder and Earthquakes improper Prologues to usher in
such a Triumph as the Inauguration of a King. When Balaam in his Parable
concerning Israel told Balak, The shout of a King is amongst them, Number. 23. 21.
sure he meant not such boisterous Acclamations as This, whose noise disturbs
the Upper Region, and affrights the Lower; But my excuse must be the common
Say, that such Meteors as Thunder and Lightning, usually clear a troubled Sky,
and purge an ill-condition'd Air.

We have of late years sucked in the unwholesome vapors of an Air tainted with
Rebellion and Rapine, with ill Opinions and worse Actions, and therefore need
the loudest Thunder to fright us into our lost Duties, and cleanse our Element
grown as degenerous as our selves.

I do not mistake the words in comparing them to Thunder, It is the voice of
the Lord. Verse 26.
Haec dicit Jehovah, It Is he utters this voice, a mighty voice, which shakes
the wilderness, Psalm. 29. 5, 8.
and breaks the Cedars of Lebanon; which levels the Mountains to make them
equal to the Vale, and beats the Towers, whose height threatened Heaven, to
rubbish, until they ly as low as their foundation: The mountains quake at him
and the hills melt, Nah. 1. 5.
and the Earth is burnt at His presence.

The dying Prophet Elisha was angry with the King of Israel, when he bid him
strike with the Arrows upon the ground, 2 King, 13. 18.
that he struck only Threetimes? had he struck oftener, V. 19.
the Syrians had been quite overthrow'n. But this Artillery which stands
mounted in my Text is sufficient to do the work intended. After these Three
Overturns there needs no re-inforcing of the blow, nor is there any Subject
left for further execution. The violent Hurrican, fiercest of whirlwinds, does
not more surely destroy all obstacles standing in the way, than these Three
Overturns Remove that which obstructs His way who was to Come.

I know the History properly points at Zedekiah who was that wicked profane
Prince, verse 25. condemned to utter destruction: 2 King. 25. 27.
And at Jehojachin, whose head was exalted by Evilmerodach, upon the Abasement
of the others height.

The Chaldee Paraphrase says, As those words, Take off the Crown, threatened
Zedekiah, so Remove the Diadem, threated Seraiah the High Priest, V. 21.
who was accordingly slain at Riblah: This Diadem or Cidaris, being an ornament
worn on the Priests head, and (as Hieron. writes) had the Name of God engraven
upon it; As also you read Wisd. 18. 24. with thy Majesty graven upon the Diadem
of his head.

Yet this particular of my Text is Mystically interpreted of Christ, by whose
Copy Kings hold their Right, All dominion being given to Him, and from him
derived upon His Vicegerents here in Earth.

And it may Prophetically and properly enough look on Zerubbabel that excellent
Prince, who was a Type of Christ too; whom, after a long interruption of the
Regal Line, God raised up to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, and Repair the
breaches of his Temple. To which end he threatens an Overthrow to the strength
of Kingdoms which should oppose his work of Restoration Agge. 2. 23.


I shall take the liberty, and that without violence to the words, or
distorsion of the sense, to apply them unto the happy occasion of This Day, and
to reflect from hence upon the Calamities fuffered under Those who sought to
hinder It. Yet with no purpose to refresh the Memory either of Those Persons,
or the Mischiefs by them Acted, which the Grace and Mercy of Him who was the
greatest sufferer would have buried in an Act of Perpetual Oblivion; but in
thankful duty to God to commemorate the defeat of Their late unpardonable
practices, who by Fraud Abjured, and by Force did all they could to keep out
Him who was to Come, from possessing his undoubted Right.

So that this First Part of my Text is a Judgment threatened, Division.
not leaving until I will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn it, and it shall be no
more.

But this Judgment has a Sequel of Mercy, and was intended only to make way
for a greater Blessing in One who Comes after: which is an He eminent for His
Personal endowments, Until He Come, And eminent for His Power which is
supported by Two such Pillars that it can never fail.

A successive Right of his own, Until He Come whose Right it is.

God, who establishes this Right as His Donation, And I will Give it Him.

I take the words in that Method wherein they ly, 1. Part. I will Overturn, etc.
I will Overturn, Overturn, Overturn. The Greek in stead of Overturn, reads,
(...), Iniquity, Iniquity, Iniquity. If you join them Both together, the
Construction holds properly in relation to Gods Justice, who will certainly by
His revenge Overturn all Iniquity. And if you apply it to our own Condition,
you must grant we have seen Iniquity and violence and strife in the City; and
felt the bitter effects of them for many years. Psalm. 55. 9, 10.
Nay there was Triplex Iniquitas, Iniquity, Iniquity, Iniquity, one successive
to the other, in the several variations of our Misery; And by the blessing of
our Gracious God we have seen Three Overturns, like so many Batteries raised to
destroy Each of them.

The First Overturn bent against the single Person, who was the fatal Product
of a Counsel more impious than the Means whereby he compassed his Bloody ends.
A strange Usurper, of whom I may truly say -- Nec bellua tetrior ulla est
Claudian.

Quam servi rabies in libera colla furentis;
Never was there Beast of that outrageous Pride and Cruelty, who from a
contemptible low condition was lifted so high as to trample upon the Laws and
Necks of a (till then) Free people.

It Is true, Psalm. 93. 4.
The floods that then lifted up their voice, Psalm. 41. 8.
Vox Cataractarum, Those Tumultuous waves, and the Madness of the People, in
their unruly votes Cried quite contrary to God's Text, In stead of Take off,
Set on the Crown upon the head of usurpation, Remove the Diadem from Him who
had only Right to wear it, adorn the Temples of a Tyrant; But the voice of God
is mightier, (says David,) This Overruling voice, cries here against This
Tyrant, as Profane as Zedekiah at his worst, Verse. 25.
(...), (they are his Epithets) and more wicked; for I find not Zedekiah's hand
stained with half the Blood our Monster in his short Rule shed; I say the same
voice cries from Heaven, which bid Cut down the Tree in Nebuchadnezzar's
vision, Dan. 4. 14.
Take off the Crown, dethrone the Usurper; and when He says the word, who can
resist or countermand? One woe is past: Our first Overturn has cast down this
aspiring Lucifer, causing his Image and remembrance to vanish out of the City,
Psalm. 73. 20.
like a Night vision: So that we may ask Quomodo cecidisti? How ar't Thou
fallen? O how suddenly do Thou cast them down! such slippery footing has
all Greatness which is not warranted by the true Doner, but built on a
Foundation of Blood.

Overturn is against a Monster of more heads, A Complicated Tyranny under that
Bed of Snakes, which Cut asunder formerly, Closed again in 59. Renewing their
Cast skins with the old Practice to Tyrannise over their fellow Subjects,
According to the Trust reposed in them, (which was the word in fashion.) That
Aggregate of Rulers, to whom no Name is proper but his who was the President of
their Assembly, Mar. 5. 9.
Legion, For they were many; A Medly compounded of all Trades, of all
Professions from the Soldier to the Mechanic Artizan, which in their Mixture
resemble the Feet of Nebuchadnezzar's Image; Their whole design being supported
like That, Da^. 2. 42. v. 43.
with Iron and Clay. The Miry Clay to show the abject dirty Instruments engaged
in their new modeled Rule, The Iron to enforce Obedience to it. At the
Building of Babel all sorts of workmen were joined, It was the same in this
work of Confusion begun upon the Kingdom and the Church; In so Destructive a
work these Operators were needful, 'Twas fit that such men who had before
understood the use of the Hammer and the Ax should be employed, when Churches
were to be demolished, and the Carved work of our Temples (as Psalm. 74.
the Prophet complained) Broken down with Axes and Hammers.

But this unequal mixture overthrew the whole Frame of their design; The Sword
which for a time strengthened this lome building, deserting them, caused it to
crumble into dust; As Cramps of Iron with-draw'n from a Rotten House make the
ill-built Fabric sink: And those examples of Insolence, which like the Tail of
the Dragon had cast down all our Stars, Rev. 12. 4.
both Those of the First Magnitude the Peers, and Those who were Equal to
Themselves, yet joined not in their horrid sense, were by the blessing of God
and by His second Overturn Cast down themselves, becoming spectacles of
reproach to all the world in those punishments which they deservedly suffered.

Overturn more, and that, like the last breath and blast of a Storm, when the
violence is spent, ushers in a Calm; This I look on as bent against that Rising
little more than a year since, whose Spring and Head appeared in these parts,
but the Stream was to be increased in every County as they passed from this our
Metropolis, whence their frantic Leaders set out, to the other Metropolis in
the North; An attempt to hinder His Arrival who was expected, when His Foot was
even upon the threshold ready to enter into his own, by an Army Collected from
all Quarters of the Kingdom. Which design looked at first with a dreadful
aspect, like the Ramm in Daniels vision, Dan. 8. 4.
Pushing Westward and Northward and Southward, in each Part whereof some
scatterings of the storm fell, until the Clouds which bare this Tympany
vanished, almost without Noise at the farewell of it.

This the prudent Counsels of some Renowned Patriots, industrious to
vindicate their oppressed Countries Liberty, and the valor of a Faithful
General (who deservedly wears an Honor no man has cause to envy) by crushing
the New threatening dangers as well as by suppressing the Old, opened so fair a
way for His Arrival who was to come, that not a dropp of Blood was spilt to
stain the Glory of His entrance, nor did any visible Face of danger appear to
disturb his Peace being Come, For God says, He will Overturn whatsoever might
withstand Him, And it shall be no more.

Such an Approach as this discovers the hand which guided him to us, and
deserves our loudest Hosanna to welcome Him, Psalm. 118. 26.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord

Those Others who went before Came in their own Name, mere Properties,
Counterfaiting such State as Actors on the Stage, whose Reign lasts no longer
than the Scean. We had not for many years beheld the True Face of Majesty
until He came, who appears in the next circumstance of my Text.

Vnti^l He come. Homer. Prove. 15. 22.
Many Counsaillours are the strength of a Kingdom, but more Princes than one,
like many Suns in the Firmament, the certain ostents of destruction.

This He stands (...), as a note of Eminence upon His Person, and Excellence
upon His Endowments.

We find the First King of Israel was designed from the Goodliness of his
Person; Saul was so: of whom I may say as Virgil of Turnus, -- Et toto vertice
supra est, He was higher by the head than the rest of the People. 1 Samuel 10.
23. 24.
See (says Samuel when he presented Him) whom the Lord has Chosen, that there
is none like to Him amongst all the People. Dionys.
Tam excellens statura consona erat Regiae dignitati, such a Stature and such a
Person became a King. Pet. Cunaeus de Repub. Hebrae. l. 2. c. 14.
Petrus Cunaeus writes, N^n jam Barbarorum duntaxat, sed hominum
excultissimorum est Majestatem corporis venerari, Magnorum operum illos capaces
putare quos eximia specie Natura donavit. Not only Barbarous people, but the
most Civilized, attributed very much to the Presence and Stature and Majestic
deportment of the Body; Thinking Those Capable of the highest achievements who
were endued with the best and Goodliest Shape. Hieron.
Hieron. gives the reason, Quia velut pulchro indumento pulchritudo Animae
vestiebatur, The beauty of the Soul is considered by the features of the Body
which is the Souls outward Tunica Animae.
Garment.

This made Samuel sent to Anoint a King out of Jesse's house, 1 Samuel 16. 6.
when he saw Eliab, to believe him the man for the Bravery of his Person; until
God rectified his error, and pointed out David, who though not of the same Size
and Pitch with his brother, Ib. verse. 18.
was a Goodly Person. You will easily judge that, because intending to combat
Goliath, Saul put his own Armor upon him, 1 Samuel 17. 38.
which in a small Stature had been ridiculous to attempt.

In all the Histories I have read, I find not any Nation but one, who best
liked Persons ill-graced in their Bodies lineaments for their Princes: Petro
M^xia Hist. lib. 3. c. 17. n. 10.
Pedro Mexia puts this difference between the Goths and the Saracens, That the
Goths desired a Prince of Tall Stature, The Saracens better approved one
bedwarfed and of mean Features.

Generally the Rule for Princes was the same which God appointed for the
Priests: where Blemishes and Imperfections of the Body made the One incapable
to serve at the Altar, The Other not so welcome to the Throne.

Our Third Richard's deformed Body and ill aspect made him looked on as that
Prodigy whom all feared, none loved. Therefore Socrates believed those could
portend nothing but Mischief on whose Bodies Nature had set her Brand, and
whose Aspect she had marked with cross ill-boding lines.

Now as the Outward Form of the Body makes a Candidate for a Kingdom, according
to Aristotle, Forma digna Imperio: So the Endowments of the Mind complete the
Choice.

As Wisdom; This was the Cause of Joseph 's advancement over Egypt, Genesis 41.
38.
Can we find (says Pharaoh) such a Man as this in whom is the Spirit of God?
And it was Hiram 's gratulation to Solomon, 1 King. 5. 7.
Blessed be the Lord this day who has given unto David a wise son to rule over
this great People.

Deliberation; Not rash in Action, nor unwilling to hear advise, but weighing
each enterprise in the Scale of Counsel and Reason: Lips. Polit. Praefat.
Vt illud in principatu beatissimum est non Cogi, ita miserrimum non Suaderi,
As it is a Princes Prerogative that he cannot be Compelled, so it is his Misery
not to be Counsaill'd.

Temperance; Eccle. 10. 17.
Happy art thou O Land when thy Princes eat in due season for strength, not
admitting Disorder in their Meals.

Then Mildness and Sweetness and Affability in disposition; This made Titus the
Emperor styled the Delight of Mankind, admired whilst he lived, and lamented
in his death as the only darling of his Empire, born to oblige his whole People.

Personal valor; This moved Israel to elect Gideon for their Prince, Judge. 8.
21.
Come thou and Rule over us, Both Thou and thy Son and thy sons Son: for thou
have delivered us from the hand of Midian.

Above all Piety and Religion toward God; Josiah's singular Devotion and Zeal
to God's service stand as Examples to render his Memory precious through all
Ages; Esa. 49. 23.
To be a Nursing Father of the Church is one of the richest Jewels in a Kings
Crown.

Lastly, Nobility in his Extraction and Birth; Eccles. 10. 17.
Happy ar't thou O Land when thy King is the son of Nobles, so says the
Preacher.

But when there are None of These, Neither Care of Religion, nor Regard of Law,
Neither Outward form, Nor Inward Endowments, Neither Birth to dignify the Body,
Nor Virtue to ennoble the Mind, Psalm. 109. 5.
Set thou a wicked man to rule over him, This is the highest Calamity, the
greatest Curse that can befall a Land. We have cause to say so, having by sad
experience too lately felt the Mischief.

Be it spoken to the Honor of God, and the Confession of a just Truth (far
from any low purpose of Adulation which neither befits my Office nor This
Presence) we miss none of these Excellencies, these Virtues in that Royal
Person whom God has set over us. Each ones eye may inform any that doubt, in
much of what I say, And the daily experience of his scarcely pattern'd Goodness
confirm the rest.

Whether I mention His constant Piety, or love of Justice, His Active or
Passive Fortitude; In all probations of a Daring Valor who has Outdone him?
(let Worcester be the witness) And I am sure in the Trial of His Patience for
many years none Could Out-suffer Him. 'Twas Jugum portatum a Juventute, Lam. 3.
27.
He has been yoked to Necessities, and acquainted with Misfortune from his
tender Age.

And for the Roaylty of His Extraction, were I an Herald and not a Preacher, I
might blazon It to the full, Proclaming to all the World, That He who is come
to us, might Claim the Crown by His proper Merit, did it not Descend upon Him
as His Undoubted Right.

Whose Right it is. Whose Right it is.


There be but Two Great Rights which you find mentioned in Scripture. 1. Jus
Primogeniturae, the Right of Primogeniture, 2. Jus Regni, the Right to a
Kingdom.

In the first of these all Domination was originally founded; For the Elder
Brother in his Tribe was Princeps Familiae, the Prince of his Family. And not
only the Excellence of Dignity which was his Birthright, But the Inheritance
is so fastened to Him as if God intended no separation, either by the Hatred or
Affection of the Parent. The Text is most remarkable (and I wish all Parents
would lay it to heart) If a man have Two wives, Deuteronomy. 21. 15.
one Beloved, and another Hated, and They have born him Children both the
Beloved and the Hated, And if the Firstborn son be here is that was Hated, Verse.
16.
Then it shall be when he makes his sons to Inherit that which he has, That
he may not make the son of the Beloved Firstborn before the son of the Hated,
Verse. 17.
which is indeed the Firstborn; But he shall acknowledge the son of the Hated
for the Firstborn, by Giving him a double Portion of all that he has; for he
is the beginning of his strength, the Right of the Firstborn is his.

Therefore though the Law has been overcurious to un-rivet this Birthright by
Gods and Man's Law entailed upon the Elder, bringing in Feigned Persons and
False Vouchees, and Formal Proclamations to divest it, I must only say thus
much, Sic non fuit ab initio (as Christ said of Divorce) It was not so from the
Beginning, Mat. 19. 8.
but out of the hardness of men's hearts did this Invention spring. How ill an
Inheritance wrested from the Right heir to be placed upon another has
prosper'd, let the Example of so many unhappy Families ruined upon this Account
testify.

The second is Jus Regni, the Right to a Kingdom, which has Jus Divinum, a
Divine Right for it is warrant, Francisc. a Victor. Relect. 3. n. 1.
Omnis civilis Potestas ita Deum habet Authorem, ut nec Orbis totius consensu
tolli potest; This receives such Authority from God, that the whole World
cannot abrogate it.

I do not only mean a Successive Right but an Elective.

I Confess where Princes are Elected by their Subjects, the Government is not
so Absolute, being oftimes clogged with Conditions, yet is the Right so firm
that it can never be Reversed nor Reassumed by Those who first conferred It.
Bellarmine is of a contrary Judgment when he says, Bellarmin. Ex Navarro citat
a Suarez.
Populum nunquam suam potestatem ita in Regem transfer, quin illam sibi in
habitu retineat, although the People Actually transfer the Power upon the King,
Yet Habitually They retein it in Themselves; But this is Contradicted by
Persons of his own Party eminent for their Learning and famous for their
Writings. Suarez Suarez Defens. Fidei Cathol. li. 3. cap. 3. p. 125 n. 4.
plainly charge him with Falsehood. Non est simpliciter verum Regem pendere in
sua potestate a Populo, etiamsi ab ipso eam acceperit. And afterward he very
honestly and fairly Concludes, Rex postquam legitime constitutus est, supremam
habet potestatem in omnibus ad quae illam acceperit, etiam si a Populo illam
acceperit, When once a King is lawfully constituted, He has Supreme Power over
the People. Again Royardus, Royard Dominic. 1. in Advent.
Rege constituto non potest Populus jugum subjectionis repellere, The People
cannot withdraw their subjection from a lawful Prince. Lastly, Franciscus a
Victoria, In a Case like This, The Cardinals Election of the Pope, Francis. a
Victor. Relect. 2. nu. 4.
Electores non habent Authoritatem in quem eligunt, Sed Authoritatem Applicandi
istam Dignitatem, Those who Elect have not Authority over him whom they have
Elected, but only an Authority to Apply that Dignity. So sure and irrevocable
is the Right of an Elective Prince.

But when the Right of Succession brings a King to his Throne, This is of all
others the Noblest, the Firmest, and Carry's the greatest mark of Gods favor,
both to the Present Prince, and to Those from whom he was Derived

Succession to the Crown of Israel is by God promised to David as one of the
Richest Temporal blessings He could give. He bids Nathan the Prophet tell him,
When thy days be fulfilled, and Thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, 2 Samuel 7.
12.
I will set up Thy seed after Thee, which shall proceed out of Thy bowels, And
I will establish his Kingdom. When God is angry with a Land, he cuts off the
Line of Succession, Jer. 22. 30.
Write this man Childless; He quenches his Light and the Luster of his Name,
sending him to his last Bed like a despised Lamp, Job 12. 5.
inglorious, and in the Dark, without any Heir to preserve either his Power or
his Name.

When this Successive Right was interrupted, though by persons of the same
Regal Line, what Tragedies ensued, and what Blood was spilt, let our own
Chronicles resolve from Richard the 2. to Henry 6.

It is the goodness of God to us, that we enjoy a Successive King: And it is
the Kings Glory, that He comes to us derived to His Crown through a Succession
of Numerous Monarchs. To what Votes soever Elective Rulers ow their Scepters,
Succession is the Vote of God, who both declares the Right, and then Confirms
it as his Donation. It follows in the last place

And I will give it.

Crowns conferred by other hands sit loose and tottering upon the Head of such
as wear them, I will give it, And I will give it.
keeps Them fast.

This is the Magna Charta for Princes, The Great Charter by which Kings hold
the Right to their Kingdoms, Prove. 18. 15.
By Me Kings Rule; It is God who sets up and pulls down, Giving the Kingdom
unto whom He pleases. Tertullian said well, Inde est Imperator unde and Homo
antequam Imperator, Dan. 2. 21.
The Emperor is made by Him, who made him Man before: Even Heathens joined in
the confession of this Truth, Callimachus.
The Greek Poet tells you, (...): And Tacitus more like a Christian than a
Heathen, Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
Principes Imperium a Deo habent eosque instar Dei esse, Princes receive their
Ruling Power from God and are in His Stead.

Where are Those then who place the Right to Dispose Kingdoms in the Pope? As
do his Sycophants the Canonists, who blush not to bestow the Style of God upon
him, Dominus Deus noster Papa, That so He may have better color to bestow the
Other.

Or Those in another Extreme, who entitle the People to this Power, Buchanan.
de Jure Regni apud S^o^os.
Populo jus est ut Imperium cui vult deferat. A strange Prodigy in opinion, not
heard of until Those Men came into the World, who (as was falsely alleged of the
Apostles at Thessalonica) Turned the World upside down, Act. 17. 6.
placing the Feet above the Head, Romans 13. 1.
and Subjecting the Higher Powers, contrary to the Rule of God, to the People,
who by His Command ought to be subject unto Them.

I may apply Nazianzens question to this purpose, Gregor. Nazian. Orat. 15.
(...); what madness is this to leave the Head and take Rules from the Feet?
He goes on, (...). Ibid.
It is praeposterous to the Order of Nature when the Fountain is obstructed,
and the Stream which borrows being from it holds full Course; when the Sun
loses his luster, and a dim Star enlightened by it governs the World. Senec.
Trag.
Male imperatur cum regit vulgus Duces, cries the Tragedian, It is a pitiful
Kingdom where the People Rule the Prince.

Chemists will tell you, nothing can make Gold but the Great Elixar which Turns
all it Touches. Doubtless the Peoples Power is a Metal of too low and Coarse
Allay to produce a Crown* Thou shall set a Crown of Pure Gold upon His Head,
Psalm. 21. 3.
is God's Peculiar.

When the rebellious Israelites in Moses absence would needs make a God, Exodus
32. 1.
That is a Leader or Ruler to go before them, They contributed their Earings to
the carrying on that design; But the Effect and Issue of that Contribution was
only a Calf. v. 4.
I beseech you remember, from all our Contributary Plate, from the silver Basin
even to the smallest Bodkin, whether we had any Productions amongst us better
than This.

Certainly before Knox and Buchanan, and Junius Brutus, These Doctrines to
Diminish Princes were never broached. One tells you, The King has no Propriety
either in his Kingdom, or His Revenue, Junius Bruius vindic^ae cont. Tyrannos,
quaest. 3. p. 136.
Non Proprietarius, sane ne usufructuarius Regni.

Another quarrels Him for the upperhand, scarcely grants him Precedence: If he
do it is all, And unless in Private will not allow Him the Better Man: when he
comes in Public, Buchanan. de lure Reg. apud Scotos.
Populus Rege praestan^ior and Major, The People are his better and much above
him. Again Though the King be Singulis Major Universis Minor. ibid.
Greater than any Particular Subject, Yet he is Less than the whole People,
Populum a quo Reges nostri habent quicquid Juris sibi vendicant Regibus esse
Potentiorem. Ibid.
Again, Populus eandem Potestatem habet in Regem quam Rex in Singulum: The
People have the same Power over their King as the King has over any single
Man: And again (take him for all) when the People call their King in question
before them, Ibid.
Minor ad Majorem in Jus vocatur, the Lesser is Convented, Arraigned, Condemned
by the Greater. Excellent stuff! From whence you may discern what hands laid
the first foundation of our High Courts of Justice. Indeed after all the Arts
and Labor to assert this pretended Power of the People, after all the
distorted Scriptures and Miss-apply'd Texts by Those Sons of Bichri who blew
the First Trumpets of Sedition in our Israel, Curse ye Meroz etc. And cursed be
he that withholds his Sword from shedding Blood, And To your Tents O Israel we
have no part in the son of Jesse, with many like these; There was but one
speeding un-controlable Text to do Their Bloody Business, Mat. 21. 37.
This is the Heir, come let us kill Him, and then the Inheritance (the Right to
dispose the Kingdom) is ours.

I cannot without horror mention it; And I pray God There be not too many
amongst us who yet hold an Obedience not out of Conscience but Constraint or
Outward Compliance, because They want opportunity to Resist.

This is the sense of a great Leader in his time, who by occasion of that Text,
Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities, replies, Tit. 3. 1.
It was good Politic advise St. Paul gave for that time, The Christians were
few and poor, had no power to do otherwise, Nor were Ripe for any other
purpose. I give you his own words. Buchanan. de Jure Reg.
Finge ad Christianos qui sub Turcis vivunt aliquem e nostris Doctoribus
scribere, ad homines inquam Re tenues, Animo demissos, and Inermes and Paucos,
et ad omnem omnium injuriam expositos, Quid rogo aliud consuleret quam quod
Paulus Ecclesiae quae tum Romae erat?

Strange kind of Men; who from such Principles as these scatter their Wildfire
both from the Press and Pulpit, to inflame their abused Hearers, and Kindle
that Combustion which by the Mercy of God has been so newly quenched within
this City, and indeed through the whole Kingdom (for it was a very diffusive
Plott) And as it was one of the most Treacherous Designs wherewith these late
Days of Mischief Teemed, so we have Cause to Multiply our Thanksgiving to God
for the Timely Discovery and Defeat of it. The Apostle gives Them their proper
Style, of Filthy Dreamers, Phanaticks and Enthusiasts who despise Dominions,
and speak evil of Dignities, Iud. ep. v. 8.
whether in the State or in the Church. If any thing of Order, or Decency, or
Settled devotion be offered to Them, They Cry out Popery and Superstition, with
as much Noise and as Little Sense as Demetrius with his Fellow Craft-men did
upon Diana at Ephesus: Act. 19. 24. 28.
And when you come to examine their dislike by sober Reason They can give as
little account as They: The greater part whereof (The Text tells you) Knew not
what They ailed, Verse. 32.
why They came together, or why they made those hideous exclamations.

Men who decry the Pope, yet Cry up Themselves into an Authority as great as
His, Not only over the People but over the Prince, That declame against the
present Government to introduce a Worse of their own. Judge. 9. 15.
As Abimelech, who was the Bramble in Jothani's Parable, invited All to Rest
under his shadow,, which Could afford no Shelter but a Scratch: No Appeal lying
from their Irregular Consistories but to Themselves, (I need not tell you who
Proclaimed Assemblies to be the Supreme Indicatures in all Causes
Ecclesiastical, Protestat. Jul. 1638. Proclaimed at Glasgow.
some of those Heads are high enough now) By which means They so entangle
Thofe who fly to Their perplexed Judicatures for Relief, that, like Sheep who
in a Tempest run to the Bryar for Protection, They Return with a lost Fleece
and a Torn skin.

But This is a Day of Good tidings, Conclusion.
a Day of Comfort and Rejoicing. I will not therefore mingle any sharp
Invective with it against Those who entertein it not with equal Duty or with
the same affection as we do; Neither will I give a farther mention to These
Discords which mar the Music of this Day, A day of Gods making, Psalm. 118 24.
Hic est Dies quem fecit Dominus: Nay, Hic est Dies in quo Dominus fecit Regem,
This is the Day upon which God Made the King. This 29th. of May was the Happy
Day of His Nativity, -- Illa Sidus inocciduum perpetuum que dedit. On this Day
did This Star arise in Our British Haemisphere, who shines the brighter by this
Concurrence, this addition to our Happiness, That the Inauguration to His Life
is now become the Solemn Inauguration to His Crown.

A Day wherein we meet to offer up our Thanks to God that He is Come to His
Throne whose Right it is; And Upon whom the Desire of All our Israel was set, 1 Samuel 9. 20
as Samuel told the first Anointed King.

To Offer up our hearty Prayers for the Continuance of this Triumph, That this
Anniversary may long be celebrated by us; That the King may see a Revolution of
many Sun-shines like This: And that as it was made a solemn Decree in Israel to
keep an Annual Mourning for the slain Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 25.
so it may pass among our Laws to hold this Day, as once the Feast of Purim
in Esters time, Ester 9. 24.
in memory of our Deliverance from a Servitude, nay from a Massacre unto which
we by Lot were destined.

Especially for the Deliverance of our Sovereign from the hands of a Bloody
Human now pearched higher than the Gallows by Him prepared for others; And from
the dangerous Votes of Those Miscreants who had Abjured His Right, to place it
upon That Barabbas, who carries on him the perpetual Stamp of Sedition and
Murder. Luc. 23. 19.


To bless His Glorious Name that He has preserved Him from foreign Attempts
laid to Destroy Him during His Exile, and undertaken by such whose near Trust
freed them from all suspect, As well as from Domestic Dangers after His Return.

To Bless God who preserved Him that He might Come; And Bless him again That
He is Come, Given to the Hearty Desires of His Loyal People.

Finally, Ezra 6. 10.
as Darius Commanded the Jews, To Pray for the Life of the King: And though at
present I cannot say (as it there follows) To Pray for the Kings Sons; Yet to
Pray according to the Prospect our Hopes now have of that Happiness, That He
may have Sons to be the Subject of our Prayers in the future, as Himself this
Day is.

That He may grow Old, Yet never superannated in His Prosperity and Comforts;
That God would add many Years unto His Life, Yea take from our years, who most
gladly would spare them, to add unto His.

De nostris Annis tibi Jupiter augeat Annos. That we may account our felicity
involved and wrapped up in His; As Alexanders Army confessed, Quint. Cur^ius.
Omnes unius Spiritu vivere, They were Spirited by Him.

That as He is the Breath of our Nostrills, Lamen. 4. 20.
so we take Care that no unwholesome Vapors, no seditious Damps be raised to
annoy His Peace or offend Him.

That God would place Him, as He promised Zerubbabel, Agge 2. 23.
As a Signet upon his right hand; That He would own Him in all His
undertakings, as He did Zerubbabel that excellent Instrument of His Glory.

What can I say more? Let me sum up all in that Eulogy, that Loyal Acclamation
which Tertullian says the Roman People used to their Emperor, Tertullian.
Vitam Prolixam, Apologet. cap. 35.
Imperium Securum, Domum tutam, Exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, Populum
probum, Orbem quietum: That God would Bless Him with a Long Life, A Secure
Empire, A Safe Palace, A Valiant Army, A Faithful Counsel, A Contented
People, and (if it be possible) Peace with all the World.

Let God Hear and Grant these our Prayers, And let Those want the Comforts of
Life and benefit of Prayer themselves, who do not Cordially and with all
Loyalty of Soul say Amen to this Prayer.

AMEN.

FINIS.

