AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Constitution, Discipline, Unity and Worship, OF THE
Primitive Church, That Flourished within the First Three Hundred Years after
CHRIST.

Faithfully Collected out of the Extant Writings of those Ages.

By an Impartial Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John Wyat at the
Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Design of the following Treatise is in general to represent the
Constitution, Discipline, Unity and Worship of the Primitive Church, that
flourished within the first Three Hundred Years after Christ; but more
particularly and especially to describe their Opinions and Practices, with
respect to those things that are now unhappily controverted between those of
these Kingdoms, who are commonly known by the Names of Church of England-men,
Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists; for which reason it comes to pass,
that to those Points, concerning which there is no difference amongst us, I
have not spoken so largely as otherwise I might have done; and some other
Customs of theirs I have not mentioned at all, because now neglected and
disused by us.

What I have written as to this Subject, I have wholly collected out of the
Genuine and unquestionably Authentic Writings of those Ages, that are now
extant, making use of no other Writings whatsoever, except the Ecclesiastical
History of Eusebius, which was writ in the beginning of the Fourth Age, and
relates only those Affairs that were transacted in the Three former, beyond the
Period of which time this Enquiry does not reach; but is wholly limited
thereby, and confined thereunto. That which has been thus collected, has been
done, I hope, with the greatest Impartiality and Fidelity, without any
prepossession of Mind, or any fraudulent dealing whatsoever, which the Reader
may the sooner believe, and the easier be convinced of, since for the clearer
Demonstration of my Faithfulness and Vnprejudicedness herein, I have taken care
to print in the Margent the Original Words of all the Passages that I have
cited, at least of all that are necessary, together with the very Pages whence
I fetched them, that so the Reader turning to the Pages mentioned in those
Editions that I use, (which Editions I shall set down at the end of this
Preface) and finding it according to my Quotations, may the more readily be
persuaded, that throughout this whole Tract I have been every way honest and
unbiased.

And as I have faithfully and impartially collected these Observations, so I
have as modestly and unconcernedly represented them, avoiding all Words or
Speeches that might seem to carry the least sharpness or Reflection in them,
and have as nakedly expressed them, declining all affected or pompous
Expressions, contenting my self with those Terms, that most naturally serve to
render the Truth more perspicuous and evident, according to the Observation of
Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). Stromat. lib. 2. p. 263.
He that would deliver the Truth, ought not studiously to affect an Elegancy of
Expression, but only to use such Words, whereby he may render what he means
intelligible.

Whether all, or some, or none of the following Primitive Customs may be
changed by the Civil Magistrate, or by a Convocational Assembly, I pretend not
here to handle; my Design at present is only to search into matter of Fact, to
find out what were the Vsages of the Ancient Church within the first Three
Hundred Years after Christ; for, as was said before, no lower do I intend to
go, which after the most impartial and serious Enquiry, I find to be according
to the ensuing Treatise, in the penning whereof I have avoided all Prolixity
and Tediousness, and for that end omitting to answer several Objections, that I
know may be made against several things which I have here asserted, mine
Intention being briefly and perspicuously to prove what I judge to be the true
Practice of the Primitive Church, as to those Points now disputed by us.

As for the Occasion of my Publishing this Treatise, it cannot be imagined to
proceed from a Spirit of Vanity or Ambition, since I so far conceal my Name, as
that even my Bookseller knows not who I am; much less, I hope, will it be
construed by any, to proceed from a Spirit of Contention and Animosity, from an
ill Design to foment and increase our present Feuds and Divisions; since I
assure the whole World, our unnatural Quarrels do so much afflict and trouble
me, as that I would sacrifice not only this Book, but also all that I either am
or have, if thereby I might be an happy Instrument to compose and heal them.
But amongst other Reasons, these two were the chiefest that swayed me hereunto,
To inform others, and, To inform my self: To inform others what the Practices
of the Primitive Apostolic Churches were, if any shall be inquisitive and
desirous to know them; or, if I am mistaken, (as who is without his Errors?) to
be better informed my self, which, I must needs confess, was that which I
chiefly designed in the Publication hereof; wherefore without any Ostentation
or challenging, but unfeignedly and sincerely to prevent Mistakes in my younger
Years, I humbly desire, (if the Request be not too bold) and shall heartily
thank any Learned Person, that will be so kind as to inform me, if he knows me
to have erred in any one, or more Particulars, which he may do, either
Publicly, or if he thinks fit, Privately, by Letter to my Bookseller, who will
convey it safely to my Hands; and if any one that finds me deceived in any one
or more Points, will favor me so far, as to undertake such a trouble, I should
desire these few things of him, That he would be pleased, as I have done, to
use only those Writings that were composed within my prescribed time, and if
possible, the same Editions, and not only to form Objections against what I
have written, but also to answer, or rather to give me another Sense of those
Passages which I have cited, and then I promise, if my Mistakes are fairly
shown, I will not pertinaciously and obstinately defend them, but most
willingly and thankfully renounce them, since my Design is not to defend a
Party, but to search out the Truth.

I have but one thing more to add in this Preface, and that is, that when I
first resolved on the printing of this Treatise, I designed to have published
my Observations on the fourth general Head propounded in the Title Page to be
enquired into, viz. The Worship of the Primitive Church, as well as now I have
done those on the three former, but for some Reasons I have reserved this for a
particular Tract by its self, which probably, though I do not absolutely
promise it, may in a little time more be also published; and that the rather,
because in this Part I have made two or three References thereunto, which I
thought good to acquaint the Reader with, that so if he cannot find some things
that I have referred to in this Treatise, he may be assured they are to be met
with in the ensuing one.

The Primitive Authors mentioned in this Treatise, together with those Editions
that I have made use of, are as follow.
S. Ignatii Epistolae Graeco-Latin. Quarto, Edit. Isaci Vossii. Amstelodam.
1646.

S. Barnabae Epistola Catholica, Edit. ad Calcem S. Ignatii, Quarto.
Amstelodam. 1646.

S. Clementis Romani Epistolae Graeco-Latin. Quaerto Edit. Patricii Junii.
Oxonii, 1633.

S. Irenaei Opera, Folio. Edit. Nic. Galasii. Genevae, 1580.

S. Justini Martyris Opera Graeco-Latin. Folio. Coloniae, 1686.

Epistola Plinii Secundi Trojano Imperatori de Christianis in front Operum
Justin. Martyr. Colon. 1686.

Clementis Alexandrini Opera, Folio Edit. Heinsii. Lugdun. Batav. 1616.

Tertulliani Opera, Folio Edit. Paris. 1580.

Novatiani De Trinitate and De Cibis Judaicis inter Opera Tertulliani. Edit.
Paris. 1580.

Cypriani Opera, Folio. Edit. Sim. Goulart. apud Johan. le Preux. 1593.

Vita Cypriani per Pontium ejus Diaconum. In front Oper. Cyprian. Edit.
Goulart. 1593.

Fragmentum Victorini Petavionensis De Fabrica Mundi, page 103, 104. Histor.
literar. Dr. S. Cave, Edit. Folio. Londini, 1688.

Minucii Felices Octavius Edit. ad Calcem Tertullian. Apolog. per Desiderium
Heraldum. Quarto. Paris. 1613.

Origenis Commentaria omnia quae Graece Reperiuntur, Edit. de Huetii. 2 Vol.
Folio. Rothomagi. 1668.

Originis contra Celsum, Libri Octo, and ejusdem Philocalia Graeco-Latin. Edit
Quarto, per Gulielm. Spencer. Cantabrigiae, 1677.

Originis (...), seu, De Oratione. Graeco-Latin. Octavo. Oxonii. 1685.

As for those other Works of Origin which are extant only in Latin, I have made
no use at all of those of Ruffin's Translation, except his Creed, since in them
we know not which we read, whether Origin or Ruffin; and as for those which
were translated by more faithful Hands, I have used the Editions of Merlin or
Erasmus, without nominating the Page.

Eusebii Pamphili Ecclesiastica Historia Graeco-Latin. Folio. Edit. Henric.
Vales. Paris. 1659. I have read only the Seven first Books of Eusebius's
History, because the three others go beyond my limited Time.

As for the Writings of S. Gregory of Neocaesarea, they are but few, and from
thence I have taken nothing but his Creed, so that there is no need to mention
any Edition of his Works. The same I may say also of the short Epistle of
Polycarp, which I have cited but once, and therein have used the Version of Dr.
Cave, extant in his Apostolici, page 127.

There are vet some other Fathers whose remaining Tracts I have read, as
Theophilus Antiochenus, Athenagoras, etc. who are not cited in this (...),
because I have found nothing in them (...) to my Design.

An Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity, and Worship, of the
Primitive Church.
CHAP. I.
. 1. The various Significations of the word Church.. 2. A particular Church the
chief Subject of the ensuing Discourse: The constituent parts thereof,
Twofold, viz. Clergy and Laity.. 3. Each of these had their particular
Functions, and both their joint Offices: Three things on which a great part of
the following Discourse depends, proposed to be handled, viz. The Peculiar Acts
of the Clergy, The Peculiar Acts of the Laity, and the Joint Acts of them
both.. 4. The Peculiar Acts of the Clergy propounded to be discussed according
to their several Orders: First, of the Bishops: A View of the World as it was
in a state of Heathenism, at the first Preaching of Christianity, necessary to
be considered: Where the Apostles planted Churches, they appointed the first
Converts to be Bishops thereof.. 5. But one Bishop in a Church: The
Orthodoxness of the Faith proved from the Succession of the Bishops: The Titles
and Relation of the Bishop to his Flock.

. 1. THAT we may give the more clear and distinct Answer to this Important
Query, it is necessary, that we first examine the Primitive Notion of the Word
Church, upon the due apprehension of which depends the Right Understanding of a
great Part of our following Discourse.

This word, Church, as in our modern acceptance, so also in the Writings of
the Fathers, is equivocal, having different Significations according to the
different Subjects to which it is applied. I shall not here concern my self
about the Derivation of the Word, or its Original Use amongst the Heathens,
from whom it was translated into the Christian Church; but only take notice of
its various Uses amongst the ancient Christians, which were many, as,

1. It is very often to be understood of the Church Universal, that is, of all
those, who throughout the face of the whole Earth professed Faith in Christ,
and acknowledged him to be the Savior of Mankind. This Irenaeus calls, (...)
(...). Lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 34.
The Church dispersed through the whole World to the ends of the Earth, and (...)
(...). Lib. 1. cap. 3. p. 36.
The Church scattered in the whole World. And Origin calls it, (...) (...).
Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 25. p. 226.
The Church of God under Heaven. This is that which they called the Catholic
Church, for Catholic signifies the same as Universal. Thus Polycarp when he
was seized by his Murderers, prayed for (...) Apud Eus. l. 4. c. 15. p. 131.
The Catholic Church throughout the World. And in this Sense Dionysius
Alexandrinus calls the persecuting Emperor Macrianus, (...). Epistad Herm.
apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 10. p. 256.
A Warrior against the Catholic Church of God.

II. The word Church is frequently to be understood of a particular Church,
that is, of a Company of Believers, who at one time, in one and the same place,
did associate themselves together, and concur in the Participation of all the
Institutions and Ordinances of Jesus Christ with their proper Pastors and
Ministers. Thus Irenaeus mentions that Church Ea quae est in quoque loco
Ecclesia. Lib. 2. c. 56. p. 158.
which is in any place. And so Dionysius Alexandrinus writes, that when he was
banished to Cephro in Lybia, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 11. p. 259.
there came so many Christians unto him, that even there he had a Church.
Tertullian thinks that, Ubi tres, Ecclesia est. Exhort. ad Castitat. p. 457.
Three were sufficient to make a Church. In this sense we must understand,
Ecclesia Romana, Cyprian. Epist. 31.. 3. p. 70.
the Church of Rome, (...). (...). ad Smirn. p. 1.
the Church of Smyrna, (...). Idem. Ibid. p. 8.
the Church of Antioch, (...). Origin contr. Celsum; lib. 3. c. 129.
the Church of Athens, the Church of Alexandria, or the Church in any other
such place whatsoever, that is, a Congregation of Christians assembling all
together for Religious Exercises at Rome, Antioch, Smirna, Athens, Alexandria,
or such like places.

III. The word Church is sometimes used for the Place, where a particular
Church or Congregation met for the Celebration of Divine Service. Thus Paulus
Samosatenus the Heretical Bishop of Antioch ordered certain Women to stand
(...) Epist. Synod. Antioch. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 281.
in the middle of the Church, and fing Psalms in his Praise. So Clemens
Alexandrinui advises, that Men and Women should with all Modesty and Humility
enter (...) Paedag. lib. 3. c. 11. p. 189.
into the Church. So the Clergy of the Church of Rome in their Letter to
Cyprian, concerning the Restitution of the Lapsed, give as their advice, Adeant
ad limen Ecclesiae. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 31.. 7. p. 71.
That they should only come to the Threshold of the Churchdoor, but not go over
it. And in this Sense is the Word frequently to be understood in De praescript.
advers. Haeret. p. 90. De Corona Militis, p. 336. And very often in his Book De
Virginibus Velandis.
Tertullian, De Orat.. 20. p. 132.
Origin, and others, to recite whose Testimonies at large would be both tedious
and needless.

IV. I find the Word Church once used by Cyprian for a Collection of many
particular Churches, who mentions in the Singular Number, In Provincia Africa
and Numidia Ecclesiam Domini, Epist. 71.. 4. p. 214.
the Church of God in Africa and Numidia. Else I do not remember, that ever I
met with it in this Sense, in any Writings either of this, or the rest of the
Fathers; but whenever they would speak of the Christians in any Kingdom or
Province, they always said in the Plural, The Churches, never in the Singular,
The Church of such a Kingdom or Province. Thus Dyonisius Alexandrinus does not
say the Church, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 5. p. 251.
but the Churches of Cilicia. And so Irenaeus mentions, (...). Lib. 1. c. 3. p.
36.
The Churches that were in Germany, Spain, France, the East, Egypt and Lybia.
So also Tertullian speaks of the Ecclesiis Asiae and Phrygiae. Adversus
Praxeam, p. 314.
Churches of Asia and Phrygia, and Per Graeciam Ecclesiae. De Virgin. Veland.
p. 386.
the Churches of Greece. And so of every Country they always express the
Churches thereof in the Plural Number.

V. The Word Church frequently occurs for that, which we commonly call the
Invisible Church, that is, for those, who by a Sound Repentance and a Lively
Faith, are actually interested in the Lord Jesus Christ: According to this
signification of the Word must we understand Tertullian, when he says, that
Christ had Christus sibi sponsabat ecclesiam. Advers. Marcion. lib. 4. p. 196.
espoused the Church, and, that Spirituales nuptias Ecclesiae and Christi.
Exhort. ad Castitat. p. 455.
there was a Spiritual Marriage between Christ and the Church. And that of
Irenaeus, Ecclesia ad figuram imaginis filii ejus coap tetur. Lib. 4. c. 72. p.
308.
That the Church was fitted according to the form of the Son of God. And in
this Sense is the Word oftentimes used in others of the Fathers, as I might
easily show, if any one did doubt it.

VI. The Word Church is frequently to be interpreted of the Faith and Doctrine
of the Church. In this Sense Irenaeus prays, That the Conversos ad ecclesiam
Dei, Lib. 3. c. 46. p. 229.
Heretics might be reclaimed from their Heresies, and be converted to the
Church of God; and exhorts all sincere Christians not to follow Heretics, but
to Confugere ad Ecclesiam. Lib. 5. c. 17. p. 342.
fly to the Church: Upon which account Heretics are said to have left the
Church, as Tertullian told Marcion, that when he became an Heretic, Ab
Ecclesia Christi recessisti. De carne Christi, p. 13.
he departed from the Church of Christ, and their Heresies are said to be
dissonant from the Church, as Origin writes, that the Opinion of the
Transmigration of Souls was (...). Comment. in Mat. Tom. 13. p. 304. Vol. 1.
alien from the Church.

There are yet several other Significations of this Word, though not so usual
as some of the forementioned ones, nor so pertinent to my Design, so that I
might justly pass them over, without so much as mentioning them: But lest any
should be desirous to know them, I will just name them, and then proceed to
what is more material.

Besides then those former Significations, the Word according to its Original
Import is also used for any Congregation in general; sometimes it is applied to
any particular Sect of Heretics, as Tertullian calls the Marcionites Ecclesiam
suam. Adversus Marcion. lib. 5. p. 255.
the Church of Marcion: At other times it is attributed to the Orthodox in
opposition to the Heretics, as by the same Haereses Ecclesiam lacessentes. De
praescript. advers. Haeret. p. 69.
Tertullian: Sometimes it is appropriated to the Heathen Assemblies, as by
(...). Contra Cells. lib. 3. p. 128.
Origin, at other times in Opposition to the Jews it is ascribed to the
believing Gentiles, as by Ea quae ex gentibus est (...), Lib. 4. c. 37. p. 271.
Irenaeus: In some places it is taken for the Deputies of a Particular Church,
as in (...). Ad Philadelph. p. 52.
Ignatius. In other places it signifies the Assembly of the Spirits of just Men
made perfect in Heaven, which we commonly call the Church Triumphant, as in
(...). Padag. lib. 2. c. 1. p. 104.
Clemens Alexandriaeus. Once I find it denoting the (...). Apud (...). lib. 7.
cap. 30. p. 279.
Laity only, in opposition to the Clergy: And once signifying only Ecclesia
vero Christus. Tertullian. de (...), p. 382.
Christ as the Head of the Faithful.

. 2. But the usual and common Acceptance of the Word, and of which we must
chiefly treat, is that of a Particular Church, that is, a Society of
Christians, meeting together in one place under their proper Pastors, for the
Performance of Religious Worship, and the exercising of Christian Discipline.

Now the first thing that naturally presents its self to our Consideration, is
to enquire into the Constituent Parts of a Particular Church, or who made up
and composed such a Church. In the general, they were called (...), the Epist.
Eccles. Smirn. ad Eccles. Philomil. apud (...). lib. 4. c. 15. p. 134.
Elect, (...). Clem. Roman. Epist. 1. ad (...). (...). 1.
the Called and Sanctified by the Will of God. And in innumerable places they
are called (...), the Brethren, because of their Brotherly Love and Affection;
and (...), the Faithful, in opposition to the Pagan World, who had no Faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, nor in the Promises of the Gospel. But more particularly
we may divide them into two Parts; into the People that composed the Body of
the Church, and those Persons who were set apart for Religious and
Ecclesiastical Employments: Or to conform to our ordinary Dialect, into the
Clergy and Laity, which is an early distinction, being mentioned by (...).
Epist. 1. ad Cor. p. 53.
Clemens Romanus, and after him by Homil, 11. in Jerem. p. 113, 114. (...). 1.
Origin, and several others.

. 3. Each of these had their particular Offices, and both together had their
joint Employments, to all which I shall distinctly speak in the ensuing Tract,
as they naturally resolve themselves into these Three Particulars:

I. The Peculiar Acts of the Clergy. II. The Peculiar Acts of the Laity. III.
The Joint Acts of them both.
By the Resolution of which three Questions, some Discovery will be made of the
Constitution and Discipline of the Primitive Church, and of their Practice with
respect to many Points unhappily controverted amongst us.

. 4. I begin with the first of these, What were the Peculiar Acts of the
Clergy? Now here must be considered the Functions of every particular Order and
Degree of the Clergy, which we may say to be three, viz. Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, whose Employments we shall severally handle; as also several other
Points, which under those Heads shall offer themselves unto us. I shall begin
first with the Bishop; but for the better understanding both of him and the
rest, it will be necessary, first of all, to consider the condition of the
whole World, as it was before the Preaching of the Gospel, in a state of
Paganism and Darkness, having their Understandings clouded with Ignorance and
Error, alienated from God, and the true Worship of him, applauding their own
brutish Inventions, and adoring as God whatever their corrupted Reason and
silly Fancies proposed to them as Objects of Adoration and Homage. Into this
miserable state all Mankind, except the Jews, had wilfully cast themselves; and
had not Christ the Son of Righteousness enlightened them, they would have
continued in that lost and blind condition to this very day: But our Savior
having on his Cross Triumphed over Principalities and Powers, and perfectly
conquered the Devil, who before had ruled effectually in the Heathen World; and
being ascended into Heaven, and sat down at the Right Hand of the Father, on
the day of Pentecost he sent down the Holy Ghost on his Apostles and Disciples,
who were then assembled at Jerusalem, enduing them thereby with the Gift of
Tongues, and working Miracles, and both commissionating and fitting them for
the Propagation of his Church and Kingdom, who having received this Power and
Authority from on high, went forth Preaching the Gospel, First, to the Jews,
and then to the Gentiles, declaring those glad Tidings to all Kingdoms and
Provinces; so that as the Apostle Paul said, Romans 10. 18. Their sound went into
all the Earth, and their words unto the ends of the World; every one taking a
particular part of the World for his proper Province, to make known the joyful
News of Life and Salvation through Christ therein. Thus St. Andrew principally
preached the Gospel in Scythia, St. Bartholomew in India, St. Matthew in
Parthia, St. John in the Lesser Asia, and all the rest of the Apostles had
their particular Provinces allotted them, wherein they went forth preaching the
Gospel; and as they came to any City, Town or Village, they published to the
Inhabitants thereof the blessed news of Life and Immortality through Jesus
Christ, constituting the first Converts of every place through which they
passed, Bishops and Deacons of those Churches which they there gathered. So
says Clemens Romanus, (...). Epist. 1. ad Corinth. p. 54.
The Apostles went forth preaching in City and Country, appointing the First
Fruits of their Ministry for Bishops and Deacons, generally leaving those
Bishops and Deacons to govern and enlarge those particular Churches, over which
they had placed them, whilst they themselves passed forwards, planted other
Churches, and placed Governors over them. Thus says Tertullian, Smirnaeorum
Ecclesia habens Polycarpum ab Johanne conlocatum, Romanorum Clementem a Petro
ordinatum. De (...) script. advers. Haeret. p. 80.
Clemens was ordained Bishop of Rome by St. Peter, and Polycarp Bishop of
Smirna by St. John.

. 5. Whether in the Apostolic and Primitive days, there were more Bishops than
one in a Church, at first sight seems difficult to resolve: That the Holy
Scriptures and (...). Epist. 1. ad Cor. p. 2.
Clemens Romanus mention many in one Church, is certain: And on the other hand
it is as certain, that Ignatius, Tertullian, Cyprian, and the following Fathers
affirm, that there was and ought to be but one in a Church. These
Contradictions may at the first view seem Inextricable; but I hope the
following Account will reconcile all these seeming Difficulties, and withal
afford us a fair and easy Conception of the difference between the Ancient
Bishops and Presbyters.

I shall then lay down as sure, that there was but one Supreme Bishop in a
place, that was the (...), The Bishop, by way of Eminency and Propriety. The
proper Pastor and Minister of his Parish, to whose Care and Trust the Souls of
that Church or Parish, over which he presided, were principally and more
immediately committed. So says Cyprian, Unus in Ecclesia ad (...) Sacerdos.
Epist. 55.. 6. p. 138.
There is but one Bishop in a Church at a time. And so Cornelius Objects to
Novatian, That he did not remember, (...). Ad Fabium. Antioch. apud Eusebius. lib.
6. c. 43. p. 244.
that there ought to be but one Bishop in a Church. And throughout the whole
Epistles of Ignatius, and the generality of Writers succeeding him, we find but
one single Bishop in a Church, whose Quotations to which purpose would be
fruitless to recite here, since the (...) Practice of the Universal Church
confirms it, and a great part of the following Discourse will clearly
illustrate it.

Only it may not be impertinent to remark this by the way, that by the (...),
or Succession of Bishops, from those Bishops who were Ordained by the Apostles,
the Orthodox were wont to prove the Succession of their Faith, and the Novelty
of that of the Heretics, Edant origines ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant (...)
Episcoporum (...), ita per successiones ab initio decurrentem, ut (...) aliquem
ex (...) vel Apostolicis (...), qui tamen cum (...) perseveraverit, habuerit
autorem and antecessorem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos
deserunt, sicut Smirnaeorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum ab Johanne conlocatum
(...), sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum proinde utique exhibent,
quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos, (...) seminis traduces habeant.
De praescript. advers. (...) p. 78.
Let them demonstrate the Original of their Churches, as Tertullian challenges
the Marcionites, and other Heretics; Let them turn over the Orders of their
Bishops, and see whether they have had a Succession of Bishops from any one who
was Constituted by the Apostles or Apostolic Men: Thus the truly Apostolic
Churches have, as the Church of Smirna has Polycarp there placed by St. John,
and the Church of Rome Clement, ordained by Peter; and other Churches can tell,
who were ordained Bishops over them by the Apostles, and who have been their
Successors to this very day. So also says Irenaeus, Eam traditionem quae est ab
Apostolis, quae per Successiones Presbyterorum in (...) custoditur, provocamus
eos. Lib. 3. c. 2. p. 170.
We challenge the Heretics to that Tradition, which was handed down from the
Apostles by the Succession of Bishops.

And in the Lib. 3. c. 3. p. 170, 171.
next Chapter of the same Book, the said Father gives us a Catalogue of the
Bishops of Rome till his days, by whom the true Faith was successively
transmitted down from the Apostles; in which Catalogue we find but one Bishop
at a time, and as he died, so another single Person succeeded him in the Charge
of that Flock or Parish.

So that this Consideration evidences also, that there was but one Bishop
strictly so called, in a Church at a time, who was related to his Flock, A
pastore oves, and filios (...) parente (...). Cypr. Epist. 38.. 1. p. 90.
as a Pastor to his Sheep, and a Parent to his Children. The Titles of this
Supreme Church Officer are most of them reckoned up in one place by Cyprian,
which are, Episcopus, Praepositus, Pastor, Gubernator, Antistes, Sacerdos.
Epist. 69.. 5. p. 208.
Bishop, Pastor, President, Governor, Superintendent and Priest. And this is
he, which in the Revelations is called (...). De (...),. 35. p. 34.
the Angel of his Church, as Origin thinks, which Appellations denote both his
Authority and Office, his Power and Duty, of both which we shall somewhat
treat, after we have discoursed of the Circuit and Extent of his Jurisdiction
and Superintendency, which shall be the Contents of the following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
. 1. As but one Bishop to a Church, so but one Church to a Bishop. The Bishop's
Cure never called a Diocese, but usually a Parish, no larger than our
Parishes.. 2. Demonstrated by several Arguments.. 3. A Survey of the extent of
several Bishoprics, as they were in Ignatius's days, as of Smirna.. 4.
Ephesus.. 5. Magnesia.. 6. Philadelphia. And. 7. Trallium.. 8. The Bigness of
the Diocese of Antioch.. 9. Of Rome.. 10. Of Carthage.. 11. A Reflection on the
Diocese of Alexandria.. 12. Bishops in Villages.. 13. All the Christians of a
Diocese met together in one place every Sunday to serve God.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapter shown that there was but one Bishop to a
Church, we shall in this evidence, that there was but one Church to a Bishop,
which will appear from this single Consideration, viz. That the ancient
Diocesses are never said to contain Churches, in the Plural, but only a Church,
in the Singular. So they say, (...). (...). Romans Epist. 1. p. 62.
the Church of the Corinthians, Smirnis Ecclesia. Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3. p. 171.
the Church of Smirna, (...). Ignat. Epist. 4. p. (...).
the Church in Magnesia, (...). Idem Epist. 5. p (...).
the Church in Philadelphia, (...). Idem ibidem, p. 45.
the Church in Antioch, and so of any other place whatsoever, the Church of, or
in such a place.

This was the common name whereby a Bishops Cure was denominated, the Bishop
himself being usually called, The Bishop of this or that Church, as Tertullian
says, (...) in Smirnis ecclesia constitutus episcopus. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. p.
171.
That Polycarp was ordained Bishop of the Church of Smirna.

As for the Word Diocese, by which the Bishops Flock is now usually expressed, I
do not remember that ever I found it used in this Sense by any of the Ancients:
But there is another Word, still retained by us, by which they frequently
denominated the Bishops Cure, and that is Parish: So in the Synodical Epistle
of Irenaeus to Pope Victor, the Bishoprics of Asia are twice called (...).
Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24. p. 193.
Parishes. And in Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History the Word is so applied in
several hundred places. It is usual there to read of the Bishops of the (...),
lib. 2. c. 24. p. 66.
Parish of Alexandria, of the (...), lib. 3. c. 4. p. 73.
Parish of Ephesus, of the (...), lib. 3. c. 4. p. 74.
Parish of Corinth, of the Parish of (...) lib. 4. c. (...). p. 144.
Athens, of the (...), lib. 7. cap. 3. p. 251.
Parish of Carthage; and so of the Bishops of the Parishes of several other
Churches; by that Term denoting the very same, that we now call a Parish, viz.
a competent number of Christians dwelling near together, having one Bishop,
Pastor or Minister set over them, with whom they all met at one time to worship
and serve God. This may be evinced from the intent of the Word it self, which
signifies a Dwelling one by another, as Neighbors do; or an Habitation in one
and the same place, as the Church of Smirna writ to the Church Apud Eusebius. lib.
4. c. 15. p. 129.
that Parished in Philomelium, (...). And the Epistle of Clemens Romanus is to
the Church of God Epist. 1. (...) Cor. p. 1.
Parishing at Corinth, (...), that is, dwelling or living in Philomilium and
Corinth; so that a Parish is the same with a Particular Church, or a single
Congregation; which is yet more evident from a Passage in the Differtations of
Apollonius against Alexander a Cataphrygian Heretic, wherein it is said, That
because that Heretic had been a Robber, therefore (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 5,
cap. 18. p. 185.
that Parish to which he belonged would not receive him, that is, that
particular Church or Congregation to which he appertained, excluded him from
Communion because of his Depredations and Robberies; so that a Parish and a
Particular Church are Synonimous Terms, signifying one and the same thing; and
consequently a Bishop having but one Parish under his Jurisdiction, could
extend his Government no farther than one single Congregation; because a single
Congregation and a Parish were all one, of the same Bulk and Magnitude.

. 2. But that the Bishops Diocese exceeded not the Bounds of a modern Parish,
and was the same, as in Name, so also in Thing, will appear from these
following Observations, as,

1. All the People of a Diocese did every Sunday meet all together in one place
to celebrate Divine Service. Thus says Justin Martyr, (...). Apol. 2. p. 98.
On Sunday all Assemble together in one Place, where the Bishop preaches and
prays; for as Ignatius writes, (...). Epist. ad (...). p. 6.
Where the Bishop is, there the People must be; and (...) Epist. ad Tralles. p
48.
there is a necessity that we do nothing without the Bishop; since (...).
Epist. ad Smirn. p. 6.
it is unlawful to do any thing without him; for (...). Epist. ad Philadelph.
p. 40.
where the Pastor is, there the (...) ought to follow; wherefore (...) Epist.
ad Magnes. p. 33.
as Christ did nothing without the Father, so do you nothing without the Bishop
and Presbyters, but assemble into the same place, that you may have one Prayer,
one Supplication, one Mind, and one Hope; (...). Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 20.
for if the Prayer of one or two have so great a force, how much more prevalent
must that be, which is made by the Bishop and the whole Church? He then that
does not assemble together, is proud, and has condemned himself: For it is
written, God resists the proud. Let us not therefore resist the Bishop, that
we may be subject to God. So that these Passages clearly prove, That all the
Members of the Bishops Church assembled together in one place to send up their
common Prayers to the Throne of Grace, and to discharge those other Religious
Duties which were incumbent on them, which convincingly evidences the Bishops
Church to be no bigger than our Parishes; for if it had been bigger, it would
have been impossible that the Members thereof, should have constantly assembled
together in one place, as we see here they did.

2. The Bishop had but one Altar or Communion Table in his whole Diocese, at
which his whole Flock received the Sacrament from him. (...). Epist. ad Philad.
p. 41.
There is but one Altar, says Ignatius, as there is but one Bishop. At this
Altar the Bishop administered the Sacrament to his whole Flock at one time. So
writes Cyprian, Sacramenti veritatem fraternitate omni praesente celebramus.
Epist. 63.. 12. p. 177.
We celebrate the Sacrament, the whole Brotherhood being present. And thus it
was in Justin Martyr's Days, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 98.
The Bishop's whole Diocese met together on Sunday, when the Bishop gave them
the Eucharist; and if any were absent, he sent it to them by the Deacons.
Certainly that Diocese could not be large, where all usually communicated at
one time; and the Deacons carried about the Consecrated Eucharist to those that
were absent; which would have been an endless and painful Task for the Deacons,
had their Bishopric contained more Christians in it, than one Congregation
would have held. Tertullian writes, that in his Time and Country, Nec de
aliorum manu quam de praesidentium sumimus. De (...), p. 338.
the Christians received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper from the hands of
the Bishop alone. Now in those days and places they communicated at least
(...). de oratione, p. 661.
three times a week, viz. Wednesdays, Fridays, and Lord's Days, which had been
impossible to have been done, if the Bishop had had Inspection over more than
one Congregation, as is obvious to every ones Reason; for the Bishop being
Finite and Corporeal as well as others, could not be present in many places at
once, but must be confined to one determinated fixed place, in which alone he
could administer and dispense the Eucharist: And for this Reason it is, that
Ignatius exhorts the Philadelphians (...). Epist. ad Philadelph. p. 40.
to use the one (...), that is, not to leave the Bishop, and communicate
elsewhere, but to partake of that single Eucharist which was administered by
him: For as he proceeds to say in the same place, (...). Ibid.
There is but one Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, one Cup, one Altar, and one
Bishop. As there was but one Bishop in a Church, so there was but one Altar, a
Bishop and an Altar being Correlates: So that to set up another Altar, was a
Periphrasis of a Schismatic, or of one that causelessly separated from his
lawful Bishop, and sat up another, which was that they called Schism, as we
shall show in its proper place. Thus Cyprian describes a Schismatic as one,
Contemptis episcopis, and Dei Sacerdotibus derelictis constituere (...) aliud
altar. De Unitat. Ecclesiae,. 15. p. 301.
that contemns his Bishop, leaves the Ministers of God, and dares to set up
another Altar: And particularly he brands Novatian as such an one, because
Profanum altar (...). Epist. 67.. 2. p. 198.
he erected a profane Altar, that is, an Altar in opposition to the Altar of
Cornelius his lawful Bishop: For, as he says in another place, Aliud altar
constitui, (...) novum (...), (...) unum altar, and unum sacerdotium, non
potest. Epist. 40.. 4. p. 93.
No man can regularly constitute a new Bishop, or erect a new Altar, besides
the one Bishop, and the one Altar: For which Reason he calls the Altar that is
erected by Schismatics, against the One Altar of their lawful Bishops, Altar
profanum. Epist. 65.. 4. p. 193.
A profane Altar: Which agrees with that of Ignatius, that (...). Epist. ad
Tralles. p. 50.
He that is within the Altar is pure, but he that does any thing without the
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, is impure; and as he says in another place,
(...). Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 20.
Whosoever is without the Altar, wants the Bread of God.

3. The other Sacrament of Baptism was generally administered by the Bishops
alone within their Respective Diocesses. So says Tertullian, Sub Antistis
contestamur nos renunciare diabolo and pompae. De Coron. Milit. p. 336.
Before the Bishop we renounce the Devil and the World. For as Cyprian says,
Non nifi in Ecclesia praepositis licere baptizare. Epist. 73.. 6. p. 220.
The Bishops ought only to baptize: And to the same effect writes Fortunatus
Bishop of Thucabori, that our Lord Jesus Christ Potestatem baptizandi Episcopis
dedit. Act. Council. Carth. apud Cyprian. (...). 445.
gave unto the Bishops the power of Baptizing. So that the Bishops did
ordinarily baptize all the Persons that were baptized in their Diocesses; and
if so, it is not probable, I may say possible, that their Diocesses were
extended beyond the bulk of single Congregations.

4. The Churches Charity was Deposited with the Bishop, who, as Justin Martyr
reports, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 99.
was the common Curator and Overseer of all the Orphans, Widows, Diseased,
Strangers, Imprisoned, and, in a word, of all those that were needy and
indigent. To this charitable Office Ignatius advises, Epist. ad Polycarp. p.
12.
Polycarpus; but of that Advice more shall be spoken in another place; only let
us here observe, That that Diocese could not be very large, where the Bishop
personally relieved and succored all the Poor and Indigent therein.

5. All the People of a Diocese were present at Church Censures, as Origin
describes an Offender, as appearing (...). Comment. in Matthew. Tom. 13. p. 335.
Vol. 1.
before the whole Church. So Clemens Romanus calls the Censures of the Church
(...). Epist. 1. ad Cor. p. 69.
the things commanded by the multitude. And so the two offending Subdeacons and
Acolyth at Carthage were to be tried Plebe universa. Cyprian. Epist. 28.. 2. p.
64.
before the whole

6. No Offenders were restored again to the Churches Peace, without the
knowledge and consent of the whole Diocese: So Cyprian writes, that before they
were readmitted to Communion, they were to Acturi causam apud plebem
universam. Epist. 10.. 4. p. 30.
plead their Cause before all the People. And it was ordained by an African
Synod, that except in danger of Death, or an instantaneous Persecution, none
should be received into the Churches Peace, Sine petitu and conscientia (...).
Apud Cyprian. Epist. 59.. 1. p. 164.
without the knowledge and consent of the People.

7. When the Bishop of a Church was dead, all the People of that Church met
together in one Place to choose a new Bishop. So Sabinus was elected Bishop of
Emerita, De universae fraternitatis suffiagio. Apud Cypr. Epist. 68.. 6. p. 202.
by the (...) of all the Brotherhood; which was also the custom throughout all
Africa, Apud nos quoque and fere per provincias universas tenetur, ut ad eam
plebem cui praepositus ordinatur, episcopi ejusdem Provinciae (...) quique
conveniant, and episcopus deligatur plebe (...). (...).
for the Bishop to be chosen in the Presence of the People. And so Fabianus was
chosen to be Bishop of Rome, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 28. p. 229.
by all the Brethren who were met together in one place for that very end.

8. At the Ordinations of the Clergy the whole Body of the People were present.
So an African Synod held Anno 258, determined, Ordinationes Sacerdotales non
nisi sub populi assistentes Conscientia fieri oportere, ut plebe praesente, vel
detegantur malorum crimina, vel bonorum merita praedicentur, and sit Ordinatio
(...) and legitima, quae omnium Suffragio and Judicio (...) examinata. Apud
Cyprian. Epist. 68.. 4. p. 201.
That the Ordination of Ministers ought to be done with the knowledge, and in
the Presence of the People, that the People being present, either the Crimes of
the wicked may be detected, or the Merits of the good declared; and so the
Ordination may be Just and Lawful, being approved by the Suffrage and Judgment
of all. And Bishop Cyprian writes from his Exile to all the People of his
Diocese, that In OrdinationibusClericis, Fratres charislimi, solemus vos ante
consulere, and mores, ac merita fingulorum communi concilio ponderare. Ad
Plebem Universam Epist. 33. p. 76.
it had been his constant Practice in all Ordinations, to consult their
Opinions, and by their common Counsels to weigh the manners and merits of every
one: Therein imitating the Example of the Apostles and Apostolic Men, who
Ordained none, but with (...). Clemens Romanus Epist. 1. ad Cor. p. 57.
the Approbation of the whole Church.

9. Public Letters from one Church to another were read before the whole
Diocese. Thus Cornelius Bishop of Rome, whatever Letters he received from
Foreign Churches, he Sanctissimae atque amplissimae plebi (...). Cyprian.
Epist. 55.. 21. p. 144.
always read them to his most holy and numerous People. And without doubt when
Firmilian writ (...). Epist. Synod. (...). (...) Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 279.
to all the Parish of Antioch, they could all assemble together to read his
Letter, and return an Answer to it; since we find that in those days one whole
Church writ to another whole Church, as (...). Clem. Romans Epist. 1. p. 1.
the Church of Rome writ to the Church of Corinth. And Cyprian. Fraternitas
omnis. Cyprian. Epist. 58.. 2. p. 163.
and his whole Flock, sent gratulatory Letters to Pope Lucius upon his return
from Exile.

Lastly, The whole Diocese of the Bishop did meet all together to manage
Church Affairs. Thus when the Schism of Felicissimus in the Bishopric of
Carthage was to be debated, Secundum (...) quoque vestrum, ea quae agenda sunt
disponere pariter and limare poterimus. Ad Plebem Epist. 40.. 7. p. 94.
It was to be done according to the will of the People, and by the consent of
the Laity. And when there were some hot Disputes about the Restitution of the
Lapsed, the said Cyprian promised his whole Diocese, Tune examinabuntur singula
praesentibus and judicantibus vobis. Ad Plebem Epist. 12.. 1. p. 37.
that all those things should be examined before them, and be judged by them.
And so also, when they were to send a Messenger to any Foreign Church, all the
People could meet together to choose that Messenger, as they could in the (...).
(...). (...). ad Philad. p. 45.
Church of Philadelphia.

Now put all these Observations together, and duly consider, whether they do
not prove the Primitive Parishes to be no larger than our modern ones are, that
is, that they had no more Believers or Christians in them than there are now in
ours: I do not say, that the Ancient Bishoprics had no larger Territories, or
no greater space of Ground, than our Parishes have. On the contrary, it is very
probable that many of them had much more; since in those early days of
Christianity, in many places the Faithful might be so few, as that for twenty
or thirty Miles round, they might associate together under one Bishop, and make
up but one Church, and that a small one too: But this I fay, that how large
soever their Local Extent was, their Members made but one single Congregation,
and had no more Christians in it, than our Parishes now have; for that Diocese
cannot possibly be more than one single Congregation, where all the People met
together at one time, Prayed together, Received the Sacrament together,
assisted at Church Censures together, and dispatched Church Affairs together;
and yet the Members of the Primitive Diocesses did all this together, as the
preceding Observations evidently declare; so that I might stop here, and add no
(...) Proofs to that which has been already so clearly proved.

. 3. But yet that we may more clearly illustrate this Point, we shall
demonstrate it by another method, viz. By showing the real Bulk and Size of
those Bishoprics, concerning whom we have any Notices remaining on ancient
Records; and manifest, that the very largest of them were no greater than our
particular Congregations are. And for the Proof of this, we shall quote the
Writings of St. Ignatius, in whose genuine Epistles there is such an account of
the Bishoprics of Smirna, Ephesus, Magnesia, Philadelphia, and Trallium, as
manifestly evidences them to be but so many single Congregations.

As for the Diocese of Smirna, its extent could not be very large, since (...).
Epist. ad (...). p. 6.
nothing of Church Affairs was done there without the Bishop; he baptized and
administered the Eucharist, and none else could do it within his Cure without
his permission; wherever he was, his whole Flock followed him; which they might
without any Inconveniency do, since they (...). Epist. ad Polycarp. p. 13.
frequently assembled together; as Ignatius advised Polycarp the Bishop of this
Church, (...), etc. Ibidem, p. 15.
To convene his Diocese to choose a faithful honest Man to send a Messenger into
Syria: So that the Bishop of this Church (...). (...), p. 13.
could know his whole Flock personally by their Names, carrying himself
respectfully and charitably to all (...). Ibidem, p. 13.
with all meekness and humility toward Serving-men and Serving-maids, and
charitably, (...). Epist. ad Polycarp, p. 12.
taking care of the Widows within his Diocese, permitting (...). Ihidem, p. 12.
nothing to be done there without his Privity. Insomuch (...). Ibidem, p. 13.
that none were married without his previous advice and consent. Now, how all
these things could be done, how all this Bishopric could meet together in one
place, how the Bishop could personally know all the Members thereof by their
respective Names, even the meanest Serving-maids therein, and permit none to be
married without his Knowledge and Advice, without reducing this Diocese to a
single Parish, I know not.

. 4. As for the Diocese of Ephesus, there was but one Altar or Communion Table
in its whole Territory, at which they all communicated together; whence they
are said, (...). Epist. ad (...). p. 20, 29.
To break the one Bread; and (...). Ibid. p. 20.
he that was without or separated from that Altar, is said, to want the bread
of God. The Members also of this Church could all meet together in one place,
to send up their joint Prayers to God in Christ: And therefore Ignatius
condemns all those of that Diocese (...). Ibidem, p. 20.
who did not assemble together in that one place, with the rest of the Members
thereof, to send up their Prayers to God, as proud, self-conceited, and justly
condemnable; because thereby they (...) themselves of that unconceivable
Benefir, that would accrue unto them by joining in the Prayers of the whole
Church (...). Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 20.
For if the Prayer of one or two has so great a force with God, how (...) more
prevalent must the Prayer of the Bishop and the whole Church be? So that if to
communicate together, and to pray together, be the Marks of a Particular
Church, then this Bishopric was one.

. 5. As for the Church of Magnesia, they all assembled with the Bishop, having
but (...). Epist. ad Magnes. p. 34.
one Church, and (...). Ibid. p. 34.
one Altar, (...). Ibidem. p. 33.
joining all together in one Prayer, because (...). Ibidem, p. 32.
to have congregated elsewhere would have been against Conscience and Precept.
Now how large such a Church is, where there is but one Meeting Place, and one
Altar, where all communicate and pray together, is no hard matter to determine.

6. Touching the Bishopric of Philadelphia, its Extent may be guessed at by
this, that the Members thereof (...). Epist. ad Philadelph. p. 40.
could do nothing without the Bishop, (...). Ibidem, p. 40.
who being their Shepherd, wherever he was, they were to follow him like Sheep,
(...) Epist. ad Philadelph. p. 40.
receiving the Sacrament all together from him, (...). Ibid. p. 41.
at that one Altar belonging to their Diocese; which they might well enough do,
since their Multitudes were not so great, but that on other occasions they
could meet all together, as (...). (...), p. 45.
to choose a Messenger to send to the Church at Antioch in Syria.

. 7. As for the Diocese of Trallium, that could be no larger than the former
ones, since it had but one Altar in it, which was correlate to its one Bishop;
so that to separate from the Altar, was the same, as to separate from the
Bishop; whence Ignatius says, that (...). Epist. ad Tralles. p. (...).
He that is within the Altar is pure, that is, He that does any thing without
the Bishop, Priests and Deacons, is impure.

Now let any impartial Man judge, whether all these Descriptions of those
Ancient Diocesses do not forcibly constrain us to reduce them to the Rate of
our modern Parishes. And if these were no greater, especially Ephesus, at which
place St. Paul preached three years, we have no reason to imagine, that other
Bishoprics where the Apostles never were, or at least never preached so long,
surmounted their Bulk and Largeness.

How long it was before these Diocesses swelled into several Congregations, is
not my business to determine, since it happened not within my prescribed time;
except in the Church of Alexandria; the reason and manner whereof shall be
shown in a few Leafs more, after that I have more fully evidenced this Point,
by demonstrating, that the greatest Bishoprics in the World, even in the Third
Century, were no more than so many single Congregations: And if this can be
proved, it is the solidest Demonstration that can be given: For the larger a
Church was, and the more time it had to settle and increase its self, the
greater Reason have we to expect that it should exceed all others in Numbers
and Diffusiveness.

Now the four greatest Diocesses, that in those days were in the World, are
Antioch, Rome, Carthage, Alexandria. The three former of which, during the
whole three hundred years after Christ, never branched themselves into several
particular Congregations, though the latter did, as shall be hereafter shown.

. 8. As for the Diocese of Antioch, its Members were not so many, but that 265
years after Christ, they were able to meet all in one place, of which we have
this memorable Instance, that when Paulus Samosatenus the Heretical Bishop
thereof, was deprived by a Synod held in that place, and Domnus substituted in
his room, (...). Apud (...). Lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 282.
he refused to resign the Churches House, till the Emperor Aurelian forced him
to resign (...). Ibidem.
that House: So that for above 250 Years after Christ, the whole Bishopric of
Antioch had but one Church to serve God in.

. 9. How large the Diocese of Rome was, may be conjectured by that;

1. All the People thereof could meet together to perform Divine Service, as
appears by that History of a certain Confessor called Natalis, who returning
from the Theodosian Heresy, put himself into the Habit of a Penitent, threw
himself at the Feet of the Clergy and Laity, as they went into their Public
Meeting Place, and so bewailed his Fault, (...). Anonym. apud (...). lib. 5.
cap. 28. p. 197.
that at length the Church was touched with Compassion toward him.

2. In this Diocese there was but one Church or Meeting Place; for when Bishop
Anterus died, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 28. p. 229.
All the Brethren met together in the Church, to choose a Successor; which
distinction or nomination of place, viz. That they met in the Church, denotes
that they had but one Church all; for if they had had more Churches than one,
the Historian would have left us in the dark, as to what Church they met in,
whether in St. James's, St. John's, or St. Peter's.

3. In this Bishopric also they had but one Altar or Communion Table, as
appears from a Passage of Cyprian, who describes the Schism of Novatian a
Presbyter of this Church, by Profanum altar erigere. Epist. 67.. 2. p. 198.
his erecting a Profane Altar, in opposition to the Altar of Cornelius his
lawful Bishop.

4. The whole Diocese could concur together in Salutations and Letters to other
Churches. Thus concludes a Letter of the Clergy of Rome to the Clergy of
Carthage, Salutant vos fratres, qui sunt in vinculis, and Presbyteri, and tota
Ecclesia. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 3.. 3. p. 12.
The Brethren which are in Bonds salute you, and the Presbyters, and the whole
Church.

5. Whatever Letters were writ to that Church, were read before them all, as it
was the Custom of Bishop Cornolius, Sanctissimae atque amplissimae plebi,
legere te semper literas (...). Cyprian. Epist. 55.. 21. p. 144.
to read all public Letters to his most holy and most numerous Flock.

Lastly, The People of this Diocese met all together to choose a Bishop, when
the Sea was vacant. So upon the Death of Anterus, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 28. p. 229.
All the Brethren met together in the Church to choose a Successor, where all
the People unanimously chose Fabianus. And so after the Death of Fabianus,
Cornelius was chosen Bishop of that Diocese Cleri ac Plebis Suffragio. Cyprian.
(...). 67.. 2. p. 198.
by the Suffrage of the Clergy and People.

Now whether all these things put together, whether their having but one
Communion Table in their whole Diocese, as also but one Church, where they all
usually met, do not unavoidably reduce this Bishopric to the Circumference of
a modern Parish, I leave every Man to judge.

. 10. The next Diocese to be considered is Carthage, which next to Rome and
Alexandria, was the greatest City in the World, and probably had as many
Christians in it, as either, especially if that is true, which Tertullian
insinuates, that the tenth part thereof was Christian; for he remonstrates to
Scapula the Persecuting President of that City, that Quid ipsa Carthago passura
est, decimanda a te. Ad Sca (...), p. 450.
if he should destroy the Christians of Carthage, he must root out the Tenth
part thereof. But yet how many soever the Christians of that Bishopric were,
even some years after Tertullian's days, they were no more in number, than
there are now in our Parishes, as is evident from Scores of Passages in the
Writings of Cyprian Bishop of that Church. For,

1. The Bishop of that Diocese Ut omnes optime nossem. Cyprian. Epist. 38.. 1.
p. 90.
could know every one therein.

2. The Bishop of that Diocese was the common Curator of all the Poor therein,
relieving the Poor and Indigent, paying of their Debts, and aiding the
necessitous Tradesmen with Money to set up their Trades. As Cyprian when he was
in his exiled State, sent Caldonius, Herculanus, Rogatianus, and Numidicus to
his Church at Carthage, Ut expungeretis necessitates fratrum nostrorum
sumptibus, si qui etiam vellent suas arts exercere, additamento quantum satis
esset, desideria eorum (...). Idem Ibidem
to pay off the Debts of the indebted Members thereof, and to help those poor
Mechanics with a convenient Sum of Money, who were willing to set up their
Trades. If Cyprian's Diocese had consisted of scores of Parishes, how many
Thousand Pounds must he have expended, to have paid off the Debts of all the
insolvent Persons therein, and to have (...) every poor Trader with a
sufficient Stock to carry on his Employment?

3. All the Diocese was present, when the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was
administered. So says Cyprian, Sacramenti veritatem (...) omni praesente
celebramus. Epist. 63.. 12. p. 177.
We celebrate the Sacrament, the whole Brotherhood being present.

4. When Celerinus was ordained Lector or Clerk by Cyprian, he Read from the
Pulpit, so that Plebi Universae, Epist. 34.. 4. p. 81.
All the People could see and hear him.

5. In all Ordinations, all the People were consulted, and none were admitted
into Holy Orders without their Approbation, as is assured by Cyprian Bishop of
this Diocese, who tells us, that it was his constant custom In ordinationibus
Clericis, fratres charissimi, solemus vos ante consulere, and mores ac merita
(...) communi consilio ponderare. Epist. (...). ad Clerum and Plebem. p. 76.
in all Ordinations to consult his People, and with their common Counsel to
weigh the merits of every Candidate of the Sacred Orders. And therefore when
for extraordinary Merits he advanced one to the Degree of a Lector or Clerk,
without first communicating it to his Diocese, he writes from his Exiled State
Plebi Universae. Epist. 34. p. 80.
to his whole Flock the Reason of it.

6. When that See was vacant, all the People met together to choose a Bishop.
Whence Pontius says, that Cyprian was elected Bishop of this Diocese Plebis
favore. In vita Cypriani.
by the favor of the people. And Cyprian himself acknowledges, that he was
chosen by Populi universi Suffragio. Epist. 55.. 7. p. 139.
the Suffrage of all his People.

7. All the People of this Diocese could meet together to send Letters to other
Churches; an instance whereof we have in that gratulatory Letter still extant
in Cyprian, which they Vicarias vero pro nobis ego and Collegae, and
Fiaternitas omnis has ad vos literas (...). Apud Cyprian. Epist. 58.. 2. p. 163.
all sent to Lucius Bishop of Rome, on his Return from Exile.

8. All the People were present at Church Censures, and concurred at the
Secundum vestra divina (...) conjurati. Epist. 40. ad (...),. 1. p. 92.
Excommunication of Offenders. Thus Cyprian writing from his Exile, to the
People of this his Diocese, about the Irregularities of two of his Subdeacons,
and one of his Acolyths; and about the Schism of Felicissimus, assures them,
that as to the former, when ever it should please God to return him in Peace,
Et cum plebe ipsa universa. Epist. 28.. 2. p. 64.
it should be determined by him and his Colleagues, and his whole Flock. And as
to the latter, that then likewise that should be transacted Secundum arbitrium
quoque vestrum, and omnium (...) commune Consilium. Epist. 40. ad Plebem,. 7.
p. 94.
according to the Arbitrament of the People, and the common Counsel of them all.

9. At the Absolution of Penitents, all the People were present, who examined
the Reality of the Offender's Repentance; and if well satisfied of it,
consented, that they should be admitted to the Churches Peace. Therefore when
some Presbyters in a time of Persecution, had with too great (...) and
Precipitancy assoyled some of those, that through the Violence of the
Persecution had succumbed, Cyprian writes them from his Exile an objurgatory
Letter, commanding them to admit no more, till Peace should be restored to the
Church, when those Offenders should plead their Cause Acturi apud Plebem
universam causam suam. Epist. 10.. 4. p. 30.
before all the People. And touching the same matter he writes in another place
to all the People of his Diocese, that when it should please God to restore
Peace to the Church, then all those matters Examinabuntur singula praesentibus
and judicantibus vobis. Epist. 12. ad Plebem,. 1. p. 37.
should be examined in their Presence, and be judged by them.

Lastly, Nothing was done in this Diocese without the Consent of the People. So
resolved Bishop Cyprian A primordio episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine
consensu Plebis (...) privata sententia gerere. Epist. 6.. 5. p. 17.
from the first time I was made Bishop, said he, I determined to do nothing
without the consent of my People. And accordingly when he was exiled from his
Flock, he writ to the Clergy and Laity thereof, that when it should please God
to return him unto them, De iis quae vel gesta sunt, vel gerenda, sicut honor
(...). poscit, in commune tractabimus. Epist. 6.. 5. p. 17.
all Affairs, as their mutual Honor did require, should be debated in common
by them.

Now whether all these Observations do not evidently reduce the Diocese of
Carthage to the same Bulk with our Parishes, I leave to every one to (...): For
my part, I must needs profess, that I cannot imagine, how all the People thereof
could receive the Sacrament together, assist at the Excommunication and
Absolution of Offenders, assemble together to elect their Bishop, and do the
rest of those forementioned particulars, without confining this Bishopric
within the Limits of a particular Congregation.

. 11. As for the Diocese of Alexandria, though the numbers of the Christians
therein were not so many, but that in the middle of the Fourth Century they
could all, or at least most of them, meet together in one place, as I might
evince from the Writings of Apolog. ad Constant.
Athanasius, were it not beyond my prescribed time; yet in the third Century
they had divided themselves into several distinct and separate Congregations,
which were all subjected to one Bishop, as is clearly enough asserted by
Dyonisius Bishop of this Church, who mentions, (...). Advers. (...) apud Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 11. p. 260.
the distinct Congregations in the extremest Suburbs of the City. The Reason
whereof seems to be this; Those Members of this Bishopric, who lived in the
remotest parts of it, finding it incommodious and troublesome every Lord's Day,
Saturday, Wednesday and Friday (on which days they always assembled) to go to
their one usual Meeting Place, which was very far from their own Homes; and
withal being unwilling to divide themselves from their old Church and Bishop,
lest they should seem guilty of the detestable Sin of Schism, which consisted
in a Causeless Separation from their Bishop and Parish Church, as shall be
hereafter shown, desired their proper Bishop, to give them leave for
Convenience sake, to Erect near their own Habitations a Chapel of Ease, which
should be a Daughter-Church to the Bishops, under his Jurisdiction, and guided
by a Presbyter of his Commission and Appointment, whereat they would usually
meet, though on some Solemn Occasions they would still all assemble in one Church
with their one Bishop.

That for this Reason these separate Congregations were introduced at
Alexandria, seems evident enough; because Dyonisius Alexandrinus says, that
these distinct Congregations were only in the (...). Vide ut antea.
remotest Suburbs; and the Christians hereof were not as yet arrived to those
great numbers, but that seventy years after they could meet all together in one
and the same place, as might be proved from that forementioned place of
Athanasius.

So that these distinct Congregations were only for the Convenience and Ease of
those who lived at a great distance from the Bishop's Church, being introduced
in the third Century, and peculiar to the Bishopric of Alexandria: All other
Bishoprics confining themselves within their Primitive Bounds of a single
Congregation, as we have before proved the largest of them did; even Antioch,
Rome, and Carthage.

. 12. If then a Bishopric was but a single Congregation, it is no marvel that
we find Bishops not only in Cities, but in Country Villages; there being a
Bishop constituted, wherever there were Believers enough to form a competent
Congregation; For, says Clemens Romanus, the Apostles going forth, and (...),
Epist. 1. ad Corintn. p. 54.
preaching both in Country and City, constituted Bishops and Deacons there.
Much to which purpose Cyprian says, That Per omnes Provincias, and per urbes
singulas ordinati sunt Episcopi, Epist. 52.. 16. p. 119.
Bishops were ordained throughout all Provinces and Cities: Hence in the
Encyclycal Epistle of the Synod of Antioch, it is said, That Paulus Samosatenus
had many Flatterers (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. p. (...).
amongst the adjacent City and Country Bishops; of this sort of Country-Bishops
was Zoticus, Bishop (...). Anonym. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. p. 182.
of the Village of Comane. And we may reasonably believe, That many of those
Bishops, who in the Year 258, were assembled at Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian.
p. 443.
Carthage to the number of fourscore and seven, had no other than obscure
Villages for their Seats, since we find not the least notice of them in
Ptolomy, or any of the old Geographers.

. 13. But let the Bishops Seats have been in any place whatever, their Limits,
as has been proved, exceeded not those of our Modern Parishes: I do not here
mean, as was said before, that the Territory of some of them, was no larger;
no, I readily grant that; for it is very probable, that in those places, where
there were but few Believers, the Christians, for several Miles round, met all
(...) at the greatest place within that Compass, where probably there were most
Christians, whence both the Church and its Bishop took their Denomination from
that Place where they so assembled. But this is what I mean, that there were no
more Christians in that Bishopric, than there are now in our ordinary
Parishes; and that the Believers of that whole Territory met altogether with
their Bishop for the Performance of Religious Services.

Thus it was in the Age and Country of Justin Martyr, who describing their
solemn Assemblies, writes, That (...). Apolog. 2. p. 98.
on Sunday all the Inhabitants both of City and Country met together, where the
Lector read some Portions of the Holy Scriptures; and the Bishop preached unto
them, administered the Eucharist, and sent by the Deacons part of the
Consecrated Elements to those that were absent. So that the Inhabitants both of
City and Country, assembled all at the Bishop's Church, hearing him, and
communicating with him, following herein the Exhortation of Saint Ignatius to
the Magnesians, (...). Epist. ad Magnes. p. 33.
Let nothing, says he, be in you, that may divide you; but be united to the
Bishop, and those that preside over you: As therefore our Lord Jesus Christ did
nothing without his Father, neither by himself, nor his Apostles, so do you
nothing without the Bishop and Presbyters, but assemble into one Place, and
have one Prayer, one Supplication, one Mind, and one Hope.

CHAP. III.
. 1. What the Bishop's Office was.. 2. Always Resident on his Cure.. 3. How the
Bishop was Chosen, Elected, or Presented by the Majority of the Parish.. 4.
Approved by the neighboring Bishops.. 5. Installed by Imposition of Hands. How
many Bishops necessary to this Installment.. 6. When a Bishop was promoted, he
certified it to other Bishops.. 7. A brief Recapitulation of the peculiar Acts
of the Bishop.

. 1. THE Bishop's Flock having been so largely discussed, it will now be
necessary to speak something of the Bishop's Duty toward them, and of the
several Particulars of his honorable Office: I shall not here be tedious,
since about this there is no great difference; only briefly enumerate the
several Actions belonging to his Charge.

In brief therefore; the particular Acts of his Function were such as these,
viz. Origin. in (...). Hom. 3.
Preaching of the Word, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 98.
Praying with his People, administering the two Sacraments of Tertul. de
Baptism. p. 602.
Baptism and the Idem de Coron. Milit. p. 338.
Lord's Supper, Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 99.
taking care of the Poor, Firmilian. apud Cypr. Epist. 75.. 6. p. 237.
Ordaining of Ministers, Tertul. Apol. cap. 39. p. 709.
Governing his Flock, Cypr. Ep. 38.. 2. p. 90.
Excommunicating of Offenders, Idem Ep. 10.. 2. p. 30.
Absolving of Penitents; and, in a word; whatever Acts can be comprised under
those three General Heads of Preaching, Worship, and Government, were parts of
the Bishop's Function and Office.

I have but just named these things, because they are not much controverted;
and my Design leads me chiefly to the Consideration of those matters which have
been unhappily disputed amongst us.

. 2. To the constant Discharge of those forementioned Actions, did the
Primitive Bishops sedulously apply themselves, continually preaching unto their
People, praying with them, and watching over them, and to that end, residing
always with them; which Incumbency or Residency on their Parishes, was deemed
so necessary, that Cyprian enumerating the Sins that brought the Wrath of God
upon the Churches in that bloody Persecution of Decius, mentions the Bishops
Non-Residencies as one; Episcopi derelicta cathedia, plebe deserta, per alienas
Provincias oberrantes, negotiationis questuosae (...) aucupari, De Lapsis,. 4.
p. 278.
Their leaving their Rectories, and deserting their Flocks, and wandering about
the Country to hunt after Worldly Gain and Advantage: And therefore the said
Cyprian writing to the Roman Consessors, who were inveigled into the Schism of
Novatian, tells them, Nos Ecclesia derelicta, (...) exire, and ad vos venire
non possumus. Epist. 44.. 2. p. 102.
that since he could not leave his Church, and come in Person unto them,
therefore by his Letters he most earnestly exhorted them to quit that (...)
Faction; so that he looked on his Obligation of Residency at his Church to be
so binding, as that in no Case almost, could he warrant the leaving of it;
which Determination of his might be the more fixed and peremptory, because that
not long before, he was so severely taxed Epist. 3. apud Cyprian. p. 11.
by the Roman Clergy, and by many of his own Pontius in vita Cypriani.
Parish, for departing from them for a while, though it was to avoid the Fury
of his Persecutors, who had already proscribed him, and would have executed him
as a Malesactor, had he not by that Recess from his Church, escaped their
murderous Hand.

So that the Primitive Apostolic Bishops constantly resided with their Flocks,
conscientiously applying themselves with the utmost Diligence and Industry to
the Promotion of the Spiritual Welfare of those that were committed to their
trust, employing themselves in all Acts of Piety, and Offices of Charity; so
leading a laborious and mortified Life, till either a natural, or a violent
Death removed them from Earth to Heaven, where they were made Priests to the
most High, and were infinitely remunerated for all their Pains and Sorrows; and
so leaving their particular Flocks on Earth, to be sed and governed by others,
who should succeed them in their places; which brings me in the next place to
enquire, How a vacant Bishopric was supplied, or in what manner a Bishop or
Minister was elected to a Diocese or Parish?

. 3. Now the manner of electing a Bishop, I find to be thus: When a Parish or
Bishopric was vacant through the Death of the Incumbent, all the Members of
that Parish, both Clergy and Laity, met together in the Church commonly, to
choose a fit Person for his Successor, to whom they might commit the Care and
Government of their Church.

Thus when Alexander was chosen Bishop of Jerusalem, it was by the (...).
Eusebius, lib. 6, cap. 11. p. 212.
Compulsion or Choice of the Members of that Church. And as for the Bishopric
of Rome, we have a memorable Instance of this kind in the Advancement of
Fabianus to that See, upon the Death of Bishop Anterus: (...) Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 28. p. 229.
All the People met together in the Church to choose a Successor, proposing
several illustrious and eminent Personages, as fit for that Office, whilst no
one so much as thought upon Fabianus then present, till a Dove miraculously
came and sat upon his Head, in the same manner as the Holy Ghost formerly
descended on our Savior; and then all the People, guided as it were, with one
Divine Spirit, cried out with one Mind and Soul, That Fabianus was worthy of
the Bishopric; and so straightways taking him, they placed him on the
Episcopal Throne. And as Fabianus, so likewise his Successor Cornelius Episcopo
Cornelio -- Cleri ac plebis suffragio ordinato. Cyprian. Epist. 67.. 2. p. 198.
was elected by the suffrage of the Clergy and Laity.

Thus also with respect to the Diocese of Carthage, Cyprian was chosen Bishop
thereof by its Inhabitants and Members, as Pontius his Deacon writes, Judicio
Dei, and plebis favore ad Officium Sacerdotii, and Episcopatus Gradum, ad huc
Neophytus- electus est. In Vita Cypriani.
That though he was a Novice, yet by the Grace of God, and the Favor of the
People, he was elevated to that sublime Dignity; which is no more than what
Cyprian himself acknowledges, who frequently owns, that he was promoted to that
Honorable Charge by the Populi universi suffragio. Epist. 55.. 7. p. 139.
Populi suffragium. Epist. 55.. 6. p. 138. Suffragium vestrum, Epist. 406. 1. p.
92.
Suffrage of the People.

. 4. When the People had thus elected a Bishop, they presented him to the
neighboring Bishops for their Approbation and Consent, because without their
concurrent Assent, there could be no Bishop legally instituted, or confirmed.

Thus when the forementioned Alexander was Chosen Bishop of Jerusalem, by the
Brethren of that place; he had also the (...). Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 11. p. 212.
common Consent of the circumjacent Bishops. Now the Reason of this, I suppose,
was, lest the People through Ignorance or Affection, should choose an unfit, or an
unable Man for that sacred Office; it being supposed, that a Synod of Bishops
had more Wisdom, Learning, and Prudence, than a Congregation of unlearned and
ignorant Men, and so were better able to judge of the Abilities and
Qualifications of the Person elect, than the People were. Hence we find, that
sometimes the Election of a Bishop is attributed to the Choice of the
Neighboring Bishops, with the Consent and Suffrage of the People: This Custom
generally prevailed throughout Africa; where upon the Vacancy of a See, Apud
nos, and fere per Provincias universas tenetur, ut ad Ordinationes rite
celebrandas, ad came plebem cui praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem
Provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur, plebe praesente,
quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit, and uniuscujusque actum de ejus
Conversatione perspexit. Quod factum videmus in Sabini Ordinatione, ut de
universae fraternitatis Suffragio, and de Episcoporum judicio Episcopatus ei
deferetur. Synod. African. apud Cyprian. Epist. 68.. 6. p. 202.
The Neighboring Bishops of the Province met together at that Church, and
chose a Bishop in the presence of the People, who knew his Life and
Conversation before; which Custom was observed in the Election of Sabinus,
Bishop of Emerita in Spain, who was advanced to that Dignity by the Suffrage of
all the Brethren, and of all the Bishops there present. But whether the
Election of a Bishop, be ascribed to the adjoining Ministers, or to the People
of that Parish, it comes all to one and the same thing; neither the Choice of
the Bishops of the Voisinage, without the Consent of the People; nor the
Election of the People, without the Approbation of those Bishops, was
sufficient and valid of it self; but both concurred to a legal and orderly
Promotion, which was according to the Example of the Apostles and Apostolic
Preachers, who in the first Plantation of Churches, (...). Clem. Roman. Epist.
1. ad Corinth. p. 57.
Ordained Bishops and Deacons, with the Consent of the whole Church.

. 5. A Bishop being thus elected and confirmed, the next thing that followed,
was his Ordination or (...), which was done in his own Church by the
neighboring Bishops; as Cyprian mentions some Bishops in his time, who went to
In Capsensi Civitate propter Ordinationem Episcopi essetis, Epist. 53.. 1. p.
131.
a City called Capse to install a Bishop; whither when they were come, they
took the Bishop Elect, and in the presence of his Flock, Ordained, or Installed
him Bishop of that Church, by Imposition of Hands, as Sabinus was Episcopatus
ei deferretur, and manus ei imponeretur. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 68.. 6. p. 202.
placed in his Bishopric by Imposition of Hands. Therefore Fortunatus the
Schismatical Bishop of Carthage, Quinque Pseudo-episcopi Carthaginem venerint,
and Fortunatam sibi dementiae suae socium constituerint. Cyprian. Epist. 55..
12. p. 140.
got five Bishops to come and Ordain him at Carthage: And so Novatian, when he
Schismatically aspired to the Bishopric of Rome, that he might not seem to
leap in Uncanonically, (...). Cornel. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. p. 243.
wheedled three ignorant and simple Bishops to come to Rome, and install him in
that Bishopric by Imposition of Hands.

How many Bishops were necessary to this installing of a Bishop Elect, I find
not; Three were sufficient, as is apparent from the forecited action of
Novatian; whether less would do, I know not, since I find not the least
footsteps of it in my Antiquity, unless that from Novatian's sending for, and
(...) just three Bishops out of Italy, we conclude that Number to be necessary.

But if there were more than Three, it was not accounted unnecessary or
needless; for the more Bishops there were present at an Installment, the more
did its validity and unexceptionableness appear: Whence Cyprian argues the
undeniable Legality of Cornelius's Promotion to the Sea of Rome, because he had
Episcopo in Ecclesia a sedecim Coepiscopis facto. Epist. 52.. 16. p. 119.
sixteen Bishops present at his Ordination: And for this Reason it was, that
Fortunatus, the Schismatical Bishop of Carthage falsely boasted, That there
were Jactare viginti quinque Episcopos affuisse. Cyprian. Epist. 55.. 12. p.
140.
Twenty-five Bishops present at his Installment. And thus in short, we have
viewed the Method of the Ancients in their Election of Bishops; we have shown,
that they were elected by the People, approved and installed by the
Neighboring Bishops; on which Account it is, that Cyprian calls them Delecti,
ordinati. Epist. 41.. 2. p. 97.
Chosen and ordained.

. 6. It may not now be amiss to mention this Custom, that when a Bishop was
thus presented and advanced to a See, he immediately gave notice of it to other
Bishops, especially to the most renowned Bishops and Bishoprics, as Tu te
Episcopum factum literis nunciares. Cyprian. Epist. 42.. 4. p. 99.
Cornelius writ to Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, an Account of his being promoted
to the Sea of Rome; betwixt which two Churches, there was such a peculiar
Intercourse and Harmony, as that this Custom was more particularly observed by
them, insomuch that it was observed by the Schismatical Bishops of each Church,
Venerunt ad nos missi a Novatiano Maximus Presbyter, etc. Cyprian. Epist. 41..
1. p. 96.
Novatian giving notice to Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, of his Promotion to the
Church of Rome: And Ad te Legati a Fortunato missi. Idem Epist. 55.. 18. p. 143.
Fortunatus advising Cornelius Bishop of Rome, of his Advancement to the Church
of Carthage.

. 7. Let what has been spoken now suffice for the peculiar Acts of the Bishop:
We have proved, that there was but one Bishop to a Church, and one Church to a
Bishop; we have shown the Bishop's Office and Function, Election and
Ordination; what farther to add on this Head, I know not: For as for those
other Acts which he performed jointly with his Flock, we must refer them to
another place, till we have handled those other Matters which previously
propose themselves unto us: The first of which will be an Examination into the
Office and Order of a Presbyter, which, because it will be somewhat long, shall
be the Subject of the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. The Definition and Description of a Presbyter; what he was.. 2. Inferior
to a Bishop in Degree:. 3. But equal to a Bishop in Order.. 4. The Reason why
there were many Presbyters in a Church.. 5. Presbyters not necessary to the
Constitution of a Church.. 6. When Presbyters began.

. 1. IT will be both needless and tedious to endeavor to prove, that the
Ancients generally mention Presbyters distinct from Bishops. Every one, I
suppose, will readily own and acknowledge it. The great Question which has
most deplorably sharpened and sour'd the Minds of too many, is what the Office
and Order of a Presbyter was: About this the World has been, and still is most
uncharitably divided; some equalize a Presbyter in every thing with a Bishop;
others as much debase him, each according to their particular Opinions, either
advance or degrade him. In many Controversies a middle way has been the
safest, perhaps in this, the Medium between the two Extremes may be the truest:
Whether what I am now going to say, be the true (...) of the Matter, I leave to
the Learned Reader to determine; I may be deceived, neither mine Years, nor
Abilities, exempt me from Mistakes and Errors: But this I must needs say, That
after the most diligent Researches, and impartialest Enquiries, The following
Notion seems to me most plausible, and most consentaneous to Truth; and which,
with a great facility and clearness, solves those Doubts and Objections, which,
according to those other Hypotheses, I know not how to answer. But yet however,
I am not so wedded and bigoted to this Opinion, but if any shall produce
better, and more convincing Arguments to the contrary, I will not contentiously
defend, but readily relinquish it, since I search after Truth, not to promote a
particular Party or Interest.

Now for the better Explication of this Point, I shall first lay down a
Definition and Description of a Presbyter, and then prove the parts thereof.

Now the Definition of a Presbyter may be this: A Person in Holy Orders, having
thereby an inherent Right to perform the whole Office of a Bishop; but being
possessed of no Place or Parish, not actually discharging it, without the
Permission and Consent of the Bishop of a Place or Parish.

But lest this Definition should seem obscure, I shall (...) it by this
following Instance: As a Curate has the same Mission and Power with the
Minister, whose Place he supplies; yet being not the Minister of that place, he
cannot perform there any acts of his Ministerial Function, without leave from
the Minister thereof: So a Presbyter had the same Order and Power with a
Bishop, whom he assisted in his Cure; yet being not the Bishop or Minister of
that Cure, he could not there perform any parts of his Pastoral Office, without
the permission of the Bishop thereof: So that what we generally render Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, would be more intelligible in our Tongue, if we did
express it by Rectors, Vicars, and Deacons; by Rectors, understanding the
Bishops; and by Vicars, the Presbyters; the former being the actual Incumbents
of a Place, and the latter Curates or Assistants, and so different in Degree,
but yet equal in Order.

Now this is what I understand by a Presbyter; for the Confirmation of which,
these two things are to be proved.

I. That the Presbyters were the Bishops Curates and Assistants, and so
inferior to them in the actual Exercise of their Ecclesiastical Commission.

II. That yet notwithstanding, they had the same inherent Right with the
Bishops, and so were not of a distinct specific Order from them. Or more
briefly thus:

1. That the Presbyters were different from the Bishops in gradu, or in degree;
but yet,

2. They were equal to them in Ordine, or in Order.

2. As to the first of these; That Presbyters were but the Bishops Curates and
Assistants, inferior to them in Degree, or in the actual Discharge of their
Ecclesiastical Commission. This will appear to have been, in effect, already
proved, if we recollect what has been asserted, touching the Bishop and his
Office, That there was but one Bishop in a Church; That he usually performed
all the parts of Divine Service; That he was the general Disposer and Manager
of all things within his Diocese, there being nothing done there without his
Consent and Approbation: To which we may particularly add,

1. That without the Bishop's leave, a Presbyter could not baptize: Thus says
Tertullian Baptismum dandi habet jus -- Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and
Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi auctoritate propter Ecclesiae honorem. De
Baptism. p. 602.
The Bishop has the Right of Baptizing, then the Presbyters and Deacons, but
yet for the Honor of the Church, not without the Authority of the Bishop; and
to the same Effect, says Ignatius, (...). Epist. ad Smirn. p. 6.
It is not lawful for any one to baptize, except the Bishop permit him.

2. Without the Bishop's permission, a Presbyter could not administer the
Lord's Supper. (...). Epist. ad Smirn. p. 6.
That Eucharist, says Ignatius, is only valid, which is performed by the
Bishop, or by whom he shall permit; for it is not lawful for any one to
celebrate the Eucharist, without leave from the Bishop.

3. Without the Bishops Consent, a Presbyter could not preach; and when he did
preach, he could not choose his own Subject, but discoursed on those Matters
which were enjoined him by the Bishop, as (...). Homil. de Engastrym. p. 28.
Vol. 1.
the Bishop commanded Origin to preach about the Witch of Endor.

4. Without the Bishop's Permission, a Presbyter could not absolve Offenders,
therefore Cyprian Aliqui de Presbyteris, nec Evangelii, nec loci sui memores,
sed neque futurum Domini Judicium, neque nunc sibi praepositum Episcopum
cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub Antecessoribus factum est, cum contumelia
and contemptu praepositi totum sibi vendicent. Epist. 10.. 1. p. 29. Vide etiam
Epist. 11.. 1. p. 32. and Epist. 12.. 1. p. 37.
severely chides some of his Presbyters, because they dared in his absence,
without his Consent and Leave, to give the Church's Peace to some offending
Criminals.

But what need I reckon up particulars, when in general there was no
Ecclesiastical Office performed by the Presbyters, without the Consent and
Permission of the Bishop: So says Ignatius, (...). (...). ad Smirn. p. 6.
Let nothing be done of Ecclesiastical Concerns, without the Bishop; for (...).
Idem ibid. p. 7.
Whosoever does any thing without the knowledge of the Bishop, is a Worshipper
of the Devil.

Now had the Presbyters had an equal Power in the Government of those Churches
wherein they lived, how could it have been impudent and usurping in them to
have performed the particular acts of their Ecclesiastical Function, without
the Bishop's Leave and Consent? No, it was not fit or just, that any one should
preach, or govern in a Parish, without the permission of the Bishop or Pastor
thereof; for where Churches had been regularly formed under the Jurisdiction of
their proper Bishops, it had been an unaccountable Impudence, and a most
detestable act of Schism for any one, though never so legally Ordained, to have
entered those Parishes, and there to have performed Ecclesiastical
Administrations, without the permission of, or which is all one, in Defiance to
the Bishops, or Ministers thereof; for though a Presbyter by his Ordination had
as ample an inherent Right and Power to discharge all Clerical Offices, as any
Bishop in the World had; yet Peace, Unity and Order, obliged him not to invade
that part of God's Church, which was committed to another Man's Care, without
that Man's Approbation and Consent.

So then in this Sense a Presbyter was inferior to a Bishop in Degree, in that
having no Parish of his own, he could not actually discharge the particular
Acts of his Ministerial Function, without leave from the Bishop of a Parish or
Diocese: The Bishops were superior to the Presbyters, in that they were the
presented, (...), and inducted Ministers of their respective Parishes; and the
Presbyters were inferior to the Bishops, in that they were but their Curates
and Assistants.

. 3. But though the Presbyters were thus different from the Bishops in Degree,
yet they were of the very same specific Order with them, having the same
inherent Right to perform those Ecclesiastical Offices, which the Bishop did,
as will appear from these three Arguments.

1. That by the Bishop's permission they discharged all those Offices, which a
Bishop did. 2. That they were called by the same Titles and Appellations as the
Bishops were: And, 3. That they are expressly said to be of the same Order with
the Bishops. As to the first of these, That by the Bishop's permission, they
discharged all those Offices which a Bishop did; this will appear from that,

1. When the Bishop ordered them, they preached. Thus Origin, in the beginning
of some of his Sermons, tells us, That he was commanded thereunto by the
Bishop, as particularly when he preached about the Witch of Endor; he says,
(...). Hom. de Engastrym. p. 28. Vol. 1.
The Bishop commanded him to do it.

2. By the permission of the Bishop, Presbyters baptized. Thus writes
Tertullian, Baptismum dandi habet jus- Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and
Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi auctoritate. De Baptism. p. 602.
The Bishop has the Right of Baptizing, and then the Presbyters, but not
without his leave.

3. By the leave of the Bishop, Presbyters administered the Eucharist, as must
be supposed in that saying of Ignatius, (...). Epist. ad Smirn. p. 6.
That that Eucharist only was valid, which was celebrated by the Bishop, or by
one appointed by him; and that the Eucharist could not be delivered but by the
Bishop, or by one whom he did approve.

4. The Presbyters ruled in those Churches to which they belonged, else this
Exhortation of Polycarpus to the Presbyters of Philippi, would have been in
vain; Epist. ad Philip.. 5. Thus (...) by Dr. Cave, in the Life of St.
Polycarp, p. 127.
Let the Presbyters be tender and merciful, compassionate toward all, reducing
those that are in Errors, visiting all that are weak, not negligent of the
Widow and the Orphan, and him that is poor; but ever providing what is honest
in the sight of God and Men; abstaining from all Wrath, Respect of Persons, and
unrighteous Judgment; being far from Covetousness, not hastily believing a
Report against any Man, not rigid in Judgment, knowing that we are all faulty,
and obnoxious to Judgment. Hence,

5. They presided in Church-Consistories together with the Bishop, and composed
the executive part of the Ecclesiastical Court; from whence it was called the
Presbytery, because in it, as Tertullian says, Probati praesident Seniores.
Apol. c. 39. p. 709.
Approved Elders did preside.

6. They had also the Power of Excommunication, as Vid. Cyprian. Epist. 38. and
39. p. 90. and 92.
Rogatianus and Numidicus, Two Presbyters of Cyprian's Church, by his Order
joined with some Bishops of his Nomination, in the Excommunication of certain
Schismatics of his Diocese. But of both these two Heads, more will be spoken
in another place.

7. Presbyters restored returning Penitents, to the Church's peace. Thus we
read in an Epistle of Dyonisius, Bishop of Alexandria, That a certain Offender
called Serapion, approaching to the time of his Dissolution, (...). Ad Fabium
Antioch. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 44. p. 246.
Sent for one of the Presbyters to absolve him, which the Presbyter did,
according to the Order of his Bishop, who had before commanded, That the
Presbyters should absolve those who were in danger of Death.

8. Presbyters Confirmed, as we shall most evidently prove, when we come to
treat of Confirmation: Only remark here by the way, That in the days of
Cyprian, there was a hot Controversy, Whether those that were baptized by
Heretics, and came over to the Catholic Church, should be received as Members
thereof by Baptism and Confirmation, or by Confirmation alone? Now I would fain
know, Whether during the vacancy of a See, or the Bishop's absence, which
sometimes might be very long, as Cyprian was absent two years, a Presbyter
could not admit a returning Heretic to the Peace and Unity of the Church,
especially if we consider their positive Damnation of all those that died out
of the Church? If the Presbyters had not had this Power of Confirmation, many
penitent Souls must have been damned for the unavoidable Default of a Bishop,
which is too cruel and unjust to imagine.

9. As for Ordination, I find but little said of this in Antiquity; yet as
little as there is, there are clearer Proofs of the Presbyters Ordaining, than
there are of their administering the Lord's Supper: Omnis potestas and gratia in
Ecclesia constituta sit ubi praesident majores (...), qui and baptizandi, and
manum imponendi and ordinandi possident potestatem. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 75..
6. p. 237.
All Power and Grace, says Firmilian, is constituted in the Church, where
Seniors preside, who have the Power of Baptizing, Confirming, and Ordaining; or
as it may be rendered, and perhaps more agreeable to the sense of the place; Who
had the Power as of Baptizing, so also of Confirming and Ordaining. What these
Seniors were, will be best understood by a parallel place in Tertullian; for
that place in Tertullian, and this in Firmilian, are usually cited to expound
one another, by most Learned Men, as by the most Learned Primitive
Christianity. Part 3. cap. 5. p. 379.
Dr. Cave, and others. Now the passage in Tertullian is this; In the
Ecclesiastical Courts Probati praesident Seniores. Apol. c. 39. p. 709.
approved Elders preside: Now by these approved Elders, Bishops and Presbyters,
must necessarily be understood; because Tertullian speaks here of the
Discipline exerted in one particular Church or Parish, in which there was but
one Bishop; and if only he had presided, then there could not have been Elders
in the Plural Number; but there being many Elders to make out their Number, we
must add the Presbyters to the Bishop, who also presided with him, as we shall
more fully show in another place. Now the same that presided in
Church-Consistories, the same also ordained; Presbyters as well as Bishops
presided in Church-Consistories; therefore Presbyters as well as Bishops
Ordained. And as in those Churches where there were Presbyters, both they and
the Bishop presided together, so also they Ordained together, both laying on
their Hands in Ordination, as St. Timothy was Ordained (...). 1 Timothy 4. 14.
by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery; that is, by the Hands of the
Bishop and Presbyters of that Parish where he was Ordained, as is the constant
signification of the word Presbytery, in all the Writings of the Ancients. But,

10. Though as to every particular act of the Bishop's Office, it could not be
proved particularly, that a Presbyter did discharge them; yet it would be
sufficient, if we could prove, that in the general, a Presbyter could, and did
perform them all. Now that a Presbyter could do so, and consequently by the
Bishop's permission did do so, will appear from the Example of the great Saint
Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, who being exiled from his Church, writes a Letter
to the Clergy thereof; wherein he exhorts and begs them Fungamini illic and
vestris partibus ac meis, ut nihil vel ad disciplinam, vel ad diligentiam
desit. Epist. 5.. 1. p. 15.
to discharge their own and his Office too, that so nothing might be wanting
either to Discipline or Diligence. And much to the same Effect he thus writes
them in another Letter, Fretus ergo and dilectione and religione (...), quam
satis novi, his literis and hortor, and mando, ut vos -- vice (...) fungamini
circa gerenda ea, quae administratio religiofa deposcit. Epist. 6.. 2. p. 17.
Trusting therefore to your Kindness and Religion, which I have abundantly
experienced, I exhort and command you by these Letters, that in my stead you
perform those Offices which the Ecclesiastical Dispensation requires. And in a
Letter written upon the same Occasion, by the Clergy of the Church of Rome, to
the Clergy of the Church of Carthage, we find these Words toward the beginning
thereof, Et cum incumbat nobis qui videmur praepositi esse, and vice pastoris
(...) gregem, si negligentes inveniamur, dicetur nobis quod and antecessoribus
nostris dictum est, qui tam negligentes praepositi erant: quoniam perditum non
requisivimus, and errantem non correximus, and claudum non colligavimus, and
(...) eorum edebamus, and lanis eorum operiebamur. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 3.. 1.
p. 11.
And since it is incumbent upon us, who are as it were Bishops, to keep the
Flock in the room of the Pastor. If we shall be found negligent, it shall be
said unto us, as it was said to our careless preceding Bishops, in Ezekiel 34.
3, 4. That we looked not after that which was lost, we did not correct him that
wandered, nor bound up him that was lame, but we did eat their Milk, and were
covered with their Wool. So that the Presbyters were as it were Bishops, that
in the Bishop's Absence kept his Flock, and in his stead performed all those
Ecclesiastical Offices, which were incumbent on him.

Now then if the Presbyters could supply the place of an Absent Bishop, and in
general discharge all those Offices, to which a Bishop had been obliged, if he
had been present; it naturally follows that the Presbyters could discharge
every particular Act and Part thereof. If I should say, such an one has all the
Senses of a Man, and yet also assert that he cannot see, I should be judged a
Self-contradictor in that Assertion; for in affirming that he had all the Human
Senses, I also affirmed, that he saw, because Seeing is one of those Senses.
For whatsoever is affirmed of an Universal, is affirmed of every one of its
Particulars. So when the Fathers say, that the Presbyters performed the whole
Office of the Bishop, it naturally ensues, that they Confirmed, Ordained,
Baptized, etc. because those are Particulars of that Universal.

But now from the whole we may collect a solid Argument for the Equality of
Presbyters with Bishops as to Order; for if a Presbyter did all a Bishop did,
what difference was there between them? A Bishop preached, baptized and
confirmed, so did a Presbyter. A Bishop excommunicated, absolved and ordained,
so did a Presbyter: Whatever a Bishop did, the same did a Presbyter; the
particular Acts of their Office was the same; the only difference that was
between them was in Degree; but this proves there was none at all in Order.

2. That Bishops and Presbyters were of the same Order, appears also, from that
originally they had one and the same Name, each of them being indifferently
called Bishops or Presbyters. Hence we read in the Sacred Writ of several
Bishops in one particular Church, as the (...). 20. Actor. v. 28.
Bishops of Ephesus, and (...). 1. Phil. 1.
Philippi, that is, the Bishops and Presbyters of those Churches, as they were
afterward distinctly called. And Clemens Romanus sometimes mentions many
Bishops in the Church of Corinth, whom at other times he calls by the Name of
Presbyters, using those two Terms as Synonimous Titles and Appellations, Epist.
1. ad Corinth. p. 2.
You have obeyed, says he, those that were set over you, (...), and Ibidem, p.
30.
Let us revere those that are set over us, (...), which are the usual Titles of
the Bishops; and yet these in another place he calls (...). Ibid. p. 62.
Presbyters, describing their Office, by (...). Ibid. p. 69.
their sitting, or presiding over us. Wherefore he commands the Corinthians
(...). Ibid. p. 73.
to be subject to their Presbyters, and whom in one Line he calls Ibidem, p. 58.
(...), or Bishops. The second Line after he calls (...), or Presbyters. So
Polycarp exhorts the Philippians to be subject to their Presbyters and Deacons,
under the name of Presbyters including both Bishops and Priests, as we now call
them.

The first that expressed these Church Officers by the distinct Terms of
Bishops and Presbyters, was Ignatius, who lived in the beginning of the Second
Century, appropriating the Title of Bishop, (...), or Overseer, to that
Minister who was the more immediate Overseer and Governor of his Parish; and
that of (...), Elder or Presbyter, to him who had no particular Care and
Inspection of a Parish, but was only an Assistant or Curate to a Bishop that
had; the word (...), or Bishop, denoting a Relation to a Flock or Cure, (...),
or Presbyter, signifying only a Power or an ability to take the Charge of such
a Flock or Cure; the former implying an actual discharge of the Office, the
latter a power so to do.

This Distinction of Titles arising from the difference of their Circumstances,
which we find first mentioned in Ignatius, was generally followed by the
succeeding Fathers, who for the most part distinguish between Bishops and
Presbyters; though sometimes according to the primitive Usage they
indifferently apply those Terms to each of those persons.

Thus on the one hand the Titles of Presbyters are given unto Bishops; as
Irenaeus in his Synodical Epistle, twice calis Anicetus, Pius, Higynus,
Telesphorus, and Xistus Bishops of Rome, Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. p. 193.
(...), or Presbyters. And those Qui in ecclesia sunt Presbyteri -- qui cum
episcopatus successione, etc. lib. 4. cap. 43. p. 277.
Bishops who derived their Succession immediately from the Apostles, he calls,
the Presbyters in the Church; and whom Clemens Alexandrinus in one Line calls
the Bishop of a certain City not far from Ephesus, a few Lines after he calls
(...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. p. 193.
the Presbyter.

And on the other hand, the Titles of Bishops are ascribed to Presbyters, as
one of the Discretive Appellations of a Bishop is Pastor. Yet Cyprian also
calls his Presbyters Pastores ovium. Epist. 11.. 1. p. 33.
the Pastors of the Flock. Another was that of President, or one set over the
People. Yet Cyprian also calls his Presbyters Praepositi. Ibidem.
Presidents, or set over the People. The Bishops were also called Rectors or
Rulers. So Origin calls the Presbyters (...). Comment in Matthew. Vol. 1. p. 246.
the Governors of the People. And we find both Bishops and Presbyters included
under the common Name of Presidents or Prelates, by St. Cyprian, in this his
Exhortation to Pomponius, Et cum omnes omnino disciplinam tenere oporteat,
multo magis Praepositos and Diaconos curare hoc (...) est, qui exemplum and
documentum caeteris de conversatione and moribus suis (...). Epist. 62.. 2. p.
169.
And if all must observe the Divine Discipline, how much more must the
Presidents and Deacons do it, who by their Conversation and Manners must yield
a good Example to others?

Now if the same Appellation of a thing be a good Proof for the Identity of its
Nature, then Bishops and Presbyters must be of the same Order, because they had
the same Names and Titles. Suppose it was disputed, whether a Parson and
Lecturer were of the same Order, would not this sufficiently prove the
Affirmative? That though for some Accidental Respects they might be
distinguished in their Appellations, yet originally and frequently they were
called by one and the same Name. The same it is in this Case, though for some
contingent and adventitious Reasons Bishops and Presbyters were discriminated
in their Titles, yet originally they were always, and afterward sometimes,
called by one and the same Appellation; and therefore we may justly deem them
to be one and the same Order.

But if this Reason be not thought cogent enough, the Third and last will
unquestionably put all out of doubt, and most clearly evince the Identity or
Sameness of Bishops and Presbyters, as to Order; and that is, that it is
expressly said by the Ancients, That there were but two distinct Ecclesiastical
Orders, viz. Bishops and Deacons, or Presbyters and Deacons; and if there were
but these two, Presbyters cannot be distinct from Bishops, for then there would
be three. Now that there were but two Orders, viz. Bishops and Deacons, is
plain from that Golden Ancient Remain of Clemens Romanus, wherein he thus
writes, (...). Epist. 1. ad Corinth. p. 54.
In the Country and (...) where the Apostles preached, they ordained their
first Converts for Bishops and Deacons, over those who should believe: Nor were
these Orders new; for for many Ages past it was thus prophesied concerning
Bishops and Deacons, I will appoint their Bishops in Righteousness, and their
Deacons in Faith. This place of Scripture which is here quoted, is in Isa. 60.
17. I will make thine Officers peace, and thine Exactors righteousness. Whether
it is rightly applied, is not my business to determine. That that I observe from
hence is, that there were but two Orders instituted by the Apostles, viz.
Bishops and Deacons, which Clemens supposes were prophetically promised long
before: And this is yet more evidently asserted in another passage of the said
Clemens a little after, where he says, that the (...). Ibidem, p. 57.
Apostles foreknew through our Lord Jesus Christ, that Contention would arise
about the Name of Episcopacy, and therefore being endued with a perfect
foreknowledge, appointed the aforesaid Officers, viz. Bishops and Deacons, and
left the manner of their Succession described, that so when they died, other
approved Men might succeed them, and reform their Office. So that there were
only the Two Orders of Bishops and Deacons instituted by the Apostles. And if
they ordained but those Two, I think no one had ever a Commission to add a
Third, or to split One into Two, as must be done, if we separate the Order of
Presbyters from the Order of Bishops: But that when the Apostles appointed the
Order of Bishops, Presbyters were included therein, will manifestly appear from
the Induction of those forecited Passages in Clemens's Epistle, and his drift
and design thereby, which was to appease and calm the Schisms and Factions of
some unruly Members in the Church of Corinth, who designed to depose their
Presbyters; and that he might dissuade them from this violent and irregular
Action, amongst other Arguments he proposes to them, that this was to thwart
the Design and Will of God, who would that all should live orderly in their
respective places, doing the Duties of their own Stations, not invading the
Offices and Functions of others; and that for this end, that all occasions of
disorderliness and confusion might be prevented, he had Instituted Diversities
of Offices in his Church, appointing every Man to his particular Work, to which
he was to apply himself, without violently leaping into other Men's places; and
that particularly the Apostles foreseeing through the Holy Spirit, that
contentious and unruly Men would irregularly aspire to the Episcopal Office, by
the Deposition of their lawful Presbyters; therefore that such turbulent
Spirits might be repressed, or left inexcusable, they ordained Bishops and
Deacons where they preached, and described the manner and qualifications of
their Successors, who should come after them when they were dead and gone, and
be revered and obeyed with the same Respect and Obedience as they before were;
and that therefore they were to be condemned as Perverters of the Divine
Institution, and Contemners of the Apostolic Authority, who dared to degrade
their Presbyters, who had received their Episcopal Authority in an immediate
Succession from those who (...) advanced to that Dignity by the Apostles
themselves.

This was the true Reason for which the forequoted Passages were spoken, which
clearly evinces, that Presbyters were included under the Title of Bishops, or
rather that they were Bishops; For to what end should Clemens exhort the
Schismatical Corinthians to obey their Presbyters, from the consideration of
the Apostles Ordination of Bishops, if their Presbyters had not been Bishops?

But that the Order of Presbyters was the same with the Order of Bishops, will
appear also from that place of Irenaeus, where he exhorts us Presbyteri qui
serviunt suis voluptatibus, and non praeponunt timorem Dei in cordibus suis,
sed contumeliis agunt reliquos, and principalis consessionis tumore elati sunt
-- ab omnibus igitur talibus absistere oportet, adhaerere vero his, qui and
Apostolorum sicut praediximus, doctrinam custodiunt, and cum Presbyterii Ordine
Sermonem sanum, and Conversationem sine offensa praestant ad informationem and
correctionem reliquorum -- Tales Presbyteros nutrit Ecclesia, de quibus and
Propheta ait, and dabo principes tuos in pace, and Episcopos tuos in (...).
Lib. 4. c. (...). p. 278.
to withdraw from those Presbyters, who serve their Lusts, and having not the
fear of God in their hearts, contemn others, and are lifted up with the Dignity
of their first Session; but to adhere to those who keep the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and with their Presbyterial Order are inoffensive, and exemplary in
sound Doctrine, and an holy Conversation, to the Information and Correction of
others; for such Presbyters the Church educates, and of whom the Prophet says,
I will (...) thee Princes in Peace, and Bishops in Righteousness. Now that by
these Presbyters, Bishops are meant, I need not take much pains to prove; the
precedent Chapter positively asserts it; the Description of them in this
Quotation, by their enjoying the Dignity of the first Session, and the
application of that Text of Isaiah unto them, clearly evinces it. No one can
deny but that there were Bishops, that is, that they were superior in degree
to other Presbyters; or, as Irenaeus styles it, honored with the first
Session; but yet he also says, that they were not different in Order, being of
the Presbyterial Order, which includes both Bishops and Presbyters.

To this Testimony of Irenaeus I shall subjoin that of Clemens Alexandrinus,
who though he mentions (...). (...). (...). 6. p. 481.
the Processes of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, from which some conclude the
Bishops Superiority of Order; yet the subsequent Words evidently declare, that
it must be meant only of Degree, and that as to Order they were one and the
same; for he immediately adds, That those Offices are an imitation of the
Angelick Glory, and of that Dispensation, which, as the Scriptures say, they
wait for, who treading in the steps of the Apostles, live in the perfection of
Evangelick Righteousness; for these, the Apostle writes, shall be took up into
the Clouds, (Here he alludes to the manner of the Saints Glorification in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord) and there first as Deacons attend, and then according to the
Process, or next station of Glory, be admitted into the Presbytery; for Glory
differs from Glory, till they increase to a perfect man. Now in this Passage
there are two things which manifest, that there were but two Ecclesiastical
Orders, viz. Bishops and Deacons, or Presbyters and Deacons; the first is, that
he says, that those Orders were resembled by the Angelick Orders. Now the
Scripture mentions but two Orders of Angels, viz. Archangels and Angels, the
Archangels presiding over the Angels, and the Angels obeying and attending on
the Archangels. According to this resemblance therefore there must be but Two
Ecclesiastical Orders in the Church, which are Bishops or (...) byters
presiding and governing, with the Deacons attending and obeying. The other part
of this Passage, which proves but two Ecclesiastical Orders, is his likening of
them to the progressive Glory of the Saints, who at the Judgment Day shall be
caught up in the Clouds, and there shall first as Deacons attend and wait on
Christ's Judgment Seat, and then, when the Judgment is over, shall have their
Glory perfected, in being placed on the Celestial Thrones of that Sublime
Presbytery, where they shall for ever be blessed and happy.

So that there were only the two Orders of Deacons and Presbyters, the former
whereof being the inseriour Order, never sat at their (...) Conventions, but
like Servants Videt and ordinationes, sive stationes ministrorum ejus.
Diaconorum, ut mihi videtur, ordinem memorat astantium divino ministerio.
(...). 2. in Cantic. Cantic. Origin.
stood and waited on the latter, who Nobiscum sedeat in Clero. Cyprian. Epist.
35. p. 84.
sat down on (...), or Seats in the form of a Semicircle, whence they are
frequently called, Consessus Presbyterii, Or the Session of the Presbytery, in
which Session he that was more peculiarly the Bishop or Minister of the Parish,
sat at the Head of the Semicircle, on a Seat somewhat elevated above those of
his Collegis meis. Epist. 28.. 2. p. 64.
Colleagues, as Cyprian calls them, and so was distinguished from them by his
Priority in the same Order, but not by his being of another Order. Thus the
foresaid Clemens Alexandrinus distinguishes the Bishop from the Presbyters, by
his being advanced to the (...), or the first Seat in the Presbytery, not by
his sitting in a different Seat from them: For thus he writes, (...). Stromat.
lib. 6. p. 480.
He is in truth a Presbyter of the Church, and a Minister of the Will of God,
who does and teaches the things of the Lord, not ordained by Men, or esteemed
just, because a Presbyter, but because just, therefore received into the (...),
who although he be not honored with the first Seat on Earth, yet shall
hereafter sit down on the Twenty and Four Thrones, mentioned in the
Revelations, judging the People. So that both Bishops and Presbyters were
Members of the same Presbytery, only the Bishop was advanced to the first and
chiefest Seat therein, which is the very same with what I come now from
proving, viz. That Bishops and Presbyters were Equal in Order, but Different in
Degree; That the former were the Ministers of their respective Parishes, and
the latter their Curates or Assistants.

Whether this has been fully proved, or whether the precedent Quotations do
naturally conclude the Premises, the Learned Reader will easily determine. I am
not conscious that I have stretched any Words beyond their natural
Signification, having deduced from them nothing but what they fairly imported:
If I am mistaken, I hope I shall be pardoned, since I did it not designedly or
voluntarily. As before, so now I profess again, that if any one shall be so
kind and obliging to give me better Information, I shall thankfully and
willingly acknowledge and quit mine Error; but till that Information be given,
and the falsity of my present Opinion be evinced, (which after the impartialest
and narrowest Enquiry, I see not how it can be done) I hope no one will be
offended, that I have asserted the Equality or Identity of the Bishops and
Presbyters as to Order, and their difference as to Preeminency or Degree.

. 4. Now from this Notion of Presbyters, there evidently results the Reason why
there were many of them in one Church, even for the same Intent and End, though
more necessary and needful, that Curates are now to those Ministers and
Incumbents whom they serve, it was found by Experience, that variety of
Accidents and Circumstances did frequently occur both in times of Peace and
Persecution; the Particulars whereof would be needless to enumerate, that
disabled the Bishops from attending on, and discharging their Pastoral Office;
therefore that such Vacancies might be supplied, and such Inconveniences
remedied, they entertained Presbyters or Curates, who during their Absence
might supply their Places, who also were helpful to them, whilst they were
present with their Flocks, to counsel and advise them; whence Bishop Cyprian
assures us, that he did all things by the Communi Consilio. Epist. 24. p. 55.
Common Council of his Presbyters.

Besides this, in those early days of Christianity, Churches were in most
places thin, and at a great distance from one another; so that if a Bishop by
any Disaster was Incapacitated for the Discharge of his Function, it would be
very difficult to get a neighboring Bishop to assist him. To which we may also
add, that in those times there were no public Schools or Universities, except
we say the Catechetick Lecture at Alexandria, was one for the breeding of young
Ministers, who might succeed the Bishops as they died; wherefore the Bishops of
every Church took care to instruct and elevate some young Men, who might be
prepared to come in their place when they were dead and gone. And thus for
these and the like Reasons most Churches were furnished with a competent number
of Presbyters, who helped the Bishops while living, and were fitted to succeed
them when dead.

. 5. I say only, most Churches were furnished with Presbyters, because all were
not, especially those Churches which were newly planted, where either the
Numbers or Abilities of the Believers were small and inconsiderable: Neither
indeed were Presbyters Essential to the Constitution of a Church; a Church
might be without them, as well as a Parish can be without a (...) now; it was
sufficient that they had a Bishop; a Presbyter was only necessary for the
easing of the Bishop in his Office, and to be qualified for the succeeding him
in his Place and Dignity after his Death. For as (...) writes, Ubi
Ecclesiastici Ordinis non est consessus, and offert, and tingit Sacerdos, qui
est (...) solus. (...). ad Castiat. p. 457.
Where there are no Presbyters, the Bishop alone administers the two Sacraments
of the Lord's Supper and Baptism.

. 6. As for the time when Presbyters began, to me it seems plain, that their
Office was even in the Apostolic Age, though by their Names they were not
distinguished from Bishops till sometime after. The first Author now extant,
who distinctly mentions Bishops and Presbyters, is Ignatius Bishop of Antioch,
who lived in the beginning of the Second Century: But without doubt before his
time, even in the days of the Apostles, where Churches increased, or were
somewhat large, there were more in Holy Orders than the Bishops of those
Churches. We read in the New Testament of the Bishops of Ephesus, Acts 20. 28.
and Philippi, Philip. 1. 1. which must be understood of what was afterward
distinctly called Bishops and Presbyters. So likewise we read in St. Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. of a Presbytery, which in all the Writings of the Fathers, for any
thing I can find to the contrary, perpetually signifies the Bishop and
Presbyters of a particular Church or Parish. And to this (...) may add what
Clemens Alexandrinus Reports of St. John, that he went into the neighboring
Provinces of Ephesus, (...). Apud. (...). lib. 3. cap. 23. p. 92.
Partly that he might constitute Bishops, partly that he might plant new
Churches, and partly that he might appoint such in the number of the Clergy, as
should be commanded him by the Holy Ghost. Where by the Word Clergy, being
opposed to Bishops, and so consequently different from them, must be understood
either Deacons alone, or which is far more probable, Presbyters and Deacons.

CHAP. V.
. 1. The Order and Office of the Deacons.. 2. Subdeacons what?. 3. Of Acolyths,
Exorcists, and Lectors; through those Offices the Bishops gradually ascended to
their Episcopal Dignity.. 4. Of Ordination. First, of Deacons.. 5. Next of
Presbyters; (...) Candidates for that Office presented themselves to the
Presbytery of the Parish where they were Ordained.. 6. By them examined about
(...) Qualifications, viz. Their Age.. 7. Their Condition in the World.. 8.
Their Conversation.. 9. And their Understanding. Humane Learning needful.. 10.
Some Inveighed against Humane Learning, but condemned by Clemens Alexandrinus..
11. Those that were to be Ordained Presbyters, generally passed through the
Inferior Offices.. 12. When to be ordained, propounded to the People for their
Attestation.. 13. Ordained in, but not to a particular Church.. 14. Ordained by
the Imposition of Hands of the Presbytery.. 15. The Conclusion of the first
Particular, concerning the Peculiar Acts of the Clergy.

. 1. NExt to the Presbyters were the Deacons, concerning whose Office and Order
I shall say very little, since there is no great Controversy about it; and had
it not been to have rendered this Discourse complete and entire, I should in
silence have passed it over. Briefly therefore, their original Institution, as
in (...) 6. 2. was to serve Tables, which included these two things, A looking
after the Poor, and an attendance at the Lord's Table. As for the Care of the
Poor, Origin tells us, that the (...). Comment. in (...). Tom. 16. p. 443. Vol.
1.
Deacons dispensed to them the Churches Money, being employed under the Bishop
to inspect and relieve all the Indigent within their Diocese: As for their
Attendance at the Lord's Table, their Office with respect to that, consisted in
preparing the Bread and Wine, in cleansing the Sacramental Cups, and other such
like necessary things; whence they are called by Ignatius (...). Epist. ad
Tralles. p. 48.
Deacons of Meats and Cups, assisting also, in some places at least, the Bishop
or Presbyters in the Celebration of the Eucharist, (...). (...). Martyr.
Apolog. 2. p. 97.
delivering the Elements to the Communioants. They also preached, of which more
in another place; and in the Baptismum dandi habet jus Episcopus dehinc
Presbyteri and Diaconi. Tertul. de Bapt. p. 602.
Absence of the Bishop and Presbyters baptized. In a word, according to the
signification of their Name, they were as Ignatius calls them, (...). Epist. ad
(...). p. 48.
the Churches Servants, set apart on purpose to serve God, and attend on their
Business, being constituted, as Eusebius terms it, (...). Lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 38.
for the Service of the Public.

. 2. Next to the Deacons were the Subdencons, who are mentioned both by
Hypodiaconum Optatum. Epist. 24. p. 55.
Cyprian and (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. p. 244.
Cornelius. As the Office of the Presbyters was to assist and help the Bishops,
so theirs was to assist and help the Deacons. And as the Presbyters were of the
same Order with the Bishop, so probably the Subdeacons were of the same Order
with the Deacons, which may be gathered from what we may suppose to have been
the Origin and Rise of these Subdeacons, which might be this, That in no Church
whatsoever, was it usual to have more than Seven Deacons, because that was the
original Number instituted by the Apostles; wherefore when any Church grew so
great and numerous, that this stinted Number of Deacons was not sufficient to
discharge their necessary Ministrations, that they might not seem to swerve
from the Apostolical Example, they added Assistants to the Deacons, whom they
called Subdeacons or Under Deacons, who were employed by the Head or Chief
Deacons, to do those Services in their stead and room, to which, by their
Office, they were obliged. But whether this be a sufficient Argument to prove
the Subdeacons to be of the same Order with the Deacons, I shall not determine,
because this Office being now antiquated, it is not very pertinent to my
Design, I only offer it to the Consideration of the Learned, who have Will and
Ability to search into it.

. 3. Besides those forementioned Orders, who were immediately consecrated to
the Service of God, and by him commissioned thereunto, there were another sort
of Ecclesiastics, who were employed about the meaner Offices of the Church,
such as Naricum Acoluthum. Cyprian. Epist. 36. p. 87.
Acolyths, Unus de exorcistis vir probatus. (...). (...) Cypr. Ep. 75.. 10. p.
238.
Exorcists and Hos lectores constitutos. Cyp. Ep. 34.. 4. p. 81.
Lectors, whose Offices, because they are now disused, except that of the
Lector, I shall pass over in silence, reserving a Discourse of the Lector for
another place; only in general, these were Candidates for the Ministry, who by
the due discharge of these meaner Employs, were to give Proof of their Ability
and Integrity, the Bishops in those days not usually arriving per Saltum to
that Dignity and Honor; but commonly beginning with the most inferior Office,
and so gradually proceeding through the others, till they came to the supreme
Office of all, as Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Non iste ad Episcopatum subito
(...), per omnia (...) officia promotus -- ad Sacerdotii sublime fastigium
cunctis Religionis gradibus ascendit. Cypriar. Epist. 52.. 4. p. 115.
Did not presently leap into the Episcopal Throne, but first passed through all
the Ecclesiastical Offices, gradually ascending to that Sublime Dignity. The
Church in those happy days, by such a long Trial and Experience, using all
possible Precaution and Exactness, that none but fit and qualified Men should
be admitted into those Sacred Functions and Orders, which were attended with
(...) dreadful and tremendous a Charge. And this now brings me in the next
place, to enquire into the Manner and Form of the Primitive Ordinations, which
I choose to discourse of in this place, since I shall find none more proper for
it throughout this whole Treatise.

. 4. As for the various Senses and Acceptations which may be put on the Word
Ordination, I shall not at all meddle with them; that Ordination that I shall
speak of is this, the Grant of a Peculiar Commission and Power, which remains
indelible in the Person to whom it is committed, and can never be obliterated
or rased out, except the Person himself cause it by his Heresy, Apostasy, or
most extremely gross and scandalous Impiety. Now this sort of Ordination was
conferred only upon Deacons and Presbyters, or on Deacons and Bishops,
Presbyters and Bishops being here to be considered as all one, as Ministers of
the Church-Universal. As for the Ordination of Deacons, there is no great
Dispute about that, so I shall say no more concerning it, than that we have the
manner thereof at their first Institution in Acts 6. 6. which was, that they
were Ordained to their Office by Prayer and Imposition of Hands.

. 5. But as for the Ordination of Presbyters, I shall more distinctly and
largely treat of the Manner and Form thereof, which seems to be as follows.

Whosoever desired to be admitted into this Sacred Office, he first proposed
himself to the Presbytery of the Parish where he dwelled and was to be
Ordained, desiring their Consent to his designed Intention, praying them to
confer upon him those Holy Orders which he craved. Now we may suppose his
Petition was to the whole Presbytery, because a Bishop alone could not give
those Holy Orders, as is most evident from Cyprian, who assures us, that
Communi Consilio omnium nostrum. Epist. 24. p. 55.
all Clerical Ordinations were performed by the Common Counsel of the whole
Prebytery. And therefore when upon a Necesse fuit -- necessitate urgente
promotum est. Ibidem.
most urgent and necessary occasion he had been forced to ordain one, but a
Lector without the Advice and Consent of his Presbytery, which one would be apt
to think was no great Usurpation, he takes great pains ( Ep. 24. p. 55.) to
justify and excuse himself for so doing.

. 6. Upon this Application of the Candidate for the Ministry, the Presbytery
took it into their Consideration, debated his Petition Communi Consilio. Epist.
24. apud Cypr. p. 55.
in their Common Council, and proceeded to examine whether he had those
Endowments and Qualifications which were requisite for that Sacred Office. What
those Gifts and Qualifications were, touching which he was examined, may be
reduced to these Four Heads, his Age, his Condition in the World, his
Conversation, and his Understanding.

As for his Age; It was necessary for him to have lived some time in the World,
to have been of a ripe and mature Age; for they ordained no Novices, or young
Striplings: That was the Practice of the Heretics, whom Tertullian jeers and
upbraids with Ordaining Nunc Neophytos conlocant. (...) praescript. adv.
Haeret. p. 89.
Raw and Unexperienced Clerks. But as for the Orthodox, they took care to
confer Orders on none, but on such as were well stricken in years; observing
herein the Apostolic Canon in 1 Timothy 3. 6. Not a Novice, lest being lifted up
with Pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. But yet if any young
Man was endued with extraordinary Grace and Ability, the fewness of his Years
was no Obstacle to his Promotion, that being superseded by the Greatness of his
Merit; as we find in the case of Aurelius in Cyprian, who though In annis ad huc
novellus. Cypr. Epist. 33. p. 76.
young in years, yet for his eminent Courage and Merebatur -- Clericae
Ordination is -- gradus and incrementa -- non de annis suis, sed de meritis
aestimandus. Ibidem.
Excellency, was graced with Ecclesiastical Orders: And such an one, I suppose,
was the Bishop of Magnesia in the times of Ignatius, which gave occasion to
that Exhortation, to the People of that Diocese, (...). (...). Epist. ad
Magnes. p. 31.
not to despise their Bishop's Age, but to yield him all due Respect and
Reverence.

. 7. As for his Condition in the World; he was not to be entangled with any
mundane Affairs, but to be free from all secular Employments, and at perfect
Liberty to apply himself wholly to the Duties of his Office and Function. This
also was founded on that other Apostolic Canon in 2 Timothy 2. 4. Nemo militans
Deo obligat se molestiis Saecularibus, ut possit placere ei cui se probavit.
Quod cum de omnibus dictum sit, quanto magis molestiis and laqueis Saecularibus
obligari non debent, qui divinis rebus and spiritualibus occupati, ab Ecclesia
recedere, and ad terrenos and saeculares actus vacare non possunt, cujus
ordinationis and religionis formam Levitae prius in lege tenuerunt, ut cum
terram dividerent, and possessiones partirentur undecem Tribus, Levitica
Tribus, quae Templo and Altari, and Ministeriis Divinis vacabat, nihil de illa
divisionis portione perciperet, sed aliis terram colentibus, illa tantum Deum
coleret, and ad victum atque alimentum suum ab undecem Tribubus de sructibus
qui nascebantur, decimas reciperet. Quod totum fiebat de auctoritate and
dispositione divina, ut qui operationibus divinis insistebant, in nulla re
avocarentur, nec cogitare aut agere saecularia cogerentur. Quae nunc ratio and
forma in Clero tenetur, ut qui in Ecclesia Domini Ordinatione Clerica
promoventur, in nullo ab administratione Divina avocentur, nec molestiis and
negotiis saecularibus alligentur, sed in honor sportulantium fratrum tanquam
Decimas ex fructibus accipientes, ab Altari and Sacrificiis non recedant, sed
die ac nocte Coelestibus rebus and Spiritualibus serviant. Epist. 66.. 1, 2. p.
195.
No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that
(...) may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. Which Words, says
Cyprian, if spoken of all, How much more ought not they to be entangled with
Secular Troubles and Snares, who being busied in Divine and Spiritual things,
cannot leave the Church, to mind earthly and worldly actions? Which Religious
Ordination, as he goes on to write, was emblematiz'd by the Levites under the
Law; for when the Land was divided, and possessions were given to eleven
Tribes, the Levites who waited upon the Temple and Altar, and the Sacred
Offices thereof, had no share in that Division; but the others tilled the
ground, whilst they only worshipped God, and received Tenths of the others
Increase for their Food and Sustenance; all which happened by the Divine
Authority and Dispensation, (...) who waited on Divine Employments, should not
be withdrawn therefrom, or be forced either to think of, or to do any Secular
Affairs: Which fashion, as he there continues to write, is now observed by the
Clergy, that those who are promoted to Clerical Ordinations, should not be
impeded in their Divine Administrations, or iucumbred with secular Concerns and
Affairs, but as Tenths, receiving Subscriptions from the Brethren; depart not
from the Altar and Sacrifices, but night and day attend on Spiritual and
Heavenly Ministrations. These words were spoken on the occasion of a certain
Bishop called Geminius Victor, who at his Death made a certain Presbyter,
called Geminius Faustinus Trustee of his last Will and Testament, which Trust
Cyprian condemns as void and null, Cum jampridem in Consilio Episcoporum
statutum sit, ne quis de Clericis and Dei Ministris tutorem vel curatorem
testamento suo constituat, quando singuli Divino Sacerdotio honorati, and in
Clerico Ministerio constituti, non nisi Altari and Sacrificiis deservire, and
precibus atque orationibus vacare debeant. Idem Ibidem.
Because a Synod had before decreed, that no Clergyman should be a Trustee, for
this Reason, because those who were in Holy Orders ought only to attend upon
the Altar and its Sacrifices, and to give themselves wholly to Prayer and
Supplication. It was a Blot in the Heretics Ordinations, that they Nunc
Saeculo obstrictos concolant. Tertul. de Praescript. adv. Haeret. p. 89.
Ordained such as were involved in the World, and embarass'd with Carnal and
Secular Concerns.

. 8. As for the Conversation of the (...) to be Ordained, he was to be Humiles
and mites. Cyprian Epist. 38.. 1. p. 90.
humble and meek, of an unspotted and exemplary Life. So says Cyprian, In
Ordinationibus Sacerdotum non (...) immaculates and integros antislites eligere
debemus, qui sancte and digne Sacrificia Deo offerentes, audiri in precibus
possint, quas faciunt pro Plebis Dominicae incolumitate, cum scriptum sit, Deus
peccatorem non audit, sed siquis Deum coluerit, and voluntatem ejus (...),
illum audit. Epist. 68.. 2. p. 201.
In all Ordinations we ought to choose Men of an unspotted Integrity, who
worthily and holily offering up Sacrifices to God, may be heard in those
Prayers which they make for the safety of their Flock: For it is written, God
hears not a Sinner; but if any one be a Worshipper of him; and does his Will,
him he hears. Wherefore before they were Ordained, they were proposed to the
People for their Testimony and Attestation of their holy Life and Conversation:
But of this we shall speak more in another place: Only it may not be improper
to remember here, that this is also an Apostolic Canon, in (...) Tim. 3. 2, 3,
7. A Bishop then must be Blameless, the Husband of one Wife, vigilant, sober,
of good Behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to Wine, no
Striker, not guilty of filthy Lucre, but Patient, not a Brawler, not Covetous.
Moreover he must have a good report of them which are without, lest he fall
into Reproach, and the snare of the Devil.

. 9. As for the understanding of the Person to be Ordained, he was to be of a
good Capacity, fit and able duly to teach others. This is also another of the
Apostolic Canons in 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a
Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. And
in 1 Timothy 3. 2. A Bishop must be apt to teach, which implies an Ability of
teaching, and a (...) of rightly understanding, apprehending, and applying the
Word of God; to which end Humane Learning was so conducive, as that Origin
pleads not only for its usefulness, but also for its necessity, especially for
that part of it, which we call Logic, to find out the true Sense and Meaning
of the Scripture, as appears from this following Digression, which he makes
concerning it, in one of his Commentaries, (...). Tom. 1. Comment. in Genes. p.
16, 17. Vol. 1.
How is it possible, says he, that a Question either in Ethics, Physics, or
Divinity, should be understood, as it ought, without Logic? You shall hear no
Absurdity from those who are skilled in Logic, and diligently search out the
signification of words; whereas many times, through our ignorance in Logic, we
greatly err, not distinguishing Homonymies, Amphibolies, the different Vsages,
Properties and Distinction of Words, as some from the Ignorance of the Homonymy
of the word World, have sell into wicked Opinions touching its Maker, not
diseerning what that signifies in 1 John 5. 19. The World lies in wickedness;
where they understanding by the World, the frame of Heaven and Earth, and all
Creatures therein, blaspheme the Creator thereof, by affirming, that the Sun,
Moon and Stars, which move in so exact an Order, lie in Wickedness. So also
through the same Ignorance they know not the true Sense of that Text in 1 John
30. This is the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World. Neither
of that in 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself:
Wherefore if we would not err about the true sense of the Holy Scripture, it is
necessary that we understand Logic, which art of (...). Contra (...), lib. 6.
p. 279.
Logic, the foresaid Father thinks, is recommended to us by Solomon in Prove.
10. 17. He that refuses Reproof, or Logic, as he renders it, erreth.

Clemens Alexandrinus also stiffly asserts the Utility of Humane Learning, where
he says, (...) Stiom. lib. 1. p. 207. (...). Ibidem. p. 233.
That it is profitable to Christianity for the clear and distinct
Demonstrations of its Doctrine, 1 in that it helps us to the more evident
understanding of the Truth. And in particular for Logic, he gives it high
Encomiums, as that (...). Stromat. lib. 6. p. 472.
it is a hedge to defend the Truth from being prod down by Sophisters, that
(...). Ibidem.
it gives us great light duly to understand the Holy Scriptures, that (...).
Stromat. lib. 1. p. 234.
it is necessary to confute the Sophisms of Heretics. And in general, for all
sorts of Learning he tells us, (...). Ibid. p. 210.
that it keeps the way of Life, that we be not deceived or circumvented, by
those that endeavor to draw us into the way of sin. So that he thinks
Philosophy and the Liberal Arts (...). Stromat. lib. 1. p. 210.
came down from Heaven unto Men. But should I produce all the Passages in this
Father, concerning the Utility and Excellency of Humane Learning, I must
transcribe several Pages in Folio, which if the Reader has a Curiosity to view,
he may especially take notice of these Places, Stromat. lib. 1. Page 209, 210,
211, 212, 213, 214, 215 and Stromat. lib. 6. Page 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476,
477.

. 10. It is true, there were some in those days, of whom Clemens (...)
complains, (...). Str. lib. 6. p. 472.
who dreaded Philosophy, lest it should deceive them, as much as Children did
Hobgoblins. Because they saw by too lamentable experience, that many Learned
Men's Brains were so charmed, or intoxicated with Philosophical Notions, as that
they labored to transform them into Christian Verities, and so thereby became
Authors of most pestilent and damnable Heresies, which is particularly observed
by Tertullian, with respect to the Heretics of his time, who in this account
calls Haereticorum Patriarchae Philosophi. Advers. Hermog. p. 266.
the Philosophers, the Patriarchs, of Heretics. Therefore they accused
Philosophy it self, as (...). Clemens Alexand. Strom. l. 4. p. 204.
the Production of some evil Inventor, introduced into the World for the ruin
and destruction of Mankind. Even Tertullian himself, for this reason had an
extreme Pique against Philosophy, and violently decry'd it, especially Logic,
as inconsistent with true Christianity, as may be seen at large in his Book, De
Prescriptione adversus Haereticos, p. 70, 71

But to this Objection Clemens Alexandrinus replies, that if any Man had been
deceived and misled by Philosophy, (...). Stromat. lib. 1. p. 204.
that that proceeded not from Philosophy, but from the wickedness of his
Nature; for whosoever has Wisdom enough to use it, he is able thereby to make a
larger and a more demonstrative Defense of the Faith than others. And
concerning Logic in particular, he tells them, that as for Eristick, jangling
Logic, for impertinent and contentious Sophisms, which he elegently calls
(...) Stromat. lib. 6. p. 500.
the Shadows of Reason; he disliked it as much as they, and frequently Stromat.
lib. 1. p. 205, 211, 212, 215. and lib. 6. p. 472, 500.
inveighs against it: But as for the (...) substantial part of it, he could not
but deem it profitable and advantageous, since (...). (...). lib. 1. p. 233.
it helps us to find out the Truth, (...). Stromat. lib. 6. p. 472.
enables us the better to understand the Scriptures, and (...). Stromat. lib.
1. p. 234.
shows us how to refel the Sophisms and cunning arguments of the Heretics.

But besides this sort of Objectors, there were others, of whom Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks, who condemned Learning on this account, because it was
(...). Stromat. lib. 6. p. (...).
humane, unto whom that Father answers, that (...). Ibidem. p. 476.
was most unreasonable, that Philosophy only should be condemned on this
account, and that the meanest Arts besides, even those of a Smith and
Shipwright, which are as much Humane, should be commended and approved; that
(...). Ibidem. p. 475.
they did not rest here and go no farther, but having got what was useful and
profitable from it, they ascended higher unto the true Philosophy, (...).
Stromat. lib. 1. p. 207.
making this humane Philosophy a Guide unto, or, a Preparatory for the true
Philosophy.

These were the Sentiments of this Learned Father touching the Utility and
Excellency of Humane Learning, with respect to the Interpretation of Scripture,
the finding out and defending of the true Faith and Doctrine, and such like
things, which were the very Heart and Soul of the Presbyters Function and
Employ; from whence we may rationally collect, that it was needful, amiable,
and profitable in a Presbyter: I do not say that it was absolutely necessary,
for it is apparent that a great part of the ancient Presbyters were not skilled
in it; but I say that it was very useful and advantageous, and they prized and
esteemed those Presbyters, who were versed in it, especially those of them who
were Arch-Presbyters or Bishops, who, if possible, were to be well read in
those parts of Learning, which were proper to confirm the Articles of
Christianity, and to confute the Enemies thereof. This is plainly insinuated by
Origin, when he says, (...). Contra Celsum, (...). 6. p. 279.
That the Holy Scriptures exhort us to learn Logic, in that place, where it is
said by Solomon, He that refuses reproof, or Logic, as he understands it,
erreth; and that therefore he that instructs others, (the Greek Word more
particularly denotes the Bishop) ought to be able to convince Gainsayers.

. 11. Upon this Examination of the Candidates for the Ministry; and their
Approbation by the Presbytery, the next thing that followed was their being
declared capable of their desired Function, to which they were very seldom
presently advanced, but first gave a Specimen of their Abilities in their
discharge of other inferior Ecclesiastic Offices, and so proceeded by degrees
to the Supreme Function of all, as Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Non (...) ad
Episcopatum subito pervenit, per omnia ecclesiastica officia promotus -- ad
Sacerdotii sublime fastigium cunctis religionis (...) ascendit. (...). Epist.
52.. 4. p. 115.
did not presently leap into his Office, but passing through all the
Ecclesiastical Employments, gradually ascended thereunto. And as Aurelius, a
Member of the Church of Carthage, Merebatur talis Clericae Ordinationis
ulteriores gradus and incrementa majora, sed interim placuit ut ab Officio
(...) incipiat. Idem Epist. 33. p. 77.
began first with the lowermost Office of a Lector, though by his extraordinary
Merits he deserved those that were more sublime and honorable.

. 12. That this was their constant and unalterable Practice, I dare not affirm;
I rather think the contrary, as I might easily prove, were it pertinent to my
Design; this that follows is more certain, that whether they were gradually or
presently Ordained Presbyters, their Names were published or propounded to the
People of that Church, where they were to be Ordained, that so, if worthy of
that Office, they might have the Testimony and Attestation of the People; or if
unworthy and unfit, they might be debarred and excluded from it, Ordinationes
Sacerdotales non nisi sub Populi assistentis conscientia fieri oportere, ut
plebe praesente vel detegantur malorum crimina, vel bonorum merita
praedicentur, and sit ordinatio justa and legitima, quae omnium suffragio and
judicio fuerit examinata. Cyprian. Epist. 68.. 4. p. 201.
by which course the Crimes of the Wicked were discovered, the Virtues of the
Good declared, and the Ordination became Valid and Legitimate, being examined
by the Suffrage and Judgment of all.

. 13. If the People objected nothing against the Persons proposed, but approved
their fitness for that Office; the next thing that followed, was their Actual
Ordination in that particular Church, where they were so propounded, not that
they were only ordained for that particular Church, but in it they were
ordained Ministers of the Church Universal, being at liberty, either to serve
that Church, where they received their Orders, or, if they had a Legal Call, to
spend their Labors elsewhere, in other Churches, as Origin was a Presbyter of
Alexandria, though he was (...). (...). lib. 6. c. 8. p. 209.
Ordained in Palestina, by the Bishops of Caesarea and Jerusalem, and Numidicus
Presbyter adscribatur Presbyterorum Carthaginensium numero. (...). Epist. 35.
p. 84.
Numidicus was a Presbyter of the Church of Carthage, though he received his
Orders elsewhere. Hence the Presbyters of a Church were not confined to a set
number, as the Bishop and Deacons were, but were sometimes more, sometimes
less; as fit Persons for that Office presented themselves, so were they
Ordained, some of whom still remained in the same Church, where they received
their Orders; and others went and served other Churches every one going where
the Providence of God did call him.

. 14. But now their formal Ordination was by Imposition of Hands, usually of
the Bishop and Presbyters of the Parish where they were Ordained: For this
there needs no other Proof than that Injunction of St. Paul to Timothy, (...)
Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.

As for Imposition of hands, it was a Ceremony that was variously used in the
Old Testament, from whence it was translated into the New, and in the Primitive
Church used on sundry occasions, to no purpose here to enumerate: One of those
Actions was, Ordination of Church Officers, wherein, I think, it was never
omitted. Thus Novatian was Ordained a Presbyter (...). Cornel. apud Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 43. p. 245.
by Imposition of Hands. And the Bishops of Cesarea and Jerusalem (...). Apud
Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 8. p. 209.
Imposed Hands on Origin to make him a Presbyter. The Imposition of Hands being
the Completion of Ordination, or the Final Act thereof; for whosoever had past
through the forementioned Examination and Attestation, and consequently to that
had received the laying on of Hands, he was esteemed by all, as legally
Ordained, and was ever after deemed to have sufficient Power and Authority to
exert and discharge the Duty and Office of the Presbytership, to which by those
Actions he was advanced and promoted.

. 15. Here now I shall conclude what I designed to write, with respect to the
first Particular, concerning the Peculiar Acts of the Clergy, under which I
have discoursed distinctly of the Office, and Order of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, as also of several other things relating to their Charge and Dignity.
As for those other Acts of theirs, which remain to be inquired into, I shall
not meddle with them here; for though they may have some Rapport or Connection to
this Head, yet they more properly and immediately respect the third, unto which
place therefore I shall refer their Discussion and Examination.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. The Peculiar Acts of the Laity proposed to be discoursed of. What were the
Qualifications of Church Membership.. 2. The People, in some Cases, had Power
to depose their Bishops.. 3. The Conjunct Acts of the Clergy and Laity proposed
to be discoursed of. All Ecclesiastical Affairs were managed by their joint
Endeavors.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapters treated of the Peculiar Acts of the Clergy,
I come now in this to speak something to the Peculiar Acts of the Laity, and to
enquire into those Actions and Powers, which they exerted distinctly by
themselves. And here it may not be amiss first of all to make an Enquiry into
the Constitution of the Laity, that is, how and by what means they were first
admitted to be Members of a Church, by Virtue of which Membership they were
made Partakers of all those Powers, which we shall hereafter mention.

Now for Answer hereunto, in general, Per Baptisina Spiritus sanctus accipitur,
and sic a baptizatis and Spiritum sanctum (...) ad bibendum calicem Domini
pervenitur. Cyprian. Ep. 63.. 5. p. 175.
all those that were baptized, were looked upon as Members of the Church, and
had a right to all the Privileges thereof; except they had been guilty of
grofs and scandalous Sins, as Idolatry, Murder, Adultery, and such like; for
then they were cast out of the Church, and not admitted again, till by a
Penitent and holy Deportment they had testified their Grief and Sorrow for
their unholy and irregular Actions; for as Origin says, (...). Contra (...),
lib. 3. p. 143.
We do our utmost, that our Assemblies be composed of good and wise Men. So
that (...). Origin contra (...), lib. 4. p. 178.
none who are admitted to our Congregations, and Prayers, are vicious and
wicked, except very rarely it may happen, that a particular bad. Man may be
concealed in so great a number.

But since the greatest part of Christians were adult Persons at their
Conversion to Christianity, and admission into Church Fellowship and Society,
therefore we must consider the Prerequisites of Baptism, since that Sacrament
gave them a Right and Title to that admission or reception.

Now those Persons who designed to leave Heathenism and Idolatry, and desired
to be Members of a Christian Church, were not presently advanced to that
degree, but were first continued a certain space of Time in the rank of the
Catechumens, or the Catechized ones: These were Candidates of Christianity, who
were to stay some time in that Order for these two Reasons: The one was, That
they might be catechized and instructed in the Articles of the Christian Faith,
from whence they were called Catechumens: And the other was, (...). Idem
Ibidem, p. 142.
that they might give demonstrations of the reality of their Intentions, by the
Change of their Lives, and the Holiness of their Conversations.

Whilst they were in this Estate, or rather in a Preparatory thereunto, (...).
Idem Ibidem, p. 142.
they were first privately instructed at home, till they understood the more
Intelligible Principles of Christianity, and then they were admitted into the
first Rank of Catechumens, who are called by Tertullian De Praescript. adv.
Haeret. p. 89.
Edocti, or, those that are taught. These were permitted (...). Origin contia
Celsum, lib. 3. p. (...).
to come into the Church where they stood in a place by themselves, (...). Idem
(...), p. 143.
and were present at the Sermons, which were adapted to their Capacities, being
Discourses of the Ordinary and less mysterious Truths of the Gospel. If they
behaved themselves well in this Rank, then they were advanced to the (...),
Idem Ibidem. p. 142.
Superior Rank of the De (...). advers. Haeret. p. 89.
Perfecti, or, Perfect, as Tertullian calls them, who stayed not only at the
Lessons and Sermons, but also at the Prayers, which were the conclusion of the
first Service, and in a little time were baptized, and tarried with the
Faithful at the Celebration of the Eueharist, or the Second Service.

This was the manner of (...) amongst the Ancients; none in those days were
hastily advanced to the higher Forms of Christianity, but according to their
Knowledge and Merit gradually arrived thereunto, being first instructed at
home, then admitted to the Didactick part of the Public, and then to the
Supplicative part thereof. It was the wicked Policy of the Heretics Quis
Catechumenus, quis fidelis incertum (...); pariter audiunt, pariter orant.
Tert. de Praescript. advers. Haeret. p. 88.
Indifferently to pray and hear with all, making no difference between the
Faithful or the Catechumens: But the True Church distinguished and permitted
not the Catechumens to enjoy the Privileges of the Faithful, till they had in
a Sense merited them, which was, when through a considerable time of Trial they
had evidenced the sineerity of their Hearts, by the Sanctity and Purity of
their Lives, and then, as Origin says, (...). Contra (...), lib. 3. p. 147.
we initiate them in our Mysteries, when they have made a Proficiency in
Holiness, and according to the utmost of their power, have reformed their
Conversations. When they had changed their Manners, and rectified their
Irregular Carriages; then they were washed with the Water of Baptism, and not
before; for as Tertullian says, Non ideo abluimur, ut delinquere desinamus,
sed quia desinivimus. (...) Poenitentia, p. 379.
We are not baptized, that we may ceafe to sin, but because we have already
ceased.

As soon as they were baptized, they commenced Members of the Church Universal,
and of that Particular Church, wherein they were so baptized, and became actual
Sharers and Exerters of all the Privileges and Powers of the Faithful.

. 2. Now what the distinct and separate Powers of the Faithful were, must be
next considered; several of them, to make the Discourse under the former Head
complete, we (...) there, as their Election and choice of their Bishops, their
Attestation to those that were Ordained, and such like, which will be
unnecessary and tedious to repeat here; and others of them cannot be well
separated from their Conjunct Acts with the Clergy, but must with them be
discoursed of in the next Head, so that there will be little or nothing to say
here of their Discretive and Particular Acts, save, that as they had Power to
elect their Bishops, so if their Bishops proved afterward scandalous and
grossly wicked in Life, or at least Heretical in Doctrine, and Apostates from
the Faith, they had Power to depose them, and to choose others in their rooms.
This I must be forced also to mention in another place, so that for the Proof
of it I shall urge only the Case of Martialis and Basilides, two Spanish
Bishops, who for Apostasy and Idolatry, were deserted by their Parishes, who
Elected Felix and Sabinus Bishops in their steads. After this Deposition
Martialis and Basilides claimed the Exercise of their Episcopal Authority, but
their Parishes denied it to them; and that they might not seem to act by a
Power, which belonged not unto them, they sent to several Bishops in Africa, to
know their Judgment thereupon, who being convened in a Synod Anno 258, whereof
Cyprian was President, approved and commended their Proceedings, assuring them,
Desiderio vestro divina praecepta respondent quibus jampridem mandantur voce
coelesti, and (...), quos and quales oporteat (...) altari -- in Levitico
praecipit Dominus and (...) Homo, in quo fuerit macula and vitium non accedet
offerre dona Deo -- nec sibi plebs blandiatur quasi immunis (...) contagio
delicti (...), cum Sacerdote peccatore communicans -- Propter quod plebs
obsequens praeceptis dominicis. and Deum metuens, a peceatore praeposito
separare se debet, nec se ad Sacrilegi Sacerdotis Sacrificia miscere; quando
ipsa maxim habeat (...) vel eligendi dignos (...), vel indignos (...). Epist.
68. apud Cyprian.. 1, 3, 4. p. 200, 201.
That it was according to the Divine Law, which was express, that none but
those that were holy and blameless should approach God's Altar; That if they
had continued to have communicated with their Profane Bishops, they would have
been Accessaries to their Guilt and Villainy, and would have contradicted those
Examples and Commands in Scripture, which oblige a People to separate from
their wicked and ungodly Ministers; That they had not acted irregularly in what
they had done; since as the People had the chief Power of choosing worthy
Bishops, so also of refusing those that were unworthy: And many other such like
Passages are to be found in that Synodical Epistle, which (...) assert the
Peoples Power to depose a wicked and Scandalous Bishop.

But however, though the People had such a Power appertaining to them, yet being
subject to be guided by Giddiness, Envy or Pride, where Churches were regularly
associated, and their Circumstances did permit it, they did not by virtue of
their power alone, upon their own single Judgment depose their Bishop; but that
their Actions might be the more Authentic and Unquestionable, they had their
Complaints heard, and the whole Affair examined by the Synod to which they
belonged, or by some other Bishops, who, if their Accusations were just and
valid, might concur with them in the Deposition of their Bishop, and in the
Election of a new one: And from hence it is, that we find the Power of Deposing
Bishops ascribed to Synods, Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 282.
as Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, was deprived by a Synod held in that
place, and Nonaginta (...) sententia condemnatum. Cyprian. Epist. 55.. 11. p.
140.
Privatus Bishop of Lambese was deposed by a Synod of ninety Bishops. The same
Method being observed in the Deposition of a Bishop, as in his Election. As a
Bishop was elected by the People, over whom he was to preside, and by the
neighboring Bishops, so was he deposed by the same; both which things seem to
be intimated in that Passage of the forementioned Synodical (...), wherein it
is said, (...) ipsa maxim habeat (...), (...) eligendi (...) Sacerdotes, vel
indignos recusandi. Apud Cypr. Epist. 68.. 4. p. 201.
That the People chiefly has Power either to choose worthy Bishops, or to refuse
unworthy ones. The word chiefly implying, that besides the People, some others
were necessary to concur with them either in the Election or Deprivation of a
Bishop; and those were the neighboring Bishops, or to speak more properly,
that Synod to which they appertained; of which Synods, of their Power and
Authority, I shall discourse more largely elsewhere.

. 3. Having thus briefly dispatched the Second Head, I now proceed to handle
the Third, which respects the Conjunct Acts of the (...) and Laity: In answer
whereunto, I find, that, in general, all things relating to the Government and
Policy of the Church, were performed by their joint Consent and
Administrations, (...), (...). Epist. ad (...). p. 47.
the People were to do nothing without the Bishop: And on the contrary, ^
he did nothing without the knowledge and consent of his People. ^
When any Letters came from Foreign Churches, they were received, and read
before the whole Church, and Vicarias vero pro nobis, ego, and Collegae, and
Fraternitas omnis, has ad vos literas mitimus. (...), Ep. 58.. 2. p. 163.
the whole Church agreed (...) common Letters to be sent to other Churches. And
so for all other matters relating to the Policy of the Church, they were
managed In commune tractabimus. (...). Epist. 6.. 5. p. 17.
by the common advice and Counsel of the Clergy and Laity, both concurred to
the Discharge of those Actions, to recite every particular Act whereof would be
extremely tedious and fruitless. Wherefore in speaking hereunto, I shall
confine my self to those of their Complex Acts, that regarded the Discipline of
the Church, which being an Answer to the Second Part of our Enquiry, viz. An
Enquiry into the Discipline of the Primitive Church, shall be the Subject of
the following Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. The Necessity, Quality, and Excellency of Discipline. Six things
propounded to be handled. 1. For what Faults Offenders were censured. 2. Who
were the Judges that censured. 3. The manner of their Censures. 4. What their
Censures were. 5. The Course that Offenders took to be absolved. 6. The manner
of their Absolution.. 2. Censures were inflicted for all sorts of Crimes,
especially for Idolatry.. 3. The whole Church were the Judges that composed the
Ecclesiastical Consistory. The Executive Power lodged in the Clergy, and the
Legistative both in Clergy and Laity. In difficult Points some neighboring
Bishops assisted at the Decision of them.. 4 The manner of their Censures.. 5.
Their Censures consisted in Excommunications, and Suspensions; the dreadfulness
thereof.. 6. The Course that Offenders took to be absolved: They first lay
grovelling and weeping at the Church Doors.. 7. Then admitted into the Rank of
the Penitents. Their Behavior during their time of Penance.. 8. How long their
Penance was. In some Cases the fixed Period anticipated; when ended, the
Penitents were examined by the Court, and if approved, then Absolved.. 9. The
manner of their Absolution. They came into the Church with all Expressions of
Sorrow, publicly confessed the Sin for which they had been censured. The
Church was tenderly affected with their Confession.. 10. After Confession they
were absolved by the Clergies Imposition of Hands.. 11. Then admitted to the
Churches Peace. The Clergy generally restored only to Lay Communion.

. 1. AS all Governments are necessitated to make use of Laws, and other
Political Means, to preserve their Constitution. So the Church of Christ, which
has a certain Government annexed to it, that it may preserve its self from
Ruin and Confusion, has certain Laws and Orders for the due Regulation of her
Members, and Penalties annexed to the Breaches thereof. But herein lies the
difference between the one and the other; The Penalties and Executions of the
former, are like its Constitution, purely Humane and Carnal; but those of the
other are Spiritual; as Religion was at first received by Spiritual and
Voluntary, and not by Carnal and Involuntary means: for as Tertullian says, Nec
Religionis est cogere Religionem, quae sponte suscipi debeat, non vi. Ad
Scapulam, p. 447.
It is not Religion, to force a Religion, which ought to be willingly, not
forcibly received. So by the same means it was continued, and the Penalties of
the Breach of it were of the same Nature also. The Churches Arms were
Spiritual, consisting of Admonitions, Excommunications, Suspensions, and such
like, by the weilding of which she Governed her Members, and preserved her own
Peace and Purity. Now this is that which is called Discipline, which is
absolutely necessary to the Unity, Peace, and being of the Church; for where
there is no Law, Government or Order, that Society cannot possibly (...), but
must sink in its own Ruins and Confusions.

To recite the numerous Encomiums of Discipline, that are interspersed in the
Writings of the Ancients, would be an endless Task: Let this one suffice out of
Cyprian, Disciplina custos spei, retinaculum fidei, Dux itineris salutaris,
fomes ac nutrimentum bonae indolis, magistra (...), facit in Christo manner
semper ac jugiter Deo vivere, and ad promissa coelestia and divina praemia
(...). Hanc and sectari salubre est, and aversari ac negligere letale. (...)
Psalmis loquitur Spiritus sanctus Continete Disciplinam, ne forte irascatur
(...), and pereatis a via recta, cum exaiserit cito ira ejus super vos. Et
iterum; peccatori autem dixit Deus, ad quid exponis justificationes meas, and
assumis testamentum meum per os ruum? Tu autem odisti Disci. plinam, and
abjecisti Sermones meos retro. Et denuo legimus: Disciplinam quia abjicit,
infelix est. Et de Salomone mandata Sapientiae monentis accipimus: Fili ne
neglexeris disciplinam Domini, nec defeceris ab eo correptus. Quem enim diligit
Dominus corripit. Si autem Deus quem diligit, corripit, and ad hoc corripit, ut
emendet, fratres quoque and (...), non oderunt; sed diligunt eos quos
corripiunt ut emendent; quando and Deus per (...) praedixerit, and tempora
nostra significaverit, (...) and dabo vobis pastores secundum cor meum, and
pascent vos pascentes cum Disciplina. De (...) and Habitu Virginum,. 1. p. 265,
266.
Discipline, says he, is the Keeper of Hope, the Stay of Faith, the Captain of
Salvation, the Fuel and Nutriment of a good Disposition, the Mistress of
Virtue, that makes us perpetually abide in Christ, and live to God, and tend
toward the Heavenly and Divine Promises. This to follow is saving, but to
despise and neglect is deadly. The Holy Ghost speaks in Psalm. 2. 12. Keep
Discipline, lest the Lord be angry, and ye perish from the right way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little against you. And again, in Psalm. 50. 16. But unto
the Sinner God said, What have thou to do to declare my Law, and to take my
Judgments into thy Mouth? Thou hate Discipline, and castest my Words behind
thee. And again we read in Wisdom 3. 11. He that casts off Discipline is
unhappy. And by Solomon we have received this command from Wisdom, in Prove. 3.
11. My Son, forget not the Discipline of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
corrected; for whom the Lord loves he corrects. But if God corrects whom he
loves, and corrects them that they may amend; Christians also, and especially
Ministers, do not hate, but love those whom they correct, that they may amend,
since God has also soretold our Times in Jer. 3. 15. And I will give you
Pastors after mine own Heart, and they shall seed you in Discipline.

Now this is that Discipline, viz. The Power and Authority of the Church
exerted by her, for her own Preservation, in the censuring of her offending
Members, that I am now to Discourse of; for the clearer apprehension whereof
these six Queries must be examined into, 1. For what Faults Offenders were
censured. 2. Who were the Judges that censured. 3. The manner of their
Censures. 4. What their Censures were. 5. The Course that Offenders took to be
Absolved. And, 6. The manner of their Absolution.

. 2. As to the first of these, For what Faults Offenders were censured. I
answer, for So was (...) in Cyprian. Epist. 38.. 2. p. 90.
Schism, Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 16. p. 181.
Heresy, Origin. Hom. 7. in Jerem. p. 94. Vol. 1.
Covetousness, Origin. Ibidcm.
Gluttony, Cyprian. Ep. 52.. 13. p. 118.
Fornication, Cyprian. Ep. 38.. 2. p. 90.
Adultery, and for Origin contra Celsum, lib. 3. p. 142.
all other Sins whatsoever, none excepted; nay, the holy and good Men of those
days were so zealous against Sin, that they used the strictest Severities
against the least appearances of it, not indulging or sparing the least Branch
of its pestiferous Production, but smartly punishing the least sprout of it,
its lesser Acts, as well as those that were more scandalous and notorious.
Cyprian writes, that not only Epist. 12.. 1. p. 37.
Gravissimae and extrema delicta, The greatest and most heinous Crimes, but
even Minora Delicta, The Lesser Faults were punished by their Ecclesiastical
Courts, so cutting off Sin in its Bud, and by the Excision of its lesser Acts
and Ebullitions, preventing its more gross and scandalous Eruptions. That
particular Sin which they most severely punished, and through the frequency of
Persecutions had numerous Objects of, was Apostasy from the Truth, or a lapsing
into Idolatry, which Crime was always (...) with the extremest Rigor; of which
Ninus, Clementianus and Florus were sad Instances, who though they had for some
time courageously endured their Persecutions and Torments, yet at last, through
the violence thereof, and the weakness of their Flesh, unwillingly consenting
to the Heathen Idolatries, were for that Fault forced to undergo three years
Penance; and had it not been for their ancient Merits, must have underwent it
much longer, as may be seen at large in the 53d Epistle of Cyprian. And thus by
these and such like severe and rigorous Courses, those primitive Virtuoso's
endeavored to prevent sin, and to make all the Professors of the Christian
Religion truly holy and pious; for as Origin says, (...). Contra Celsum, lib.
3. p. 143.
We use our utmost Endeavors, that our Assemblies be composed of wise and
honest Men.

. 3. As for the Judges that composed the Consistory or Ecclesiastical Court,
before whom offending Criminals were convened, and by whom censured, they will
appear to have been the whole Church, both Clergy and Laity; not the Bishop
without the People, nor the People without the Bishop, but both conjunctly
constituted that Supreme Tribunal, which censured Delinquents and
Transgressors, as will be evident from what follows.

All the Power that any Church-Court exerted, was derived from that Promife and
Commission of Christ, in Matthew. 16. 18, 19. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. And
I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Now this Power some of the Ancients mention,
as given to the Bishops. Thus Origin writes, (...). Commentar. in Matthaeum,
Tom. 12. p. 279. Vol. 1.
That the Bishops applied to themselves this Promise that was made to Peter,
teaching, That they had received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven from our
Savior, that so whatsoever was bound, that is, condemned by them on Earth, was
bound in Heaven; and whatsoever was loosed by them, was also loosed in Heaven;
which, says he, may be Orthodoxly enough applied to them, if they hold Peter's
Confession, and are such as the Church of Christ may be built upon. And so also
says Cyprian, Ecclefia super Episcopos constituatur; and omnis actus Ecclesiae,
per eosdem praepositos gubernetur. Epist. 27.. 1. p. 62.
The Church is founded upon the Bishops, by whom every Ecclesiastical Action is
governed.

Others of the Ancients mention this Power, as given to the whole Church,
according to that in Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. If thy Brother shall trespass
against thee, go and tell him his Fault between thee and him (...) if he shall
hear thee, thou have gained thy (...) but if he will not hear thee, take with
thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word
may be established; and if he shall neglect them, tell it unto the Church; but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen and a
Publican. Verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in
Heaven. By the Church here is to be understood, the whole Body of a particular
Church or Parish, unto which some of the Fathers attribute the Power of the
Keys, as Tertullian, Si clausum putas Coelum, memento claves ejus hic Dominum
Petro, and per eum Ecclesiae reliquisse. Scorpiac. p. 612.
If thou fear Heaven to be shut, remember the Lord gave its Keys to Peter,
and by him to the Church. And Firmilian, Potestas remittendorum peccatorum
Apostolis data (...), and Ecclesi is quas illi a Christo missi. constituerunt,
and Episcopis qui eis Ordinatione vacaria successerunt. Apud Cyprian. Epist.
75.. 14. p. 240.
The Power of remitting Sins is given to the Apostles, and to the Churches
which they constituted, and to the Bishops who succeeded them. Now from this
different attribution of the Power of the Keys, we may infer this, That it was
so lodged both in Bishops and People, as that each had some share in it: The
Bishop had the whole Executive, and part of the Legislative Power; and the
People had a part in the Legislative, though not in the Executive. As for the
Executive Power, by which I understand the formal Pronunciation of Suspensions
and Excommunications, the Imposition of Hands in the Absolution of Penitents,
and such like; that could be done by none, but by the Bishop, or by Persons in
Holy Orders Deputed and Commissioned by him, as the Sequel will evince. But as
for the Legislative, Decretive, or Judicatorial Power, that (...) both to
Clergy and Laity, who conjunctly made up that Supreme Consistorial Court, which
was in every Parish, before which all Offenders were tried; and, if found
Guilty, sentenced and condemned.

Now that the Clergy were Members of this Ecclesiastical Court, is a thing so
evidently known and granted by all, as that it would be superfluous to heap up
many Quotations to prove it, so that I shall but just confirm it, after I have
proved that which may seem more strange; and that is, That the Laity were
Members thereof, and Judges therein, being Sharers with the Clergy in the
Judicial Power of the Spiritual Court: And this will most evidently appear by
the consideration of these following Testimonies: The first shall be out of
that place of Clemens Romanus, where he writes, (...). (...). 1. ad (...). p.
69.
Who will say according to the Example of Moses, If Seditions, Contentions and
Schisms are happened because of me, I will depart, I will go wheresoever you
please, and I will do what are enjoined me by the People, so the Church of
Christ be in Peace.

So Origin describes a Criminal as appearing (...). Comment. in Mat. Tom. 13.
p. 335. Vol. 1.
Before the whole Church. And Dyonisius Bishop of Alexandria in his Letter to
Fabius Bishop of Antioch, speaks of one Serapion, that had fallen in the Times
of Persecution, who had several times appeared before the Church, to beg their
Pardon, but (...). Eusebius. lib. o. c. 44. p. 246.
no one did ever take any notice of him.

But Cyprian is most full in this matter, as when two Subdeacons, and an
Acolyth of his Parish, had committed some great Misdemeanors, he professes that
he himself was not a sufficient Judge of their Crimes, but Haec (...) tractanda
(...), and limanda before ratio -- cum plebe ipsa universa. Epist. 28.. 2. p.
64.
they ought to be tried by all the People. And concerning Felicissimus the
(...), he writes to his People from his Exile, that, if it pleased God, he
would come to them after Easter, and then that Secundum arbitrium quoque
vestrum and omnium nostrum Commune Consilium -- ea (...) agenda sunt disponere
pariter, and limare poterimus. Epist. 40. 1. p. 94.
Affair should be adjusted according to their Arbitrament and Common Counsel.
And in another place he condemns the rash Precipitation of some of his
Presbyters in admitting the Lapsed to Communion, because of some Pacificatory
Libels obtained from the Confessors, and charges them to admit no more till
Peace was restored to the Church, and then they should Acturi and apud nos, and
apud plebem universam causam suam. Epist. 10.. 4. p. 30.
plead their Cause before the Clergy, and before all the People. And concerning
the same matter, he writes in another Letter to the People of his Parish, Cum
pace nobis omnibus a Domino prius data, ad Ecclesiam regredi caeperimus, tunc
examinabuntur singula praesentibus ac judicantibus vobis. Epist. 12. ad (...),.
1. p. 37.
That when it should please God to restore Peace to the Church, and reduce him
from his Exile, that then it should be examined in their Presence, and
according to their Judgment.

So that the Consistory Court was composed of the People, as well as of the
Bishop, each of whom had a negative Voice therein. On one side, the Bishop
could do nothing without the People. So when several returned from the Schism
of Fortunatus, and Bishop Cyprian was willing to receive them into the Churches
Peace, he complains of the unwillingness of his People to admit them, and the
great difficulties he had to obtain their Consent, as he thus describes it in
his Letter to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, O si posses, Frater charissime, iuic
interesse (...), cum pravi (...) and perversi de Schismate revertuntur, videres
quis mihi (...) sit persuadere patientiam Fratribus nostris, ut (...) dolor
sopito (...) curandisque conseutiant; vix (...), (...) extorqueo, ut tales
(...) admitti. Epist. 55.. 17. p. 143.
O my dear Brother, if you could be present with me, when those Men return from
their Schism, you would wonder at what pains I take to persuade our Brethren to
be patient, that laying aside their Grief of Mind, they would consent to the
healing and receiving of those that are sick; I can scarce (...), yea, I extort
a Grant from my People, that such (...) received to Communion. And on the other
side, the People could do dothing without the Bishop; as when one of the three
Bishops that (...) Ordained Novatian, came back to the Church and desired
admission, the People alone could not receive him, without the Consent of the
Bishop (...), for else they would not have (...). Cornel. apud (...). (...). 6.
cap. 43. p. 244.
so earnestly pressed him (...) his permission, as we find they did.

Thus then we have viewed the Members of the Spiritual Court, and have proved
that they were all the Members, or the whole Body of the Church, Clergy as well
as Laity, and Laity as well as Clergy; (...) one without the other, but both
together.

But now forasmuch as the People were encumbred with earthly business, and it
was not possible that they could constantly give their attendance, and narrowly
search into every thing that should be brought before them: Therefore we may
suppose, that the Members of the Presbytery, who, as was said before, under the
Head of Ordination, were to be free from all Worldly Cares and Employments,
were appointed as a Committee to prepare matters for the whole Court. An
instance whereof we meet with in Maximus, Vrbanus, Sidonius, and some others,
that had joined in the Schism of Novatian, who being sensible of their Fault,
In Presbyterium venerunt -- Quod erat consequens, omnis hic actus populo fuerit
insinuandus. (...). Epist. 46.. 2, 3. p. 104, 105.
Came into the Presbytery, and desired the Churches Peace; the Presbytery
accepted of their Submission, and proposed it to the whole Church, who readily
embraced it.

So that the Presbytery prepared matters for the whole Court, which Court was
the Supreme Tribunal within the Limits of that Parish, before whom all matters
that there occurred, were tried, and by whom all were judged; only when any
great and difficult points were decided, it is probable it was the custom to
desire the Bishops of the neighboring Parishes to come over, and assist there
in presence, that so their Censures might be the freer from any imputation of
Partiality or Injustice. Thus when a nice Affair was to be determined at Rome,
Cornelius Adfuerunt Episcopi quinque -- ut firmato consilio, quid circa
personam eorum observari deberet, consensu omnium (...). Cornel. ad (...).
Epist. 46.. 2. p. 104.
desired five Bishops to assist, that so what they did might be firm and
indisputable.

. 4. Having thus found out the Members of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal, the next
thing to be considered, is the manner and Form of their Proceedings in the
Exercise of their Judicial Power and Authority, which by Tertullian is
described to be after this manner: When at their general Assemblies the other
parts of Divine Worship were ended, Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes,
and censura divina; nam and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei
conspectu, (...) futuri judicii praejudicium est, fi quis ita deliquerit, ut a
communicatione orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur.
Praesident probati quique Seniores, honorem istum non precio sed testimonio
adepti. Apolog. cap. 39. p. 709.
then followed Exhortations, Reproofs, and a Divine Censure; for the Judgment
is given with great weight, as amongst those that are sure, that God beholds
what they do; and this is one of the highest Preludiums and Forerunners of the
Judgment to come, when the Delinquent is banished from the Communion of
Prayers, Assemblies, and all Holy Commerce. Approved Elders preside there, who
obtained that Honor by Testimony, not by Price. So that when the Consistory
was sat, the Bishop and his assisting Presbyters, here called Approved Elders;
but commonly the Presbytery presided and moderated all things there proposed
and debated. Then the Offenders, if possible, were actually brought before
them, (though the nonappearance of the Criminals was no impediment to their
Proceedings) for notwithstanding they condemned them, and censured them not
only for those Crimes, for which they were cited to appear, but also for their
Contumacy and Stubbornness, as Cyprian writes, Spirituali gladio superbi and
contumaces necantur, dum de ecclesia ejiciuntur. Epist. 62.. 3. p. 170.
the Proud and Obstinate are killed with the Spiritual Sword, whilst they are
cast out of the Church; and Contumaces and Deum non timentes, and ab Ecclesia
in totum recedentes, nemo comitetur. Epist. 64.. 4. p. 191.
those that are stubborn and fear not God, but go off from the Church, let no
Man accompany. But yet, I say, if possible, the Offenders personally appeared,
that so their Crimes might be objected to them, to which they were to plead, as
Cyprian says, that the Lapsed Acturi and apud nos, and apud Plebem universam
causam suam, Epist. 10.. 4. p. 30.
were to plead their Cause before the Clergy and the whole Church. Then the
Court considered the Defendant's Plea, as Cyprian writes, In commune
tractabimus. Epist. 6.. 5. p. 17.
that all things were debated in common amongst them. And if the Bishop and
Majority of the Court judged their Defense insufficient, they were voted by
their common Suffrage to be condemned and censured, as Cyprian writes, that
Secundum vestra divina suffragia conjurati. Epist. 40. ad Plebem.. 1. p. 92.
whoever was excommunicated, it was by the Divine Suffrages of the People. The
Delinquent being thus cast, or found Guilty, the next thing that succeeded, was
the formal Declaration of the Sentence of the Court, which was pronounced, as
Tertullian intimates in that forequoted Passage, by one of the presiding
Elders, that is, either by the Bishop or a Presbyter Commissioned by him, the
manner of which Pronunciation seems also from that Passage to be thus: He that
passed the formal Sentence on the Criminal, first began with Exhortations; that
is, as we may reasonably suppose, he exhorted the Faithful to use all diligent
Care and Fear to avoid those Sins and Crimes, which had brought the Offenders
before them to so lamentable and fatal Condition. Then followed Reproofs, which
were sharp Rebukes and Reprehensions to the Delinquents for their foul
Miscarriages and enormous Practices, setting forth the Evil, Villainy and Misery
of them; That they were provoking to God, grievous to the Faithful, scandalous
to Religion, and in fine, ruining and pernicious to themselves; in that it
rendered them obnoxious to that Divine Censure, which then immediately, as the
Conclusion of all, he formally pronounced on them. Which brings me to the
Consideration of the Fourth Query, viz. What the Primitive Censures were; of
which, in the following Section.

. 5. Now in answer hereunto; as the Church, so her Arms were Spiritual; her
Thunderbolts (...) in Suspensions and Excommunications, in ejecting and
throwing out of the Church her scandalous and rotten Members, not permitting a
re-induction of them, till by visible signs of Repentance they had satisfied
for their Crimes and Villainies.

Various are the Appellations that are given to the Sentence of Excommunication
in the Writings of the Ancients. By Dionysius Alexandrinus it is called, (...).
Apud Eusebius. l. 7. c. 7. p. 253.
A driving away from the Church. By Tertullian, Ab Ecclesiae Communicatione
abjectus. De Praescript. advers. Haeret. p. 95.
A casting out from the Churches Communion, and A Communicatione depellere. De
Monogam. p. 477.
a driving from Communion. By Cyprian, Ab Ecclesia separati, Epist. 38.. 2. p.
90.
A Separation from the Church, De Ecclesia se pellerent. Epist. 40.. 1. p. 92.
An Ejection out of the Church, Spirituali gladio necantur. Epist. 62.. 3. p.
170.
A killing with the Spiritual Sword, and many other such like Terms occur in
the Fathers, all tending to describe the Fearfulness and Misery of an
Excommunicated State: So tremendous was it, that whosoever was in that
condition, was looked upon as accursed by God, and really was so by Men, who
esteemed him as a Limb of Satan, and a Member of the Devil, shunning his
Company as they did the Plague, or any other infectious Disease. Contumaces and
Deum non timentes, and ab Ecclesia in totum recedentes, nemo comitetur. Epist.
65.. 4. p. 191.
Those, says Cyprian, that are Proud, and fear not God, but go off from the
Church, let no Man accompany. And therefore Irenaeus speaking concerning the
Heretics, who were all Excommunicated, says, Quos Paulus jubet nobis devitare,
Joannes enim non Ave nobis eis (...) volens. Qui enim (...), inquit, eis Ave,
communicate operibus eorum nequissimis. Lib. 1. cap. 13. p. 63.
that according to the Command of Paul, we must avoid them; and John forbids us
so much as to wish them God speed, since by so doing we communicate with their
Evil Works. And Tertullian in that forementioned place writes, A communicatione
orationis and conventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur. Apol. c. 39. p.
709.
That the Delinquent was banished from the Communion of Prayers, Assemblies,
and all holy Converse; being looked upon as one unworthy of humane Society,
cast out of the Church of God here; and if impenitently dying in that
condition, as certainly excluded the Kingdom of God hereafter. For as Origin
writes on Matthew. 18. 18. on which Text Excommunication is founded, (...).
Comment. in Matthew. Tom. 13. p. 336. Vol. 1.
He that is condemned and bound by the Church on Earth, remains bound, none in
Heaven unloosing him.

. 6. No wonder then that Men in their right Senses were affrightned at the
tremendous Misery of an Excommunicated Condition, and that when through their
corrupt Natures and wicked Practices they had incurred that Sentence, they
never left Fasting. Watching, Weeping, and the endurance of the severest
Courses of Mortification, till they were absolved from it, and reinstated in
God and the Churches Favor. Which brings me in the next place to search into
the Course that Offenders took to be received into the Church again, the usual
Method whereof seems to have been thus:

All those that desired to be delivered from that miserable state, in the first
place in a most penitent and humble manner came weeping and crying unto the
Church-doors, where they lay grovelling on the Ground, prostrating themselves at
the Feet of the Faithful as they went into Church, and begging their Prayers to
God for them. The Behavior of these Men is thus elegantly expressed by the
Clergy of the Church of Rome in a Letter to Cyprian, Pulsent sane fores, sed
non utique confringant; adeant ad limen Ecclesiae, sed non utique transiliant.
Castrorum coelestium excubent portis, sed armati modestia, qua intelligant se
desertores fuisse. Resumant precum suarum tubam, sed qua non bellicum clangant.
Arment se quidem modestiae telis, and quem negando mortis metu fidei
demiserant, clypeum resumant, sed ut contra hostem Diabolum vel nunc armati non
contra Ecclesiam, quae illorum dolet casus, armatos (...) esse credant. Multum
illis proficiet petitio modesta, postulatio verecunda, humilitas necessaria,
patientia non otiosa; mittant legatos pro suis doloribus lacrymas; advocatione
fungantur ex intimo pectore prolati gemitus, dolorem probantes cominissi
criminis and pudorem, Epist. 31. apud Cyprian.. 7. p. 71.
Let them, say they, knock at the Churchdoors, but not break them; let them
come to the Threshold of the Church, but not. pass over it; let them watch at
the Gates of the Celestial Tents, but armed with Modesty, by which they may
remember they were Deserters; let them resume the Trumpet of their Prayers, but
not to sound an Alarm to Battle; let them arm themselves with the Darts of
Modesty, and retake that Shield, which by their Apostasy they lost, that so
they may be armed, not against the Church, which grieves at their Misery, but
against their Adversary the Devil; a modest Petition, a bashful Supplication, a
necessary Humility, and an Industrious Patience will be advantageous to them;
let them express their grief by their Tears, and their sorrow and shame for
their Crimes by their Groans. So Tertullian, in the same manner describes one
in this state, Sacco and cineri incubare, corpus sordibus obscurare, animum
(...) dejicere, -- (...) preces alere, (...), lachrymari, and mug re dies
noctesque -- Presbyteris advolvi, and caris Dei adgeniculari, omnibus fratribus
(...) deprecationis suae iujungere. De Foenitentia, p. 381.
by lying in Sackcloth and Ashes, by having a squalid Body, and a dejected
Soul, by fasting, praying, weeping, groaning and roaring night and day; by
throwing himself at the Clergies feet, and kneeling before the Faithful,
begging and desiring their Prayers and Pardon.

. 7. If the Ecclesiastical Court thought their Repentance to be real, and those
external Expressions of Sorrow and Grief to proceed from suitable Affections of
Heart, then they began to incline to some Terms of Remission and
Reconciliation, and gave the Delinquents some hopes of it, by admitting them to
come into the Church, and to stay at some part of Divine Service, but not at
the whole of it, to communicate with the Faithful, till they had for a long
space of time, which they then imposed on them, by their humble and modest
Carriage gave good Proofs of their Sorrow and Repentance.

This fixed Time of Trial was called, the Time of Penance, during which the
Penitent, as he was now called, appeared in all the Formalities of Sorrow, with
a course Habit, and a dejected Countenance, continually fasting and praying,
lamenting and bemoaning the greatness and aggravations of his Sin and
Wickedness, as may be seen in sundry places of the Fathers, all which to
transcribe would be very tedious; wherefore I shall content my self with
Translating a few Elegancies pertinent to this purpose, out of Cyprian's Book
De Lapsis, wherein he thus inveighs against those, who in a state of Penance
indulged themselves in the Delights and Enjoyments of the Flesh, Lamentari eum
putamus ex toto cord jejuniis, fletibus, planctibus Dominum deprecari; qui ex
primo criminis die lavacra quotidie celebrat, qui epulis affluentibus pastus,
and (...) largiore distentus, cruditates suas postridie ructat, nec cibos and
potus suos cum pauperum necessitate communicate? Qui hilaris ac laetus incedit,
quomodo mortem suam deflet? An illa ingemiscit and plangit, cui vacat cultum
pretiosae vestis induere, nec indumentum Christi, quod perdidit, cogitare?
Accipere pretiosa ornamenta and monilia elaborata, nec Divini and Coelestis
ornatus damna deflere; tu licet indumenta (...) and vestes sericas induas, nuda
es; auro te licet and margaritis gemmisque (...), (...) Christi decore deformis
es. Et quae capillos tuos inficis, vel nunc in doloribus desine, and quae nigri
pulveris ductu oculorum liniamenta (...), vel nune lacrymis oculos tuos ablue.
Si quem de tuis charis mortali exitu perdidisses, ingemisceres dolenter, and
fleres: Facie inculta, vest mutata, neglecto capillo, vultu nubilo, ore
dejecto indicia maeroris (...), animam tuam misera perdidisti -- (...) non
(...) plangis, non jugiter ingemiscis?. 24, (...). p. 285.
Can we think that that Man weeps with his whole Heart, and with-Fastings,
Tears, and Sighs beseeches God, who from the very first day of his Offense
daily frequents the Baths, who indulging to his gluttonous Appetite this Day,
vomits up his undigested Crudities the next day, and does not communicate of
his Meat and Drink to the Necessities of the Poor? He that goes gay and jocund,
how does he bewayl his Death? Does that Woman weep and mourn, who spends her
time in putting on splendid Garments, and does not think upon the Garment of
Christ, which she lost? Who seeks after precious Ornaments and rich Jewels, and
does not bewail the loss of the Heavenly and Divine adorning? Although thou
put on exotic Garbs and silken Garments, thou art naked; although thou
beautifiest thy self with Gold and Pearls, without the Beauty of Christ thou
art deformed: And thou who dyest thine Hair, now leave it off in this time of
Penance; and thou who paintest thine Eyes, wash it off with thy Tears. If thou
should lose any one of thy dear Friends by Death, thou would sorrowfully
weep and howl, and express the greatness of thy Sorrow by thy disregarded Face,
mourning Garments, neglected Hair, cloudy Countenance, and dejected Visage.
Why, O Wretch, thou have lost thy Soul, and wilt not thou bitterly weep, and
continually lament? Orare oportet impensius and rogare, diem luctu transigere,
vigiliis noctes ac fletibus ducere, tempus omne lachrymosis lamentationibus
occupare, stratos solo adhaerere cineri, in cilicio and sordibus volutari: post
indumentum Christi perditum, nullum hic jam velle veslitum: post Diaboli cibum
malle jejunium.. 28. p. 286.
Now therefore pray and supplicate more earnestly, pass the Day in weeping, the
Night in watching and crying, both Night and Day in Tears and Lamentations,
prostrate your selves upon the Ground, roll your selves in dust and ashes;
after having lost the Garment of Christ, have no clothing here; having tasted
the Devil's Meat, choose now to fast.

. 8. How long these Penitentiary Stations were, cannot be defined, since they
differed according to the Quality of the Offense and the Offender, according to
the Circumstance of Time, and the Will and Pleasure of the (...) Court who
imposed them; some were in the state of Penance two Years, some three, some
five, some ten, some more, some even to their Lives ends; but how long and
rigorous soever their Penance was, they were patiently, humbly, and thankfully
to endure it the whole time, being not absolved, till they had undergone
Legitimum and plenum tempus satisfactionis. Cyprian. Epist. 59.. 1. p. 164.
the legal and full time of Satisfaction.

It is true indeed, that in some extraordinary Cases the Prudence of the Church
saw fit to dispense with the usual length and Severity of their inflicted
Discipline, as in Urgere exitus coeperit. Apud (...). Epist. 13.. 1. p. 39.
Case of Death, Lapsis pacem dandamesse, and eos ad praelium, quod imminet,
armari and (...) oportere. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 54.. 1. p. 132.
of an approaching Persecution, or, when a great multitude, and eminent leading
Persons were cencerned in the same Offense; as in the case of Trophimus, which
may be seen in the 52d Epistle of Cyprian. Besides these, the Confessors
claimed the Privilege of restoring Penitents before the usual time; which
irregular and unreasonable Practice of theirs caused great Disturbances to the
Church of Carthage in the Days of Cyprian, which may be seen at large in
several Epistles extant in the beginning of his Works.

But laying aside these unusual Circumstances, the fixed Period of Penance was
never anticipated; but how long and severe soever it was, the Penitent
cheerfully submitted to it.

When the appointed Time of Penance was ended, the Penitent applied himself to
the Ecclesiastical Court for Absolution, who Inspecta vita ejus qui agit
poenitentiam. Cypr. Epist. 12.. 1. p. 37.
examined his Demeanours and Actions, which if they approved and liked, they
then proceeded to the formal assoyling of him, of which in the following
Sections.

. 9. On the appointed Day for Absolution, the Penitent, or he that was now to
be absolved, came into the Church mourning and weeping, and expressing all
external Indications of his Internal Sorrow: As when Natalis, a Roman
Confessor, was absolved for his joining with the Theodotian Heretics, he came
into the Church, as it is related by an ancient (...) Christian, (...). Apud
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 28. p. 197.
covered with Sackcloth and Ashes, throwing himself at the Feet of the Clergy
and Laity, and with Tears in his Eyes begging their pardon and forgiveness. It
being looked upon as very proper, that they should be admitted into the Church
Non minis sed precibus and lamentationibus. Cypr. Ep. 55.. 18. p. 143.
by Tears, not by Threats; by Prayers, and not by Curses.

Hence at this time for the greater Demonstration of their Sorrow and Humility,
they were to make a public Confession of their Sin, styled by them
Exomologesis, which was, as Cyprian says, Exomologesin (...)-(...) atque
extremi delicti. Epist. 11.. 1. p. 32.
A Confession of their great and heinous Crime, and was a necessary Antecedent
to Absolution, inasmuch as it was the Source and Spring of all true Repentance.
For as Tertullian observes, Satisfactio confessione disponitur, confessione
poenitentia noscitur. De Poenitentia, p. 380.
Out of Confession is born Repentance, and by Confession comes Satisfaction.
And in many places of Epist. 10.. 2. p. 30. Epist. 11.. 1. p. 32.
Cyprian the necessity of Confession is asserted; for as Tertullian says,
Tantum relevat confessio delictum, quantum dissimulatio exaggerat; (...) enim
satisfactionis consilium est, dissimulatio contumaciae. De Poenitentia, p. 380.
Confession as much diminishes the Fault, as Dissimulation aggravates it;
Confession is the Advice of Satisfaction, Dissimulation of Contumacy. And
therefore he condemns those, who through shame deferred from Day to Day the
Publication of their Sin, as Pudoris magis memores quam Salutis velut illi qui
in partibus verecundioribus corporis contracta vexatione, conscientiam
medentium vitant, and ita cum erubescentia sua pereunt. De (...), p. 382.
more mindful of their shamefacedness, than of their Salvation: Like those who
have a Disease in their Secret Parts, through shame conceal it from the
Chyrurgeons, and so with their Modesty die and perish. Confession therefore
being so necessary, the greatest Offenders were not exempted from it; as when
Philip the Emperor, as Eusebius calls him, or rather Philip a Prefect of Egypt,
would have joined with the Faithful in the Churches Prayer, Bishop Babylas
denied him admission, because of his enormous Crimes; nor would he receive him,
till he had made (...). Apud (...). lib. 6. cap. 34. p. 232.
a Public Confession of his Faults. And accordingly when one of those Bishops
that Schismatically Ordained Novatian, returned as a Penitent, he came into the
Church weeping, and (...). Cornel. apud (...). lib. 6. c. 43. p. 243.
Confessing his Sin; where we may observe, that it is said in the singular
Number, his Sin, (...), which intimates, that the Penitent's Confession was not
only general, or for all his Sins in the gross; but it was particular, for that
special Sin for which he was censured; consonant whereunto Cyprian, as before
quoted, writes, that the Penitent Exomologesin gravissimi atque extremi
delicti. Epist. 11.. 1. p. 32.
confessed his most great and heinous Sin; that is, that Sin for which he was
so severely punished.

This Confession of the Penitents was made with all the outward Signs of Sorrow
and Grief, which usually so affected the Faithful, as that they sympathized
with them in mourning and weeping. Whence Tertullian exhorts the Penitent not
through shame to conceal, but from a true Godly Disposition, to confess his
Fault before the whole Church, and to weep and mourn for it, Ergo cum te ad
fratrum genua protendis -- aeque illi cum super te lacrymas agunt. De
Poenitentia, p. 382.
since they, being his Brethren, would also weep with, and over him. And so
from the same Consideration, Cyprian exhorted the Lapsed to this Penitent
Confession, Cum lacrymis nostris vestras lacrymas jungite; cum nostro gemitu,
vestros gemitus copulate. De Lapsis,. 27. p. 285.
with our Tears, says he, join your Tears; with our Groans couple your Groans.

. 10. As soon as Confession was over, then followed the formal Absolution,
which was thus: The Person to be absolved, kneeled down before the Bishop and
the Clergy, who put their Hands upon his Head, and blessed him; by which
external Ceremony the Penitent was declaratively and formally admitted to the
Churches Peace. Thus Cyprian writes, that they Per impositionem manus Episcopi
and Cleri jus communicationis accipiunt. Epist. 10.. 2. p. 30.
received the Right of Communion by the Imposition of Hands of the Bishop and
his Clergy. And that Nec ad Communicationem venire quis possit, nisi prius illi
and ab Episcopo and Clero manus (...) imposita. Epist. 12.. 1. p. 37.
no one can be admitted to Communion, unless the Bishop and Clergy have imposed
Hands on him. This being accounted the third and last general Requisite for the
reconciling of Offenders, the two former being the undergoing a state of
Penance, and a public Confession of their Sin; all which three are frequently
mentioned together as such by Cyprian, as where he Agant peccatores
poenitentiam justo tempore, and secundum disciplinae ordinem ad exomologesin
veniant, and per impofitionem manus Episcopi and Cleri jus communicationis
accipiant. Epist. 10.. 2. p. 30.
says, Let Offenders do Penance a set space of time, and according to the Order
of Discipline, let them come to Confession, and by Imposition of Hands of the
Bishop and Clergy, let them receive the Right of Communion. And in other places
he complains of the irregular and unadvised Actions of some of his Presbyters,
that they admitted some of the Lapsed to Communion, Ante actam poenitentiam,
ante Exomologesin gravissimi atque extremi delicti factam, ante manum ab
Episcopo and Clero in poenitentiam impositam, offerre lapsis pacem, and
Eucharistiam dare audeant. Epist. (...).. 1. p. 32. and almost the same words
are repeated, Epist. 12.. 1. p. 37.
before they had undergone a duc Penance, made a Public Confession of their
Sin, and had Hands imposed on them by the Bishop and Clergy.

. 11. After the Penitents were absolved by imposition of Hands, then they were
received into the Communion of the Faithful, and made Partakers again of all
those Privileges, which by their Crimes they had for a while forfeited: Only
when an offending Clergy man was absolved, he only was restored to Communion as
a Layman, but never readmitted to his Ecclesiastical Dignity. Thus when one
of the Schismatical Bishops, that Ordained Novatian, returned to the Church, he
was deprived of his Ecclesiastical Office, and admitted only to (...). (...).
apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. p. 243.
Lay-Communion. So likewise Apostate or Lapsed Bishops were never restored
again to their Office. The Reasons whereof may be seen in the 64th Epistle of
Cyprian. And therefore Basilides a lapsed Bishop Satis sibi gratulans, si sibi
vel Laico communicare contingeret. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 68.. 7. p. 202.
would have been extremely glad, if the Church would but have permitted him to
communicate as a Layman. But yet I suppose that for every Fault Clergymen were
not deprived of their Orders, but only according to the Greatness of their
Crimes, and the Aggravation of them, since I find that Maximus a Presbyter of
the Church of Rome, who had been deluded into the Schism of Novatian, was upon
his Submission Maximam Presbyterum locum suum agnoscere jussimus. Cornel. apud
Cyprian. Epist. 46.. 4. p. 105.
restored by Cornelius, to his former Office.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. Of the Independency of Churches.. 2. Of the Dependency of Churches.. 3. Of
Synods, and the several kinds of them.. 4. How often Synods were convened.. 5.
Who were the Members of Synods.. 6. By whose Authority Synods were convened..
7. When convened, the manner of their Proceedings, a Moderator first chosen,
what the Moderator's Office was.. 8. Then they entered upon Business, which had
relation either to Foreign Churches, or their own; with respect to Foreign
Churches, their Acts were only advising.. 9. With respect to their own Churches
obliging. The End and Power of Synods enquired into.

. 1. TO that large Discourse of the Primitive Discipline, which was the Subject
of the preceding Chapter, it will be necessary to add this Observation, that
all those judicial Acts were exerted in and by every single Parish, every
particular Church having Power to exercise Discipline on her own Members,
without the Concurrency of other Churches; else in those places where there
might be but one Church for several Miles round, which we may reasonably
suppose, the Members of that Church must have traveled several, if not Scores
of Miles, to have had the consent of other Churches, for the Punishment of
their Ofsenders: But there is no need to make this Supposition, since it was
decreed by an African Synod, Statutum sit omnibus nobis, and aequum sit pariter
ac justum, ut unius cujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est crimen admissum, and
singulis pastoribus (...) gregis sit (...) quam regat unusquisque and gubernet
rationem sui actus Domino rediturus. Apud (...). Epist. 55.. 16. p. 142.
that every one's Cause should be heard where the Crime was committed, because
that to every Pastor was committed a particular Portion of Christ's Flock,
which he was particularly to rule and govern, and to render an account thereof
unto the Lord. And so another African Synod, that decreed the Rebaptization of
those that were Baptized by Heretics, thus conclude their Synodical Epistle to
Pope Stephen, who held the contrary, Caeterum scimus quosdam quod semel
imbiberint nolle deponere, nec propositum suum facile mutare, sed salvo inter
Collegas pacis and concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria, quae apud se semel sint
usurpata, (...) qua in re nec nos vim cuiquam facimus, aut legem damus, cum
habeat in Ecclesiae administratione voluntatis suae arbitrium liberum (...)
praepositus, rationem actus sui Domino redditurus. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 72.. 3.
p. 217.
Whereas we know that some Bishops will not relinquish an Opinion, which they
have embraced, but keeping the Bond of Peace and Concord with their Colleagues,
will retain some proper and peculiar Sentiments, which they have formerly
received; to these we offer no violence, or prescribe any Law, since every
Bishop has in the administration of his Church, free liberty to follow his own
Will, being to render an account of his Actions unto the Lord.

After these two Synodical Determinations, it might be thought needless to
produce the single Testimony of Cyprian, but that it shows us not only the
practice of the Bishops of his Age, but also of their Predecessors. Apud
antecessores nostros quidam de Episcopis (...) in provincia nostra dandam pacem
moechis non putaverunt and in totum poenitentiae locum contra adultetia
clauserunt, non (...) a Coepiscoporum suorum collegio recesserunt, aut
Catholicae Ecclesiae unitatem vel duritiae vel censurae suae obstinatione
ruperunt, ut quia apud alios adulteris pax dabatur, qui non dabat de Ecclesia
separaretur, manente concordiae vinculo and perseverante Catholicae Ecclesiae
individuo Sacramento, actum suum disponit and dirigit unusquisque Episcopus,
rationem propositi sui Domino redditurus. Epist. 52.. 13. p. 118.
Amongst the ancient Bishops of our Province, says he, some thought that no
Peace was to be given to Adulterers, for ever excluding them from the Communion
of the Church; but yet they did not leave their Fellow-Bishops, or for this
break the Unity of the Catholic Church; and those that gave Peace to
Adulterers, did not therefore separate from those that did not, but still
retaining the Bond of Concord, every Bishop disposed and directed his own Acts,
rendering an account of them unto the Lord.

Thus every Church was in this Sense independent; that is, without the
Concurrence and Authority of any other Church; it had a sufficient Right and
Power in its self to punish and chastise all its delinquent and offending
Members.

. 2. But yet in another Sense it was dependent, as considered with other
Churches, as part of the Church Universal, Cum sit a Christo una Ecclesia per
totum mundum in multa membra divisa, item episcopatus unus Episcoporum multorum
concordi (...) diffusus. Epist. 52.. 13. p 118.
There is but one Church of Christ, says Cyprian, divided through the whole
World into many Members, and one Episcopacy diffused through the numerous
Concord of many Bishops. A Particular Church was not the whole Church of
Christ, but only a Part or Member of the Universal one; and as one Member of
the natural Body has a regard to all the other Members thereof, so a
particular Church, which was but one Member of the Universal, had relation and
respect to the other Members thereof. Hence though the Labors and Inspections of
the Bishops were more peculiarly confined to their own Parishes, yet as
Ministers of the Church Universal, they employed a general kind of Inspection
over other Churches also, observing their Condition and Circumstances, and
giving unto them an account of their own state and posture; as Cyprian
inspected that of Arles, giving this as his Reason for it, that Nam etsi
pastores multi sumus, unum tamen gregem pascimus, and oves universas quas
Christus sanguine suo and passione quaesivit, colligere and fovere debemus.
Epist. 67.. 6. p. 199.
although they were many Pastors, yet they were but one Flock, and they ought to
congregate and cherish all the Sheep, which Christ redeemed by his Blood and
Passion. And the Clergy of the Church of Rome thanked Cyprian, that he had
acquainted them with the state of the Church in Africa; for say they, Omnes
enim nos decet pro co pore totius Ecclesiae, cujus per varias quasque
provincias membra digesta sunt, excubare. Apud Cypr. Epist. 30.. 4. p. 67.
We ought all of us to take care of the Body of the whole Church, whose Members
are distended through various Provinces. If the Bishop of one Church had any
difficult Point to determine, he sent to another Bishop for his Advice and
Decision thereof. As when Dyonisius Bishop of Alexandria had a critical Cause
to determine, he sent to Xystus Bishop of Rome, (...). (...) Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 9. p. 254.
to know his Opinion and Counsel therein. And so when there was some difference
at Carthage about the Pacificatory Libels of the Martyrs, Cyprian writ to the
Church of Rome for their Advice therein. For says he, Et dilectio communis and
ratio exposcit, fratres charissimi, nihil conscientiae vestrae subtrahere de
his quae apud nos geruntur, ut sit nobis circa utilitatem ecclesiasticae
administrationis commune consilium. Epist. 29. p. 66.
Dearly beloved Brethren, both common Reason and Love require, that none of
these things that are transacted here, should be kept from your Knowledge, but
that we should have your Counsel about Ecclesiastical Administrations. In
these, and in many other such like Cases, which would be needless to enumerate,
there was a Correspondence between the particular Churches of the Universal one.

. 3. But that that chiefly deserves our (...), was their Intercourse and
Government by Synodical Assemblies, that is, by a Convocation of Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, and Deputed Laymen of several particular Churches, who
frequently met together to maintain Unity, Love and Concord, to advise about
their common Circumstances and Conditions, to regulate all Ecclesiastical or
Church Affairs within their respective Limits, and to manage other such like
things, of which I shall more largely treat in the end of this Chapter.

That which must be spoken of in this Section is, the several kinds or sorts of
Synods, the most august and supreme kind whereof, was an Universal or (...)
Synod, which was a Congregation of the Bishops and Deputies of as many Churches
as would please to come from all Parts of the World: Of this sort I find but
one within my limited space of the first three Hundred Years after Christ, and
that was the Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 279.
Council of Antioch, that condemned Paulus Samosatenus. Or if this will not
pass for a General Council, there was no such one before that of Nice, which
was held Anno 325. and so there was no one of this kind within that time to
which I am confined.

But those Synods, which were very frequent within my prescribed time, were
Provincial Synods, that is, as many particular Churches as could conveniently
and orderly associate themselves together, and by their common Consent and
Authority dispose and regulate all things that related to their Polity, Unity,
Peace, and Order. What extent of Ground, or how many particular Churches each
of such Synods did contain, cannot be determined; their Precincts were not
alike in all places, but according as their Circumstances and Conveniences
would permit; so they formed themselves into these Synodical Assemblies, and
were governed in common by those Synods, who were called the Synods of such or
such a Province: As we read in Cyprian of the Coepiscopis nostris in eadem
provincia (...) tutis. Epist. 67.. 1. p. 198.
Province of Arles, and the Bishops therein. And Cyprian frequently speaks of
the Bishops of his Province, (...) provincia nostra. st. 52.. 13. p. 118.
as the Bishops 2 in Per provinciam noam. Ep. 42.. 2. p. 99.
our Province, and 3 throughout our Province, and Per provinciam. Epist. 55..
18. p. 143.
throughout the Province: And tells us, that Latius fusa est nostra provincia.
Epist. 45.. 2. p. 103.
his Province was very large, and that it was Apud nos and fere per provincias
universas tenetur. ut -- ad eam (...) cui (...) ordinatur Episcopi ejusdem
provinciae proximi quique conveniant. Epist. 68.. 6. p. 202.
the custom of his Province, and almost all other Provinces, that upon the
Vacancy of a Parish, the neighboring Bishops of that Province should meet
together at that Parish to Ordain them a new Bishop.

. 4. How often these Provincial Synods were convened, is uncertain, since that
varied according to their Circumstances, and their (...) Customs. Firmilian
Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia writes, that in his Province Per singulos
annos in unum conveniamus. Apud Cypr. Epist. 75.. 3. p. 236.
they met every Year. And whosoever will consider the frequent Synods that are
mentioned in Cyprian, will find that in his Province they met at least once,
and sometimes twice or thrice a Year.

. 5. As for the Members that composed these Synods, they were Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, and Deputed Laymen in behalf of the People of their
respective Churches. Thus at that great Synod of Antioch, that condemned Paulus
Samosatenus, there were present (...). Ex Epist. Synod. apud Eusebius. l. 7. c.
30. p. 279.
Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and the Churches of God, that is, Laymen that
represented the People of their several Churches. So also we read in an ancient
Fragment in Eusebius, that when the Heresy of the Montanists was fixed and
preached, (...). etc. Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. p. 181.
the Faithful in Asia met together several times to examine it, and upon
examination condemned it. So also when there were some Heats in the Church of
Carthage about the Restitution of the Lapsed, Cyprian writes from his Exile,
that the Lapsed should be patient till God had restored Peace to the Church,
and then there should Ut Episcopi plures in unum convenientes, praesente and
(...) plebedisponere omnia consilii communis religione possimus. Epist. 14.. 2.
p. 41.
be convened a Synod of Bishops, and of the Laity who had stood firm during the
Persecution, to consult about, and determine their Affairs. Which Proposition
was approved by Moses and Maximus, and other Roman Confessors, who liked the
consulting Consultis omnibus Episcopis, Presbyteris, Diaconibus, Confessoribus,
and ipsis stantium Laicis. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 26.. 4. p. 60.
of a Synod of Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Confessors, and the standing
Laity, as also did the whole Body of the Clergy of the Church of Rome, who were
willing, that that Affair Collatione consiliorum cum Episcopis, Presbyteris
Diaconis, Confessoribus, pariter ac stantibus Laicis sacta, lapsorum tractare
rationem. (...) Cyprian. Epist. 31.. 5. p. 70.
of the Lapsed should be determined by the common Counsel of the Bishops,
Presbyters, Deacons, Confessors, and the standing Laity. And thus at that great
Council held at (...), Anno 258. there were present Eighty Seven Episcopi
plurimis -- cum Presbyteris and Diaconibus, praesente etiam plebis maxima
part. Act. Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian. p. 443.
Bishops, together with Presbyters, Deacons, and a great part of the Laity.

. 6. If it shall be demanded by whose Authority and Appointment Synods were
assembled. To this it will be replied, That it must necessarily have been by
their own, because in those Days there was no Christian Magistrate to order or
determine those Affairs.

. 7. When a Synod was convened, before ever they entered upon any Public
Causes, they chose out of the gravest and renownedst Bishops amongst them, one,
or sometimes two, to be their Moderator or Moderators; as at the Council held
at Carthage, Anno 258. Act. Council. Carthag. ad Calcem oper. Cypr.
Cyprian was Moderator or Prolocutor thereof. And so we read of the Prolocutors
of several Synods, that were assembled in diverse parts of the World, to
determine the Controversies concerning Easter: As Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.
p. 190, 191.
Victor Bishop of Rome was Prolocutor of a Synod held there. Palmas Bishop of
Amastris Moderator of a Synod held in Pontus; and Irenaeus Bishop of Lions of
another in France. Apud Fuseb. lib. 5. cap. 24. p. 191.
Polycrates Bishop os Ephesus presided over a Synod of Asiatick Bishops; and
Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. p. 190.
at a Convocation in Palestina there were two Moderators, viz. Theophilus
Bishop of Caesarea, and Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem. The Office and Duty of a
Moderator was to preside in the Synod, to see all things calmly and fairly
debated and decreed; and at the conclusion of any Cause, to sum up what had
been debated and urged on both sides, to take the Votes and Suffrages of the
Members of the Synod; and last of all, to give his own. All this is evident in
the Proceedings of the Council of Carthage, which are extant at the end of
Cyprian's Works, Cyprian being Moderator of that Council: After all things were
read and finished relating to the Question in hand, sums up all, telling the
Synod what they had heard, and that nothing more remained to be done, but the
Declaration of their Judgment thereupon. Accordingly thereunto the Bishops gave
their respective Votes and Decisions; and last of all Cyprian, as President,
gave in his.

. 8. When the Moderator was chosen, then they entered upon the consideration of
the Affairs that lay before them, which may be considered in a twofold
respect, either as relating to Foreign Churches, or to those Churches only of
whom they were the Representatives. As for foreign Churches, their
Determinations were not obligatory unto them, because they were not represented
by them; and so the chiefest matter they had to do with them, was to give them
their Advice and Counsel in any difficult Point, which they had proposed to
them; as when the People of Astorga and Emerita in Spain had written to some
African Churches for their Advice, what to do with their two Bishops, who had
lapsed in Times of Persecution. This Case was debated in a Synod held Anno 258,
whose Opinion thereupon is to be seen in their Synodical Epistle, extant at
large amongst the Works of Cyprian. Epist. 68. p. 200.

. 9. But with respect unto those particular Churches, whose Representatives
they were, their Decrees were binding and obligatory, since the Regulation and
Management of their Affairs was the general End of their Convening.

Various and many were the particular Ends of these Synodical Conventions, as
for the prevention of Injustice and Partiality in a Parish Consistory: As
suppose, that such a Consistory had wrongfully and unrighteously censured one
of their Members, what should that censured Person do, unless appeal to the
Synod to have his Cause heard there, as Felicissimus did, who after he was
excommunicated by his own Parish, of which Cyprian was Bishop, Literas ad te
collegae nostri manu sua subscriptas miserunt, qui auditis eis, quid senserint,
and quid pronunciaverint, ex eorum literis disces. Cyp. Epist. 42.. 5. p. 99.
had his Cause heard before a Synod, who ratified and confirmed the Sentence of
Excommunication against him. And therefore we may suppose it to be for the
prevention of Partiality and Injustice; that in Lesser Asia Per singulos annos
conveniamus -- ut lapsis fratribus per poenitentiam medela quaeratur. Firmil.
apud Cyprian. Epist. 75.. 3. p. 236.
Offenders were usually absolved by the Synod, which met every Year. Synods
also were assembled for the examining, condemning, and excommunicating of all
Heretics within their Limits, that so the Faithful might avoid and shun them:
As Paulus Samosatenus was condemned by the Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 30. p. 279.
Council of Antioch, for resolving of all difficult Points that did not wound
the Essentials of Religion, or had relation unto the Discipline of the Church,
as when there was some Scruple about the Time of baptizing of Children, a Apud
Cyprian. Epist. 59. p. 162.
Synod of Sixty Six Bishops met together to decide it. And so when there were
some Disputes concerning the Martyrs Power to restore the Lapsed, In unum
convenientes -- disponere omnia possimus. Apud Cypr. Epist. 14.. 2. p. 41.
Synods were to be assembled to decide them. But why do I go about to reckon up
Particulars, when as they are endless; let this suffice in general, that Synods
were convened for the Regulation and Management of all Ecclesiastical Affairs
within their respective Jurisdictions, as Firmilian writes, that in his Country
Ut per singulos annos seniores and praepositi in unum conveniamus ad disponenda
ea quae curae nostrae commissa sunt. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 75.. 3. p. 236.
the Bishops and Presbyters met together every Year, to dispose those things
which were committed to their charge. Here they consulted about the Discipline,
Government, and External Polity of their Churches, and what means were
expedient and proper for their Peace, Unity and Order, which by their common
Consent they enacted and decreed to be observed by all the Faithful of those
Churches whom they did represent.

He who denies this, must be very little acquainted with the ancient Councils,
especially those which were held after the Emperors became Christians. The
reason why we find not more Synodical Decrees of the three first Centuries,
comes not, from that they judicially determined none, or required not the
observance of them; but from that, either they were not careful, or the Fury
and Violence of the Times would not permit them to transmit them down to their
Successors; or through the length of time they are lost, and scarce any thing
besides the Names of such Synods are now remembered; and of Multitudes, neither
Names nor Decrees are to be found: But yet there is enough escaped the Fury of
Persecution, and the length of time to convince us, that those Synods did
decree those things, which they judged expedient for the Polity, Discipline and
Government of those particular Churches, that were within their respective
Provinces, and required them to be observed by all the Members thereof.

Thus we find these following Canons determined by several Synods in Africa,
viz.

Statueramus -- Si periculum infirmitatis urgeret, pacem sub ictu mortis
acciperent. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 54.. 1. p. 132.
That though a Delinquent had not endured the whole time of Penance, yet if he
was very sick, and in danger of Death, he should be absolved.

Censuimus -- Pacem dandam esse, and eos ad praelium, quod imminet, armari and
instrui oportere. Ibidem.
That at the approach of a Persecution, penitent Offenders should be restored
to the Churches Peace.

Ante legitimum and plenum tempus satisfactionis -- pax ei concederetur.
Cyprian. Epist. 59.. 1. p. 164.
That Penance should not be hastily passed over, or Absolution be rashly and
speedily given.

Decreverit ejusmodi homines ad poenitentiam quidem agendam posse admitti, ab
Ordinatione autem Cleri atque Sacerdotali honor (...). Apud Cyprian. Ep. 68..
7. p. 202.
That all lapsed and apostate Clergymen, should, upon their Repentance, be only
admitted to Communion as Laymen, and be never more capable of discharging or
performing any Ecclesiastical Function.

Statutum sit, ne quis de Clericis and Dei ministris tutorem vel curatorem
testamento suo constituat. Apud Cypr. Epist. 66.. 1. p. 195.
That no Clergyman should be a Curator or Trustee of a last Will or Testament.

And many other such like Synodical Decrees relating to the Discipline and
Polity of the Church, are to be met with in Cyprian, which were ever accounted
Obligatory to all those Parishes who lived within those respective Provinces,
and had their Representatives in those respective Synods; for to what purpose
else did they decree them, if it had been fruitless and ridiculous to have made
frequent and wearisom Journeys, with great Cost and Pains, to have debated and
determined those things, which they judged expedient for the Churches
Well-being, if after all it was indifferent, whether they were obeyed, or not?

But that their Decrees were binding, is adjudged by an African Synod of Sixty
Six Bishops, held Anno 254, Victori antequam poenitentiam plenam egisset, (...)
Therapius, pacem dederit, quae res nos satis mover, recessum esse a decreti
nostri auctoritate. Apud Cypr. Epist. 59.. 1. p. 164.
who sharply (...) a certain Bishop called Therapius, for breaking the Canons
of a Synod, in absolving a certain Presbyter called Victor, before the time
appointed by that Synod was expired. Probably the Breaker of those Canons was
to have been Deposed or Suspended, or some other severe Punishment inflicted on
him, since the Bishops of this Synod speak as if they had moderated the Rigor
of the Canons against Therapius, in that they Satisfuit objurgare Therapium --
quod temere hoc fecerit, and instruxisse ne quid tale de caetero faciat. Ibidem.
were contented only with chiding him for his rashness, and with strictly
charging him, that he should do so no more.

So another Synod in Africa decreed, that Censuerunt ne quis frater excedens,
ad tutelam vel curam Clericum nominaret, ac si quis hoc fecisset, non
offerretur pro eo, nec Sacrificium pro dormitione ejus celebraretur. Apud Cypr.
Epist. 66. 2. p. 195.
if any one should name a Clergyman in his last Will and Testament for his
Trustee, no Sacrifice should be offered for him after his Death. (What the
meaning of this Offering of Sacrifice after his Death is, I shall not show
here, since I must treat of it in another place.) Accordingly when Geminius
Victor Bishop of (...) had by his last Will and Testament constituted Geminius
Faustinus a Presbyter, his Trustee, Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, writ unto the
Clergy and Laity of Furnis touching this matter, wherein he informs them,
Graviter commoti sumus ego and collegae mei- and ideo Victor, cum contra formam
nuper in concilio a Sacerdotibus datum, Geminium Faustinum Presbyterum ausus
sit tutorem constituere, non est quod pro dormitione ejus apud vos fiat
oblatio, aut deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in Ecclesia frequentetur, ut
Sacerdotum decretum (...) and necessary factum servetur a nobis. Ibidem,. 1,
2. p. 195.
That he and his Colleagues were very much offended that Geminius Victor had
thus broke the Canons of the Synod; but that since he had done it, he hoped
they would take care that he should suffer the Penalty annexed to the Breach
thereof, that in conformity thereunto they would not mention him in their
Prayers, or make any Oblation for him, that so the Decree of the Bishops, which
was religiously and necessarily made, might be observed by them.

To these two Instances we may add that of Martialis and Basilides, two Spanish
Bishops, who for their falling into Idolatry in times of Persecution, were
deprived of their Ecclesiastical Functions, and adjudged never more to be
admitted to the Churches Communion in any other Quality than that of Laymen,
which rigorous Sentence an African Synod defends, Maxim cum jampridem decretum
est ejusmodi homines ad poenitentiam quidem agendam posse admitti, ab
ordinatione autem cleri atque sacerdotali honor prohiberi. (...) Cypr. Ep.
68.. 8. p. 202.
from the Authority of a General Council, who had before decreed, that such Men
should only be admitted to Repentance, but be for ever excluded from all
Clerical and Sacerdotal Dignities.

CHAP. IX.
. 1. Of the Unity of the Church, of Schism, defined to be a Breach of that
Unity. The Unity of the Church, and consequently the Breach of it to be
differently understood, according to the various Significations of the Word
Church.. 2. The Unity of the Church Universal considered Negatively and
Positively; Negatively, it consisted not in an Uniformity of Rites, nor in an
Unanimity of Consent to the non-essential Points of Christianity. The Rigid
Imposers thereof condemned as Cruel and Tyrannical.. 3. Positively, it
consisted in an harmonious Assent to the Essential Articles of Faith. The
Non-agreement therein called Schism, but not the Schism of the Ancients.. 4.
How the Unity of a Church Collective was broken; this neither the Schism of the
Ancients.. 5. The Unity of a particular Church consisted in two things, in the
Members Love and Amity each toward other, and in the Peoples close adherence
to their Bishop, or Parish Church: The Breach of the former sometimes called
Schism.. 6. The Breach of the latter, which was a causeless Separation from
their Bishop, the Schism of the Ancients. In how many Cases it was lawful for
the People to separate from their Bishop.. 7. A Separation under any other
Pretense whatsoever, was that which the Fathers generally and principally meant
by Schism, proved so to have been.. 8. Farther proved from Ignatius.. 9.
Exemplified in the Schism of Felicissimus and Novarian.. 10. An Objection
answered touching the Schism of Novatian. How the Schism of one particular
Church affected other Churches.. 11. A Summary and Conclusion of this Discourse
concerning Schism.

. 1. HAving in the precedent Chapters discoursed of the Constitution and
Discipline of the Primitive Church, I come now in this to treat of the Unity
thereof, which I had a very great Inclination to search into, since by the due
understanding thereof we shall the better apprehend the Notion of the Ancients
concerning Schism, because that Schism is nothing else but a Breach of that
Unity, as will (...) evidently appear from the Quotations that we shall be
forced to make use of in this Chapter.

Now that we may know what the Breach of the Unity of the Church was, it is
absolutely necessary first to know what the Unity its self was; for till we
understand its Unity, it is impossible that we should understand the Breach
thereof.

Now for the distinct apprehending hereof, we must remember the various
Acceptations of the Word Church, as they are related in the beginning of this
Treatise, and according to the different Significations thereof, so must its
Unity be diversified, or be differently understood; and according to the
different manner of its Unity, so must we apprehend the Breach thereof.

. 2. If in the first place we reflect upon the Word Church, as signifying the
Church Universal, or all those, who throughout the whole Earth profess Faith in
Christ, then we may consider its Unity in this Sense either Negatively, wherein
it did not consist; or Positively, wherein it did consist.

Negatively, It consisted not in an Uniformity of Rites and Customs; for every
particular Church was at liberty to follow its own proper Usages: One Church
was not obliged to observe the Rites of another, but every one followed its own
peculiar Customs. Thus with respect to their Fast before Easter, there was a
great Diversity in the Observation of it, (...). (...). apud Eusebius. (...). 5.
cap. 24. p. 193.
in some Churches they fasted one Day, in others two, in some more, and in
others forty Hours, but yet still they retained Peace and Concord, the
diversity of their Customs commending the Unity of their Faith. So also the
Feast of Easter its self was variously celebrated. The Asiatick Churches kept
it on a distinct Day from the Europeans, but yet still they retained (...).
Idem Ibidem.
Peace and Love, and for the diversity of such Customs, none were ever cast out
of the Communion of the Church. So likewise writes Firmilian, In plurimis
provinciis multa pro locorum and nominum diversitate variantur, nec tamen
propter hoc ab Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atque unitare aliquando (...) est.
Apud Cyprian. Epist. 75.. 5. p. 237.
That in most Provinces their Rites were varied according to the Diversities of
Names and Places, and that for this no one ever departed from the Peace and
Unity of the Catholic Church. So that the Unity of the Church Universal
consisted not in an Uniformity of Rites and Usages.

Neither in the next Place did it consist in an Unanimity of Consent to the
Non-essential Points of Christianity, but every one was lest to believe in
those lesser matters, as God should inform him. Therefore Justin Martyr
speaking of those Jewish Converts, who had adhered to the Mosaical Rites, says,
that if they did this only through their Weakness and (...), and did not
persuade other Christians to the observance of the same Judaical Customs, that
(...). Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 266.
he would receive them into Church Fellowship and Communion.

Whosoever imposed on particular Churches the observance of the former of these
two things, or on particular Persons the belief of the latter, they were
esteemed not as Preservers and Maintainers, but as Violaters and Breakers of
the Churches Unity and Concord.

An Instance of the former we have in that Controversy between the Churches of
the East and West, touching the time when Easter was to be celebrated. For when
Victor Bishop of Rome had Excommunicated the (...) Churches, because they
continued to observe that Feast on a different time from the Churches of the
West, not only the Bishops of the adverse Party, but even those of his own side
condemned him as rash, heady, and turbulent, and writ several Letters about
this Affair, wherein as the Historian writes, (...). Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24. p.
193.
they most sharply censured him.

As for the Latter, we have an instance thereof in the Controversy that was
between Stephen Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, touching the
Validity of Heretics Baptism: For when Stephen Anathematized Cyprian, because
he held the Baptism of Heretics to be null and void, other Bishops condemned
Stephen as a Breaker and Disturber of the Churches Peace. And amongst others,
Firmilian a Cappadocian Bishop, vehemently accuses him as such, because that he
would impose upon others the Belief of such a disputable Point, which, says he,
was never wonted to be done, but Multa pro locorum and nominum diversitate
variantur, nec tamen propter hoc ab Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atque unitate
aliquando discessum est. Quod nunc Stephanus ausus est facere, tumpens adversum
vos pacem, quam semper antecessores ejus vobiscum amore and honor mutuo
custodierunt.
every Church followed their own different ways, and never therefore broke the
Unity and Peace of the Catholic Church, which now, says he, Stephen dares to
do, and breaks that Peace which the ancient Bishops always preserved in mutual
Love and Honor. And therefore we find in the Acts of that great Council of
Carthage convened to determine this matter, that when Cyprian summed up the
Debates thereof, he dehorts his Fellow-Bishops from the imposing Humor and
Temper of Stephen, Superest ut de hac ipsa re singuli quid sentiamus,
proferamus, neminem judicantes, aut a jure communionis aliquem, si diversum
senserit amoventes. Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum
constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos
adigit. Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian. p. 443.
It now remains, says he, that every one of us declare our Judgments
concerning this matter, judging no Man, or removing any one from our Communion,
if he think otherwise than we do; for let none of us make himself a Bishop of
Bishops, or by a Tyrannical Terror, compel his Colleagues to the necessity of
obeying. So that the forcing a Belief in these lesser matters was Cruelty and
Tyranny in the Imposers thereof, who for such unreasonable Practices were
looked upon as Enemies to, and Violators of the Churches Concord, being the
true Schismatics, inasmuch as they were the Cause of Schism and Division; unto
whom therefore may be applied that Saying of Irenaeus, Judicabit (...) qui
Schismata operantur, qui sunt immanes, non habentes Dei dilectionem, (...)
utisitarem potius considerantes, quam unitatem Ecclesiae, propter modicas and
quaslibet causas magnum and gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt and dividunt,
and quantum in ipsis est, (...), pacem loquentes and bellum operantes, (...)
liquantes culicem and camelum transglutientes. Lib. 4. cap. 62. p. 292.
That at the last Day Christ shall judge those who cause Schisms, who are
inhumane, not having the fear of God, but prefering their own advantage before
the Unity of the Church, for trivial and slight Causes rent and divide the
great and glorious Body of Christ, and as much as in them lies, destroy it; who
speak Peace, but wage War, truly straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel.

. 3. But Positively, The Unity of the Church Universal consisted in an
Harmonious Assent to the Essential Articles of Religion, or in an Unanimous
Agreement in the Fundamentals of Faith and Doctrine. Thus (...) having recited
a Creed, or a short Summary of the Christian Faith, not much unlike to the
Aposiles Creed, immediately adds, Hane igitur praedicationem and hanc fidem
adepta Ecclesia, (...) in universo mundo diligentes conservat, (...) in una
eademque (...): Ae (...) iis fidem habet, acsi unam animam unumque (...) idem
cor haberet: (...) uno (...) haec praedicat, docet (...) tradit, acsi uno ore
praedita esset. Quamvis (...) dissimilia sint in mundo genera linguarum, una
tamen eademque est vis traditionis; nec quae constitutae sunt in Germania
Ecclesiae aliter credunt aut tradunt, nec quae in Hispaniis, neque in Galliis,
neque in Orient, neque in AEgypto, neque in Lybia, aut in medio orbis terrarum
fundatae sunt. Sed quemadmodum Sol creatura Dei unus and idem est in universo
mundo. ita and (...) veritatis ubique lucet, and illuminat omnes homines qui ad
notionem veritatis venire volunt. Lib. 1. cap. 3. p. 36.
The Church having received this Faith and Doctrine, although dispersed through
the whole World, diligently preserves it, as though she inhabited but one House,
and accordingly she believes these things, as (...) she had but one Soul and
one Heart, and consonantly preaches and teaches these things, as though she had
but one Mouth; for although there are various Languages in the World, yet the
Doctrine is one and the same; so that the Churches in Germany, France, Asia,
Egypt or Lybia, have not a different Faith; but as the Sun is one and the same
to all the Creatures of God in the whole World: So the Preaching of the Word is
a Light that enlightens every where, and illuminates all Men that would come to
the knowledge of the Truth. Now this Bond of Unity was broken, when there was a
Recession from, or a Corruption of the true Faith and Doctrine, as Irenaeus
speaks concerning Tatian the Father of the Encratites, that as long as his
Master Justin Martyr lived, he held the found Faith, but after his Death (...).
Apud (...). lib. 4. cap. 29. p. (...).
falling off from the Church, he shaped that new Form of Doctrine. This Unity
of the Church in Doctrine, according to Hegesippus, continued till the Days of
Simeon Cleopas Bishop of Jerusalem, who was Martyred under Trajan; but after
that false Teachers prevailed, such as the (...), Marcionists, (...), and
others, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22. p. 143.
from whom sprung false Christ's, false Apostles, and false Prophets, who by
their corrupt Doctrines against God and his Christ, divided the Unity of the
Church. So that the Unity of the Church Universal consisted in an agreement of
Doctrine, and the Corruption of that Doctrine was a Breach of that Unity, and
whoever so broke it, are said to divide and separate the Unity of the Church,
or which is all one, to be Schismatics. So Irenaeus writes, that those that
introduced new Doctrines, Scindunt and separant unitatem Ecclesiae. Lib. 4.
cap. 43. p. 278.
did divide and separate the Unity of the Church. And Cyprian writes, that
Diabolus Haereses invenit and Schismata, quibus subverteret fidem, veritatem
corrumperet, scinderet unitatem. De Unitate Ecclesiae. 2. p. 296.
the Devil found out Heresies and Sehisms, by which he might subvert the Faith,
corrupt the Truth, and divide the Unity. But now for Distinctions sake the
Breach of this Unity was commonly called Heresy, and the word Schism generally
applied to the Breach of the Churches Unity in another sense, of which more in
the other Sections.

. 4. If in the next place we consider the Word Church collectively, as denoting
a Collection of many particular Churches, in which Sense it is once used in In
provincia Africa and Numidia Ecclesiam Domini. Epist. 71.. 4. p. 214.
Cyprian. Then its Unity may have consisted in a Brotherly correspondence with,
and affection toward each other, which they demonstrated by all outward
Expressions of Love and Concord, as by receiving to Communion the Members of
each other, as Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. p. 193.
Irenaeus mentions, was observed between the Churches of Rome and Asia, in
mutually advising and assisting one another by Letters, or otherwise, of which
there are frequent instances in the Ancients, and especially in Cyprian's
Epistles, and in manifesting all other Marks and Tokens of their Love and
Concord. Now this Unity was broken, when Particular Churches clash'd with each
other, when from being possessed with Spirits of Meekness, Love and Charity,
they were inflamed with Hatred, Rage and Fury against each other. A sad
Instance whereof we have in that Controversy betwixt Cyprian and Stephen, or
rather between the Churches of Europe and Africa, touching the Validity of
Heretical Baptism, wherein those good Men were so far transported with
Bitterness and Rancour against each other, that they interchangeably gave such
(...) Language and invidious Epithets, as are too odious to name, which if the
Reader be curious to know, he may find too much of it in Cyprian's Epistles.

Or if several particular Churches had for the promotion of Peace, Unity and
Order, regularly disposed themselves into a Synodical Government and
Discipline, as was always done when their Circumstances and Conveniences would
permit them; then whoever broke or violated their reasonable Canons, were
censured as turbulent and factious, as it has been evidenced in the former
Chapter, and needs no farther Proof in this, because that the Schism of the
Ancients was not a Breach of the Churches Unity in this Sense, viz. as denoting
or signifying a Church Collective.

. 5. But Schism principally and originally respected a particular Church or
Parish, though it might consequentially influence others too. Now the Unity of a
particular Church consisted in the Members Love and Amity toward each other,
and in their due Subjection or Subordination to their Pastor or Bishop:
Accordingly the Breach of that Unity consisted in these two things, either in a
Hatred and Malice of each other, or in a Rebellion against their Lawful
Pastor, or which is all one, in a causeless Separation from their Bishop, and
those that adhered to him.

As for the first of these, there might be Envies and Discords between the
Inhabitants of a Parish, without a formal Separation from Communion, which Jars
and Feuds were called Schism; an Instance whereof we find in the Church of
Corinth, unto whom St. Paul objected in 1 Cor. 11. 18. When ye come together in
the Church, I hear that there be Divisions, or as it is in the Original, (...),
Schisms amongst you. Here there was no separate Communion, for they all came
together in the Church, and yet there were Schisms amongst them, that is,
Strifes, Quarrels and Discords. And as far as I can perceive from the Epistle
of Clemens Romanus, which was writ to appease another Schism in the same Church
of Corinth, there were then only Turmoils and Differences, without any actual
Separation. But on this I shall not enlarge, because it is not what the
Ancients ordinarily meant by Schism.

. 6. But that which they generally and commonly termed Schism, was a Rebellion
against, or an ungrounded and causless Separation from their Lawful Pastor, or
their Parish Church. Now because I say, that a causless Separation from their
Bishop was Schism, it will be necessary to know how many Causes could justify
the Peoples Desertion of their Pastor, and these I think were two, or at most
three; the first was Apostasy from the Faith, or when a Bishop renounced the
Christian Faith, and through fear of Persecution embraced the Heathenish
Idolatries, as was done in the case of Basilidem and Martialem libellis
Idololatriae commaculatos -- Episcopatum (...), and Sacerdotium Dei
administrare non oportere. Epist. Synod. apud Cyprian. Epist. 68.. 1. p. 200.
Martialis and Basilides two Spanish Bishops, and was justified by an African
Synod, as is to be seen throughout their whole Synodical Epistle, still extant
amongst those of Cyprian's. The second Cause was Heresy, as Irenaeus says,
Oportet long fugere ab (...). Lib. 1. cap. 13. p. 63.
We must fly far off from all Heretics. And Origin allows the People to
separate from their Bishop, Si habueris accusationem doctrinae (...), and
alienorum ab (...). (...). 7. (...).
if they could accuse him of false and (...) Doctrine.

A third Cause was a scandalous and wicked Life, as is asserted by an African
Synod held Anno 258. whose Exhortations and Arguments to this purpose may be
seen at large in their Synodical Epistle, still extant in Cyprian, Epist. 68.
p. 200. out of which several Passages pertinent to this occasion, have been
already cited in the sixth Chapter of this Treatise, to which I must refer the
Reader. Of this mind also was Irenaeus before them, who writes, Qui vero
Presbyteri serviunt suis voluptatibus, and non praeponunt (...) Dei in cordibus
luis, sed contumeliis agunt reliquos, and principalis consessionis tumore elati
sunt, and in absconfis agunt mala -- ab omnibus talibus absistere (...). Lib.
4. cap. 44. p. 278.
That as for those Presbyters, who serve their Pleasures, and have not the fear
of God before their Eyes, who contumeliously use others, are lifted up with
Pride, and secretly commit wickedness, from (...) such Presbyters we ought to
separate. Origin indeed seems to be of another mind, and thinks that the
Bishops Immorality in Life could not justify his Parishes Separation, Qui
curam habet vitae suae, non meis delictis qui videor in Ecclesia praedicare
scandalizabitur, sed ipsum dogma considerans, and pertractans Ecclesiae sidem,
a me quidem aversabitur, doctrinam vero suscipiet secundum (...) Domini, qui
ait, supra Cathedram Moysi sederunt Scribae and Pharisaei, omnia enim (...)
vobis (...) audite and facite, juxta autem opera illorum nolite facere; dicunt
quippe and non faciunt: iste sermo de me est, qui bona doceo, and contraria
gero and sum sedens supra cathedram Moysi quasi Scriba and Pharisaeus;
praeceptum tibi est, O Popule, (...) non habueris accusationem Doctrinae (...),
and alienorum ab Ecclesia dogmatum, conspexeris vero meam culpabilem vitam,
atque peccata, ut non habeas juxta dicentis vitam tuam instituere, sed ea
facere quae loquor. Homil. 7. in Ezechiel.
He, says he, that has a care of his Soul, will not be scandalized at my
Faults, who am his Bishop, but considering my Doctrine, and finding it
agreeable to the Churches Faith, from me indeed he will be averse, but he will
receive my Doctrine according to the Precept of the Lord, which says, The
Scribes and (...) sit on Moses his Chair, whatever therefore they say unto you
hear, and do, but according unto their Works do not, for they say and do not:
That Scripture is of me, who teach what is good, and do the contrary, and sit
upon the Chair of Moses as a Scribe or Pharisee; the Precept is to thee, O
People, if thou can not accuse me of false Doctrine, or Heretical Opinions,
but only beholdest my wicked and sinful Life; thou must not square thy Life
according to my Life, but do those things which I speak. Now whether Irenaeus,
or an African Synod, or Origin be to be most credited, I leave the Learned to
judge, though I think they may be both nearer reconciled than they seem to be,
Irenaeus and that Synod affirming, that the People of their own Power and
Authority might immediately, without the concurrent Assent of other Churches,
upon the Immorality and Scandal of their Bishop, leave and desert him; Origin
restraining the People from present Execution, till they had the Authority of a
Synod for so doing; for thus he must be understood, or else he will contradict
all other Writers, it being avouched by all, that Synods did depose all those
Bishops that were guilty of criminal and scandalous Enormities, as Privatus
Bishop of Lambese was deposed by a Synod of Ninety Bishops, Ob multa and gravia
delicta. Cyprian. Epist. 55.. 11. p. 140.
for his many and heinous Crimes.

. 7. But now excepting these three Causes of Apostasy, Heresy and Immorality,
it was Schism in a Parish to leave their Minister, or to set up another Bishop
against him; for though they at first chose their Bishop, yet their Bishop being
on their Choice approved and confirmed by the neighboring Bishops, they could
not dethrone him, without truly assigning one of those forementioned Causes;
for this was to gather a Church out of a Church, to erect a new Altar and a new
Bishop, which could not be in one Church; for as Cyprian writes, Deus unus est,
and Christua unus, and una Ecclesia, and Cathedra una super Petrum Domini voce
fundata; aliud altar constitui, aut Sacerdotium novum fieri praeter unum
altar and unum Sacerdotium non potest: Quisquis alibi collegerit, spargit,
adulterum est, impium est, quodcunque humano furore instituitur, ut dispositio
divina violetur. Epist. 40.. 4. p. 93.
God is one, Christ is one, the Church is one, the Rock on which the Church is
built is one; wherefore to erect a new Altar, and constitute a new Bishop,
besides the one Altar and the one Bishop, is impracticable; whosoever gathers
here, scatters; so to do is adulterous, impious, sacrilegious, mad and wicked.
Neque enim aliunde nata sunt schismata, quam inde quod Sacerdoti Dei non
obtemperatur, nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex vice
Christi (...). Epist. 55.. 6. p. 138.
From hence, says Cyprian, Schisms do arise, that the Bishop is not obeyed; and
it is not considered that there ought to be but one Bishop, and one Judge in a
Church at a time. And Hi sunt ortus atque conatus Schismaticorum male (...)
placeant, ut praepositum superbo (...) contemnant, (...) de Ecclesia receditur,
sic altar profanum (...), sic contra (...), and ordinationem atque unitatem
Dei rebellatur. Epist. 65.. 4. p. 193.
this is the Rise and Source of Schismatics, that through their swelling Pride
they contemn their Bishop, and so they go off from the Church, so they erect a
profane Altar, and so they rebel against the Peace of Christ, and the
Ordination and Unity of God. And again, Inde Schismata and Haereses (...) sunt,
and oriuntur, dum Episcopus qui unus est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba
quorundam praesumptione contemnitur, and homo dignatione Dei honoratus indignus
hominibus judicatur. Epist. 69.. 4. p. 208.
From thence proceed Schisms, that the Bishop who is but one, and presides over
the Church, is contemned by the proud Presumption of Men, and he that was
thought worthy by God, is esteemed unworthy by Men. And again, Illi sunt
Ecclesia plebs Sacerdoti adunata, and pastori suo grex adhaerens, unde scire
debes Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, and Ecclesiam in Episcopo, and si qui cum
Episcopo non sunt, in Ecclesia non esse, and frustra sibi blandiri eos, qui
pacem cum Sacerdotibus Dei non habentes obrepunt, and latentur apud quosdam
communicare se credunt, quando Ecclesia, quae Catholica una est, (...) non sit,
neque divisa, sed sit utique connexa, and cohaerentium sibi invicem Sacerdotum
glutino copulata. Epist. 69.. 7. p. 209.
The Church is the People united to their Bishop, and the Sheep adhering to
their Pastor; the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop;
whosoever are not with the Bishop, are not in the Church, and those do in vain
flatter themselves, who having not Peace with God's Priests, creep about, and
privately communicate with some, as they think, when the Catholic Church is
not divided, but connexed and coupled together by the Unity of its agreeing
Bishops. Whosoever therefore should causelessly desert his Bishop, and solicit
others so to do, was a true Schismatic, since in so doing, Cum Episcopo
portionem plebis dividere, id est, a pastore oves, and filios a parente
separare, and Christi membra dissipare. Epist. 38.. 1. p. 90.
he divided a Portion of the Flock with the Bishop, separated the Sheep from
their Pastor, and dissipated the Members of Christ.

From these Quotations then it is apparent, that the Primitive Schism respected
only a particular Church, and consisted in a Person's Separation from Communion
with his lawful Bishop without a just and authentic Cause; when any one should
set up a particular Church in a particular Church, in opposition to the lawful
Bishop thereof, and should draw away the Inhabitants of that Parish from the
Communion of their legal Minister, setting up distinct Meetings and
Conventicula sibi diversa (...). De (...). Eccles.. 10. p. 299.
Conventicles, as Cyprian calls them. This was true Schism; for as Ignatius
says, whosoever so assembled (...). Ad (...). p. 2.
were not congregated legally according to the Command: And (...). (...). ad
(...). p. 7.
whosoever officiated without the Bishop, sacrificed to the Devil.

. 8. This Notion now of Schism gives us a clear Reason, why we find in Ignatius
so frequent and Pathetick Injunctions of Obedience to, and Unity with our
respective Pastors, of avoiding all Divisions, and closely adhering to them;
because a deserting of them, or a separating from them, was a Commission of
this horrid and detestable Sin of Schism, as will appear from these following
Exhortations and Instructions of his, with which every Leaf almost of his
Epistles are fraught and furnished, (...). Epist. ad (...). p. 6.
All you of the Church of Smirna obey your Bishop as Jesus Christ did the
Father, and the Presbytery as the Apostles, and honor the (...) according to
the Command of God. Let nothing of Ecclesiastical Services be done without the
Bishop; let that Communion only be esteemed valid, which is performed by the
Bishop, or by one permitted by him. Wherever the Bishop is, there let the
People be; as where Jesus Christ is, there the Catholic Church is; it is not
lawful without the Bishop, or one permitted by him, to baptize or celebrate the
(...); this is pleasing unto God, that so whatsoever is done may be firm and
Legal. (...). (...). ad (...). p. 14.
Have respect unto your Bishop; as God has respect unto you. My Soul for
theirs that obey their Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons, and with them let my
part in God be. (...). Ad (...). p. 20.
Let us not resist our Bishop, lest we be found Resisters of God. (...). (...).
ad Magnesios, p. 33.
I exhort you to do every thing in the Unity of God, the Bishop presiding in
the place of God, and the Presbyters in the place of the Council of the
Apostles, and the Deacons persorming the entrusted Ministry of Jesus Christ;
let there nothing be in you that may divide you, but be united to your Bishop
and Presidents: As therefore Christ did nothing without the Father, being
united to him, neither by himself nor by his Apostles, so do you nothing
without the Bishop and Presbyters, nor privately withdraw from them, but
assemble together, having one Prayer, one Supplication, one Mind and one Hope.
(...). (...). ad (...). p. 40.
Flee all Division; where the Pastor is, there as Sheep follow, for there are
many (...) Wolves, that seek to carry you away, but let them have no place in
your Unity -- Whoever are God's and Jesus Christ's, they are with the Bishop;
and whosoever repenting shall come to the Unity of the Church, those shall be
God's, that they may live according to Jesus Christ. Be not deceived, my
Brethren, if any one follows a (...), or one that causes Division and
Separation, he shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. (...). (...). ad
Philadelph. p. 43.
Respect the Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons; do nothing without the Bishop,
Keep your Flesh as the Temple of God, Love Unity, Avoid Schisms, be followers
of Jesus Christ, as he was of his Father -- Where Division and Wrath is, God
dwells not; God therefore pardons all Penitents, if they penitentially return
to the Unity of God, and the Presbytery of the Bishop. And some other such like
Expressions there are in the (...) of this Father, which evidently demonstrate
Schism to be nothing else than a causeless Separation from our Parish Bishop or
Minister, and a wandering after, or an Adhesion to another false and pretended
Pastor.

. 9. But for the clearer Proof, that this was what the Fathers meant by Schism,
it may not be altogether unnecessary to add unto these Quotations an Example or
two; for Examples more convincingly (...) than bare Testimonies and Citations.
And here let us first view the Schism of Felicissimus in the hurch of Carthage,
as it is related in the 38th, 40th, and 55th Epistles of Cyprian, and we shall
find it respecting only that particular Church or Parish. When Cyprian was
elected Bishop of Carthage, Felicissimus and others of his Faction opposed him,
but finding themselves too weak, and not powerful enough to balance his
interest, they yielded to his Promotion, but yet still retained an Hatred
against his Person, and waited for a more favorable opportunity and a
plausible Pretense to separate from him. It pleased God that Cyprian some time
after his Advancement, was forced, by reason of the Persecution, to withdraw
and absent from his Flock, during which Absence that Faction made use of all
means to lessen his Interest, till they had made their Party indifferently
strong, and then they broke out into an open Separation from him, forming
themselves into a distinct Meeting, creating a new Bishop, erecting a new
Altar, and constituting a new Church. Now all this was acted in, and respected
only the particular Parish of Carthage, without causing or attempting any
Separation in any other Church or Parish; and yet this Cyprian calls Schism,
and Excommunicates the Actors in it as Schismatics, and Breakers of the Unity
of the Church, of his Church Actually, and of all the other Churches of the
Church Universal Virtually, who like the Members of the Natural Body, are
affected with the Pains and Convulsions of each other.

So also the famous Schism of Novatian respected only the particular Church of
Rome, being no other than his causeless Separation from Cornelius his lawful
Bishop, and his erecting separate Conventicles against him, as may be read at
large in those Epistles of Cyprian, that treat of this Affair, and in his Book
De Vnitate Ecclesiae.

. 10. But I foresee an evident Objection against this restrained Notion of
Schism, and in particular from the Schism of Novatian, which I cannot well pass
over without resolving, since the Solution thereof will inform us in the
manner, how the Schism of one particular Church did affect other Churches. Now
the Objection may be this: If Schism respected only one particular Church,
whence then comes it to pass that we read of Novatian Bishops, not only at
Rome, where that Schism first began, but in several other Churches and Parishes
besides? Now to this I answer, That we must distinguish between the Schism and
the Heresy of Novatian; had Novatian been only guilty of Schism, in all
probability, his Schismatical Actions, as well as all other Schisms before,
would have ended in the same Church where they began, and have proceeded no
farther; but he having once engaged in his Schism, and willing to continue it,
that he might have some pretense for those enormous Practices, he accused his
Bishop of remitting and loosing the Reins of Discipline, in communicating with
Trophimus, and others, that had Sacrificed to Idols, as may be amply seen in
the 55th Epistle of Cyprian; consequently for the Justification of this
Accusation, he added this Doctrine, as the Characteristick Dogma of his Party,
That the Church had no Power to absolve those who lapsed after Baptism, but
were to leave them to the Tribunal of God. This was an Error in Doctrine,
invidious to the Mercy of God, and injurious to the Merits of Christ, as
Cyprian shows at large in his 55th Epistle. Every Error in Doctrine was called
Heresy. Accordingly Novatian is branded for this as an Heretic; whence the
Confessors in their return from his Party, confessed that in adhering to them,
Commisisse se Schismata, and haeresis auctores fuisse. Cyprian. Epist. 46.. 1.
p. 104.
they had committed Schisms, and been the Authors of Heresies. And in the same
Epistle they call Novatian Schismatico and (...) homine. Ibidem. 3. p. 105.
an Heretic, and a Schismatic. So Cyprian also accuses the said Novatian,
Haereticae pravitatis. Epist. 47.. 1. p. 107.
of heretical Pravity; and calls his Error Schismaticus and haereticus error.
Epist. 51.. 2. p. 111.
a Schismatical and Heretical Error.

So that Novatian's Schism was accompanied with Heresy; which, as usual, was
called after the Name of its Author; and having many eminent Persons to abet
it, and a specious show of Sanctity and Mortification, it is no wonder that it
spreads its self into many other Churches, besides that where it was first
hatched; unto which we may also add their Industrious Endeavors to proselyte
Men unto their Party, Ostiatim per multorum domos, vel oppidatim, per quasdam
civitates discurrentes, obstinationis suae and erroris scissi sibi quaerant
comites. Epist. 41.. 2. p. 97.
running about, as Cyprian writes, from House to House, and from Town to Town,
to gain Companions in their Obstinacy and Error. For many of them really
thinking themselves to be in the right, and believing others to be in the
wrong, conceived it to be their bounden Duty to leave their Bishop, if he would
not leave his Heresy, as they apprehended it to be. And probably several
Bishops of the Orthodox, who were the legal Pastors of their respective
Parishes, were through their own Ignorance, and those Men's fair Pretenses,
deluded into the same uncharitable Error with them, Of denying the Lapsed any
Pardon. But we need not guess at this as only probable, since we have an
Instance of it in Martian the lawful Bishop of Arles, concerning whom, Cyprian
writes to Stephen Bishop of Rome, that he had received Advice from the Bishops
of that Province, Martianus Arelate consistens Novatiano se conjunxerit, and a
Catholicae Ecclesiae unitate, atque a corporis nostri and Sacerdotii
consensione discesserit, tenens Haereticae praesumptionis durissimam
pravitatem, ut servis Dei poenitentibus and dolentibus, and ad Ecclesiam
lachrymis and gemitu and dolor pulsantibus, divinae pietatis and lenitatis
paterna solatia and subsidia claudantur, nec ad fovenda vulnera admittantur
vulnerati, sed sine spe pacis and communicationis relicti ad luporum rapinam
and praedam Diaboli projiciantur. Epist. 67.. 1. p. 198.
That Martian of Arles had joined himself unto Novatian, and had departed from
the Unity of the Church, and the Concord of the Bishops, holding that Heretical
Severity, that the Consolations of Divine Pity and Fatherly Lenity, should be
shut against the penitent and mourning Servants of God, who knock at the Church
with Tears, Sighs and Groans, so that the wounded are not admitted to have
their Wounds healed, but being left without any hope of Peace or Communion, are
thrown out to the Rapine of Wolves, and Prey of the Devil.

So that it was not Novatian's Schism, but his Heresy, that was diffused
through other Churches; his Schism respected only his own Church, but his
Heresy, which was a Breach of the Unity of the Church Universal, respected
other Churches also; so that in answer to the forenamed Objection, we need only
say this, That there was no such thing as the Objection supposes; that is, that
there were no Bishops or Followers of Novatian's Schism in other Churches, but
that those that were discriminated by his Name, were the Bishops and Followers
of his Heresy. But however let us suppose the worst, viz. That all
Schismatics had been Orthodox and sound in every Point of Faith, had been
exemplary and pious in the discharge of every Duty, had been guilty of no Crime
but their Schism from their Bishop and Parish, and yet their Schism might have
influenced other Churches and Parishes too, and that I think these two ways.

1. If one or more Churches had admitted to Communion those that were
Excommunicated by their own Church for Schism, that Church or Churches made
themselves Partakers of those Men's Crimes, and involved themselves in the same
Guilt of Division and Schism with them, as Martian, Bishop of Arles, was
adjudged by Cyprian as a Schismatic, Cum Novatianus ipse, quem sequitur, olim
abstentus and hostis Ecclefiae judicatus sit. Epist. 67.. 2. p. 198.
Because he had joined with Novatian, when he had been before Excommunicated. I
do not here mean, that a Bishop or Parish to make themselves guilty, should
actually or personally communicate with the Author of the Schism himself, much
less in the Church where he began his Schism, but it was enough if they joined
with his Legates or Messengers, or any of his Followers in any Church
whatsoever; and therefore neither an Et cum ad nos in Africam legatos misisset,
optans ad communicationem nostram admitti, hinc sententiam retulerit, se foris
esse coepisse, nec posse a quoquam nostrum sibi communicari. Cypr. Ep. 67.. 2.
p. 198.
African Synod, nor Cum Novatiano te non communicare. Idem Epist. 52.. 1. p.
113.
Antonius an African Bishop, would communicate with the Legates of Novatian.
Nor would Felicissimum rejectum a te illic esse. Cyprian. Epist. 55.. 1. p. 137.
Cornelius join in Communion with Felicissimus a Schismatic of Carthage, when
he came to Rome; but as he was excluded from Communion in his own Church, so
likewise was he in that of Rome.

2. It was the Custom when any Bishop was Elected, to send News of his
Promotion to other Bishops, as Tuas literas legimus. Cyprian. Epist. 42.. 1. p.
99.
Cornelius did to Cyprian, that so he might have their Confirmation, and their
future Letters to the Bishop of that Church, to which he was promoted, might be
directed unto him, as Literas nostras ad te direximus. Cyprian. Epist. 42.. 1.
p. 99.
Cyprian did unto Cornelius; which Custom of sending Messengers to other
Churches, to acquaint them of their Advancement to the Episcopal Throne, was
also observed by the Schismatics, and in particular by Novatian, who Venerunt
ad nos, missi a Novatiano Maximus Presbyter and Augendus Diaconus, and Machaeus
quidam, and Longinus. Cyprian. Epist. 41.. 1. p. 96.
sent Maximus a Presbyter, Augendus a Deacon, Machaeus and Longinus unto
Cyprian, to inform him of his Promotion to the Sea of Rome. Now if any Bishop
or Church did knowingly approve the Pretensions of the Schismatical Bishop,
they broke the Concord of the Church, and became guilty of Schism, as may be
gathered from the beginning of an Epistle of Cyprian's to Antonius an African
Bishop, wherein he writes him, Accepi literas tuas, concordiam collegii
Sacerdotalis firmiter obtinentes and Catholicae Ecclesiae cohaerentes, quibus
significasti cum Novatiano (...) non communicare, sed cum Cornelio Coepiscopo
nostro unum tenere consensum. Epist. 52.. 1. p. 113.
That he had received his Letter, which firmly consented to the Concord of the
Sacerdotal College, and adhered to the Catholic Church, by which he had
signified, that he would not communicate with Novatian, but hold an Agreement
with Bishop Cornelius. And therefore when Legates came to Cyprian, both from
Cornelius and Novatian, he duly weighed who was legally Elected; and finding
Cornelius so to be, he approved his Election, Literas nostras ad (...)
direximus. Epist. 42.. 1. p. 99.
Directed his Congratulatory Letters unto him, A communicatione eos nostra
statim cohibendos. esse censuimus. Epist. 41.. 1. p. 96.
refused to communicate with the Schismatical Messengers of Novatian, Nec
mandare desistimus, ut perniciosa dissensione deposita -- agnoscant, Episcopo
(...) facto, alium constitui nullo modo posse. Ibid.. 2. p. 97.
and exhorted them to quit their Schism, and to submit to their lawfully
elected Bishop.

So that in these two respects, the Schism of a particular Church might
influence others also, involving them in the same Crime, creating Quarrels and
Dissentions between their respective Bishops, and so dividing the Dischargers
of that Honorable Office, whom God had made one; for as Cyprian says, Cum sit
a Christo una Ecclesia per totum mundum in multa (...) item (...) unus (...)
multorum concordi numerositate (...). Epist. 52.. 16. p. 119.
As there is but one Church throughout the whole World, divided into many
Members; so there is but one Bishopric diffused through the agreeing Number of
many Bishops.

. 11. But now that we may conclude this Chapter, the Sum of all that has been
spoken concerning Schism, is, that Schism in its large Sense, was a Breach of
the Unity of the Church Universal; but in its usual and restrained Sense of a
Church Particular, whosoever without any just reason, through Faction, Pride
and Envy, separated from his Bishop, or his Parish Church, he was a true
Schismatic; and whosoever was thus a Schismatic, if we may believe Saint
Cyprian, Alienus est -- habere jam non potest (...) patrem, qui (...) non habet
matrem; tales etiam si occisi in confessione nominis suerint, macula (...) nec
sanguine abluitur. De Unit. Eccles.. 5. and 12. p. 297. and 300.
He had no longer God for his Father, nor the Church for his Mother, but was
out of the Number of the Faithful; and though he should die for the Faith, yet
should he never be saved.

Thus much then shall serve for that Query, concerning the Churches Unity. The
next and (...) thing that is to be enquired into, is the Worship of the
Primitive Church; that is, the Form and Method of their Public Services, of
Reading, Singing, Preaching, Praying, of Baptism, Confirmation, and the Lord's
Supper; of their Fasts and Feasts; of their Rites and Ceremonies, and such
like, which I thought to have annexed to this Treatise; but this being larger
than I expected, and the Discourse relating to the Primitive Worship being like
to be almost as large, I have for this and (...) other Reasons, reserved it for
a particular Tract by its self; which, if nothing prevents, may be exposed
hereafter to public View and Observation.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE ENQUIRY INTO THE Constitution, Discipline, Unity and
Worship, OF THE Primitive Church, That Flourished within the First Three
Hundred Years after CHRIST.

Faithfully Collected out of the Extant Writings of those Ages.

By an Impartial Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John Wyat at the
Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1691.

The Second Part of the Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity and
Worship of the Primitive Church.
CHAP. I.
. 1. Of the Public Worship of the Primitive Church.. 2. In their Assemblies
they began with Reading the Scriptures. Other Writings Read besides the
Scriptures.. 3. Who Read the Scriptures, from whence they were Read, and how
they were Read.. 4. Whether there were appointed Lessons.. 5. After the (...)
of the Scriptures, there followed Singing of Psalms.. 6. What Psalms they
Sung.. 7. The manner of their Singing.. 8. Of Singing Men, and of Church
Music.. 9. To Singing of Psalms succeeded Preaching. On what the Preacher
discoursed: How long his Sermon was.. 10. The Method of their Sermons.. 11. Who
Preached; usually the Bishop, or by his Permission, any other, either Clergyman
or Layman.

. 1. HAving in a former Treatise enquired into the Constitution, Discipline,
and Unity of the Primitive Church; I intend in this to enquire into the Worship
thereof, which naturally divides its self into these Two Parts, Into the
Worship its self, and, Into the necessary Circumstances thereof, as Time and
Place, and such like; both which I design to handle, beginning first with the
Worship its self, wherein I shall not meddle with the Object thereof, since all
Protestants agree in the Adoring God alone through Jesus Christ, but only speak
of those Particular Acts and Services, whereby in the Public Congregations we
honor and adore Almighty God, such as Reading of the Scriptures, Singing of
Psalms, Preaching, Praying, and the Two Sacraments, every one of which I shall
consider in their Order, as they were performed in the Ancient Parish Churches.
And First,

. 2. When the Congregation was assembled, the first Act of Divine Service,
which they performed, was the Reading of the Holy Scriptures. In our Public
Assemblies, says Tertullian, Scripturae leguntur, Psalmi canuntur, adlocutiones
(...), and Petitiones delegantur. De (...), c. 3. p. 530.
The Scriptures are Read, Psalms Sung, Sermons Preached, and Prayers presented.
So also Just in Martyr writes, that in their Religious Assemblies, first of
all, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 98.
The Writings of the Prophets and Apostles were read.

But besides the Sacred Scriptures, there were other Writings read in several
Churches, viz. The Epistles and Tracts of Eminent and Pious Men, such as the
Book of (...). Eusebius. lib 3. c. 3. p. (...).
Hermas, called Pastor, and (...). Eusebius. lib. 3. c. (...). p. 88.
the Epistle of Clemens Romanus to the Church of Corinth, which were read in
the public Congregations of many Churches.

. 3. He that read the Scriptures, was particularly destinated to this Office,
as a Preparative to Holy Orders, as Aurelius, whom Cyprian designed for a
Presbyter, Placuit ut ab Officio lectionis incipiat. Epist. 33. p. 77.
was first to begin with the Office of reading. The Name by which this Officer
was distinguished, was in Greek, Just. Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 98.
(...). In Latin, Tertul. de Praescript. advers. (...). p. 89.
Lector, both which signify in English, a Reader, or as we now call him, a
Clark. The Place from whence the Clark Read, was an Eminency erected in the
Church, that so all the People might see and hear him, which was called
Cyprian. Epist. 33. p. 77. and Epist. 34.. 4. p. 81.
Pulpitum, or a Pulpit, from which Pulpit he read the Scriptures alone, and not
others alternatively with him; it being his Office only to Read, whilst the
Congregation listened to him, as Cyprian writes, that Celerinus a Lector, Plebi
Universae -- legate Praecepta and Evangelium Domini. Epist. 34.. 4. p. 81.
Read the Law and the Gospel to all the People. Celerinus only read, whilst all
the People attended; and therefore when this Duty was ended, it is described
only (...). (...). Martyr. Apolog. 2. p. 98.
by the Lectors ceasing to Read, and not by the Peoples ceasing so to do.

. 4. How much the Lector read at a Time is uncertain, since they varied
according to the Circumstances of their Condition. So writes Tertullian, that
Cogimur ad literarum divinarum Commemorationem, siquid praesentium temporum
qualitas aut praemonere cogit aut recognoscere. Apolog. cap. 39. p. 709.
they Read the Scriptures according to the Quality of their present Times. And
to the same purpose says Justin Martyr, that the Clark read, (...). Apolog. 2.
p. 98.
until it was sufficient.

. 5. When the Readended, then followed the Singing of Psalms. So says
Tertullian, Scripturae leguntur, Psalmi canuntur. De Anim. cap. 3. p. 530.
(...) Scriptures are Read, and Psalms Sung. This was a considerable Part of
the Christians Service, who, as Pliny writes, met together before Day, Carmen
Christo, quasi Deo dicere. Epist. ad (...).
to sing an Hymn to Christ, it being useful to elevate the Mind in Heavenly
Raptures of Praise and Adoration, and to raise a Pious Soul into greater
Degrees of Admiration of God's Love and Bounty, whence such a Soul is described
by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). Stromat. lib. 6. p. 483.
to be continually Blessing, Praising, Singing and presenting Hymns to God the
Lord of all, being assisted by the Holy Spirit of God, (...), etc. Origin. de
Orat.. 6. p. 7.
without whose Aid it was impossible to Sing either in good Rhyme, Tune, Meter
or Harmony.

The Christians in those Days condemned only the debauched Bacchanalian Singing
and Roaring, but commended the Blessing and Praising of God, (...). Clem. Alex.
Paedag. lib. 2. c. 4. p. 121.
by Thanksgiving and Singing of Psalms. Inasmuch that it was made one (...)
Distinction of a Christian: As Tertullian inveighs against the Marriage of a
Believing Woman with an (...), because thereby she would be hindered from
discharging the Ordinances of the Gospel, amongst which he enumerates Singing
of Psalms; for then, says he, Quid maritus suus illi? Vel marito quid illa
cantabit? Ad Uxor. lib. 2. p. 431.
What would her Husband sing to her? or, What would she sing to her Husband?
And a little after he describes the happy Condition of that Couple, who were
both Christians, in that they did both join together in, and exhort one another
to, the vigorous Performance of God's Worship, Sonant inter duos Psalmi and
Hymni, and mutuo provocant, quis melius Deo suo canet? Ibidem, p. 433.
Psalms and Hymns sound between those two, and they mutually excite one
another, who shall sing unto God best; it being their daily Employment, and
recurring as often as they eat their Meat. Thus faith Clemens Alexandrinus,
(...). Stromat. lib. 7. p. 523.
a good Christians Life, is a continued Festival, his Sacrifices are Prayers
and Praises, Reading of Scriptures before Meat, and Singing of Psalms and Hymns
at Meat. Hence in their Feasts and Banquers, (...). Stromat. lib. 6. p. 475.
When they drank to one another, they Sung an Hymn, therein blessing God for
his unexpressible Gifts toward Mankind, both as to their Bodies and Souls.

I confess indeed that most of these Quotations respect only Private Singing of
Psalms, and so they may seem to be somewhat alien from my purpose; on which
Account I should not have mentioned them, but have wholly passed them over in
silence, had it not been to have satisfied those, who hold it unlawful to Sing
any Psalms at all, in what manner soever; for if singing in private was usual
and commendable, then no doubt public Singing was so also.

. 6. What those Psalms or Hymns were, that the Primitive Christians sung, may
be a Question necessary to be resolved, which I take to be twofold, either
such as were taken out of the Holy Scriptures, and particularly out of the Book
of Psalms, or such as were of their own private composing. So writes
Tertullian, that after the Celebration of the Lord's Supper,

Quisque de Scripturis Sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio provocatur in medium Deo
canere. Apolog. c. 39. p. 710.
Every one Sung an Hymn out of the Bible, or of his own composing. As for the
Singing of David's Psalms, the same Father particularly mentions the 133d
Psalm, as Sung in his Days, Vide quam bonum and quam jueundum habitare Fiatres
in unum: Hoc tu psallere non facile (...), nisi quo tempore cum compluribus
coenas. Advers. Psychy. cos de Jejunio. p. 650.
O how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity: This
thou can not easily sing, unless when thou suppest with many. As for the
Hymns that were of Private Men's Composition, it was one of the Accusations of
Paulus Samosatenus, the Heretical Bishop of Antioch, (...) Act. Council. (...).
apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 30. p. 281.
that he abolished those Psalms, which were wont to be Sung to the Honor of
the Lord Jesus Christ, as Novel, and composed by Modern Authors, and that he
appointed Women on Easter Day, in the middle of the Church, to sing Psalms in
his Praise. And in the Fragment of an Anonymous Author extant in Eusebius, we
find the Heresy of Artemon, who denied the Divinity of Christ, (...), not only
by the Scriptures, and the Writings of the precedent Fathers, but also (...).
Lib. 5. cap. 28. p. 196.
by the Psalms and Hymns of the Brethren, which were formerly composed by them,
wherein they praised Christ by making him a God. Such a private composed Hymn
was that which Clemens Alexandrinus mentions, as one commonly known among the
Christians in his Days, beginning (...), or Hail Light. Protreptic. p. 52.

. 7. As for the manner of the Primitive Singing, it was (...). Origin. de
Oratione,. 6. p. 7.
in good Tune, and Concent, all the People bearing a part in it; but whether
all together, or Antiphonally, cannot well be determined, every Country
probably following its own Mode, Singing only in General being commanded, not
the particular manner or fashion of it. In a Precedent Origin. de Orat.. 6. p.
7.
Quotation mention is made of Singing, in Concent, (...), or with Voices
altogether. In other Places the Alternative Method of Singing seems expressly to
be used; as Pliny writes, That the Christians in his time, met together before
Day, Carmen (...) dicere secum invicem. Epist. ad Trajan.
to Sing an Hymn to Christ by course, or, one against another. And so in that
forecited Passage of Tertullian, Quid Maritus suus illi? Vel marito quid illa
cantabit? Ad Uxor. lib. 2. p. 431.
What will an Unbelieving Husband sing to a Believing Wife? Or what will a
Believing Wife sing to an Unbelieving Husband?

. 8. As for Singing Men and Singing Women, I find that Paulus Samosatenus the
Heretical Bishop of Antioch, abolished the old usual Hymns, and (...). (...).
lib. 7. cap. 30. p. 281.
appointed certain Women on Easter Day in the middle of the Church, to sing
Psalms in his Praise. But whether these Singing Women were first Instituted by
this Heretical Bishop, or were before his Time, I cannot tell.

As for Church-Musick, for Organs, and the like, those Primitive Ages were
wholly ignorant of them; for it cannot rationally be conceived, that in those
Days of continual Persecution or Violence, they could either use or preserve
them; all that they looked after, was to Sing (...). Origin. de Oratione,. 6.
p. 7.
in Rhyme, Meter, Tune and Concent, to offer up unto God the Praises of their
Voices, Lips and Mouths, which Clemens Alexandrinus thinks, was Emblematized or
shadowed forth by those Musical Instruments mentioned in the 150th Psalm,
where, says he, (...). (...). lib. 2. c. 4. p. 121.
We are commanded to praise God on the Psaltery, that is, on the Tongue,
because the Tongue is the Psaltery of the Lord; and to praise him on (...)
Harp, by which we must understand the Mouth; and to praise him on the loud
sounding Cymbals, by which the Tongue is to be understood, which sounds or
speaks through the knocking or coition of the Lips.

. 9. When the Singing of Psalms was ended, then succeeded the Preaching of the
Word. So writes Tertullian, Scripturae leguntur, Psalmi canuntur, ad locutiones
proferuntur. De Anima, c. 3. p. 530.
Scriptures are read, Psalms sung, and then Sermons pronounced. As for the
Subject of the Preacher's Sermon, it was usually a Commentary or Explication of
the Lessons that were just before read. So it was in the Time and Country of
Justin Martyr, who writes, that (...). Apolog. 2. p. 98.
when the Reader had ended, the Bishop made a Sermon, by way of Instruction and
Exhortation, to the Imitation of those excellent things which had been read.
Whence Origin calls their Sermons (...). Contra Celsum, lib. 3. p. 142.
Explanations of the Lessons. And such Explanations are all his Sermons or
Homilies, as whosoever reads them will easily see; and he himself intimates as
much in Homil. de Engastrym. And Homil. 17. in Jerem.
several of them.

As for the Length of their Sermons, they usually preached an Hour, as Origin
complains of his abundance of Matter, that if he should thoroughly handle every
part of it, it would (...). Homil de (...). p. 29.
require not only the one Hour of their Assembly, but several. Therefore when
the Lessons were long and copious, which sometimes consisted of several
Chapters, as the Lesson which was the Subject of Origen's 15th Homily on
Jeremiah, reached from the 15th Chapter and 10th Verse, to the 17th Chapter and
5th Verse. The Preacher passed over some of the Matter unmentioned, and handled
the most important, or the most curious part therein. Thus in the beginning of
a Sermon of Origen's, we find, that the Chapters that were read, were the 25,
26, 27, and 28th Chapters of the first Book of Samuel, (...). Hom. de (...). p.
28, 29.
which he complains were too large and (...) to be all handled at once, and
therefore he would only discourse of the 28th Chapter, touching the Witch of
Endor, and those things related there (...) her.

. 10. As for the manner of their Sermons, we may observe this Method in those
of Origen's, that he first began with a short (...), and then explained Verse
after Verse, or Sentence after Sentence, (...) the Natural and Literal
Signification of the Words, and then the Spiritualized or Mystical meaning of
them, and concluded with a suitable Application of all, either (...). Origin.
(...). lib. 3. p. 142.
by way of Exhortation to Piety and Virtue, or by way of Dehortation from Vice
and Impiety. Always accommodating their Discourses to the Capacities of their
Hearers. (...). Idem, (...), p. 143.
Is their Auditors were prudent and understanding, then they scrupled not to
treat of the profound Mysteries of the Gospel; but if they had attained no
great measure of Knowledge, and had need of Milk, as the Apostle styles it,
then they concealed from them those deep and recondite Points.

. 11. As for the Preacher himself, it was usually the Bishop of the Parish. So
says (...) Martyr, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 98.
The Bishop Preaches by way of Instruction and Exhortation, to the Imitation of
those excellent things which we ^. Or else he desired a Presbyter, or some
other fit Person to preach in his room; without his Consent it had been Schism
and Violence in any Person whatsoever to have usurped his Chair, but with his
Permission any Clergyman or Layman might Preach in his Pulpit. Now that
Clergymen Preached, no one will question, though it will be doubted, whether
Laymen did: But that they did so, appears from a memorable History concerning
Origin, who going from Alexandria into Palestina, by the Desire of the Bishops
of that Country, publicly Preached in the Church, and expounded the Holy
Scriptures, although he was not yet in Holy Orders. At which Action, when
Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria was offended, Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and
Theoctistus of Caesarea writ to him in defense of it, as follows, (...). Apud
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 19. p. 222.
Whereas you write in your Letter, that it was never before seen or done, That
Laymen should preach in the presence of Bishops, therein you wander from the
Truth; for wheresoever any are found, that are fit to profit the Brethren, the
Holy Bishops of their own accord ask them to Preach unto the People. So Evelpis
was desired by Neon Bishop of Laranda, and Paulinus by Celsus of Iconium, and
Theodorus by Atticus of Synnada, our most blessed Brethren; and it is credible,
that this is likewise done in other Places, though we know it not. But yet
though Laymen Preached, it was not every one that did so, but only those, that
were (...), fit to prosit the Brethren; and though they were never so fit, yet
they did not irregularly or disorderly run about a Preaching, or discharge that
Sacred Office, till they were desired by the Bishop of a Parish to do it,
(...), but stayed for the Permission and Approbation of such an one; for
without that, their Sermons and Discourses would have been but so many Acts of
Schism and Faction.

CHAP. II.
. 1. After Preaching all the Congregation rose up to join in Public Prayers..
2. They prayed toward the East. Their Reasons for that Custom.. 3. They lifted
up their Hands and Eyes toward Heaven.. 4. Whether the Minister that
Officiated wore a Surplice, and therein of Ministers Habits.. 5. Whether they
Sung their Prayers, and whether they used Responsals.. 6. Of prescribed
Liturgies. The Lord's Prayer not always, but commonly used by them.. 7. To the
Lord's Prayer they added other Prayers of their own Choice or Invention, proved
so to have been.. 8. Whether their Prayers were divided into several Collects.

. 1. AS soon as the Sermon was ended, then all the Congregation rose up to
present their Common and Public Prayers unto Almighty God, as Justin Martyr
writes, that when the Preacher had finished his Discourse, (...). Apolog. 2. p.
98.
They all rose up, and offered their Prayers unto God. Standing being the usual
Posture of Praying (at least the constant one on Sundays, on which Day they
esteemed it a Sin to kneel) whence the Preacher frequently concluded his Sermon
with an Exhortation to his Auditors, to stand up and pray to God, as we find it
more than once in the Conclusion of Origen's Sermons, as, (...). Hom. 19. in
Jerem. Vol. 1. p. 198.
Wherefore standing up, let us beg help from God, that we may be blessed in
Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen. And, Quapropter
consurgentes deprecemur Dominum, ut digni efficiamur -- Christo Jesu, cui est
Gloria and Imperium in Saecula Saeculorum. Amen. Homil. 2. in Cantic.
wherefore rising up, let us pray to God, that we may be made worthy of Jesus
Christ, to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen. And again,
Surgentes per Christum Sacrificia Patri Offeramus, ipse enim propitiatio est
pro peccatis nostris, cui est Gloria and Imperium in Saecula Saeculorum. In
(...). Homil. 1.
Standing up let us offer Sacrifices to the Father through Christ, who is the
Propitiation for our Sins, to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever,
Amen.

. 2. Accordingly the whole Congregation stood up, and turned their Faces
toward the East, it being their Custom and Manner to pray toward that
Quarter, as Tertullian writes, Nos ad Orientis Regionem precari. Apolog. c. 16.
p. 688.
We pray toward the East. Now the Reasons that I meet with for this Usage, may
be reduced to these Three or Four.

I. Out of Respect and Reverence to their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, they
prayed toward the East, because the East is a Title (...) to Christ in the Old
Testament; for that Place in Zach. 6. 12. Behold the Man whose Name is the
(...), they Translated according to the Septuagint, (...). (...). Martyr.
Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 334.
Behold the Man whose Name is the East, which misapprehension of the Word
Branch, arose from the different Significations or Applications of the Greek
Word, by which the Septuagint expressed it. In the Original Hebrew the Word is
(...), which signifies an arising or sprouting out, as does a Branch from a
Root. The Word by which they rendered it in Greek, is (...), which in a large
Sense comprehends all sorts of arising and springing out; but strictly and
generally is applied to the arising and first appearing of the Sun, and by a
Metonymy, is appropriated to the East, because the Sun arises in that Quarter.
The Fathers therefore not knowing the Original, and finding Christ to be called
in their Ordinary Version (...), presently concluded, that according to the
usual signification of the Word, he was there termed by the Prophet, The East,
whom they conceived to be so called, because (...). Idem, (...), p. 334.
he was to arise like a Star: And, (...). (...). (...). p. 350.
as the Sun that arises in the East penetrates through the World with its warm
and illuminating Rays; So Christ the Sun of Righteousness would arise with more
Warmth and Light, and pierce farther than the material Sun, even into the
Depths of Men's Hearts and Minds. Hence the East is called by Tertullian, (...)
Christi figuram. Advers. Valentin. p. 284.
A Type of Christ, and for this Reason we may very well suppose, that they
prayed toward the East, as well as built their Churches toward it, which that
they did, we shall show in its proper place.

II. Another Reason might be with respect to the Similitude of the Rising of
the Sun, with our Spiritual arising out of the Darkness of Sin and Corruption,
which I find thus expressed by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). Stromat. lib. 7. p.
520.
Let Prayers be made toward the East, because the East is the Representation
of our Spiritual Nativity: As from thence Light first arose, shining out of
Darkness; so according to that Rising of the Sun, the Day of true Knowledge
arose on those, who lay buried in Ignorance; whence the ancient Temples looked
toward the West, that so they who stood against the Images therein, might be
forced to look toward the East.

III. Origin advises to pray toward the Eastern Climate, to denote our
Diligence in the Service of God, in being more forward to arise and set about
it, than the Sun is to run his daily Course, for which he produces an
Apocryphal Text, Wisdom 16. 28. (...). De (...),. 20. p. 127.
That it might be known, that we must prevent the Sun to give thee thanks, and
at the Dayspring pray unto thee.

IV. Another Reason for their praying toward the East, was their Opinion of
the Excellency of this Quarter above others, which Argument Origin thus
delivers, as well as I can Translate it. (...). De Oratione,. 21. p. 133, 134.
Whereas there are four Climates, the North and South, the West and East, who
will not acknowledge that we bught to pray looking toward the East,
Symbolically representing thereby, our Souls beholdthe arising of the true
Light? If a Man, which way soever the Doors of his House are placed, would
rather make his Prayers toward the Windows, saying, That the sight of the Sky
has something more peculiar (...) it, to stir up his Affection, than his
looking against a Wall. Or if it so happen, that the Windows of his House do
not look toward the East, that happened from the Arbitrary Structure of the
Builder, but not from Nature, which prefers the East before the other Quarters,
and Nature is to be preferred before that Building. Or if any one will pray in
the open Field, will he not pray rather toward the East, than toward the
West? And if in these things the (...) is preferred before the West, why is it
not so also in every other thing besides?

For these four Reasons now, but principally I suppose for the first, they
usually prayed toward the East, inasmuch that for their Worshipping toward
this Quarter, and for their Religious Observation of the Lord's Day, or Sunday,
so called, because Dedicated to the Sun, they Inde suspicio, (...) nos ad (...)
Regionem (...) (...). Apol: 16. p. 688.
were accused by the Heathens of Reverencing and Adoring the Sun.

. 3. The Congregation being thus turned toward the East, they put themselves
into a (...) of Prayer, stretching out their Hands, and lifting up their Eyes
toward Heaven, as Clemens. Alexandrinus writes, We lift up our (...). (...).
Iib. p. p. 510.
Head, and stretch out our Hands toward Heaven. And so Tertullian, We ^.
pray looking upto Heaven, (...) expanded Hands, by this devout (...) imitating
(...), etc. Origin. de Orat.. 20. p. 128.
the lifting up of their Hearts to God in the (...) Wherefore, as now to
quicken the Peoples Devotion, the (...) before Prayer excites them thereunto,
by saying, Let us pray. So in the African Churches, in Cyprian's Days, the
Minister Sacerdos (...) Orationem Praefatione praemissa, parat Fratrum (...)
dicendo, Sursum corda, and responder (...), Habemus ad Dominum. Cyprian. de
Orat. Dominic.. 22. p. 316.
Prefac'd in his Prayer, by saying to the People, Lift up your Hearts. To which
the People to testify their Consent, answered, We lift them up unto the Lord.

. 4. After this the Minister began to Pray. But before we handle his Prayer, it
may not be unnecessary to consider in what Habit he Officiated, whether in a
Surplice, or no. His usual Garb was a Pallium, which is the same with what we
call a Pallio nihil expeditius -- quippe tota molitio ejus operire est solutim,
id est, uno circumjectu -- ita omnia hominis simul contegit. Tertul. de Pallio,
p. 490.
Cloak. This as being the most simple and plain Garment was commonly worn by
the Christians; the usual Garb throughout the whole Roman Empire was the Toga,
which was more gay and splendid than the Pallium; wherefore those who came over
from Paganism to Christianity, for the Indication of their Humility and
Contempt of the World, quitted the Toga as too pompous and mundane, and assumed
the Pallium or Cloak, as more grave and modest; from which change of Apparel,
and renouncing of a sumptuous Habit, to embrace a poor and mean one, the
Heathens derided and exposed the Christians, even to a Proverb, a Toga ad
Pallium, which sarcastical Language engaged Tertullian to write a little Tract
in Defense of the Cloak, which is still extant in his Writings, under the Title
of De Pallio.

But Salmasius and Primitive Christianity, Part 2. c. 3. p. 47.
Dr. Cave think this severe Habit was not worn by all (...), but only by those
of them that lead a more austere and mortified Life, such as the Clergy, and
some self-denying Personages (...) the Laity, and that therefore it is called
by Tertullian in the sorementioned Tract, Sacerdotis Habitus, or Priests
Apparel, as it is in all ancient Manuscripts, and in the first Edition of
Beatus Rhenanus, and not Sacer Habitus, The Holy Apparel, as it is in the later
Editions. But whether it were so or no, I shall not here debate. This is
sufficient for my purpose, that the Clergy usually wore a Cloak. But now, that
in times of Public Prayer, they should put a Surplice, or any other kind of
Linen Garment over their Cloaks, neither Tertullian, nor any other, speak the
least Syllable of it: Instead of putting another Vestment on their Gown or
Cloak, Tertullian mentions some in his Days, who at Prayers would throw off
their Gown or Cloak, which he condemns as a Superstitious Affectation, and an
Heathenish (...). So, says he, Quorundam positis penulis Orationem facere: sic
enim adeunt ad idola nationes: quod utique (...) fieri (...), (...) qui de
habitu Orandi docent, comprehendissent, nisi si qui putant Paulum penulam suam
in Oratione penes Carpum reliquisse. D. Oratione, p. 659.
the Heathens pray to their Gods, which if (...). ought to have been done,
would have been enjoined by the Apostles, who have given Directions concerning
the manner of Prayer; unless some think, that when Paul had put off his Cloak
at Prayer, he forgot it, and left it behind him at Carpus's.

. 5. But quitting the Habit of him that (...), let us return to his Prayer,
which he pronounced Modestis precibus orare. Cyprian. de Orat. Dominic.. 2. p.
309.
with a modest and bashful Voice, that being most proper for those, who came to
acknowledge the multitude and heinousness of their Sins, and to beg God's
Pardon and Grace, which is the End and Design of Prayer. Musical Singing is
best agreeable to the praising and adoring of God; Enixis precibus, lacrymis,
ingemiscamus, preces, gemitus, lachrymae. Cyprian. Epist. 8. p. 23.
but our Petitions to God ought to be sent up with most fervent Prayers, with
Tears, and Cries, and Groans.

Doubtless the Minister so prayed, as did most affect the People, whose Mouth
he was to God; for they did not vocally (...) with him in the Prayers, but only
testified their Assent to what the Minister prayed, by saying (...), or So be
it. Thus in the Prayer at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, the President
of the Assembly only prayed, and the People concurred with the Amen. So writes
Justin Martyr, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 97.
The Bishop makes a long Prayer over the Elements, and when he ends, all the
People present give their Approbation, by saying, Amen. And (...). Ibid. p. 97.
When the Elements are blessed by the Minister's Prayer, and the People have
approved it, by saying, Amen, Then they are distributed. And (...). Ibid. p. 98.
the Bishop, according to his Ability, prays over the Elements, and the People
give their Acclamations, saying, Amen. So that scrupulous Person mentioned by
Dionysius Alexandrinus in his Epistle to Xystus, is said, (...). Apud (...).
lib. 7. c. 9. p. 255.
to have frequently heard the Eucharistical Prayer, and with the rest of the
Congregation to have answered, Amen. Henricus Valesius in his Notes on this
Place; as likewise Dr. Hammond in his Annotations on 1 Cor. 14. think that St.
Paul had reference to this Custom of the Peoples saying Amen, at the Conclusion
of the Eucharistical Prayer in 1 Cor. 14. 16. Else when thou shall bless with
the Spirit, how shall be that Occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at
thy giving of Thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? In which
place St. Paul condemns as absurd and senseless, the Practice of some Men, who
would consecrate the Sacrament in Hebrew or Syriack before Greeks, who
understanding not those Tongues, could not bear their share in the
Eucharistical Prayer, which consisted not in Antiphonal or Responsory Replies
to the Minister, but only in saying (...), or, So be it, to what he had prayed.

It is true indeed, that these Citations are spoken in particular of the Prayer
before the Lords Supper; but yet they may be also applied to their Prayer after
Sermon, since we have no reason to imagine, that in the one they should use
Responsals, and in the other none. But that in all their Prayers the Priest
only prayed, seems to be apparent, from that it was one part of his Office, to
pray for the People, In precibus quas faciunt pro Plebis Dominicae
incolumitate. Epist. 68.. 2. p. 201.
The Priests, says Cyprian, pray for the safety of the Lord's People. And, Qui
idolis sacrificando sacrilega Sacrificia fecerunt, Sacerdotium Dei sibi
vindicare non possunt, nec ullam in conspectu ejus precem pro Fratribus facere.
Epist. 64.. 2. p. 190.
the Priests who have Sacrificed to Idols, cannot assume to themselves the
Priesthood, or make any Prayer in God's sight for the Brethren. Oportet eos ad
Sacerdotium deligi, quos a Deo (...) audiri. Epist. 68.. 3. p. 201.
Therefore those ought to be chosen into the Priesthood, whom God will hear. It
was the Priest that solely pronounced the Public Prayers without the Voices of
the People: And indeed it was impossible for the People to respond, since they
had no fixed public Form of Prayer, except the Lord's Prayer, which Lord's
Prayer they frequently, though not always, repeated: And then as to their other
Prayers, every Bishop or Minister of a Parish, was left to his own Liberty and
Ability therein.

. 6. As for the use of the Lord's Prayer, it must first be observed, that the
(...) repeating of it with other Prayers, was not esteemed necessary, but
frequently it was omitted. Thus in the Heavenly Prayer of Polycarpus at the
Stake, the Lord's Prayer is neither at beginning nor ending. The Conclusion of
it is, (...). Apxd Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 15. p. 133.
Lord I will praise thee, I will bless thee, I will magnify thee, through the
Eternal High Priest Christ Jesus thy beloved Son, by whom to thee, with him,
and the Holy Ghost, be Glory now, and for evermore, Amen. So Clemens
Alexandrinus concludes his last Book of Pedagogy, with a Prayer, which neither
ends nor begins with the Lord's Prayer; and Origin prescribing a Method of
Prayer, speaks not a Word of the Lord's Prayer, but Dc Oratione,. 22. p., 134,
135.
advises both to begin and end with Doxology, or a giving Praise to God. In
this Respect they regarded the Lord's Prayer, as given by Christ for a Pattern
of all other Prayers, according to which they were to be made; whence Cyprian
calls this Prayer, Orandi legem. De Unit. Ecclesiae,. 11. p. 299.
the Law or Rule of praying; Ut aliter orare quam docuit, non ignorantia sola
sit, sed and culpa. De Orat. Dominic.. 1. p. 309.
so that to pray otherwise than that Prayer directed was Ignorance and Impiety
Wherefore, says Cyprian, Unusquisque oret Deum non pro se tantum, sed pro
omnibus fratribus, sicut Dominus orare nos docuit. Epist. 8.. 6. p. 24.
Let every one pray to God, not only for himself, but for all the Brethren, as
the Lord has taught us to pray for all. And so writes Clemens Alexandrinus,
(...). Strom. (...). 7. p. 537.
that a good Man never remembers the Affronts that are offered him, but always
forgets them; wherefore he justly prays, saying, Forgive us as we forgive
others; that is, he prays according to the Sense of the fifth Petition; for it
is the Sense, not the very Words of that Petition, that he here recites.

But though the Repetition of the Lord's Prayer was not necessary, yet it was
usual; whence says Origin, Qua patrem -- nos jussit orare. In Isaiam, Homil. 1.
Christ gave us a Prayer, with which he commanded us to pray unto the Father.
And Tertullian writes, Novam orationis formam determinavit. De Oratione, p. 657.
That our Lord Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples a new Form of Prayer. Whence
he calls the Lord's Prayer, Legitima Oration. De suga in (...). p. 436.
The Lawful Prayer. And Cyprian yet more fully writes, that Orandi ipse formam
dedit, ipse quid precaremur monuit and (...): Qui (...) vivere, docuit and
(...) -- ut dum prece and oratione quam filius docuit, apud patrem loquimur,
facilius audiamur -- Quae (...) potest esse magis spiritualis Oration, quam quae
vere a (...) nobis data est, a quo nobis and Spiritus (...) missus est? Quae
vere magis apud Patrem precatio, quam quae a filio, qui (...) veritas, de ejus
ore prolata est? Ut (...) orare quam docuit, non ignorantia sola sit sed and
culpa -- Oremus itaque fratres dilectissimi, sicut Magister Deus docuit. Amica
and Familiaris (...) est Deum de suo rogare ad aures ejus ascendere (...)
orationem, (...) pater filii sui verba: cum precem (...), qui habitat intus in
pectore, ipse sit and in voce: and cum ipsum (...) apud patrem (...) pro
peccatis mostris quando peccatores pro (...) nostris petimus, advocati (...)
verba premamus. Nam cum dicat, quia quodcunque petierimus a Patre in nomine
ejus, dabit nobis: quanto efficacius (...) quod (...) in Christi nomine, si
petamus (...) oratione? De (...). Dominic.. 1, 2. p. 309.
Christ has given us a Form of Prayer, he has admonished and instructed what
we should pray for: He that made us live, has taught us to pray, that whilst
we offer unto the Father, the Prayer which the Son taught, we may be the more
easily heard. -- For what Prayer can be more Spiritual, than that which was
given us by Christ, who gave us also the Holy Spirit? And what Prayer can be
more prevalent with God, than that of his Son, who is the Truth, proceeding out
of his Mouth? So that to pray otherwise than he has taught, is both Ignorance
and Impiety. Let us pray therefore, dearly beloved Brethren, as God our Master
has taught us: It is a friendly and familiar Prayer to ask God with his own,
and to present the Prayer of Christ to his Ears; the Father will acknowledge
his Sons Words. When we pray, let him that dwells in the Heart, be in the
Voice; and since we have him an Advocate with the Father for our Sins, when we
beg pardon for our Sins, let us use the Words of our Advocate; and since he
says, that whatsoever we shall ask of the Father in his Name, he will give it
us; how much more efficaciously shall we prevail for what we beg in Christ's
Name, if we ask it in his Prayer? To this Prayer it is that Tertullian gives
this Encomium, Compendiis paucorum verborum, quot attinguntur edicta (...),
Evangeliorum, Apostolorum, Sermones Domini, Parabolae, exempla, praecepta, quot
simul expunguntur Officia Dei, honor in patre; fides, testimonium in nomine,
oblatio obsequii in voluntate, commemoratio spei in Regno, petitio vitae in
pane, exomologesis debitorum in deprecatione, sollicitudo tentationum, in
postulatione tutelae. Quid mirum! Deus solus docere potuit, ut se vellet (...).
De Orat. p. 659.
In the Compendium of a few Words, how many Declarations of Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles; how many Speeches, Parables, Examples and Precepts
are contained! How many Duties toward God! Honor to God in the Preface, Faith
in the first Petition, Hope in the Second, Resignation in the Third, Petition
for Life in the Fourth, Confession of Sins in the Fifth, Watchfulness against
Temptations in the Sixth. What Wonder! God alone could teach, how he would be
prayed to.

. 7. But though they frequently used the Lord's Prayer, yet they did not only use
that, but other Prayers also; for immediately to the foregoing Encomium of the
Lord's Prayer, Tertullian adjoyns, Posse nos super adjicere -- and sunt quae
petantur pro (...). De Oratione, p. 659
That we may add thereunto, and offer up Prayers unto God according to the
Variety of our Circumstances and Conditions. From which Passage of the said
Father, we may guess their usual Method of Prayer was first to begin with the
Lord's Prayer, as the Ground and Foundation of all others, and then according
to their Circumstances and Conditions to offer up their own Prayers and
Requests. Now that this Conjecture may appear to have some Foundation, it will
be necessary to translate at large this place of Tertullian, and to show the
Introduction or Occasion of it, which was this: After this Father had, as
before, Commented on, summed up, and magnified the Lord's Prayer, he concludes,
that nevertheless, Posse nos super adjicere. Quoniam tamen Dominus prospector
humanarum necessitatum seorsim post traditam (...) Disciplinam, (...), inquit,
and (...), and sunt quae (...), pro (...) cujusque, praemisia legitima and
ordinaria Oratione quasi fundamento, accidentium jus est desideriorum, jus est
(...) extrinsecus petitiones, cum memoria tamen (...): Ne quantum a (...)
tantum ab (...) Dei long simus. Memoria (...) sternit ad Coelum quorum
praecipuum est, (...). p. 659.
We may add thereunto; for since the Lord the Observer of all Humane
Necessities, has in another place, after he had delivered this Prayer, said,
Ask and ye shall receive: And every one has particular Circumstances to beg
for; therefore having premised the lawful and ordinary Prayer, there is place
for accidental. Requests, and a Liberty of offering up other Petitions, so as
they do agree with the Precepts: As far as we are from the Precepts, so far are
we from God's Ears; the remembrance of the Precepts makes way for our Prayers
to Heaven, of which it is the chief.

Now these other Prayers, which made up a great part of Divine Service, were
not (...) and imposed Forms, but the Words and Expressions of them were left to
the Prudence, Choice and Judgment of every particular Bishop or Minister.

I do not here say, that a Bishop or Minister used no Arbitrary Form of Prayer;
all that I say is, that there was none imposed: Neither do I say, that having
no imposed Form, they unpremeditately, immethodically or confusedly vented
their Petitions and Requests; for without doubt they observed a Method in their
Prayers; but this is what I say, That the Words or Expressions of their Prayers
were not imposed or prescribed, but every one that officiated, delivered
himself in such Terms as best pleased him, and varied his Petitions according
to the present Circumstances and Emergencies: Or if it be more intelligible,
that the Primitive Christians had no stinted Liturgies, or Imposed Forms of
Prayer.

Now this being a Negative in Matter of Fact, the bare Assertion of it is a
sufficient Proof, except its Affirmative can be evinced. Suppose it was
disputed, whether ever St. Paul writ an Epistle to the Church of Rome, the bare
Negation thereof would be Proof enough that he did not, except it could be
clearly evidenced on the contrary that he did: So unless it can be proved that
the Ancients had fixed Liturgies and Prayer-Books, we may very rationally
conclude in the Negative, that they had none at all.

Now as to these prescribed Forms, there is not the least mention of them in
any of the Primitive Writings, nor the least Word or Syllable tending thereunto
that I can find, which is a most unaccountable Silence, if ever such there
were, but rather some Expressions intimating the contrary; as that famous
controverted place of Justin Martyr, who describing the manner of the Prayer
before the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, says, That the Bishop sent up
Prayers and Praises to God Apolog. 2. p. 98.
with his utmost ability, (...), that is, that he prayed with the best of his
Abilities, Invention, Expression, Judgment and the like. I am not ignorant that
there is another Sense given of (...), or, According to his Ability. But I must
needs say, that I generally, if not always found this Phrase to include
personal Abilities. Thus as to the Explanation of Scripture, Origin writes,
that he would expound it, Com. in Matthew. Tom. 17. p. 487. Vol. 1.
according to his Ability, (...), and that he would Comment on that Parable of
the Blind Man, that was healed near Jericho, mentioned in Luke 18. 35. Com. in
Matthew. Tom. 16. p. 429. Vol. 1.
(...). And so on the Parable concerning the Husbandman; (...). Tom. 17. p. 463.
(...); and on the Marriage of the King's Son, Ibid. Tom. 17. p. 474.
(...); and that he would search out the Sense of the Gospel of St. John, Com.
in Johan. Tom. 1. p. 5. Vol. 2.
(...). Now what does Origin intend, by his searching out the Sense, and
expounding the meaning of the Scriptures to the utmost of his Power and
Ability? Is it a bare reading and transcribing of other Men's Works, or an
Employment of his own Abilities and Studies to find out the Sense and Meaning
of them? Certainly every one will think the latter to be most probable.

So as to the Argumentative Defense of the Truth, Origin promises that he would
answer the Calumnies of Celsus, Contra Celsum. lib. (...). p. 2.
according to his Power, (...): and that he would defend and confirm his
Arguments against Celsus Ibid. lib. 1. p. 36.
according to his Power, (...): and demonstrate the Reasonableness of the
Christian Religion, Ibid. lib. 6. p. 265.
according to his Power, (...): and dispute against Celsus, Ibid. lib. 7. p.
(...).
according to his Power, (...). Now whether Origen's defending the Truth, and
disputing against Celsus according to his (...) Ability and Power, consisted in
a reading, or in a bare transcribing out of a Book, the written Arguments of
other Men, or in an Employment of his own Abilities, Inventions and
Expressions, is no difficult matter to determine.

I have not found one place, wherein this Phrase of (...) does not comprehend
personal Abilities; and several scores more might I cite, where it is so to be
understood, which I shall omit, and mention only one more, spoken by Origin
with respect to this Duty of Prayer, where it must of necessity imply personal
Abilities, and that is in his Book. 22. p. 134.
De Oratione, where he prescribes the Method and Parts of Prayer, the first
whereof was Doxology; wherein, says he, he that prays must bless God according
to his Power, (...), where (...), must signify the Performer's Abilities of
Judgment and Expression, because it is not spoken of prescribed Words, but of a
prescribed Method of Prayer; as if any one should desire me to inform him, how
or in what Method he must pray; I tell him, as Origin does in this place, that
first he must begin with an Invocation of God by his Titles and Attributes;
then he must proced to praise God for his Mercies and Benefits, confessing
withal his Ingratitude and Unfruitfulness; then beg pardon for past Sins,
strength against future, and conclude all with praising God through Christ, and
that he must do all this according to the utmost of his Ability. What could any
one imagine, that I should intend by this Advice of following this Method to
the utmost of his Power, but by the exerting of his own Abilities,
Understanding, Memory, Invention, Expression, and the like, since I direct him
not to any prescribed Words, but only to the Observation of those General Heads
and Parts of Prayer.

So that the Ministers Praying (...), or according to the utmost of his
Ability, imports the exerting his Gifts and Parts in suitable Matter and apt
Expressions; and that the Primitive Prayers were so, appears yet farther from a
Passage in Origin, who thus explains that Verse in Matthew. 6. But when ye pray,
use not vain Repetitions as the Heathens do, (...) De Oratione,. 10. p. 63.
But when we pray, let us not Battologise, that is, use not vain Repetitions,
but Theologise: But we Battologise, when we do not strictly observe our Selves,
or the Words of Prayer, which we express, when we utter those things which are
filthy either to do, speak, or think, which are vile, worthily reprovable, and
alienated from the Purity of the Lord. Surely this Caution had been needless of
strictly observing the Words that they uttered, and this Fear had been
groundless of expressing themselves undecently or sinfully, if they had had a
Prayer Book to recur to; but that they had no such Prayer Book appears yet more
evidently from Tertullian, who describing their Public Prayers, says that
Illue suspicientes Christiani manibus expansis, quia innocuis, capite nudo,
quia non erubescimus, denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus. Apolog. c.
30. p. 703.
looking up to Heaven, they spread abroad their Hands because innocent;
uncovered their Heads, because not ashamed; and without a Monitor, because they
prayed from the Heart. Now what is to be understood by praying from the Heart,
will best appean from enquiring into what is opposed to it, viz. The Praying by
a Monitor. Now the praying by a Monitor, as is acknowledged by all, was praying
by a Book. But thus Tertullian affirms the Primitive Christians prayed not: We
do not pray, says he, with a Monitor, reading our Prayers out of a Book. No;
but on the contrary, we pray de Pectore, from the Heart, our own Heart and Soul
dictating to us, what is most proper and fuitable to be asked, having no need
of any other Monitor besides.

Hence their Prayers were suited to their Emergencies and present
Circumstances, as Tertullian writes, that Praemissa legitima and ordinaria
orarione, accidentium jus es desideriorum. De Orat. p. 659.
having premised the Lord's Prayer, we may offer up accidental Requests and
Petitions, of which occasional Requests we find some Instances, as in the
sixteenth Epistle of Cyprian, where that Father assures Moses and Maximus, two
Roman Confessors, Et quando in Sacrificiis precem cum plurimis facimus. Epist.
(...).. 1. p. 44.
That he remembered them in his Public Prayers with his Congregation. And in
another Epistle where he congratulates Pope Lucius upon his Return from
Banishment, he assures him, Hic quoque in Sacrificiis atque in Orationibus
nostris non cessantes Deo -- gratias agere, and orare pariter, ac petere, ut
qui perfectus (...) atque perficiens, custodiat and perficiat in vobis
confessionis vestrae gloriosam coronam. Epist. 58.. 2. p. 163.
That he did not cease in his public Prayers to bless God for so great a
Mercy, and to pray him that was perfect, to keep and perfect in him the
glorious Crown of his Confession. And so when the Church of Carthage sent a Sum
of Money to the Bishops of Numidia, for the Redemption of some Christian
Captives, they desired those Bishops In mentem habeatis in Orationibus vestris,
and eis vicem boni operis in Sacrificiis and precibus repraesentetis. Epist.
60.. 4. p. 167.
to remember them in their public Prayers. So that their Prayers could not be
(...), invariable Forms, because they could add new Petitions, as their
Occasions and Circumstances did require.

Firmilian reports of an Exorcist Woman, that being acted by the Devil, she did
wondrous Feats, taking upon her to perform Ecclesiastical Administrations, as
to Baptize and Celebrate the Eucharist, the Elements whereof she Consecrated,
Invocatione non contemptibili. Apud Cypr. Ep. 75.. 10. (...) 138.
with an Invocation not to be despised, that is, as seems to be most agreeable
unto the Place, and to the (...) of Justin Martyr. The Matter, Invention and
Expression of that Prayer, wherewith she consecrated the Elements, was not mean
of contemptible, but indifferently well performed. So that it seems evident,
that though the Method of their Prayers might in the main be the same, yet
every one was left to follow his own Fancy and Expression therein.

But that I may hasten to the Conclusion of this Section, it is very unlikely
that they were obliged to prescribed Forms, because they never read a Syllable
of their Prayers out of any Book whatsoever, which is evident from their
Posture of Prayer, which was twofold, Either with their Hands and Eyes lifted
up to Heaven, or with their Eyes shut: That they prayed with their Eyes and
Hands lifted up to Heaven, has been already shown in the Third Section of this
Chapter, to which I shall only add this farther Observation, that Expandimus
manus and dominica passione modulantes and orantes consitemur Christo. Tertul.
de Orat. p. 659.
they stretched out their Hands in the Figure of a Cross.

That they also prayed with their Eyes shut, is evident from Origin, who having
explained what is meant by that Injunction of our Savior in Matthew. 6. 5. And
when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are; for they love to
pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that they
may be seen of Men; verily, I say unto you, they have their Rewards, thus
explains the following Verse; But thou, when thou prayest, enter thou into thy
Closet, and when thou have shut to thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in
secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. (...).
De Orat.. 9. p. 62, 63.
But he that is no Hypocrite, enters into the Closet of his Heart, to the
Riches that are treasured up there, and shutting himself in amongst those
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, and not fixing his Eyes on external Objects,
as looking after any thing without, and closing every Gate of the Senses, lest
he should be drawn aside by them, and their Species or Fancies should creep
into his Mind, he prays the Father, who never flies from, or leaves such an
one, but together with the Son, dwells in him. So the same Father writes, that
a true Christian prays in every place, (...). Contia Celsum, lib. 7. p. 362.
closing the Eyes of his Senses, but erecting those of his Mind. Now let them
have prayed iu either of these Postures, and it is very evident that they could
read in neither of them; for it is very improbable that they could turn over
the Leaves of a Book, whilst their Hands were extended toward Heaven in the
Form of a Cross; or that they could read in a Book, whilst their Eyes were
lifted up, or else quite shut and closed.

If therefore there had been prescribed and imposed Forms, they must of
necessity have remembered them, which would have been an intolerable Load to the
strongest Memory, especially to have repeated Word after Word the Prayers of
their Fast Days, which must have been several Hours long, since some of their
Fasts, as will be shown in another place, were prolonged from the Morning of
one Day, to the beginning of another.

. 8. There remains now but one Question more with respect to their Public
Prayers, and that is, Whether they were divided into several Collects? To which
I have not much certain to Answer; probably on their Assemblies on Fast Days,
when they continued together treble the usual time, for the Ease of the Bishop
and his Assistants, they made several (...) Prayers, and probably at their
Ordinary Meetings, their Prayer after Sermon was but one entire Piece. But all
this is but Conjecture, all that I find positive, is touching their Prayer,
that preceded the Consecration of the Eucharistical Elements, which, as Justin
Martyr writes, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 97.
was one long Prayer, to which the People said,

Amen.
CHAP. III.
. 1. Of Baptism: The Persons Baptizing.. 2. The Persons Baptized: First,
Infants.. 3. Next, Adult Persons. The Qualifications that were required in
them.. 4. The manner of Baptism: The Person to be Baptized abjured the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, and gave his Assent to the Fundamental Articles of
the Christian Faith.. 5. A Digression concerning the Ancient Creed. The Creed
commonly called the Apostles, not known within the first Three Hundred Years
after Christ. In those Days they had other brief Summaries of Faith, agreeing
in Sense, but not in Words.. 6. All the ancient Creeds transcribed in their
Original Language.. 7. The Creed, commonly called the Apostles, compared with
the Ancient Creeds.. 8. How the Creed was composed.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapter discoursed of their Public Prayers, I (...)
in the next place to consider the Two Sacraments, viz. Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper. And first of all, to treat of that of Baptism, together with its
Appendix and Confirmation; for the more methodical and distinct handling
whereof, I shall enquire into these three Things, viz. The Persons Baptizing,
the Persons Baptized, and the manner of Baptism.

First, As to the Persons Baptizing, usually they were the Bishops or Pastors
of their Respective Parishes, as Justin Martyr describes Baptism as performed
by the (...), or Apolog. 2. p. 97.
President; and Tertullian by the Antistes, or, De (...). Milit. p. 336.
Superintendent; and Summus Sacerdos qui est Episcopus. De Baptism. p. 602.
by the High Priest, who is the Bishop; but Dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non
tamen sine Episcopi auctorirate -- Laicis etiam jus est -- (...) in
necessitatibus. Ibidem, p. 602, 603.
with his Permission and Consent, It was allowed to Presbyters and Deacons; and
in case of Necessity, even to Laymen to Baptize; but Mulier non tingendi jus
sibi pariet. Ibid. p. 603.
never under any Necessity whatsoever was it permitted to a Woman so to do.

2. As for the Persons that were Baptized, they were two sorts, either Infants,
or Adult persons. That Infants were baptized, will be evident from this single
Consideration. Baptism was always precedent to the Lord's Supper; and none were
admitted to receive the Eucharist, till they were baptized. This is so obvious
to every Man, that it needs no proof: If any one doubts it, he may (...) it
clearly asserted in the Second Apology of Justin Martyr, p. 97. Children
received the Eucharist in the Primitive Church, which is also a thing so well
known, as that for the proof of it I shall only urge one passage of Diaconus
reluctanti licet, de Sacramento Calicis infudit. De Lapsis,. 20. p. 284.
Cyprian's, where he tells a long Story of a Sucking Girl, who so violently
refused to taste the Sacramental Wine, that the Deacon was obliged forcibly to
open her Lips, and to pour down the Consecrated Wine. Therefore it naturally
follows, that Children were baptized; for if they received that Ordinance,
which always succeeded Baptism, then of necessity they must have received
Baptism its self. But I needed not to have mentioned this Consideration, since
Infant Baptism is as clearly asserted in Words at length in the Primitive
Writings, as a thing can possibly be. Thus Origin writes, that Parvuli
baptizantur in Remissionem peccatorum; Quorum peccatorum? Vel quo tempore
peccaverunt? Aut quomodo potest ulla lavacri in parvulis ratio subsistere, nisi
juxta illum seusum de quo paulo ante diximus, nullus mundus a sorde, nec fi
unius diei quidem fuerit vita ejus super terram? Et quia per Baptismi
Sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea baptizantur and parvuli.
In Lucam. Homil. 14.
Children are baptized for the Remission of their Sins, fer the purging away of
their natural Filth, and original Impurity which is inherent in them, according
to Job 15. 14. What is Man that he should be clean? And he which is born of a
Woman, that he should be Righteous? And that of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 4. v.
4. When the Lord shall have washed away the Filth of the Daughter of Sion, and
shall have purged the Blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof. No one is
clean from the Filth; no, though he lived but one Day upon the Earth. Wherefore
because through the Sacrament of Baptism, the Uncleanness of our Birth are
purged away, therefore Children are baptized. And the same Father Commenting on
that place of our Savior, Matthew. 18. 10. See that ye despise not one of these
little ones, alleges this as one Reason, why we should not do so, because of
the Angels that guard them, on which reason he makes this Query, (...).
Comment. in Mat. Tom. 13. p. 331. Vol. 1.
At what time the Angels begin their Guardianship over those little ones,
whether at the time of their Birth or their Baptism? So that little ones were
Baptized; by which little ones he means Infants and Children, as is most
evident from those other Titles, which he gives them in the same Tome, as
(...), little Children, (...), Infants; and in one place he supposes them to be
(...). Ibid. p. 321.
under three or four Years old.

To these Testimonies of Origin, I might also add those of Irenaeus, Lib. 2.
cap. 39. p. 137. and of Cyprian, De Lapsis,. 7. p. 279. But I shall choose to
wave them, because I would willingly translate at length the Determination of
an African Svnod, held Anno 254, whereat were present Threescore and Six
Bishops; ^ the occasion of which Determination was this: A certain Bishop
called Fidus, had some Scruples, not concerning the Baptism of Infants, but
concerning the time of their Baptism, whether they might be baptized before the
Second or Third Day after their Birth, or before the Eighth Day, as it was
observed with respect to Circumcision under the Mosaical Economy; the Reasons
or Grounds for which his Scruples he proposed to this Synod, who having
seriously examined them, (...) decreed, That Childrens Baptism was not to be
deferred to long, but that the Grace of God, or Baptism, should be given to
all, and most especially unto (...), which Synodical Decree, because so
pertinent to my purpose, I have at large transcribed as follows:

Quantum vero ad cansam Infantium pertinet, quos dixisti intra secundum vel
tertium diem quo nati sint constitutos baptizari non oportere; and
considerandam esse legem Circumcisionis antiquae, ut intra octavum diem eum qui
natus est baptizandum and sanctificandum non putares; long aliud in consilio
nostro omnibus visum est; in hoc enim quod tu putabas esse faciendum, nemo
consensit, sed universi potius judicavimus, nulli hominum nato misericordiam
Dei and gratiam denegandam; nam cum Dominus in Evangelio suo dicar, Filius
hominis non venit animas hominum perdere, sed salvare; quantum in nobis est, si
fieri potest, (...) anima perdenda est. Quid enim ei deest, qui semel in utero,
Dei manibus formatus est? Nobis enim atque oculis nostris, secundum dierum
secularium cursum, accipere, qui nati sunt incrementum videntur: Caeterum
quaecunque a Deo fiunt, Dei factoris majestate and opere perfecta sunt. Esse
denique apud omnes, sive infantes, sive majores natu, unam divini muneris
aequalitatem, declarat nobis divinae Scripturae fides, cum Helisaeus super
Infantem Sunamitis Viduae Filium qui mortuus jacebat, ita se Deum deprecans
superstravit, ut capiti caput, and faciei facies applicaretur, and superfusi
Helisaei membra singulis parvuli membris and pedes pedibus jungerentur. Quae
res si secundum nativitatis nostrae and Corporis qualitatem cogitetur, adulto
and provecto Infans non posset ^.

Nam and quod vestigium infantis, in primis (...) ini diebus constituti, mundum
non esse (...), quod unusquisque nostrum adhuc horreat exosculari, nec hoc
(...) coelestem gratiam dandam impedimento esse oportere; scriptumest enim,
omnia mundasunt mundis; nec aliquis nostrum id debet hortere, quod Deus
dignatus est facere. Nam etsi adhuc infans a partu novus eft, non ita est
tamen, ut quisquam illum in gratia danda atque in pace facienda horrere debeat
osculari, quando in osculo (...) unusquisque nostrum pro sua religione ipsas
adhuc recentes Dei manus debeat cogitare, quas in homine modo formato and
recens nato quodammodo exosculamur, quando id quod Deus fecit, amplectimur. Nam
quod in Judaica. Circumcisione carnali octavus dies observabatur, Sacramentum
est in umbra atque in imagine ante (...), (...) veniente Christo veritate
completum. (...) quia octavus dies, id est, post (...) dies (...) erat, quo
Dominus (...), and (...) and Circumcisionem nobis (...), hic dies (...), id
est, post Sabbacum primus, and Dominicus praecessit in imagine, quae imago
cessavit fuperveniente (...) veritate, and data nobis spirituali circumcisione.
Propter quod neminem putamus a gratia consequenda impediendum (...) lege quae
iam (...) est; nec spiritualem circumcisionem impediri carnali (...), sed omnem
omnino hominem admittendum efse ad gratiam Christi, quando and Petrus in
Actibus Apostolorum (...), and dicat, Dominus mihi dixit, (...) communem
dicendum and immundum.

Caeterum si homines (...) aliquid ad (...) gratiae posset; magis adultos and
provectos and majores natu possent impedire peccata graviora. Porro autem si
etiam gravissimis delictoribus and in Deum multum ante peccantibus, cum postea
crediderint, remissa peccatorum datur, and a baptismo atque a gratia nemo
prohibetur; quanto magis prohiberi non debet (...), qui recens natus nihil
peccavit, nisi quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus contagium mortis antique
prima nativitate contraxit? Qui ad remissam peccatorum accipiendam hoc ipso
facilius accedit, quod illi remittuntur non propria, sed aliena peccata and
idcirco, frater charissime, haec fuit in concilio nostra sententia, a baptismo
atque a gratia Dei, qui omnibus (...) and (...), and pius est, neminem per nos
debere prohiberi. Quod cum (...) universos observandum (...) atque retinendum,
tum magis circa (...) ipsos and recens natos (...) putamus, qui hoc (...) de
(...), ac de divina (...) plus merentur, quod in primo statim na (...) suae
ortu (...) flentes nihil aliud (...) quam (...).

As for the matter of Infants, whom, you said, were not to be Baptized within
the Second or Third Day after their Nativity, or according to the Law of
Circumcision within the eighth Day thereof; it has appeared to us in our
Council quite contrary; no one maintained your Opinion, but we all judged, That
the Mercy and Grace of God was to be denied to no Man; for since the Lord said
in the Gospel, The Son of Man came not to destroy, but to save the Souls of
Men; therefore as much as lies in our Power, no Soul is to be lost; for what is
there defective in him, who has been once formed in the Womb by the Hands of
God? To us indeed it seems, that Children increase, as they advance in Years;
but yet whatever things are made by God, are perfected by the Work and Majesty
of God their Maker. Besides, the (...) Scriptures declare, that both Infants
and Adult Persons have the same Equality in the Divine Workmanship: When Elisha
prayed over the Dead Child of the Sunamitish Widow, he lay upon the Child, and
put his Head upon his Head, and his Face upon his Face, and his Body upon his
Body, and his Feet upon his Feet. This may be thought improbable, how the small
Members of an Infant should equal the big ones of a grown Man; but (...) is
expressed the Divine and Spiritual Equality, that all Men are equal, and alike,
when they are made by God; that though the increase of our (...) may cause an
inequality with respect to Men, yet not with respect to God; unless that that
Grace, which is given to (...) Persons, be more or less according to the Age of
the Receivers; but the Holy Ghost is given equally to all, not according to
measure, but according to God's Mercy and Indulgence; for as God is no
respecter of Persons, so neither of Years; he equally offers to all, the (...)
of his Heavenly Grace.

And whereas you say, that an (...) for the first Days after his Birth is
unclean, so that (...) one is (...) to kiss him, this can (...) no Impediment
to his (...) of Heavenly Grace; for it is written, to the Pure all things are
pure; and none of us should dread that which God has made; for although an
(...) be newly born, yet he is not so, as that we should dread to (...) him;
since in the (...) of an Infant, we ought to think upon the fresh Works of God,
which in a (...) we This they speak with reference to their Custom of Saluting
one another at the Conclusion of their public (...).
(...) in an Infant newly formed and born, when we embrace that which God has
made. And whereas the (...) Jewish (...) was performed on the Eighth Day, that
was a Type and Shadow of some future good thing, which, Christ the Truth being
now come, is done away; because the Eighth Day, or the First Day after the
Sabbath, was (...) be the Day on which our Lord should rise and quicken us, and
give us the Spiritual Circumcision; (...) was the Carnal Circumcision on the
Eighth Day, which Type is now abolished, Christ the Truth being come, and
having given us the Spiritual Circumcision. Wherefore it is our Judgment, that
no one ought to be debarred from God's Grace by that Law, or that the Spiritual
Circumcision should be hindered by the carnal one; but all Men ought to be
admitted to the Grace of Christ, as Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles,
that the Lord said unto him, that he should call no Man common or unclean.

But if any thing can hinder Men from Baptism, it will be heinous Sins, that
will debar the Adult and Mature therefrom; and if those who have sinned
extremely against God, yet if afterward they (...), are baptized, and no Man
is prohibited (...) this Grace, how much more ought not an Insant to be (...),
who being but just born, is guilty of (...) Sin, but of Original which he (...)
from Adam? Who ought the more (...) to be received to the remission of Sins,
(...) not his own, but others sins are remitted to him. Wherefore, dearly
beloved, it is our Opinion, that from (...), and the Grace of God, who is
merciful, kind and benign to all, none (...) to be prohibited by us, which as
it is to be observed and followed with respect to all, so especially with
respect to Infants, and those that are but just born, who deserve our Help, and
the Divine (...), because at the first instant of their Nativity, they beg it
by their Cries and Tears.

Apud Cyprian. (...). 59.. 2, 3, 4. p. 164, 165.

So that here is as Formal, Synodical Decree for the Baptism of Infants as
possibly can be (...); which being the Judgment of a Synod, is more (...) and
cogent than that of a private Father, it being supposable, that a (...) Father
might write his own particular Judgment and Opinion, but the Determinations of
a Synod or Council, denote the common Practice and Usage of the Whole Church.

. 3. It is evident then, that Infants were baptifed in the Primitive Ages; and
as for the Baptism of the Adult, that being owned by all, it will be needless
to prove it. These were (...) grown in Years, able to judge and (...) for
themselves, who relinquished Paganism, and came over to the Christian Faith.
What Qualifications were required in them previous or antecedent to Baptism I
need not here relate, since I have already handled this Point in the Sixth
Chapter of the former Treatise, to which I refer the Reader. In short, such as
these were first instructed in the (...) Faith, continued some time in the Rank
of the (...), till (...), etc. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 93.
they had given good Proofs of their Resolutions to (...) a pious, religious
Life, and had protested their Assent and Consent to all the Christian Verities,
and then they were solemnly baptized. Which brings (...) to the third thing
proposed, (...). The (...) of Baptism, which for the main was, as (...).

. 4. The Person to be baptized was first asked several Questions by the Bishop,
or by him that Officiated, unto which he was to give his Answer, concerning
which Baptismal Questions and Answers Dionysius (...) speaks in his Letter to
Xystus Bishop of (...), wherein he writes of a certain sorupulous Person in his
Church, who was exceedingly troubled, when he was present at Baptism, and
(...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. (...). 9. p. 254.
heard the Questions and Answers of those that were Baptized. Which Questions
Firmilian styles, Usitata and Legitima verba interrogationis. Apud Cyprian.
Epist. 75.. 10. p. 238.
the lawful and usual Interrogatories of Baptism. Now these Questions and
Answers were twofold: First, Of Abjuration of the Devil and all his Works:
And, Secondly, Of a Firm Assent to the Articles of the Christian Faith. First,
Of Abjuration. The Minister proposed this Question to the Party baptized, or to
this Effect, Do you renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh? To which he
answered, Yes. So writes (...), Contestamur (...) renunciare Diabolo and Pompae
and Angelis (...). De (...), p. 336.
When (...) are baptized, (...) renounce the World, the Devil, and his Angels.
And (...) nos (...) and (...) and Angelis ejus ore nostro (...). De Spectac. p.
583.
with (...) Mouth we have vowed to renounce the World, the (...) and his
Angels. And Renunciavimus Diabolo and Angelis ejus. De (...). p. 618.
We have renounced the Devil and his Angels. And Pactus (...) renunciare
Diabolo, and Pompae and Angelis ejus. Lib. de (...). c. 17. p. 554.
Thou have (...) to renounce the World, the Devil, and his Angels. And, Vocati
sumus ad militiam Dei vivi, jam (...) cum in Sacramenti verba spondimus. Ad
Martyr. p. 367.
We were called to the Warfare of the Living God, when we promised in the Words
of Baptism. To the same effect also says Cyprian, Saeculo renunciaveramus cum
baptizati sumus. Epist. 7.. 5. p. 20.
When we were baptized, we renounced the World. And Mundi pompis and deliciis
jam tunc renuncravimus. De Hab. Virg.. 6. p. 267.
We have renounced the World, its Pomps and Delights. And Dei servus -- Diabolo
jam renunciarat and Saeculo. De Lapsis,. 6, p.279.
The Servant of God has renounced the Devil and the World. And, Saeculo
renunciavimus and Divitias ejus and (...) pas fide gratiae spiritualis (...).
De Orat. Dom.: 14. p. 213.
We have renounced the World, and by the Faith of Spiritual Grace have cast off
its Riches and Pomps. And, Diabolo and Mundo renunciavimus. De Bono (...),. 7.
p. 365.
We (...) the Devil and the World. And so likewise says Clemens Alexandrinus,
that in Baptism (...). Theod. Epist. p. 573.
we renounced the Devil.

The Second Question was, Whether the Party to be Baptized, did believe all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, to which he answered, Yes, as Justin Martyr
writes, (...), etc. Apolog. 2. p. 93.
that those who were to be baptized, were to give their Assent to the things
that were (...) and held by them. So Cyprian writes, that at Baptism they asked
the Baptized Person's Assent to this Creed, Symbolo baptizare, nosse Deum
Patrem, Filium Christum, Spiritum Sanctum, credis remissionem peccatorum, and
vitam aeternam per Sanctam Ecclesiam? Epist. 76.. 6. p. 248.
Whether he believed in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, remission of Sins,
and eternal Life through the Church? And that at Baptism they asked, Credis in
vitam aeternam, and remissionem peccatorum per sanctam Ecclesiam? Epist. 70..
2. p. 211.
Do thou believe (...) Life everlasting, and remission of Sins through the
Holy Church? These Articles of Faith to which the Baptized Persons gave their
Assent, are called by Cyprian, Symboli legem. Epist. 76.. 6. p. 248.
The Law of the Symbol. And by Novatian, Regula veritatis. De (...) inter Opera
(...) p. 493.
The Rule of Truth.

. 5. And here since we have mentioned the Symbol, it will be no unuseful
Digression to enquire a little into the Ancient Creeds; for as for that Creed,
which is commonly called the Aposties, all Learned Persons are now agreed, that
it was never composed by them, neither do I find it within my prescribed Time:
But though they had not that, yet they had other Creeds very like thereunto,
which contained the fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, (...) which
all Christians gave their Assent and (...), and that publicly at Baptism;
whence, as before it is called by Cyprian, The Law of the Symbol; and by
Novatian, The Rule of Truth.

This Creed was handed down from Father to Son, as a brief Summary of the
necessary Scripture Truths, not in ipsissimis verbis, or in the same set Words,
but only the Sense or Substance thereof, which is evident, from that we never
find the Creed twice repeated in the same Words, no, not by one and the same
Father; which that it may the more manifestly appear, as also that we may see
the Congruity and Affinity of the Ancient Creeds with our Present Creed,
commonly called the Apostles, I shall (...) in their Original Language all the
whole Creeds, and Pieces of Creeds, that I find within my limited Bounds,
which, together with the Authors wherein they are to be (...), are as follows.

. 6. (...). Ignat. Epist. ad (...). p. 52.

(...). (...), lib. 1. c. 2. p. 35, 36,

(...) in unum Deum fabricatorem (...) ac (...), and (...) quae in eis sunt,
per Christum Jesum Dei Filium, qui propter (...) erga Figmentum suum
dilectionem, (...) quae esset ex Virgin, generationem (...), ipse per se
hominem adunans Deo, and passus sub Pontio Pilato, and resurgens, and in
claritate receptus, in gloria venturus Salvator eorum qui salvantur, and Judex
eorum qui (...), and mittens in ignem aeternum transfiguratores veritatis, and
contemptores patris sui and adventus ejus. Irenaeus, lib. 3. cap. 4. p 172.

Regula est autem Fidei, ut jam hinc quid credamus, profitearur, illa scilicet,
qua creditur unum omnino Deum esse, (...) alium praeter mundi creatorem, qui
universa de nihilo produxerit per verbum suum, primo omnium amissum: id verbum
Filium ejus appellatum in nomine Dei, vary visum Patriarchis, in Prophetis
semper auditum, postremo delatum ex spiritu patris Dei and virture in Virginem
Matiam, carnem factum in utero ejus, and ex ea natum, egisse Jesum Christum,
exinde proedicasse novam legem and novam promissionem Regni Coelorum, virtutes
fecisse, fixum cruci tertia die resurrexisse, in coelos ereptum, sedere ad
dexteram patris, misisse vicariam vim spiritus sancti, qui credentes agant,
venturum cum claritate ad sumendos sauctos in vitae eternae, and promissorum
coelestium fructum, and ad (...) judicandos igni perpetuo, facta utriusque
partis resuscitatione cum carnis (...). Haec regula a Christo -- instituta
nullas habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas haereses (...), and quae
haereticos faciunt. (...). de (...), advers. (...). p. 73.

Unicum quidem Deum credimus, sub hac (...) dispensatione quam (...) dicimus,
ut unici Dei sit and Filius Sermo ipsius, qui ex ipso processerit, per quem
omnia facta sunt, and sine quo factum est nihil, hunc missum a patre in
Virginem, and ex ea natum hominem and Deum, filium hominis and filium Dei, and
cognominatum Jesum Christum, hunc passum, (...) mortuum and sepultum secundum
scripturas, and resuscitatum a Patre, and in coelo resumptum, sedere ad
dexteram patris, venturum judicare vivos and (...), qui exinde miserat secundum
promissionem suam a patre spiritum sanctum Paracletum, sanctificatorem fidei
eorum qui credunt in patrem, and filium, and spiritum sanctum. Hanc regulam ab
initio Evangelii decucurrisse, etc. Tertul. advers. Praxean. p. 316.

Regula Fidei una omnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis credendi
scilicet in unicum Deum omnipotentem, mundi conditorem, and (...) ejus Jesum
Christum, natum ex Virgin Maria, crucifixum sub Pontio Pilato, tertio (...)
resuscitatum a mortuis, receptum in coelis, sedentem nunc ad dexteram patris,
venturum (...) vivos and mortuos, per carnis etiam resurrectionem. Tertullian
de Virginib. veland. p. 385.

(...). Origin. Comment. in (...). Tom. 32. p. 397. Vol. 2.

Unus Deus est, qui omnia creavit, atque composuit; quique ex nullis fecit esse
universa, Deus a prima creatura and condition mundi omnium justorum, Adam,
Abel, Seth, Enos, etc. and quod hic Deus in novissimis diebus, (...) per
Prophetas suos ante promiserat, (...) Dominum (...) Jesum Christum, (...)
quidem vocaturum Israel, secundo vero etiam gentes post perfidiam populi
Israel. Hic Deus (...) and bonus pater domini nostri Jesu Christi, Legem and
Prophetas and Evangelia ipse (...), qui and Apostolorum Deus est, and veteris
and novi Testamenti: Tum deinde quia Jesus Christus ipse qui venit, ante omnem
(...) ex patre est: Qui cum in omnium condition (...) ministrasset (per ipsum
enim omnia (...)) novissimis temporibus seipsum (...) homo factus est,
incarnatus est cum Deus (...) and homo mansit quod Deus erat. Corpus assumpsit
corpori nostro simile, eo solo (...), quod natum ex Virgin and Spiritu sancto
est, and quoniam hic Jesus Christus natus and (...) est in veritate, and non
per imaginem, communem hanc mortem vere (...) est; vere enim a morte
resurrexit, and post resurrectionem conversatus cum (...) suis assumptus (...).

Tum deinde honor ac dignitate Patri ac Filio sociatum tradiderunt Spiritum
sanctum, in hoc non jam manifest discernitur, utrum (...) aut innatus. Sed
inquirenda jam ista pro viribus sunt de Sacra Scriptura, and sagaci
perquisitione investiganda, sane quod iste Spiritus (...) unumquemque sanctorum
vel Prophetarum, vel Apostolorum inspiravit, and non (...) Spiritus in
veteribus, alius vero in his, qui in adventu Christi inspirati sunt,
manifestissime in Ecclesiis praedicatur. Post haec jam, quod anima substantiam,
vitamque habens (...), cum ex hoc mundo discesserit, and pro (...) meritis
dispensabit, sive vitae aeternae ac (...) haereditate potitura, si hoc ei sua
(...) praestiterint; sive igne aeterno ac (...) mancipanda, si in hoc eam
scelerum culpa detorserit. Sed and quia erit tempus resurnectionis mortuorum,
cum corpus hoc quod in (...) seminatur surget in incorruptione, and quod
seminatur in ignominia, surget in gloria. Origin. in Proaem. lib. (...).

Credis in Deum Patrem, Filium Christum, Spiritum Sanctum, remissionem
peccatorum, and Vitam AEternam per Sanctam (...) Cyprian. Epist. 76.. 6. p. 248.

(...) (...). Gregor. (...).

. 7. These are all the Creeds that I have met with, in which the Words are
various, but generally recurring to the (...) Sense: It would be too tedious to
translate them all; wherefore I shall sum them up in the Creed, commonly called
the Apostles, and thereby show their Congruity and Agreement, as also, what is
in the Apostles Creed more than in these. Now the Articles of the Apostles
Creed, that are to be found in the (...) Creeds, are as follows:

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried --
The Third Day he rose again from the Dead, ascended into Heaven, sits at the
Right Hand of God the Father Almighty, from whence he shall come to judge both
the Quick and the Dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic (...)
-- the Forgiveness of ^.

Here are now two Clauses of our (...), viz. He descended into (...) (...) The
Communion of (...).

. 8. If we would know how they were (...), we must first consider how the whole
Creed was framed, which I conceive was done these two ways.

First, Some of the Articles were derived down from the very Days of the
Apostles.

Secondly, Others were afterward added in opposition to Heresies, as they
sprung up in the Church.

First, Some of the Articles were (...) down from the very Days of the (...),
such were these, I believe in God the (...), (or as the Greek Creeds read it,
in one (...) the Father, in opposition to the Polytheism of the Heathens) and
in Jesus Christ his only (...) Son our Lord: I believe, in the Holy (...) the
Resurrection of the Body, and the (...), lasting. For in the Days of the (...)
as well (...) afterward, it was the Practice at Baptism, to demand the
baptized (...) assent (...) the fundamental Articles of the (...) Faith, us
Philip did the (...); (...) amongst which Fundamentals we may be (...) they
reckoned the Doctrine of the (...) because they were baptized in the Name and
Dedicated to the Service of the (...); and that of the Unity of the Godhead,
because, it was the great (...) and design of their Preaching to overturn the
Pagans multiplicity of Deities; and that of the Resurrection of the (...), and
the Life everlasting, because that was the Characteristick or Peculiar Doctrine
of the (...) Religion, by which it was eminently (...) from other Sects and
Opinions, and was the only Comfort and support of the Christians under their
Sufferings and Martyrdoms, according to that of St. Paul, 1. (...). 15. 29. If
the Dead rise not at all, why are they then baptized for the Dead?

As for the other Articles of the Creed, viz. Such as are predicated of Christ,
as, His being conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, etc. and
those other two, The Holy Catholic Church, and, The Forgiveness of Sins, I
conceive them to be introduced the second way, viz. in opposition to Heresies,
as they sprung up in the Church, as, was conceived by the Holy Ghost, in
opposition to the (...), Ebionites, and Cerinthians, who taught that Christ was
born in the ordinary and common way as other Men and Women are: Was born of the
Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, etc. in contradiction to the
Docetae, Simonians, and others, who affirmed Christ to be a Man, not really,
but only Phantastically, or in appearance; of which Heretics (...) (...).
(...). ad Smirn. p. 2.
speaks; and (...) them his forementioned Creed seems particularly to be
levelled, The Remission of Sins, against the Basitidians, who held that not all
Sins, but only involuntary ones would be remitted; or rather against the
Novatians, who denied remission to the Lapsed: The Holy Catholic Church, to
exclude thereby all (...) and Schismatics from being within the Pale thereof.

By these two ways then was the Creed composed, and by the latter hereof were
those two Articles introduced, of Christ's Descent into Hell, and of the
Communion of Saints. The Communion of Saints was brought in last of all. The
Descent into Hell toward the (...) end of the Fourth Century, into the manner
and occasion whereof, as also the intent and meaning of this Article, I had
designed once to enquire, having made some Collections concerning it; but
finding I should be then forced to pass the Limits of my prescribed time, I
have thought it expedient to omit it, and to return to those Points, from
whence I have so long digressed.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. Of Godfathers.. 2. (...) preceded Baptism: The Form and Reason thereof..
3. Next came Baptism its self: The Sacramental Water (...) by Prayer.. 4. The
Person Baptized in the Name of the Trinity.. 5. (...), or dipping, generally
used.. 6. Sometimes Perfusion, or Sprinkling. The Validity thereof considered..
7. After Baptism followed Prayers.

. 1. HAving in the former Chapter made a little Digression, I now return to the
matter that first occasioned it, which was, the Questions proposed to the
Persons to be Baptized, unto which Adult Persons answered for themselves, and
Susceptors, or Godfathers, for Children. Of these Susceptors, or Sponsors,
(...) speaks, where he thus advises the delay of Childrens Baptism, Quid (...)
est sponsores etiam periculo ingeri, qui and ipsi per mortalitatem (...)
promissiones suas possunt, and proventu malae indolis falli? De Baptism. p. 603.
What necessity is there that Sponsors should expose themselves to danger, who
through Death may (...) of the Performance of their Promises, or may be
deceived by the wicked Disposition of those they promise for? Whether the use
of Sponsors was from the Apostles Days, I cannot determine, unless the Negative
may be conjectured from Justin (...), Tertullian's Senior by Fisty Years, who
when he enumerates the Method and Form of Baptism, says not one Word of
Sponsors or Godfathers, as may be seen in his Second Apology, Page 93, 94.

. 2. When these Questions and Answers were ended, then followed Exorcization,
the manner and end whereof was this: The Minister put his Hands on the Persons
Head that was to be Baptized, and breathed in his Face, implying thereby the
Exorcization, or expelling of the Devil or Evil Spirit from him, and a
preparing of him for Baptism and Confirmation, when and where the good and holy
Spirit was conferred and given.

This Practice I find mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus, who speaks of the
Theodot. Epirom. p. 573.
(...), or Exorcism before Baptism, but more fully by some of those Bishops
that were present at that famous Council of Carthage, held Anno 258 in whose
Determinations, Exorcization is required as previous and antecedent to Baptism.
Thus in that of Crescens Bishop of Cirta, Censeo omnes Haereticos and
Schismaticos qui ad Catholicam Ecclesiam voluerint venire, non ante ingredi,
nisi (...) and baptizati prius fuerint. Apud (...). p. 445.
I judge, says he, that all Heretics and Schismatics, who would come to the
Catholic Church, are not to be admitted, till they have been first Exorcized
and (...). So also said Lucius Bishop of (...), Haereticos -- censeo (...) and
baptizandos esse. Ibid. (...). 447.
It is my Opinion that all Heretics are to (...) exorcized and baptized. And
thus more clearly Vincentius Bishop of Thibaris, Haereticos scimus pejores esse
quam ethnicos, si ergo conversi ad Dominum venire voluerint, habemus utique
regulam veritatis, quam Dominus praecepto divino mandavit Apostolis, dicens:
(...) in nomine meo, (...) imponite, Daemonia expellite; and alio loco, ite,
docete gentes; baptizantes eos in nomine Patris and Filii, and Spiritas sancti;
ergo primo per manus impositionem in exorcismo; secundo per Baptismi
regenerationem, tune possunt ad Christi pollicitationem venire: alius autem
fieri censeo non debere. Ibid. p. 447.
We know Heretics to be worse than (...). If therefore they would turn and
come to the Lord, we have a Rule of Truth, which the Lord commanded the (...),
saying; Go, in my (...), lay on Hands, and cast out Devils, (Mark 16. 17.) And
in another place. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, (Matthew. 28. 19.) Therefore first let
them come by Imposition of Hands in Exorcism, and then by the Regeneration of
Baptism, that so they may be made Partakers of Christ's Promises; but otherwise
I think they cannot.

From this last Determination we may observe the Reason of these Exorcisms,
which arose from a misunderstanding of Christ's Valedictory Speech to his
Disciples in Mark 16, 17, etc. In the 16th Verse of that Chapter (...) them to
go forth preaching the Gospel, and to Baptize, which was to be (...), perpetual
Ministration to the end of the World. Then he proceeds to tell them, v. 17, 18.
that for the speedier propagation of the Gofpel, and that the Heathens (...)
the more readily embrace it, he would confer on them, and the first Preachers
(...) of, the Gift of working Miracles, that in (...) Name they should cast out
Devils, and speak with new Tongues, as they most (...) did at the Day of
Pentecost; That they should take up Serpents, as Paul did at (...) without
receiving any Injury; and if they (...) any deadly thing, it should not hurt
them; They should say Hands on the Sick, and they should recover; All which
they did, as Ecclesiastical Histories (...) testify; and St. Mark closes this
Chapter, and his Gospel, with saying, that when the Apostles went (...) and
Preached, the Lord (...) with them, and confirmed the Word with Signs
following. So that these were extraordinary Actions (...) promised to the (...)
and first (...) of the Faith of Christ.

But now it is evident from the forementioned Determination of Vincentius
Bishop of (...), that in his Age, they apprehended them to be like Baptism,
ordinary and standing Administrations in the Church, and so (...) in the Sense
of the forecited Text, introduced for an ordinary and constant Practice, that
which was promised by Christ for an extraordinary and miraculous Gift. Christ
promised his (...), the miraculous Power of casting Devils out of Bodies
possessed by them: But these Fathers understood this Promise of the common
Spiritual Effects of the Gospel, which, where it is believingly received,
delivers that Person from the Desusion and Dominion of the Devil, under which
we all naturally are, being by Nature Children of Wrath; and for the
Declaration of this invisible Freedom and Deliverance, which they all thought
to be in (...) Baptism, they made use of this external Sign of Exorcism just
before Baptism, to declare thereby, that now the unclean Devil with all his
Power and Tyranny was cast out of that Person, who was now going in and by
(...), to be (...) to the Service of a (...) Master, viz. of the Blessed
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God blessed for evermore.

. 3. When (...) was (...), then came Baptism its self; and the Person being
ready to be Baptized, the Minister, by Prayer, (...) the Water for that use,
because it was not any Water, but only Aqua ^. Act. Concit. (...). apud
Cyprian. p. 446.
that Water, as Sedatus Bishop of Turbo writes, which is sanctified in the
Church by the Prayers of the Minister, that (...) away Sin. It is true indeed,
as Tertullian writes, Omnes Aquae de (...)
That any Waters (...) Sacramentum sanctificationis consequuntur (...),
supervenit (...) statim (...) de Coelis and ^ Baptism. p. 598. may be applied
to that use, but then God must be first Invocated, and then the Holy Ghost
presently comes down from Heaven, moves upon them, and (...) them. (...), says
Cyprian, (...) ergo mundari and sanctificari (...) a Sacerdote ut possit
Baptismo suo peccata hominis qui baptizatur (...) Epist. 70.. 2. p. (...).
The Water must be first (...) and sanctified by the Priest, that by its
washing it may wash away the Sins of Man that is Baptized.

. 4. The Water being Consecrated, the Person was then Baptized in the Name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. So writes Justin (...), (...).
Apolog. 2. p. 94.
They are baptized in the Name of God the Father, Lord of all, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost. For as Clemens (...) says, (...).
Theod. Epitom. p. 573.
The baptized Person by this Dedication to the Blessed Trinity, is delivered
from the corrupt Trinity, viz. The Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and is now
Sealed by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. This Baptizing in the Name of
Trinity, Origin terms, (...). Comment. in Johan. Vol. 2. Tom. (...). p. 124.
The Invocation of the Adorable Trinity.

. 5. As for the (...) of Water employed in Baptism, that is, whether they (...)
or dipped; to me it seems evident, that their (...) Custom was (...) or dip the
whole Body. When St. Barnabas describes a baptized Person by his going down
into the Water, (...). (...). Cathol.. 9. p. 235.
We go down, says he, into the Water full of Sin and Filth, but we ascend with
Fruit and Benefit in our Hearts. And so Tertullian represents baptized Persons,
as, Aquam (...) De Spectaculis, p. 583.
entered into the Water. And as In aqua demissus. De Baptismo. p. 597.
let down into the Water. And Justin Martyr describes the same (...). Apolog.
2. p. 94.
by being washed in Water; and calls the place where they are baptized (...),
Ibidem ut supra.
a washing-place, or a Bath; whence (...) (...) against the Baptism of
Heretics, condemns it as carnal, and as being upon that account no (...) Nihil
differt a Judaeorum Baptismo, quo sic illi utuntur, and (...) tanquum communi
and vulgari lavacro tantum sordes laventur. Apud Cyprian. Ep. 75.. 11. p. 239.
different from the Baptism or washing of the Jews, which they used as a common
and ordinary Bath to wash away the (...) of their Bodies.

. 6. But though Immersion was their usual Custom, yet Perfusion or Sprinkling
was not accounted unlawful; but in cases of necessity that was used, as in
Clinic Baptism, which was, when sick Persons, whose Deaths they apprehended,
were Baptized in their Beds, as (...) (...). Cornel. ad (...). apud Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 43. p. 244.
being sick, and (...) Death, as was (...), was Baptized in his (...)
Perfusion, or, Pouring on of Water.

It is true indeed, this Baptism was not generally esteemed as perfect, as the
more solemn Baptism; for which Reason it was a Custom in some Churches, not to
advance any to Clerical Orders, who had been (...) Baptized; an Instance
whereof we have in the Church of Rome, where the Ordination of Novatian to be a
Presbyter, was (...). Ex (...). Cornel. ad. Fabium Antioch apud Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 43. p. 245.
opposed by all the Clergy, and by many of the (...), as unlawful, because of
his Clinic Perfusion. But yet that they held it not altogether or absolutely
unlawful to be done, appears from that on the Entreaties of the Bishop, they
consented that he should be ordained, as he accordingly was: And Cyprian in a
set Discourse on this Subject, declares, that he thought this Baptism to be as
perfect and (...), as that done more solemnly by Immersion, for when one Magnus
writ to him, (...) his Opinion, whether those were (...) baptized, who, through
their (...), were (...), but only perfused or aspersed, he (...).

Nos quantum concipit mediocritas nostra, (...) in nullo mutilari and (...)
posse divina beneficia, nec minus aliquid illic posse contingere, ubi plena and
tota (...) and dantis and sumentis accipitur, quod de divinis muneribus
hauritur. Neque enim sic in Sacramento Salutari delictorum contagia, ut in
lavacro carnali and seculari (...) cutis and corporis (...), ut aphronitris,
and (...) quoque adjumentis, and Solio and Piscina opus fit, quibus ablui and
mundari corpusculum (...). Aliter pectus credentis abluitur, aliter men's
hominis per fidei merita mundatur. In Sacramentis (...) necessitate cogente,
and Deo indulgentiam suam (...), totum (...) Divina compendia. Nec quemquam
movere debet, quod (...) persundi videantur aegri, cum gratiam dominicam (...),
quando (...) per Ezechielem (...) and (...), and aspergam super vos aquam
(...), and mundabi mini ab omnibus (...), and ab omnibus (...) vos, and dabo
vobis cor novum, and Spiritum novum dabo in vobis. Item in Numeris, and homo
qui (...) immundus usque ad (...), hic (...) dietertio, and die septimo and
mundus erit; si (...) non suerit purificatus die tertio, and die septimo, non
erit mundus, and exterminabitur anima illa de Israel, quoniam aqua aspersionis
non est super eum sparsa. Et iterum, and locutus est Dominus ad Moysen, dicens,
accipe (...) de (...) Israel, and (...), and ita (...) purificationem (...),
(...) aqua purificationis; and iterum, aqua aspersionis purificatio est. Unde
(...) quoque aquae (...) lavacri obtinere; and quando haec in ecclesia (...),
ubi sit and dantis and accipientis (...) integra, stare omnia and consummari ac
perfici posse (...) Domini and Fidei veritate. Epist. 76.. 9. p. 249, 250.

That as far as he could (...), he (...) that the Divine Benefits could (...)
wise be (...), or (...), nor that less thereof could (...), where the Divine
Gifts are received with a sound and full Faith, both of Giver and Receiver: Far
in Baptism, the Spots of Sin are otherwise washed (...), than the (...) of the
Body in a Secular and Carnal Bath is, in which there is need of a Seat to sit
upon, of a Vat to wash in, (...) Soap, and other such like Implements, that so
the Body may be washed and cleansed; but in another manner is the Heart of a
Believer ^ is the Mind of a Man purified by (...) Merits of Christ. In the
Sacraments of (...) through the Indulgence of God in Cases of (...), the Divine
(...) convey the (...) those that (...) Nor let (...) one think it strange,
that the Sick, when they are Baptized, are only perfused or sprinkled, since
the Scripture says, by the (...) Ezekiel, Chap. 36. v. 25, 26. I will sprinkle
clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your (...), and from all
your Idols will I cleanse you; a new Heart also will, I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you. Also it is said in Numbers, chap. 19. 19, 20. And
the Man which shall be (...) to the Evening, (...) shall (...) purified the
third Day, and the seventh Day, and (...) shall be clean; but if he shall not
be purified the third (...) and the seventh Day, he shall not (...) clean, and
that Soul shall be (...) off from Israel, because the (...) of Aspersion has
not been sprinkled on him. And again the Lord spoke unto Moses, Numb. 8. v. 6,
7. Take the (...) from among the Children of Israel, and cleanse them; and thus
shall thou do unto them to cleanse (...) sprinkle Water of Purifying upon them.
And again, the Water of Aspersion is Purification: From whence it appears, that
sprinkling is sufficient instead of Immersion; and whenever it is done, if
there be a sound Faith of Giver and Receiver it is perfect and complent.

And a little (...) in the same Epistle, the said Father argues the Validity of
Baptizing by Sprinkling, because such as had been so Baptized, were never
Baptized again.

Aut si aliquis (...) eos nihil (...), (...) quod aqua salutari (...) perfusi
sunt, sed (...) and vacuos esse; non decipiantur, and si incommodum languoris
(...) and convaluerint, baptizentur. Si autem baptizari non possunt, (...) jam
baptismo (...) sanctificati sunt, (...) in fide sua and Domini indulgentia
(...)? Idem Ibid.. 10. p. 250.

If, says he, any shall think that such have not (...) the Grace of God, but
(...) void and empty thereof, because they have been only (...) with the Saving
Laver; Let not such then that have been so Baptized, (...) themselves; but
(...) they recover their Health, let them (...) Baptized; but if they cannot be
(...), as having been already Sanctified with the Ecclesiastical Baptism, why
then are they scandalized in their Faith, and in the Mercy of God?

So that Sprinkling or Perfusion was (...) valid, and seems to be always used
in Cases of Necessity, as Immersion was in their ordinary Public Baptism, when
as Tertullian writes, Ter mergitamur. De Coron. Milit. p. 336.
they dipped the Baptized Person three times under Water, that is, dipping him
once at the naming of each Person of the Holy Trinity. Nec semel, sed ter, ad
singula nomina in personas singulas tingimur. Advers. (...). p. 229.
We are, says the foresaid Father, dipped at the naming of each Person.

. 7. When Baptism was over, the Person that had been then Baptized, as Justin
Martyr relates it, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 97.
was (...) into the number of the Faithful, who then sent up (...) Public
Prayers to God for all Men, for themselves, and for him that had been Baptized.
After which the Baptized Person, as the said Father goes on to write, was
admitted to receive the other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper with the rest of
the Faithful. So that in Justin. Martyr's Age, at least in his (...) at that
Season, it seems very probable that there followed only Prayers after Baptism:
But not long after his time, we meet with many other Ceremonies then used,
which because they have some Relation to our present Controversies, I shall
mention in the following Chapter.

CHAP. V.
. 1. After Baptism followed (...), (...) Unction.. 2. Then Signation, or (...)
with the Sign of the Cross.. 3. Then (...) of Hands, or Confirmation.. 4. (...)
Reasons for (...).. 5. For (...). 6. For Imposition of Hands. 7. (...)
immediately followed Baptism.. 8. (...) confirmed as well as Bishops.. 9.
Confirmation reiterated.

. 1. AS for those Rites that succeeded Baptism, and which we find first
mentioned in Tertullian, they were in number three, viz. Unction, Signation,
and Imposition of Hands; or if the Reader pleases, he may call them all by the
Name of Confirmation.

Touching Unction or Chrismation, (...) thus writes, Egressi de lavacro
perungimur benedicta Unctione -- in nobis carnaliter currit (...). sed
spiritualiter proficit. De Baptism. p. 599, 600.
As soon as we are baptized, we are (...) with the blessed Unction -- An
external carnal Unction is poured upon us, but it spiritually advantages. And
to the same purpose says his Follower Cyprian, Ungi quoque necesse est eum,
baptizatus sit, ut accepto Chrismate, id est, Unctione, esse Unctus Dei, and
habere in se gratiam Christi possit. Epist. 70.. 3. p. 211.
He that is baptized must of necessity be anointed, that having received the
(...) or Unction, he may be the Anointed of God, and have him in the Grace of
Christ.

. 2. Under this Crismation was comprehended Signation, or the Signing of the
Baptized Person with the Sign of the Cross, which the Minister performed with
this (...) or (...). So says (...), ^.
The Flesh is (...), that the Soul may be (...). And then it follows, The Flesh
(...) Signed, that the Soul may be fortified. This Sign was made in the
Forehead, as Cyprian observes, than King (...) for invading the Priest's
Office, Leprae (...) in front maculatus (...), (...) part corporis (...)
offenso Domino, ubi signantur qui Dominum (...). De Unit. Eccles. 16. p. 301.
was smit with a (...) on his Forehead, and marked by an offended God (...)
that place where those are marked whom God Receives. Hence he calls a
Christians Forehead; Frons cum Signo. De Lapsis, 1. p. 277.
A Signed Forehead; and thus elegantly exhorts the People of (...) in Allusion
hereunto, to take unto themselves the whole Armor of God, mentioned (...) 6.
(...). Accipiamus quoque ad (...) capitis (...), ut (...) aures, ne ^.
To take (...) themselves for a Covering for their Head, the (...) of
Salvation, that their Ears might be fortified against their (...), that their
Eyes might be strengthened against the beholding of (...) Images, that their
Forehead might (...), that so the Sign of God might be (...) inviolable. So
Pontius speaks of certain Confessors, who by the (...) of their T or mentors
Confessores frontium notatarum secunda inscriptione signatos. In Vita Cypriani.
had their Foreheads marked a Second Time.

It is observed by Tertullian, that the Devil strives to be God's Ape,
imitating the Acts of his Worship and Service, and prescribing the fame to his
Deluded Adorers, as particularly in the Idolatrous Services of (...) as, Tingit
and ipse quosdam, utique credentes and fideles suos: expiationem delictorum de
lavacro repromittit; and sic initiat (...), signat illic in frontibus milites
suos. De Praescript. advers. Haeret. p. 87.
whose Priests baptized some as his Believing and Faithful Servants, and Signed
them in their Foreheads as his (...).

. 3. To (...) Imposition of Hands, or that which most properly we term
Confirmation, which was, the Minister (...) his Hands on the Head of the Party
Baptized; Anointed and Signed, and prayed that the Holy Ghost would be pleased
to descend, and (...) upon him: This immediately followed Signation, as that
did Unction. So (...) (...), Caro ungitur, ut anima (...): caro (...), ut and
(...) muniatur; caro manus (...), ut and anima spiritu (...). De (...) p. 31.
The Flesh is (...) that the Soul may be (...); the Flesh is Signed, that the ^
(...). The Flesh is (...) with the (...) of (...) that the Soul may be (...)
the Spirit. And when (...) (...) manus (...), per (...) advocans and invitans
Spiritum sanctum. De Baptism. p. 600.
is finished, (...) Hands are imposed, with Prayers invocating and inviting the
Holy (...).

. (...). Having thus briefly shown what their Additional Acts to Baptism were,
it will in the (...) place be necessary to enquire into the (...) or Reasons of
their usage of them; (...) for Unction: This was taken from the (...) Rites,
(...) it was employed in the Instalment of (...) High Priest, to denote his
(...) to the Service of God, as Tertullian writes; De (...) Disciplina, qua
ungi (...) de (...) in Sacerdotio solebant, ex quo Aaron a Moyse (...). De
Baptism. p. 660.
This Unction is (...) the Jewish Dispensation, wherein the High Priest was
anointed with (...) of an Horn, as Aaron was by Moses. So now in the times of
the Gospel, all Christians being, as Tertullian says, (...) and (...)
Sacerdotes sumus? (...) est, Regnum quoque nos and Sacerdotes Deo and (...)
fecit. (...). ad Castitat. p. 457.
(...) to God and the (...). They were in (...) thereunto (...) by the a (...)
of Oil to their (...); (...), os the (...) Father expresses it, Caro ungitur,
ut (...). De (...). Carnis. p. 31.
The Flesh is anointed, (...) Soul may be consecrated.

From the Spiritual Unction also of God the Son by God the Father, for which
reason he was called Christ, or Anointed, they pleaded for their (...) and
external Unction, as (...) says, Christus dictur a(...) quod est unctio, quae
Domino nomen accomodavit, facta Spiritualis, quia Spiritus unctus est a Deo
patre, (...) in Actis: Collecti sunt enimvero in (...) civitate adversus (...)
filium (...) quem (...): Sic and in nobis (...), sed spiritualiter proficit. De
Bapt. p. (...).
Jesus is called Christ from being anointed, which Unction was Spiritual,
because whilst only a Spirit, he was anointed by the Father, as in the Acts.
They are gathered (...) this City against thy Holy Son, whom thou have (...);
but our (...) is Carnal, though it spiritually profits.

Cyprian adds this further Reason for this Custom of (...), viz. Ungi quoque
necesse est eum, qui (...), ut accepto (...), id est, Unctione, esse (...) Dei,
and habere in se gratiam (...). Epist. 70. 3. p. 211.
He that is Baptized, must of necessity receive the (...), or (...), that so he
may be the (...) of God, and (...) in him the Gract of Christ.

. 5. As for Signation, or the Signing with the Sign of the Cross: By this was
(...). That they were to be (...) and valiant in the Cause of Christ, having
their Hearts (...) and (...), as (...) observes, Caro signatur, (...) muniatur.
De (...). Carnis. p. 31.
The (...) is Signed, (...) the (...) may be (...). Hence this Sign was made on
an open, visible place, on their (...) which is the Seat of (...) and (...),
implying thereby, that they (...) and constantly to fight like good Soldiers
under the Cross of Christ; whence (...) says, that as the Christians, so the
(...) of (...) Signat illic in frontibus (...) suos. (...) adv. Haeret. p. 87.
Signed the Foreheads of their Soldiers.

. 6. As for the very Act of Confirmation, or Imposition of Hands, that was
practiced from an Opinion of the Imperfection of (...), that that did not
convey the Graces of the Holy Spirit, but only prepared Persons for the
reception of them, when they should be actually bestown in the Confirmation,
for as (...) says, Non quod in aquis Spiritum Sanctum consequamur, sed in aqua
(...) sub ^. De (...) p. (...).
We do not receive the Holy Ghostin Baptism, but-being (...) therein by the
(...), ((...) to the Angel that moved upon the (...) at (...)) we are (...)
prepared for the Holy Ghost. And, Tunc ille (...) super (...) and benedicta
corpora libens a (...). Ibid. p. 600.
When our Bodies, are (...) and blessed, then that most Holy Spirit willingly
descends from the Father. And Caro manus (...) adumbratut, ut and anima spiritu
illuminetur. De (...). (...), p. 31.
at the Imposition of Hands, the Soul is illuminated by the Spirit.

Cyprian in his 74th Epistle,. 6, 7, 8, (...) somewhat largely of this Custom
of Confirmation; from whence I have observed this following (...) of it. Non
per manus impositionem quis nascitur, quando accipit Spiritum Sanctum, sed in
baptismo, ut Spiritum jam natus accipiat, sicut in primo (...) Adam (...). Ante
enim (...) eum (...), and tunc (...) in faciem ejus flatum vitae, nec (...)
potest accipi (...), (...) prius (...) qui (...). 8. p. 230.
Every one in a state of Heathenism and Idolatry was considered as dead;
wherefore when any one came from that state to the Christian Faith, he was said
to live; which Life may be compared to a natural Life: As to complete a Natural
Life; there must be a Body (...) a Soul, so must the same be imagined in a
(...) Life: As in the first Creation, God first (...) the Body of Man, and then
breathed (...) him the Breath of Life; first made a fit (...) to receive the
Soul, before the Soul its self (...) framed: So in the second Creation, God
first prepares the Man, before he gives his Spirit; (...) first makes the Man a
fit Temple for the Holy Ghost, before he gives the Holy Ghost. Now the (...) by
which a Man is prepared and (...), is by Baptism, by which he is cleansed and
purged from Sin, and fitted for the Reception of the Spirit of God, in which
respect he is to be regarded as a Body: The way by which the Holy Ghost is
infused, which as a living Soul must actuate and direct that prepared Body, is
by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, or by Confirmation. For as Cyprian writes in
the same place, Peccata (...), and (...) sanctificare aqua (...) non potest,
(...) habeat and Spiritum sanctum, 7. p. 230.
Baptism alone cannot purge away. Sins, or sanctify a Man, unless he has also
the Holy Ghost. That is, has received Confirmation, as it is frequently styled
in Cyprian's Epistles. In the Decrees of the Council of Carthage, and in the
Letter of Cornelius to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, extant in Eusebius, Lib. 6.
cap. 43. p. 244. This being the Regeneration of the Spirit, and Baptism the
Regeneration of Water, both which our Savior affirmed to be necessary, when he
said unto (...), John 3. 5. Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. As Nemesianus Bishop of Thubunis
says, one is not sufficient without the other, Neque (...) sine aqua onerari
porest, neque aqua sine Spiritu -- utioque Sacramento debere (...) in Ecclesia
Catholica. Act. Council. (...). (...) Cyprian. p. 444.
the Spirit cannot (...) without Water, nor the Water without the Spirit.
Therefore it was necessary to be regenerated by both Sacraments, viz. By
Baptism and by Confirmation. Wherefore, as Cyprian exhorts, we must pray, Ut
qui adhuc sunt prima (...), incipiant (...) coelestes, ex Aqua and Spiritu
nati. De (...). Dominic. 12. (...).
That those who are yet Earthly, may become Heavenly, and be born of the Water
and the Spirit. That is, be Baptized and Confirmed, which were the external
Signs of (...) from Sin, (...) bestowing Grace, both (...) necessary to make a
complete (...); for as the same Father writes, (...) enim demum (...), and esse
(...) Dei possunt, si Sacramento utroque nascantur, cum scriptum sit, (...)
quis natus fuerit ex Aqua and Spiritu, non (...) introire in regnum Dei. Epist.
62. 1. p. 216.
Then are (...) truly sanctified, and fully become the Sons of God, when they
are regenerated with both Sacraments, Baptism and (...); according as it is
written, Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. So that though a (...) was Baptized, yet they accounted his
Christianity incomplete and imperfect till he was also confirmed: For which
reason (...) objects against (...), that he (...). (...) F. b. Antioch. (...)
Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. (...). p. 244.
could scarcely acknowledge him a complete Christian, because being baptized in
his Bed, he (...) not received Confirmation, or the Additionary Rituals to
Baptism, nor did he ever (...) receive them.

Thus you see the Reasons they produced for this Usage, to fortify which, they
added some Examples of the Holy Writ, (...) Tertullian (...) to this purpose
the Example of Jacob (...) Genesis, who put his Hands on the ^ nepotes suos ex
Joseph Esrem and Manassem. Jacob (...) inipositis and (...) manibus (...). De
(...). p. 600.
Heads of Ephraim and Manaffes, and blessed them. And Cyprian urges that
instance of the Apostles, Acts 8. 15. 17. where, after several of the (...) had
been baptized by Philip, Peter and James conferred the Holy Ghost on them by
Imposition of Hands, Quia legitimum and ecclesiasticum, baptismum consecuti
fuerant, (...) eos ultra non oportebat: Sed tantummodo quod deerat id a Petro
and Johanne (...) ut oratione (...) eis habita, and manu imposita, invocaretur
and (...) super eos Spiritus sanctus. Quod nunc quoque apud (...) geritur, ut
qui in (...) baptizantur, (...) Ecclesiae offerantur, and per nostram (...) ac
manus (...) Spiritum Sanctum consequantur, and (...). Epist. 73. 8. p. 230.
They had no need again to be Baptized, says he, having been baptized by
(...), but only what was (...) or lacking, was performed by Peter and John,
which was, that by Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, the Holy Ghost should be
conferred on them, which Custom, as he there adds, is now observed by us, that
those who are Baptized in the Church, are offered to the Governors thereof; by
whose Prayer and Imposition of Hands, they receive the Holy Ghost, and are
completed with the Lord's Seal. To this Practice also Firmilian refers that
action of St. Paul, in Acts 19. 5. Where on those who had been only Baptized by
Eos qui ab Johanne baptizati fuerint, (...) missus esset (...) Domino Spiritus
Sanctus baptizavit denuoSpirituali (...), and sic eis (...) imposuit, ut
acciperent (...) sanctum. Apud Cyprian Epist. 75. 7. p. 237.
John's Baptism, (...) the Holy Ghost by Imposition of Hands, And Cyprian
applies to Confirmation the Descent of the Holy Ghost, (...) 10. 44. Invenimus
hoc esse ab Apostolis custoditum, ut (...) domo CorneliiCenturionis super
Ethnicos qui illic aderant, Fidei calore ferventes,
descendisserSpiritusSanctus, etc. Epist. 75. 1. p. 216.
in miraculous (...) and Gifts of Tongues on Cornelius and his Friends, though
they were not then Baptized.

So much now for the Reasons of Confirmation; all that I shall do more, is to
add two or three Observations concerning it.

. 7. The first whereof is, That Confirmation was an immediate Consequent of
Baptism; it was not deferred till many Years after, but was presently
administered, as Tertullian writes, Egressi de lavacro perungimur benedicta
Unctione -- (...) manus imponitur. De (...). p. 599. p. 600.
As soon as we come out of the Baptismal Laver, we are anointed, and then we
are confirmed. Else if they had not been so soon confirmed, they must,
notwithstanding their Baptism, according to their Opinions, as it has been
before demonstrated, have continued graceless, without the Adorning Gifts of
the Holy Spirit, a long time, even as long as their Confirmation was delayed,
which to imagine concerning them is unreasonable and uncharitable.

Indeed in case of Necessity, when they had neither time nor (...) it was
waved, (...) Immersion was with respect to Baptism; but yet if the sick Person
happened to recover, he was then to be confirmed, as is evident from the Case
of Novatian, whom (...) accuses, because (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. (...).
p. 244.
that when he was restored to his Health again, he was not confirmed according
to the Canon of the Church. But otherwise (...) immediately, or (...) the same
time followed (...).

. 8. From the former Observation there follows this, that not only the Bishop,
but also his Presbyters or Curates did by his (...), and in his Absence
confirm: For if Confirmation always succeeded Baptism, then whenever Baptism
was, there was also Confirmation. Now (...) for Baptism, we may reasonably
suppose, that in a Church there were some fit to be (...) at least once a year;
and sometimes it might happen that either the Sea was (...), or the Bishop
through Persecution might be (...) from his Flock so long a time, as Cyprian
was double the space; and if so, must no Persons have been Baptized within that
time by reason of the Bishop's unavoidable Absence? That seems a little hard,
since, as was said before, they esteemed Baptism and Confirmation necessary to
Salvation, and to deprive (...) Souls of Salvation, that died within that
(...), because they had not been confirmed by (...) Bishop, which was
impossible, would be too severe and uncharitable.

Besides, that Presbyters did Baptize, we have proved already; and since
Confirmation was done at the same time with Baptism, it is very reasonable to
conclude, that he that did the one, performed the other also.

But, that Presbyters did confirm, will appear most evidently from this very
Consideration, viz. That the Imposition of Hands (...) Persons just after
Baptism, which we call Confirmation, and the Imposition of Hands at the (...)
of Offenders, which we call (...), was one and the self same thing,
Confirmation and Absolution being (...) that we make use of, to distinguish the
(...) times of the Performances of the (...) or Ceremony. The: Thing or (...)
was not different, Imposition of Hands was used both at one and (...) other,
(...) the same Mystical Signification, viz. The Conferring (...) the Holy Ghost
and his Graces on that (...): on whom (...) were imposed. Only now to
distinguish the time of this (...) of Hands, whether after Baptism, or at the
(...) of Offenders; these two Terms of Confirmation and (...) are used by us,
the former to signify that used just after Baptism, and the latter, that (...)
was employed at ^.

This now, viz. That Confirmation and (...) were one and the self same thing, I
(...) presently prove: And then in the next (...) I shall show, that with the
Bishop, and sometimes without the Bishop, Presbyters did Absolve by Imposition
of Hands. And if these (...) Points can be clearly manifested, it will (...)
follow that Presbyters did confirm; for if there was no difference between
Confirmation and Absolution, but only with respect to time; and (...)
Presbyters at one time, viz. at Absolution conferred the Holy Ghost by
Imposition of Hands, it is very unreasonable to deprive them of the same Power
at the other time, which was at Confirmation. If Presbyters could at one Season
bestow the Holy Spirit, it is very probable that they could do the same at the
other also.

Now as to the first Point, viz. That there was no difference between
Confirmation and Absolution, but that they were one and the self same thing;
This will appear most evidently from the consideration of that famous
Controversy, touching the Validity of Heretics Baptism, between Stephen
Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage: or rather between the Churches
of Europe and Africa, the Sum whereof was this, Stephen Bishop of Rome (...),
That those who were baptized by Heretics, and came over to the Catholic
Church, should be received only by Imposition of Hands. Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage contended, that besides Imposition of Hands, they should also be
baptized, unless that they had been before baptized by the Orthodox, in which
Case Imposition of Hands should be esteemed sufficient. Now this Imposition of
Hands they sometimes term that which we (...) Confirmation, and sometimes
Absolution, (...) using either of those Expressions, and indifferently applying
them, according (...) they pleased, in one place giving it the Title of
Confirmation, and in another that of Absolution, which that they did, I shall
endeavor to evince, by showing;

First, That they called this Imposition of Hands Confirmation.

Secondly, That they called it Absolution.

First, I shall prove that they called it Confirmation; unto which end let us
consider these following (...), (...) qui sint foris extra Ecclesiam tincti --
quando ad (...), atque ad Ecclesiam quae una est, venerint, baptizari (...),
(...) quod (...) sit eis manum (...) ad accipiendum Spiritum Sanctum, nisi
accrpiant and Ecclesiae (...). (...) enim demum (...) sanctificari and esse
(...) Dei possunt, (...) Sacramento utroque (...), cum scriptum (...), nisi
quis natus (...) ex Aqua and Spiritu non (...) in regnum (...). Epist. 72.
(...) p. 216.
Those, says Cyprian, which are baptized without the Church, when they come
unto us, and (...) the Church which is (...) one, they are to be baptized,
because the Imposition of Hands by Confirmation, is not sufficient without
Baptism, for then they are fully sanctified, and become the Sons of God, when
they are born (...) both Sacraments, (...) as it is written, (...) a Man be
born again of the Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. To the same effect says (...) Bishop of (...), Male sibi quidam
interpretantur, ut (...) quod per manus (...) Spiritum sanctum (...), and sic
recipiantur, cum manifestum sit utroque Sacramento debere eos renasci in
Ecclesia Catholica. Act-Concil. (...). apud Cyprian. p. 444.
Those (...) greatly (...), who affirm that they ought only to be confirmed by
Imposition of Hands, and so to be received, since it is, manifest they must be
(...) with both Sacraments in the Catholic Church. And Secundinus Bishop of
Carpis determined, that Super filios alienos, etc Soboles Antichristi (...)
Sanctum per manus impositionem (...) non posse descendere. Act. Council.
Carthag. apud Cyprian. p. 446.
on Heretics who are the Seed of Antichrist, the Holy Ghost cannot be
conferred by Imposition of Hands alone in Confirmation.

Stephen pleaded on his side, Sed in multum, inquit, proficit nomen Christi ad
fidem and baptismi Sanctificationem ut quicunque and ubicunque in nomine
Christi baptizatus fuerit, (...) gratiam Christi, quando huic Ioco breviter
occurri possit, and (...), quoniam si in (...) Christi valuit foris baptisma ad
hominem purgandom, in (...) Christi nomine valere illic potuit and manus (...)
ad accipiendum Spiritum Sanctum. Apud Cyprian Epist. 75. 16. p. 240.
That (...) very Name of Christ was so advantageous to Faith and the
Sanctification (...) Baptism, that in what place soever any one was baptized in
that Name, he immediately obtained the Grace of Christ. But unto this Firmilian
briefly replies, That if the Baptism of Heretics, because done in the Name of
Christ, was sufficient to purge away Sins, why was not Confirmation, that was
performed in the Name of the same Christ, sufficient to bestow the Holy (...)?
And therefore it is thus eagerly argued by Cyprian, Qui Haereticis sive
Schismaticis (...), (...) nobis habeant (...) Spiritum Sanctum, an (...)?
Sihabent, cur illic (...), quando ad nos veniunt, manus imponitur ad (...)
Spiritum (...), cum jam utique (...) acceptus sit ubi si fuit, dari potuit? Si
autem (...) cuncti Haeretici and Schismarici non habent Spiritum Sanctum, and
ideo apud nos manus imponitur, ut hic accipiatur, quod illic nec (...), nec
dari potest: manifeslum est nec remissionem peccatorum dari (...) eos posse,
quos (...) Spiritum sanctum non habere. Epist. 76. 8. p. 249.
Why (...) they, says he, (meaning Stephen and his Party, who received
Heretics by Imposition of Hands only) patronize Heretics and Schismatics,
let them answer us, have they the Holy Ghost, or have they not? If they have,
why then do they lay Hands on those that are baptized by them, when they ceme
over to us, to bestow on them the Holy Ghost, when they had received him
before; for if he was there, they could confer him? But if Heretics and (...)
have not the Spirit of God, and therefore we lay Hands on them in Confirmation,
that they may here receive, what Heretics neither have, nor can give; it is
manifest, that since they have not the Holy Ghost, they cannot give remission
of Sins. That is, since they cannot Confirmtherefore they cannot Baptize. So
that from these and Cyprian. Epist. 73. 8. p. 270. and 19. p. 224. Epist. 74.
6, 7, 8. p. 230. (...) apud Cyprian. Epist. 75. 7. p. 237. and 11. p. 239.
some other Passages, which to avoid tediousness I omit; it is clear, that both
Stephen and Cyprian understood by Imposition of Hands, that which we now call
(...).

Secondly, I now come to show, that they also termed it Absolution, as will
appear from these following Instances. Et dicunt se in hoc veterem
consuetudinem sequi, quando apud veteres Haereseos and Schismatum prima adhuc
fuerint initia, ut hi illic essent, qui de Ecclesia recedebant, and hic
baptizati prius fuerant: quos tamen ad Ecclesiam revertentes, and poenitentiam
agentes, necesse non erat baptizare, quod nos quoque hodie observamus, ut quos
constet hic baptizatos esse, and a nobis ad Haereticos tranfisse, si postmodum
peccato suo cognito and errore digesto, ad veritatem et matricem redeant, satis
sit in poenitentiam manum imponere: ut quia ovis jam fuerat, hanc ovem
abalienatam and errabundam in ovile suum pastor recipiat. Si autem qui ab
Haereticis venit, baptizatus in Ecclesia prius non fuit, sed alienus in totum
and profanus venit: baptizandus est, ut ovis fiat, quia una est aqua in
Ecclesia sancta quae oves faciat. Epist. 71. 2. p. 214.
They (says Cyprian, meaning Stephen and his Followers) urge, that in what they
do, they follow the old Custom, that was used by the Ancients when Heresies and
Schisms first began, when those that went over to them, first were in the
Church, and baptized therein, who when they returned again to the Church, and
did Penance, were not forced to be baptized. But this, says he, makes nothing
against us, for we now observe the very same; Those who were baptized here, and
from us went over to the Heretics. if afterward being sensible of their Error
they return to the Church, we only absolve them by the Imposition of Hands,
because once they were Sheep, and as wandering and straying Sheep the Shepherd
receives them into his Flock; but if those that come from Heretics were not
first baptized in the Church, they are to be baptized, that they may become
Sheep; for there is but one Holy Water in the Church, that makes Sheep.

But that this Imposition of Hands was the same with Absolution, will most
evidently appear from the Opinion or Determination of Stephen, and from
Cyprian's Answer thereunto.

Stephen's Opinion or Determination was Si quis ergo a quacunque Haeresi
venerit ad nos, nihil innovetur, nisi quod traditum est, ut manus illi (...) in
poenitentiam. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 74. 1. p. 229.
If any shall from any Heresy come unto us, let nothing be innovated or
introduced besides the old Tradition, which is, that Hands be imposed on him as
a Penitent. Now unto that part of this Decree which asserts the Reception of
Heretics only by Absolution, or the Imposition of Hands in Penance to be a
Tradition, descended down from their Predecessors. Cyprian replies, Si ergo
autem evangelio praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum Epistolis, aut Actibus
continetur, ut a quacunque Haeresi venientes non baptizentur, sed tantum manus
illis imponatur in Poenitentiam, observetur haec divina and sancta traditio.
Ibid. 2. p. 229.
That he would observe it as a Divine and Holy Tradition, if it were either
commanded in the Gospel, and the Epistles of the Apostles, or contained in the
Acts, that those who came from Heretics should not be baptized, but only Hands
imposed on them for Penance, or, as Penitents; but that for his part, Retro
nusquam omnino praeceptum eft, neque (...), ut Heretico tantum manus in
poenitentiam imponatur, and sic ei communicetur. Ibid. 4. p. 229.
he never found it either commanded or written, that on an Heretic Hands
should be only imposed for Penance, and so he should be admitted to Communion
Wherefore he on his side concludes and determins, Observetur itaque a nobis and
tenetur -- ut omnes qui ex quacunque Haeresi ad Ecclesiam convertuntur,
Ecclesiae unico legitimo baptismo baptizantur, exceptis his qui baptizati in
Ecclesia prius fuerant, and sic ad Haereticos transierant, hos enim oportet,
cum redeant, acta poenitentia per manus impositionem solam recipi; and in
ovile, unde erraverant, a Pastore restitui. Ibidem 16. p. 232.
Let it therefore be observed, and held by us, that all who from any Herefie
are converted to the Church, be baptized with the one lawful Baptism of the
Church, except those who were formerly baptized in the Church, who when they
return, are to be received by the alone Imposition of Hands after Penance into
the Flock, from whence they have strayed.

So that these Instances do as clearly prove, that they meant by their
Imposition of Hands, Absolution, as the former Instances do, that they meant
Confirmation, and both of them together plainly show and evidence Confirmation
and Absolution to be the very self-same thing; for since they promiscuously
used and indifferently applied these Terms, and that very thing, which in some
Places they express by Confirmation, in others they call Absolution, it
necessarily follows, that there can be no essential or specifical difference
between them, but that they are of a like numerical Identity or Sameness. But,

Secondly, I now come in the next place to demonstrate, that together with the
Bishop, and sometimes without the Bishop, Presbyters did absolve by Imposition
of Hands, That they did it, together with the Bishop, several places of Cyprian
abundantly prove. Offenders, says he, Per impositionem manus Episcopi and
Cleri jus communicationis accipiunt. Epist. 10. 2. p. 30.
Receive the right of Communion by the Imposition of Hands of the Bishop, and
of his Clergy. And, Nec ad communicatition em venire quis possit, nisi prius
illi and ab Episcopo and Clero manus fuit imposita. Ep. 12. 1. p. 37.
No Criminal can be admitted to Communion, unless the Bishop and Clergy have
imposed Hands on him. And that some times they did it without the Bishop
(always understanding his leave and permission) is apparent from the Example of
Serapion, who being out of the Churches Peace, and approaching the hour of
Dissolution, (...). Ex Epist. Alexand. apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 44. p. 246.
sent for one of the Presbyters to Absolve him, which the Presbyter did,
according to the Order of the Bishop, who had before given his Permission unto
the Presbyters to absolve those who were in danger of Death. And as the Bishop
of Alexandria gave his Presbyters this Power, so likewise did Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage, who when he was in Exile, ordered his Clergy Si premi infirmitate
aliqua and periculo coeperint, exomologesi facta, and manu eis a vobis in
poenitentiam imposita. Epist. 14. 1. p. 41.
to confess and absolve by Imposition of Hands, those who were in danger of
Death. And Si incommodo aliquo infirmitatis periculo occupati fuerint, non
expectata praesentia nostra apud Presbyterum quemcunque praesentem --
Exomologesin facere delicti sui possint; ut manu eis in poenitentiam imposita,
veniant ad Dominum cum pace. Epist. 13. 1. p. 39.
If any were in such condition, they should not expect his Presence, but betake
themselves to the first Presbyter they could find, who should receive their
Confession, and absolve them by Imposition of Hands. So that it is evident that
Presbyters, even without the Bishop, did absolve Offenders, and formally
receive them into the Churches Peace by Imposition of Hands.

Now then, If the Imposition of Hands on Persons just after Baptism, and the
Imposition of Hands at the Restitution of Offenders was one and the self-same
thing; and if Presbyters had Power and Authority to perform the latter, I see
no reason why we should abridge them of the former; both the one and the other
was Confirmation; and if Presbyters could confirm at one time, why should we
doubt of their Right and Ability to perform it another time? If it was lawful
for them to impose Hands on one occasion, it was as lawful for them to do it on
another.

9. From the precedent Observation of the Identity of that which we now
distinguish by the Names of Confirmation and Absolution, it necessarily
results, that Confirmation was not like Baptism, only once performed, but on
many Persons frequently reiterated: All Persons after Baptism were confirmed,
that is, by the Imposition of Hands and Prayer, the Holy Ghost was beseeched to
descend upon them, and so to fortify them by his Heavenly Grace, as that they
might courageously persevere in their Christian Warfare to their Lives end; but
if it should so happen, as oftentimes it did, that any so confirmed should fall
from the Christian Faith, and be for a time excluded the Churches Peace, when
they were again admitted, Hands were again imposed on them, and the Holy Spirit
again Invocated, to strengthen them with his Almighty Grace, by which they
might be upheld to the Day of Salvation; and so as often as any Man fell, and
was restored to the Churches Communion, so often was he confirmed, and the Holy
Ghost entreated more firmly to establish and settle him.

CHAP. VI.
1. Of the Lord's Supper: The Time when administered. 2. Persons that received
it; none present at the Celebration thereof besides the Communicants. 3. The
manner of its Celebration: In some places the Communicants first made their
Offerings. 4. The Minister began with a Sacramental Discourse, or Exhortation:
Then followed a Prayer, consisting of Petitions and Praises, which consecrated
both the Elements at once. 5. After that the Words of the Institution were
read. 6. Then the Bread was broken, and the Wine poured out, and both
distributed: Diversity of Customs in the manner of the Distribution. 7. The
Posture of Receiving. 8. After they had communicated they sung a Psalm and then
concluded with Prayer, and a Collection for the Poor.

1: THE first of the Christian Sacraments having been so largely discussed, I
now come to treat of the other, viz. The Lords Supper; in the handling of which
I shall enquire into these three things: 1. The Time. 2. The Person. And, 3.
The manner thereof.

First, As for the time of its Celebration: In general, it was at the
conclusion of their Solemn Services, as Justin Martyr writes, Apolog. 2. page
97.
that after they had read, sung, preached and prayed, then they proceeded to
the Administration of the Eucharist. But as for the particular part of the Day,
that seems to have been according to the Circumstances and Customs of every
Church. In Tertullian's Age and Country they received it In tempore victus. De
Coron. Milit. p. 337.
at Suppertime; from which late Assembling, it is probable, that the Heathens
took occasion to accuse them of putting out the Lights, and promiscuously
mingling one with another. Which Accusation may be read at large in Justin
Martyr's Dialogue with Tryphon, in Minutius Felix, and the Apologies of
Tertullian and Athenagoras. But whether this was then their constant Season in
times of Peace, I know not; this is certain, that in times of Persecution they
laid hold on any Season or Opportunity for the enjoying of this Sacred
Ordinance: whence Tertullian tells us of their Eucharistiae Sacramentum etiam
antelucanis coetibus. De Coron. Milit. p. 338.
receiving the Eucharist in their Antelucan Assemblies, or, in their Assemblies
before day. And Pliny reports, that in his time the Christians Ante lucem
convenire -- seque Sacramento obstringere. Epist. ad Trajan.
were wont to meet together before it was light, and to bind themselves by a
Sacrament.

Cyprian writes that in his Days In matutinis Sacrificiis -- cum ad coenandum
venimus, mixtum calicem offerimus. Epist. 63. 12. p. 177.
they administered this Sacrament both Morning and Evening. And, Christum
offerre oportebat circa vesperam diei, ut hora ipsa Sacrisicii oftenderet
occasum and vesperam mundi -- Nos autem resurrectionem Domini mane celebramus.
Ibidem.
That as Christ administered the Sacrament in the Evening, to signify the
Evening and end of the World. So they celebrated it in the Morning, to denote
the Resurrection of their Lord and Master.

All that can be gathered from hence is, That they did not deem any particular
part of the Day necessary to the Essence of the Sacrament, but every Church
regulated its self herein according to the Diversity of its Customs and
Circumstances.

2. As for the (...) communicating, they were not indifferently all that
professed the Christian Faith, as Origin writes, (...). (...) in Joan. Vol. 2
Tom. 28. p. 345.
It does not belong to every one to eat of this Bread, and to drink of this
Cup. But they were only such as were in the number of the faithful, (...).
Just. Martyr. Apolog. 2. p. 97.
such as were baptized, and received both the Credentials and Practicals of
Christianity. That is, who believed the Articles of the Christian Faith, and
lead an holy and a pious Life. Such as these, and none else, were permitted to
Communicate.

Now since none but the Faithful were admitted, it follows that the Catechumens
and the Penitents were excluded; the Catechumens because they were not yet
baptized, for Baptism always preceded the Lords Supper, as Justin Martyr says.
(...). Apolog. 2 p. 97, 98.
It is not lawful for any one to partake of the Sacramental Food, except he be
baptized. The Penitents, because for their Sins they were cast out of the
Church, and whilst excluded from the Peace thereof, they could not participate
of the Marks and Tokens of that Peace, but were to be driven therefrom, and not
admitted thereto, Ante actam poenitentiam -- offerre lapsis pacem, and
Eucharistiam dare, id est, sanctum Domini corpus profanare audeant, cum
scriptum sit; Qui ederit panem, aut biberit calicem Domini indigne, reus erit
Corporis and Sanguinis Christi. Cyprian. Epist. 11. 1. p. 32.
till they had fully satisfied for their Faults, lest otherwise they should
profane the Body of the Lord, and drink his Cup unworthily, and so be guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord.

Hence when the other parts of Divine Worship were ended, and the Celebration
of the Eucharist was to begin, the Catechumens, Penitents, and all, except the
Communicants, were to depart, as Tertullian says hereof, Piae initiationes
arceant prosanos. Apolog. cap. 7. p. 674.
Pious Initiations drive away the Profane. These being Mysteries which were to
be kept secret and concealed from all, except the Faithful; inasmuch as to
others the very method and manner of their Actions herein were unknown, which
was observed by the Pagans, who objected to the Christians the Secrecy of their
Mysteries, which Charge Tertullian does not deny, but confessing it, answers,
Ex forma omnibus mysteriis silentii fides adhibeatur, Samothracia and Eleusinia
reticentur. Apolog. cap. 7. p. 674.
That that was the very Nature of Mysteries to be concealed, as Ceres's were in
Samothracia.

3. The Catechumens with others being gone out, and none remaining but the
Faithful, the Celebration of the Eucharist next followed; which brings me to
the Inquiry of the Third thing, viz. The manner of the Celebration thereof. But
before I meddle therewith, I shall briefly premise this Observation, viz. That
in some places, as in France and Africa the Communicants first made their
Offerings, presenting according to their Ability, Bread, or Wine, or the like,
as the first Fruits of their Increase, Offerre igitur oportet Deo primitias
ejus creaturae, sicut and Moses ait, non apparebis vacuus ante conspectum
Domini Dei tui. Lib. 4. c. 34. p. 262.
It being our Duty, as Irenaeus writes, to offer unto God the first Fruits of
his Creatures, as Moses says, Thou shall not appear empty before the Lord. Non
quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi nec ingrati sint. Lib. 4. cap. 32.
p. 261.
Not as if God wanted these things, but to show our fruitfulness and gratitude
unto him. Wherefore Cyprian thus severely blamed the Rich Matrons for their
scanty Oblations, Locuples and dives es, and Dominicum celebrare te credis,
quae Corbonam omnino non respicis? Quae in Dominicum sine Sacrificio venis,
quae partem de Sacrificio quod pauper obtulit, sumis? De Opere and Eleemosyn.
14. 354.
Thou art rich and wealthy, says he, and do thou think duly to celebrate the
Lord's Supper, when thou refusest to give? Thou who come to the Sacrament
without a Sacrifice, what part can thou have from the Sacrifice which the
Poor offer up?

These Offerings were employed to the Relief of the Poor, and other Uses of the
Church; and it seems probable that a sufficient Quantity of that Bread and Wine
was presented to the Bishop, or to him that officiated, to be employed for the
Sacramental Elements, whose Consecration next succeeded, which in the main was
after this following Manner.

4. It is very likely, that in many places the Minister first began with an
Exhortation or Discourse touching the Nature and end of that Sacrament, which
the Congregation were going to partake of, that so their Hearts might be the
more elevated and raised into Heavenly Frames and Dispositions. This may be
gathered from the History of an Exorcist Woman, related by Firmilian, who took
upon her to per. form many Ecclesiastical Administrations, as to Baptize and
Celebrate the Lord's Supper, which last she did Sine Sacramento solitae
praedicationis. Apud Cypr. Epist. 75. 10. p. 238.
without the wonted Sermon, or, Discourse. Which seems to intimate, that in
those days it was customary in Lesser Asia, and perhaps at Carthage too, for
the Minister to make a Speech or Exhortation before the Participation of the
Sacrament. But whether this Practice was universal, or more ancient than (...),
I cannot determine; this that follows was, viz. A Prayer over the Elements by
him that Officiated, unto which the People gave their Assent, by saying Amen.
This Prayer is thus described by Justin Martyr, (...). Apolog. 2. p. 97.
Bread and Wine are offered to the Minister, who receiving them gives Praise
and Glory to the Lord of all through the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and in a
large manner renders particular Thanks for the present Mercies; who when he
has ended his Prayers and Praise, all the People say Amen. And (...), etc.
Ibid.
when the Minister has thus given Thanks, and the People said Amen, the
Deacons distributed the Elements. And again, (...). Ibid p. 98.
Bread and Wine are offered to the Minister, who to the utmost of his Abilities
sends up Prayers and Praises, and the People say Amen, and then the Consecrated
Elements are distributed.

From this Description by Justin Martyr of the Sacramental Prayer, we may
observe these few things pertinent to the matter in hand.

I. That there was but one long Prayer antecedent to the Distribution of the
Elements: For he says, That the Minister having received the Bread and Wine, he
offered up Prayers and Praise unto God in a large manner; and when he had
ended, the People said Amen.

II. That this long Prayer consisted of two Parts, viz. (...), and (...), as he
calls them, that is, Petition and Thanksgiving; in the former they prayed for
the Peace of the Church, the Quiet of the World, the Health of their Emperors,
and in a Word, for all Men that needed their Prayers, as it is represented by
Tertullian, Oramus pro Imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum ac potestatibus, pro
statu Saeculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora finis. Apolog. cap. 39. p. 709.
We pray, says he, for the Emperors, for all that are in Authority under them,
for the State of the World, for the Quiet of Affairs, and for the Delay of the
Day of Judgment. In the latter they gave God thanks for sending Christ, and for
the Institution of that comfortable Sacrament, desiring his Blessing on, and
Consecration of the Elements then before them.

III. That by this one Prayer both the Elements were consecrated at once; for
he says, That the Minister took both Elements together, and blessed them, and
then they were distributed. He did not consecrate them distinctly, but both
together.

5. After Prayer was ended, they read the Words of Institution, that so the
Elements might be consecrated by the Word, as well as by Prayer. Whence Origin
calls the Sacramental Elements (...). Com. in Matthew. Vol. 1. p. 254.
The Food that is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. And that is
hallowed by the Word of God, and Prayer. And (...) writes, Quando mixtus calix
and fractus panis percipit verbum Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis and corporis
Christi. Lib. 5. cap. 4. p. 318.
That when the Bread and Wine perceive the Word of God, then it becomes the
Eucharist of the Body and Blood of Christ.

6. The Elements being thus Consecrated, the Minister took the Bread, and brake
it, Panis quem frangimus -- fractus panis. Lib. 5. cap. 4. p. 318.
The Bread which we break, or, or the broken Bread, as it is styled by
Irenaeus, and then gave it to the Deacons, who distributed it to the
Communicants, and after that the Cup, which the Deacons in the like manner
delivered. So it was in Justin Martyr's time and Country, (...). Apolog. 2. p.
97.
The Element, says he, being blessed, the Deacons give to every one present of
the Consecrated Bread and Wine. But in Tertullian's Time and Country the
Minister, and not the Deacons, distributed the Elements, Nec de aliorum manu,
quam praesidentium sumimus. De Coron. Milit. p. 338.
We receive, says he, from no ones Hands but the Bishops. And yet at the same
Place not many years after, Calicem Diaconus offerre praesentibus coepit.
Cyprian. de Lapsis, 20. p. 283.
The Deacons offered the Cup to those that were present. So that herein there
was a Diversity of Customs; in some places the Deacons delivered the Elements,
in others the Bishop, or the Minister that consecrated them. But whether it was
done either by Bishop or Deacons, it seems probable, that which of them soever
did it, they delivered the Sacramental Bread and Wine particularly to each
Communicant. I find but one Example to the contrary, and that was in the Church
of Alexandria, where the Custom was to permit the People to take the Bread
themselves from the Plate, or Vessel wherein it was consecrated, as is
insinuated by (...). Stromat. lib. 1. p. 198.
Clemens Alexandrinus; but in most other Churches it is likely that the
Elements were particularly delivered to every single Communicant. So it was in
the Country of Justin Martyr, where (...). Apol. 2. p. 98.
the Deacons gave to each one of the consecrated Bread and Wine. So at Carthage
in the time of Cyprian, Calicem Diaconus of far praesentibus coepit. Cyprian.
de (...), 20. p. 283.
The Deacons offered the Cup to those that were present. In the time of which
Father it was usual for Children and Sucking Infants to receive the Sacrament,
unto whom it was necessary particularly to deliver the Elements, since it was
impossible for them to take it orderly from the Hands of others: And therefore
when a little sucking Girl refused to taste the Sacramental Wine, Diaconus --
(...) licet de Sacramento calicis infudit. Ibid. p. 284.
The Deacon violently forced it down her Throat. So it was also at Rome, as
appears from what Cornelius reports of his Antagonist Novatian, that (...).
Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. p. 245.
when he administered the Sacrament, and divided and gave to each Man his part;
with his two Hands he held those of the Receiver, saying to him, Swear unto me
by the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will never leave my
Party, to return to that of Cornelius; so forcing the miserable Receiver,
instead of saying Amen, to say, I will not return to Cornelius.

7. As for the Posture of receiving, at Alexandria the Custom was to (...). Ex
(...). Dionys. Alexan. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 43 p. 245.
stand at the Table, and receive the Elements, which may be supposed to have
been (...) this manner: The Bread and Wine being consecrated, the Communicants
came up in order to the Communion Table, and there standing received the
Elements, and then returned to their places again. But whether this was
universal I know not, or whether any other postures were used, I cannot
determine; only as for kneeling, if the Sacrament was Celebrated on the Lords
Day, as usually it was, or on any other Day between Easter and Whitsontide,
then no Church whatsoever kneeled; for as Tertullian writes, Die Dominico --
nefas ducimus -- de geniculis adorare, eadem immunitate die Paschae in
Pentecosten usque gaudemus. De Coron. Milit. p. 340.
On the Lords Day we account it a Sin to worship kneeling, which custom we also
observe from Easter to Whitsontide.

8. The Elements being thus blessed, distributed, and received, they afterward
sung an Hymn or Psalm to the Praise and Glory of God, as Tertullian writes,
Quisque de Scripturis Sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio, provocatur in medium
Deocanere. Apol. cap. 39. p. 710.
Then every one sings an Hymn to God, either of his own Composition, or out of
the Holy Scriptures. Then followed for a Conclusion a Prayer of Thanksgiving to
God Almighty for his inestimable Grace and Mercy; as the same Tertullian says,
Oration convivium dirimit. Ibidem.
Prayer concludes this Feast. To which was subjoined a Collection for the Poor.
When as Justin Martyr reports, (...). Apol. 2. p. 98, 99.
Every one that was able and willing gave according to his Ability, and that
that was gathered, was committed to the care of the Bishop, who relieved
therewith the Orphans and Widows, the Sick and Distressed, Prisoners,
Travelers, Strangers, and in a Word, all that had need thereof.

CHAP. VII.
1. Of the Circumstances of Public Worship. 2. Of the Place thereof: In Times
of Peace fixed Places for that end, metonymically called Churches. 3. How those
Churches were built. 4. No Holiness in those Places. 5. Of the Time of Public
Worship. 6. The First Day of the Week an usual Time. 7. Celebrated with
Joyfulness, esteemed holy, and spent in an holy manner. 8. Their Reasons for
the Observation of this Day. 9. The usual Title of this Day, The Lord's Day.
10. Sometimes called Sunday, but never the Sabbath Day. 11. Saturday another
Time of Public Worship.

1. HItherto I have spoken of the several particular Acts of the Public
Worship of the Ancients: I now come, according to my propounded Order, to
enquire into the necessary Circumstances thereof. By which I mean such things
as are inseparable from all humane Actions, as Place and Time, Habit, and
Gesture. As for Habit, as much of that as is Controverted, I have spoken to
already in that Chapter, where I discoursed of the Ministers Habit in Prayer.
And as for Gesture, I have already treated of Worshipping toward the East. And
of their Posture at the Reception of the Lord's Supper. There is nothing more
disputed with reference thereunto, besides the bowing at the Name of Jesus, and
the worshipping toward the Communion Table; but both these being introduced
after my prescribed time, viz. above three hundred years after Christ, I shall
say nothing to them, but pass on to the Discussing of the two remaining
Circumstances of Public Worship, viz. Place and Time.

2. First. As for Place: This all will readily grant to be a necessary
Circumstance of Divine Worship; for if we serve God, it is impossible, but that
it must be in one place or other. Now one Query with respect hereunto may be,
Whether the Primitive Christians had determined fixed Places for their Public
Worship? Unto which I answer, That usually they had; though it is true indeed,
that in times of Persecution, or when their Circumstances would not permit them
to have one usual sixed Place, they met wherever they could, (...). Dionys.
A. lex. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 22. p. 268.
in Fields, Deserts, Ships or Inns: Yet in times of Peace and Serenity they
chose the most settled convenient Place that they could get, for the Performance
of their Solemn Services; which place, by a Metonymy, they called the Church.
Thus at Rome, the place where the Christians met, and chose Fabian for their
Bishop, was (...). Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 29. p. 239.
the Church. At Antioch Paulus Samosasatenus Bishop thereof, ordered certain
Women to sing Psalms to his Praise (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 30. p. 281.
in the midst of the Church. At Carthage the Baptized Persons renounced the
Devil and all his Works. In Ecclesia. Tertul. de Coron. Milit. p. 336.
in the Church And thus In Lib. de Virgin. Veland.
Fertullian very frequently calls their definite places for Divine Worship
Churches.

3. As for the Form of these Churches, or the Fashion of their Building, I find
this Description of them in Tertullian, Nostrae columbae domus simplex, etiam
in aeditis semper and apertis, et ad lucem, amat figuram Spiritus sancti,
Orientem Christi figuram. Advers-Valentintan. p. 284.
The House of our Dove like Religion is simple, built on high and in open View,
respecting the Light as the Figure of the Holy Spirit, and the East as the
representation of Christ. The meaning whereofis, that their Churches were
erected on high and open places, and made very light and shining, in imitation
of the Holy Ghost's Descent upon the Apostles at the Day of Pentecost, who came
down with Fire, or Light upon them; and that they were built toward the East,
in resemblance of Christ, whom they apprehended in Scripture to be called the
East, concerning which Title, and the reason thereof, I have already discoursed
in that Head concerning praying toward the East, unto which place, to avoid
repetition, I refer the Reader.

4. But though they had these fixed Places or Churches for Convenience and
Decency, yet they did not imagine any such Sanctity or Holiness to be in them,
as to recommend or make more acceptable those Services that were discharged
therein, than if they had been performed elsewhere; for as Clemens Alexandrinus
writes, (...). Stromat. lib. 7. p. 520.
Every place is in Truth holy, where we receive any knowledge of God. And as
Justin Martyr says, (...). Dialog. cum Tryphon. p. 344.
Through Jesus Christ we are now all become Priests to God, who has promised
to accept our Sacrifices in every, or in any part of the World. And therefore
in times of Persecution, or such like Emergencies, they scrupled not to meet in
other places; but wherever they could securely join together in their
Religious Services, there they met, though it were (...). Dyonis. Alexand. apud
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 22. p. 268.
in Fields, Deserts, Ships, Inns or Prisons, as was the Case and Practice of
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria. So that the Primitive practice and Opinion with
respect to this Circumstance of Place was, That if the State of their Affairs
would permit them, they had fixed Places for their Public Worship, called
Churches, which they set apart to that use, for Convenience and Decencies sake;
but not attributing unto them any such Holiness, as thereby to sanctify those
Services that were performed in them.

I know nothing more with respect to Place, that requires our Consideration: I
shall therefore now proceed to enquire into the Time of Public Worship, under
which will be comprehended the Primitive Fasts and Feasts.

5. Time is as necessary a Circumstance to Religious Worship as Place; for
whilst we are in this World, we cannot serve God at all times, but must have
some determinate time to serve him in: That God's People therefore under the
Law might not be left at an uncertainty when to serve him, it pleased the
Almighty to institute the Sabbath, the Passover, and other Feasts, at which
times they were to congregate and assemble together, to give unto God the Glory
due unto his Name, And for the same end under the Evangelical Administration
there are particular Days and Seasons appointed for the Public and Solemn
Worship of the Glorious and Eternal Lord, according to the Sayings of Clemens
Romanus, God has required us to serve him. (...). Epist. 1. ad Corinth. p. 52.
in the appointed times and seasons. For which Reason we ought to serve him
(...). Ibid.
at those determinated times. That so worshipping him (...). Ibid. p. 53.
at those Commanded Seasons, we may be blessed and accepted by him.

6. Now the principallest and chiefest of these prescribed Times was the first
Day of the Week, on which they constantly met together to perform their
Religious Services. So writes Justin Martyr. (...), etc. Apolog. 2. p. 98.
On the Day that is called Sunday, all both of the Country and City assemble
together, where we preach and pray, and discharge all the other usual parts of
Divine Worship. Upon which account those parts of God's Public Worship are
styled by Tertullian Dominica Solennia. De Anima. c. 3. p. 530.
The Lord's Days Solemnities. Aurelius, who was ordained a Lector, or a Clark,
by Cyprian, is described in the Execution of his Office, Dominico legit. Cyp.
Epist. 33. p. 77.
by reading on the Lord's Day. And Victorinus Petavionensis represents, Die
Dominico cum gratiarum action ad panem exeamus. De Fabric. Mundi apud D. Cave,
p. 103.
this day, as an usual time, wherein they received the Lord's Supper. Which was
observed by the Heathen in Minucius Felix, who mentions the Christians Ad (...)
Solenni die coeunt. p. 26.
assembling to eat on a Solemn Day. And Pliny reports, that the Christians in
his time met together Essent (...) stato die ante lucem convenire, carmenque
Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem, seque Sacramento obstringere. Epist. ad
Trajan.
on an appointed day, to sing Praises unto Christ, as a God, and to bind
themselves by a Sacrament.

7. This was the Day which Clemens Alexandrinus calls (...). Stromat. lib. 6.
p. 492.
the Chief of Days, our Rest indeed; Which they observed as the highest and
supremest Festival, Diem Solis laetitia indulgemus. Apolog. cap. 16. p. (...).
On Sunday we give our selves to Joy, says Tertullian. And before him St.
Barnabas, (...). Epist. Cathol. 11. p. 244.
We keep the Eighth Day with Gladness. And Ignatius, (...). Ad (...). p. 35.
We observe the Lord's Day, banishing every thing on this day that had the
least tendency to, or the least appearance of Sorrow and Grief; inasmuch that
now they Die dominico jejunium nesas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare. Tertul.
de Cor. Mil. p. 339. 340.
esteemed it a Sin either to fast or kneel: Even the Montanists themselves,
those rigid Observers of Fasts and Abstinences Quantula est enim apud nos
interdictio ciborum duas in anno Hebdomadas Xerophagiarum nec totas, exceptis
scilicet Sabbatis and Dominicis offerimus Deo. Tertullian de Jejuuio, p. 651.
Abstained from Fasting on this most glad and joying day.

This day they accounted Holy, as Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, in his Letter to
the Church of Rome, says, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23. p. 145.
To day being the Lord's Day, we keep it holy. The way wherein they sanctified
it, or kept it holy, was the employing of themselves in Acts of Divine Worship
and Adoration, especially in the Public Parts thereof, which they constantly
performed on this day, as has been already proved; and in that forementioned
Letter, where Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, writ unto the Church of Rome, that
that day being the Lord's Day, they kept it holy. The manner of sanctifying it
is immediately subjoined, (...). Ibidem.
In it, says he, we have read your Epistle, as also the first Epistle of
Clemens. And Clemens Alexandrinus writes, (...). Strom. lib. 7. p. 535.
That a true Christian, according to the Commands of the Gospel, observes the
Lords Day, by casting out all (...) Thoughts, and entertaining all good ones,
glorifying the Resurrection of the Lord on that day.

8. The Reafon why they observed this Day with so much Joy and Gladness, was,
that they might gratefully commemorate the glorious Resurrection of their
Redeemer, that happened thereon. So writes St. Barnabas, (...). Epist.
Catholic. 11. p. 244.
We keep the eighth day with gladness, on which Christ arose from the Dead. So
says Ignatius, (...). Epist. ad Magnes. p. 35.
Let us keep the Lord's Day, on which our Life arose through (...).

And so says Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). Stomat. lib. 7. p. 535.
He that truly observes the Lord's Day, glorifies therein the Resurrection of
the Lord. Justin Martyr relates that (...). Apolog. 2. p. 99.
On Sunday the Christians assembled together, because it was the first Day of
the Week, on which God out of the confused Chaos made the World, and Jesus
Christ our Savior arose from the Dead; for on Friday he was Crucified, and on
Sunday he appeared to his Apostles and Disciples, and taught them those things
that the Christians now believe. And to the same purpose Origin advises his
Auditors to pray unto Almighty God, Maxim in Dominica die, quae passionis
Christi Commemoratrix est; neque enim resurrectio Domini semel in Anno, and non
semper post septem dies celebratur. In Isaiam. Homil. 5.
especially on the Lord's Day, which is a Commemoration of Christ's Passion;
for the Resurrection of Christ is not only celebrated once a year, but every
seven days.

9. From hence it was, that the usual Appellation of this Day both by the Greek
and Latin Churches, was The Lords Day. So it is styled by Clemens Alexandrinus,
(...). Strom. lib. 5. p. 437. and lib. 7. p. 535.
the Lords Day. And amongst the Latins, by Victorinus Petavionensis, Dies
Dominicus, De Fabric. Mund. apud Dr. Cave, Hist. literar. p. 103.
the Lords Day. As also by an Dies dominicus. Apud Cyprian. Ep. 53. 3. p. 164.
African Synod, And by Dominicum diem. De Idolat. p. 623.
Tertullian. Sometimes it is simply called (...), and, Dominicus, that is, the
Lords, without the addition of the Word Day, as it is thus called (...) by Ad
Magnes. p. 35.
Ignatius. And Dominicus by Epist. 33. p. 77.
Cyprian.

10. So that the Lords Day was the common and ordinary Title of this blessed
and glorious Day; though sometimes in compliance with the Heathens, that they
might know what Day they meant thereby, they called it in their Phrase, Sunday,
so termed because Dedicated to the Sun.

Thus Justin Martyr informing the Heathens of the Time and Manner of the
Christians Assemblies tells them (...). Apolog. 2. p. 98, and 99.
That on the Day called Sunday they met together for their Religious Exereises.
And, That on Sunday they assembled together. And so Tertullian upon the same
occasion lets the Heathens know that the Christians Diem Solis laetitiae
indulgemus. Apolog. c. 16. p. 688.
indulged themselves on Sunday to Mirth and joyfulness.

But though they so far complied with the Heathens as to call this Sunday, yet
I do not find that they ever so far indulged the Jews as to call it the Sabbath
Day; for through all their Writings, as may be especially seen in Advers.
Judaeos.
Tertullian, and Dial. cum Tryphon.
Justin Martyr, they violently declaim against Sabbatizing, or keeping the
Sabbath Day, that is, the Judaical Observation of the Seventh Day, which we
must always understand by the Word Sabbatum in the Writings of the Ancients,
not the Observation of the first Day, or the Lords Day; for that was constantly
celebrated, as it has been already proved, and by those who condemn the
Observance of the Sabbath Day, the Sanctification of the Lord's Day is approved
and recommended, as by Justin Martyr and Tertullian in those Passages already
cited, unto which we may add that clear Passage of Ignatius, (...). Epist. ad
Magnes. p. 35.
Let us no longer Sabbatize, but keep the Lords Day, on which our Life rose. Or
as it is more fully expressed in his interpolated Epistle, (...). Epist.
interpol. ad Magnes. p. 149.
Instead of Sabbatizing, let every Christian keep the Lords Day, the Day on
which Christ rose again; the Queen of Days, on which our Life arose, and Death
was conquered by Christ.

11. So that their not Sabbatizing did not exclude their keeping of the Lords
Day nor the Christian, but only the Judaical Observance of the Sabbath, or
Seventh Day; for the Eastern Churches, in compliance with the Jewish Converts,
who were numerous in those Parts, performed on the Seventh Day the same public
Religious Services that they did on the First Day, observing both the one and
the other as a Festival. Whence Origin enumerates (...). Cont. Cells. lib. 8. p.
392.
Saturday as one of the four Feasts solemnized in his time; though on the
contrary, some of the Western Churches, that they might not seem to Judaise,
fasted on Saturday, as Victorinus Petavionensis writes, Die septima -- solemus
superponere -- Parasceve superpositio fiat, ne quod cum Judaeis Sabbatum
observare videatur. De Fabric. Mun. apud D. Cave. p. 103.
We use to fast on the Seventh Day. And, It is our custom then to fast, that we
may not seem with the Jews to observe the Sabbath.

So that besides the Lord's Day, Saturday was an usual Season whereon many
Churches solemnized their Religious Services. As for those other times, in
which they Publicly assembled for the Performance of Divine Worship, they will
fall under the two General Heads of Times of Fasting and Times of Feasting, of
which in the following Chapters.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Primitive Fasts, twofold, Occasional and Fixed, Of Occasional Fasts,
what they were, and by whom appointed. 2. Of fixed Fasts, twofold, Weekly and
Annual: Wednesdays and Fridays weekly Fasts; till what time of the Day
observed, and why observed. 3. One necessary Annual Fast, viz. Lent. Why they
fasted at Lent, and how long lasted. 4. Of the manner of their Fasts. Three
sorts of Fasts, viz. Statio, Jejunium, and Superpositio. What those several
Kinds were, and at what times observed.

1. IN this Chapter I shall make an Enquiry into the Primitive Fasts, which may
be considered in a twofold respect, either as Occasional, or Fixed.

Occasional Fasts were such, as were not determined by any constant fixed
Period of Time, but observed on extraordinary and unusual Seasons, according as
the Variety and Necessity of their Circumstances did require them. Thus in
Times of Great and Imminent Danger either of Church or State, when by their
Sins they had kindled God's Wrath and Fury against them, that they might divert
his Vengeance, and appease his offended Majesty, they appointed set Days and
Times for the Abasing of themselves before the Lord, for the seeking of his
Face by Prayer and Fasting, abstaining from the Food of their Bodies, and
practicing all external Acts of Humiliation, as so many Indications of the
internal Contrition of their Hearts and Souls. So Cyprian in the time of a
sharp Persecution advised his Flock Ad placandum atque exorandum Dominum, non
voce sola, sed and jejuniis, and lachrymis, and omni genere deprecationis
ingemiscamus. Epist. 8. 1. p. 22.
To seek to appease and pacify the Lord, not only by Prayers, but by Fastings,
and by Tears, and by all kind of Entreaties. And when the same Father foresaw
an approaching Persecution, he writ to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Quoniam
providentia Domini monentis instruimur -- appropinquare (...) certaminis and
agonis nostri diem, jejuniis, vigiliis, orationibus insistere, cum omni plebe
non desinamus, incumbamus gemitibus assiduis and deprecationibus crebris, haec
sunt enim nobis arma coelestia; quae stare and perseverare fortiter faciunt.
Epist. 57. 3. p. 159.
That since God was pleased in his Providence to warn them of an approaching
Fight and Trial, they ought with their whole Flocks diligently to fast and
watch, and pray, to give themselves to continual Groans, and frequent Prayers;
for those are our Spiritual Arms, that make us firmly to stand and persevere.

Tertullian jeers the Heathens, Denique cum ab imbribus aestiva, hyberna
suspendunt, and annus in cura est, vos quidem quotidie pasti, statimque
pransuri, balneis and cauponis and lupanaribus operati, Aquilicia Jovi
immolatis, Nudipedasia populo denunciatis Coelum apud Capitolium quaeritis,
nubila de (...) expectatis, aversi ab ipso and Deo and Coelo. Nos vero jejuniis
aridi, and omni continentia aspersi (...) omni vitae fruge dilati, in sacco and
cinere volutantes, invidia Coelum tundimus, Deum tangimus, and cum
misericordiam extorserimus, Jupiter honoratur. Apolog. cap. 40. p. 711.
That in times of Danger or great necessity, after they had voluptuously and
sensually glutted themselves, they then ran to the Capitol, and with all
outward Signs of Humility, deprecated Gods Judgments, and implored his mercy,
whilst in the mean time they were Enemies unto him, But, says he, We on such
Emergencies and Occasions abstain from all things, give our selves wholly to
fasting, roll our selves in Sackcloth and Ashes; thus incline God as it were to
repent, to have Mercy and Compassion upon us; for by this way God is honored.

These Occasional Fasts were appointed by the Bishops of every Church, as they
saw fit and necessary. So writes Tertullian, Episcopi universae Plebi mandare
jejunia assolent -- ex aliqua solicitudinis ecclesiasticae causa. De Jejun. c.
13.
The Bishops are wont to ordain Fasts for their Churches, according as the
Circumstances of the Churches require.

2. The next sort of Fasts were set or fixed ones, that is, such as were always
observed at the same Time and Season; and these again were two fold, either
Weekly or Annual. First, Weekly. These were kept every Wednesday and Friday, as
Clemens Alexandrinus relates that (...). Strom. lib. 7. p. 534.
they fasted on every Wednesday and Friday. These Fasts were commonly called
Stations, in allusion to the Military Stations, or the Soldiers standing, when
on the Guard. Thus Tertullian mentions Stationum dies. De Orat. p. 661.
Their Stationary Days. And writes that Stationibus quartam and sextam Sabbati
dicamus. De Jejunio, p. 651.
Wednesdays and Fridays were Stations. On these Stationary Days their Fasts
ended Non ultra nonam detinendum. Tertul. de Jejun. p. 648.
at three a Clock in the Afternoon; whence they are called by Tertullian,
Stationum Semijejunia. Ibid. p. 650.
The half Fasts of Stations. Though some on Fridays lengthened out their Fasts
Jejunium facimus. Victor. Petav. apud D. Cave, p. 103.
till Evening.

Why they fasted on Wednesday rather than on any other Day of the Week, I
cannot find; but on Friday they chose to fast Ob Passionum Domini. Victor.
Petav. ubi antea.
because Christ was Crucified thereon.

3. The next sort of fixed Fasts is such as are annual, of which kind they had
but one, viz. Lent. And indeed besides this, they had no other necessary fixed
Fast, (...) Weekly nor Yearly; the Faithful were not strictly obliged to the
observation of any other, as will be evident from what follows.

It is true, they fasted Wednesdays and Fridays, but this was ex Arbitrio, of
their own Free Will and Choice, not ex imperio, of Command or Necessity. For
when the Montanists, began to impose as a Duty other stinted Fasts, they were
for so doing branded as Heretics, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 18. p. 184.
Who, says Apollonius concerning Montanus, is this new Doctor? His Works and
Doctrine evidently declare him, this is he that teaches the Dissolution of
Marriages, and prescribes Fasts. And for the same Practice they were accused by
the Orthodox, for Galatis nos (...) aiunt Observatores dierum, and mensium and
annorum. Tertul. de jejun. p. 645.
Galaticising, or committing the Error of the Galatians in observing Days, and
Months, and Years.

But that the Ancients esteemed Lent to be the only necessary fixed Fast, and
any other, even the Stationary Days to be indifferent, will appear most
evidently from this ensuing Passage of Tertullian, Tertullian being now a
Montanist, and defending their prescribed Fasts against the Orthodox, thus
jeeringly exposes the Opinions of his Adversaries with respect to the necessary
determined times of Fasting. Certe in evangelio illos dies (...) determinatos
putant, in quibus ablatus est sponsus: and hosesse jam solos legitimos
jejuniorum Christianorum abolitis legalibus, and propheticis vetustatibus, --
Itaque de caetero indifferenter jejunandum ex arbitrio, non ex imperio novae
disciplinae pro temporibus and causis uniuscujusque: Sic and Apostolos
observasse, nullum aliud imponentes jugum certorum and in commune omnibus
obeundorum jejuniorum: proinde nec stationum, quae and ipsae suos quidem dies
habeant quartae feriae and sextae, passim tamen currunt, neque sub lege
praecepti neque ultra supremam diei, quando and orationes fere hora nona
concludat de Petri exemplo quod actis refertur, De Jejunio, p. 645.
Forsooth, says he, they think that according to the Gospel, those days are to
be prescribed Fasts, wherein the Bridegroom was takeu away, ( i.e. Lent) and
those to be the only Fasts of Christians, the Legal and Prophetical Fasts being
abolished; and that for others we may indifferently fast, according to our
Will, not out of necessity or command, but according to our Circumstances and
conditions, and that so the Apostles abserved, commanding no other fixed and
common Fasts besides this; no, not the Stationary Days, which indeed they keep
on Wednesdays, and Fridays, and do all observe, but yet not in obedience to any
Command, or to the end of the Day, but Prayers are concluded at three a Clock
in the Afternoon, according to the Example of Peter in the Acts.

So that from hence it is evident, That the Orthodox apprehended themselves to
be free from the necessary Observation of the Stationary Fasts, and to be only
strictly obliged to fast on those Days, wherein the Bridegroom was taken away;
or on Lent, from which Periphrasis of Lent we may collect both the Reason and
the Duration thereof.

First, the Reason thereof, or the Ground on which they founded the necessity
of this Fast, and that was on that saying of Christ, in Matthew. 9. 15. The Days
will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them. This they imagined to
be an Injunction of Christ to all his Followers, to fast at that time, when the
Bridegroom should be taken away. The Bridegroom they esteemed to be Christ, the
time when he was taken away, his Crucifixion, Death, and continuing under the
Power of Death to the instant of his Resurrection, during which time they
thought themselves by the forementioned Command obliged to fast.

Secondly, From hence we may observe the Duration of this Fast, or how long it
was continued, and that was, from the time that Christ the Bridegroom was taken
away, to the time that he was restored again, that is, from his Passion to his
Resurrection. Now according to their Various Computations of the beginning and
end of Christ's being taken away, so was the Duration of their Fast; some might
reckon from Christ's Agony in the (...), others from his being betrayed by
Judas. (...) again from his being fastened to the Cross, and others from his
being actually dead; and so according to these Diversities of Computations were
their Fasts either lengthened or shortened. This we may probably suppose to be
the occasion of the different Observations of this Fast with respect to its
Duration, as we find it in Irenaeus, (...) Apud Eusebius. lib 5. cap. 24. p. 393.
Some, says he, esteem, that they must fast but one Day, others two, others
more, and some allow to this Fast forty Hours. Which last space of Time seems
to have been their general and common Allowance: Whence this Fast, was
afterward called (...), or, Quadragesima, that is, not a Fast of Forty Days,
in imitation of Christ's Fasting in the Wilderness, but a Fast of Forty Hours,
beginning at Friday Twelve a Clock, about which time Christ was dying, and
ending Sunday Morning, when Christ arose. So that from Twelve a Clock Good
Friday, as we call it, when Christ the Bridegroom was taken away, they fasted,
in obedience to his Command, as they imagined, till Sunday Morning, when he was
found again by his Resurrection, at which time they forgot their Sorrow and
Mourning, concluded their Fast, and began the joyful Festival of Easter, or of
Christ's Resurrection.

4. As for the manner of their Fasts, we may observe them to be of three sorts,
viz. Statio, Jejunium, and Superpositio; Station, Fasts, and Superposition; all
which three are at once mentioned by Victorinus Petavionensis, Usque ad horam
nonam jejunamus, usque ad vesperam, aut superpositio usque in alterum diem
fiat. De Fabric. Mun. apud D. Cave, p. 103.
We fast, says he, till the ninth hour, or till evening, or their is a
Superposition till the next morning.

I. There was the Fast of Stations, which ended at Three a Clock in the
Afternoon, or at the Ninth Hour, as it is called in the forecited Passage of
Victorinus Petavionensis. This sort of Fasting was used on (...) and Fridays,
which Days, as we have shown before were called Stationary Days, and on them
Divine Services were ended at Three a Clock in the Afternoon, for which Reason
Montanising Tertullian Stationum semijejunia. De Jejun. p. 650.
terms them, The Half Fasts of Stations.

II. The next sort was strictly called Jejunium, or a Fast; which according to
the (...) place of Victorinus Petavionensis, lasted till Evening: Of this sort,
it is probable, their Occasional Fasts were, as Tertullian writes, Denique cum
ab imbribus aeftiva, etc -- Nos jejuniis aridi, and omni (...) aspersi -- (...)
Coelum tundimus. Apolog. cap. 40. p. 711.
In times of necessity and danger we dry up our selves with Fasting, abstain
from all Meat, roll our selves in Dust and Ashes, and by these means cause God
to have mercy upon us. Though it is also likely, that in times of more eminent
Danger they extended these Fasts unto that of Superposition.

The Second sort of Fasts was observed by some on Fridays, who turned the
Station into a Fast, as Victorinus Petavionensis writes, Ob Passionem Domini
Jesu Christi aut Stationem do, aut jejunium facimus. De Fabric. Mund. apud D.
Cave, p. 103.
On Friday, in Commemoration of the Lord's Passion, I either keep a Station, or
observe a Fast.

III. The last sort of Fasts was called Superposition, or, as by the Greeks,
(...), which lasted till the Morning of the next Day, according to that of
Victorinus Petavionensis, Superpositio usque in alterum diem fiat. D. Fabric.
Mundi apud D. Cave, p. 103.
Let Superposition be done till the next Day.

As for the times when this Fast was observed, I find that in some of the
Western Churches they so kept every Saturday throughout the Year, fasting
thereon till Midnight, or till the beginning of Sunday Morning, as Victorinus
Petavioniensis says, Parasceve superpositio fiat, ne quod cum Judaeis Sabbatum
observare videamur. Ibid. p. 103.
Let Superposition be done on Saturday, lest we should seem to observe the
Jewish Sabbath. But not only in these, but in other Churches also, they so
fasted on Easter Eve, or on the Saturday preceding that Sunday, which being
Lent, was so necessary and usual, that Tertullian enumerating those particular
Acts of Divine Worship, that a Christian Woman could not freely perform, if
married to a Pagan Husband, reckons this as one, Quis Solennibus Paschae
abnoctantem securus sustinebit. Ad Vxor. lib. 2. p. 429.
That on Easter Eve she could not stay up, and watch that Night: But to please
her Husband, must be diverted from this necessary Fast, that ushered in the
Glorious Festival of Easter, which brings me in the next place to enquire into
this, and their other Feasts, of which in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
1. Of the Primitive Feasts, twofold, Occasional, and Fixed, 2. Of Easter. 3.
Of Whitsunday. 4. Of Christmas: On what Day of the Year Christ was born. 5. Of
Epiphany. 6. Besides these no other Feasts in Commemoration of Christ, the
Virgin Mary, or the Apostles. The Apostles not called Saints in the Primitive
Writings. 7. Festivals in Commemoration of the Martyrs: Observed on the Annual
Day of their Martyrdom. Persons appointed to take an exact Account of the Day
of their Decease. 8. Why those Festivals were observed. The Day of the Martyrs
Death termed their Birth days. 9. The Place where these Festivals were
Solemnized: Of the Buryingplace of the Ancients. 10. The manner of the
Observation of these Festivals.

1. AS the Primitive Fasts were twofold, so likewise were their Feasts, either
Occasional, or Fixed. As for those that were Occasional, I shall pass them
over, because not controverted, and come immediately to enquire into their
Fixed Feasts, which, as their Fasts, were also twofold, either Weekly or
Annual. Of their Weekly Feasts, which were Sundays, and in the Oriental
Churches Saturdays, I have already discoursed, so that there only remains an
Enquiry into their Annual Feasts, which, befides the Martyrs Festivals, were
two, viz. Easter and Whitsunday, or at most Three, viz, Easter, Whitsunday, and
Christmas, of each of which in their Order.

2. I begin with Easter, as being the antientest Feast of all, concerning which
Tertullian writes, Pascha celebramus annuo circulo in mense primo. De Jejun. p.
651.
We Celebrate Easter in the first Month every Year. Cyprian mentions their
Solennia Paschae. Epist. 53. 2. p. 131.
Easter Solemnities. And Origin reckons (...). Contra Cel sum, lib. 8. p. 392.
Easter as one of the four Festivals observed in his time. But that they
Solemnized Easter, is a thing so well known, that it will be unnecessary to
prove it, especially since every one knows, or at least might easily know,
those sharp Contests and Debates that were in the Church about the time when it
should be kept; the whole Affair has been at large related by several Hands in
our own Tongue; amongst others, by the most learned Dr. Cave, in his
Apostolici, in the Life of Irenaeus, to which I refer the Curious, contenting
my self with giving a very brief Account of the Controversy, which was this:
The Churches of the Lesser Asia kept their Easter the same day that the Jews
kept their Passover, on what day of the Week soever it happened. The Church of
Rome, with other Churches, kept it the Lords Day after. This Diversity of
Customs created a violent Disorder and Confusion amongst the Christians; for
the Church of Rome would impose their Usages on the Churches of the Lesser
Asia, unto which the latter peremptorily refused to submit. To appease these
Heats and Storms, Polycarp Bishop of Smirna came to Rome to confer with
Anicetus Bishop of that Church about it, who (...), that every Church should be
left to follow its own Custom, as accordingly they were to the times of Pope
Victor, who revived this Controversy, and was so turbulent and imperious, as
that he excommunicated the Asiaticks, for refusing to comply with the Church of
Rome in this matter, condemning them as Heretics, loading them with the long
and frightful Name of Tessareskaidekatitae, or, Quartodecimani, so called
because they kept their Easter Quarta Decima Luna, upon the Fourteenth Day
after the appearance of the Moon, or at the Full Moon, on what Day soever it
happened. But however the Asiaticks stood their Ground, and still maintained
their old Custom, till the Council of Nice, Anno 325. by their Authority
decided this Controversy, decreeing, that throughout the whole Christian
World, Easter should be observed not on the Day on which the Jewish Passover
fell, but on the Lord's Day ensuing, as it was ever after observed and followed.

3. The next Feast that was observed was Whitsunday, or Pentecost, in
Commemoration of the Holy Ghosts Descent on the Apostles, which also was very
ancient, being mentioned several times by De Coron. Milit. p. 340. De Baptism.
p. 604. and De Idololatria, p. 623.
Tertullian; and reckoned by Origin for one of the (...). Contra Celsum. lib.
8. p. 392.
four Festivals observed in his time, the other Three being Sundays, Saturdays,
and Easter.

4. As for Christmas, or the time of Christ's Nativity, there is a Passage in
Clemens Alexandrinus, which seems to intimate, that it was then observed as a
Festival: For speaking of the Time when Christ was born, he says, that those
who had curiously searched into it, affixed it to the 25th Day of the Month
Pachon. But the Basilidian Heretics held otherwise, (...). Strom. lib. 1. p.
249.
who also observed as a Feast, the Day of Christ's Baptism. From which Words who
also, if that be the meaning of the Words (...) one might be apt to infer, that
the meaning of Clemens Alexandrinus was, that the Basilidians not only feasted
at the time of Christ's Nativity, but also at the time of his Baptism. But
whether this Interpretation will hold, I leave to the Learned Reader to
determine. On the contrary, there are other Considerations, which more strongly
insinuate, that this Festival was not so early solemnized, as that when Origin
reckons up the Feasts observed in his Age, 1 (...). Contra Celsum. lib. 8. p.
392.
he mentions not one Syllable of Christmas; and it seems improbable that they
should Celebrate Christ's Nativity, when they disagreed about the Month and Day
when Christ was born.

Clemens Alexandrinus reckons (...) Strom. lib. 1. p. 249.
from the Birth of Christ to the Death of Commodus, exactly one hundred ninety
four Years, one month, and thirteen days; which years must be computed
according to the Nabonassar, or Egyptian Account, who varied from this in our
year, in that they had only 365 days in a year, never taking notice of the odd
Hours, or Quadrant of a Day, that every fourth Year makes a whole Day, and are
accordingly by us then added to the Month of February, which makes the
Bissextile or Leapyear. So that though the Egyptians always begun their Year
with the first day of the Month Thoth, yet making no Account of the Annual odd
Hours, that Month wandereth throughout the whole Year: And whereas now the
first Day of that Month is the first Day of our March, about Seven Hundred
Years hence, it will be the first of September; and after Seven Hundred Years
more, or near thereabouts, it will come to the first of March again. Wherefore
that we may reduce unto our Style this Calculation of Clemens Alexandrinus, we
must deduce, for those odd Hours which are not accounted, one Month and
Eighteen Days, and so reckoning the Birth of Christ from the Death of Commodus,
which happened on the first Day of January, to be One Hundred Ninety Four
Years, wanting five or six Days, it will appear that Christ was born on the
25th or 26th of the Month of December, according to the Julian Account, which
is the Epoch we follow.

But as the same Father farther writes in the same place, (...). Ibid. p. 249.
There were some, who more curiously searching after the Year and Day of
Christ's Nativity, affixed the latter to the 25th of the Month Pachon, Now in
that Year in which Christ was born, the Month Pachon commenced the twentieth
Day of April: So that according to this Computation Christ was born the 16th
Day of May. Nay, there were yet some other ingenious Men, as the same Father
continues to write, (...). Ibid. p. 249.
that assigned Christ's Nativity to the 24th or 25th of the Month Pharmuthi,
which answers to our 16th or 17th of April: So that there were Diversities of
Opinion concerning the Time of Christ's Birth, which makes it very probable,
that there was then no particular Feast observed in Commemoration of that
Glorious and transcendent Mercy.

5. There is yet another Feast called by us Epiphany, wherein there is a
Commemoration of Christ's Baptism, which I find to have been peculiarly
Solemnized by the Basilidian Heretics. For thus Clemens Alexandrinus reports
it to be a particular Custom of theirs, (...). Strom. lib. 1. p. 249.
to keep as a Festival the day of Christ's Baptism. The Day on which Christ was
baptized, (...). Ibid. p. 249.
they said to be the fifteenth of the Month Tyby, in the fifteenth Year of the
Reign of the Emperor Tiberius, which answers to our One and Thirtieth of
December; or as others imagined it, (...). Ibid.
On the Eleventh of the Month Tyby, which was the Seven and Twentieth of our
December.

6. Besides these forementioned Festivals, there were none others observed to
the Honor of the blessed Jesus, nor of the Virgin Mary, nor of the Holy
Apostles and Evangelists; and which may be a little observable, it is very
seldom, if ever, that the Ancients give the Title of Saints to those Holy
Persons, but singly style them, A Petro ordinatum. Tertul. de Praescript.
advers. Haeret. p. 78.
Peter, Tunc Paulus, etc. Idem. Scorpiac. advers. Gnostic. p. 615.
Paul, Ab Johanne conlocatum. Idem de Praescript advers. Haeret p 78
John, etc. not St. Peter, St. Paul, or St. John.

7. But now there was another sort of Festivals, which every Church Celebrated
in the Commemoration of its own Martyrs, which was, on the Anniversary Day of
their Martyrdoms: They assembled together, where they recited the Martyrs
Glorious Actions, exhorted to an Imitation of them, and blessed God for them.
So says Cyprian, Martyrum Passiones and dies anniversaria commemoratione
celebramus. Epist. 34. 3. p. 80.
The Passions of the Martyrs we Celebrate with an Anniversary Commemoration.
And so writes Tertullian, Oblationes pro defunctis, pro (...) annua die
facimus. De Coron Milit. p. 339.
Upon the Annual Day of the Martyrs Sufferings, we offer Thanks to God for
them. When this Practice began, cannot certainly be determined; it is first
found mentioned in the Letter of the Church of Smirna to the Church of
Philomilium, touching the Death of Polycarp, wherein they write, (...). Apud
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. p 135.
That they had gathered up his Martyred Bones and buried them in a decent
place, where, say they, if possible, we will meet to celebrate with Joy and
Gladness the Birthday of his Martyrdom. Hence that they might be certain of the
very day of the Martyrs Sufferings, there were some appointed to take an exact
Account of them, and faithfully to register them, that so there might be no
mistake. Thus Cyprian writ from his Exile to the Clergy of his Church, Dies
eorum, quibus excedunt, (...), ut commemorationes eorum inter memorias Martyrum
celebrare possimus -- Significet mihi dies quibus in carcere beati fratres
(...) ad immortalitatem gloriosae mortis exitu (...), and celebrentur hic a
nobis oblationes and Sacrificia ob commemorationes eorum Epist. 37 2. p 87, 88.
That they should take special care, exactly to note down the very day of the
Martyrdom of the Faithful, that so they might be commemorated amongst the
Memories of the Martyrs, and to signify to him the precise time of their
departure to a glorious Immortality, that so he might also celebrate it.

8. The Reasons for which they observed these Festivals, we find in the
forementioned Letter of the Church of Smirna, wherein they write (...). Apud
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. p. 135.
That they would meet to celebrate with Joy and Gladness the Martyrdom of
Polycarp, for the Commemoration of those who had already gloriously striven,
and for the Confirmation and Preparation of others by their Examples. So that
their Design was twofold, to animate and encourage others to follow the
glorious Examples of those Heroic Martyrs, who were commemorated before their
Eyes, and to declare the Honor and Veneration, that they had for those
invincible Champions of Jesus Christ, who by their Martyrdoms were now freed
from all their Miseries and Torments, and Translated to a blessed and glorious
Immortality, in an happy manner experiencing the Truth of that Scripture in
Ecclesiastes 7. 1. That the day of a Man's Death is better than the day of his
Birth. Whence the Time of the Martyrs Deaths was usually termed their
Birthday, because then was a Period of all their Grief and Trouble, and a
beginning of their everlasting Bliss and (...). Thus in the forementioned
Letter of the Church of Smirna concerning the Death of Polycarp, they write, 1
(...) Apud (...). lib. 4. cap. 15. p. 135.
Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis annua die facimus. De Coron Milit. p
339.
That they would meet to celebrate with joy and gladness the Birthday of his
Martyrdom. And so Tertullian says, that 3 they annually commemorated the
Birth-days of the Martyrs; that is, their Deathdays; as he writes in another
place concerning St. Paul, Tunc Paulus civitatis Romanae consequitur
nativitatem, cum illic Martyrii renascitur generositate. Scorpiac adv. Gnostic.
p. 615.
That he was born at Rome, when he suffered Martyrdom there.

9. As for the Place where these Anniversary Solemnities were performed, it was
at the Tombs of the Martyrs, who were usually buried with the rest of the
Faithful, in a distinct place from the Heathens, it being their Custom to
interr the Christians by themselves, separate from the Pagans; accounting it an
heinous Crime, if possibly it could be prevented, to mingle their Sacred Ashes
with the defiled ones of their Persecuting and Idolatrous Neighbors. Wherefore
in the Ratification of the Disposition of Martialis Bishop of Astorga by an
African Synod held Anno 258, this was one of the Articles alleged against him,
Filios -- exterarum gentium more apud profana Sepulchra depositos, and
alienigenis consepultos. Apud Cyprian. Epist. 68. 7. p 202.
That he had buried his Sons after the Pagan manner, in Gentile Sepulchers,
amongst Men of another Faith. And for this Reason it was, that the surviving
Christians would run upon ten thousand Hazards, to collect the scattered
Members of the Dead Martyrs, and decently to inter them in the common
Repository of the Faithful. As when Emilian the barbarous Prefect of Egypt,
forbad any, under Severe Penalties, to entomb the Dead Bodies of the murdered
Saints, and seduously watched if any would durst to do it. Yet (...) a Deacon
of Alexandria (...). Dionys. Alexand. apud (...). lib. 7. c. 11. p. 61.
resolutely ventured upon it; And it is applauded by the Historian as an Act of
Religious Boldness and Freedom, whereby Asturias a Roman Senator rendered
himself renouned, in that when (...). Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 16. p. 264.
he saw the Martyrdom of Marinus at Caesarea, he took his martyred Body,
clothed it with a precious Garment, bore it away on his own Shoulders, and
magnificently and decently (...) it. And in a Letter from the Christians of
Lions and Vienna in France to the Churches of (...), concerning their sore and
grievous Persecutions, we find them passionately complaining of the Inhumane
Cruelty of their Persecutors, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1. p. 169.
that neither Prayers nor Tears, neither Gold nor Silver, could prevail with
them, to permit them to collect the dead Bodies of their murdered Brethren,
and decently to (...) them. As on the other hand, the Faithful or the Church of
Smirna rejoiced, that they had gotten the most precious Bones of Polycarp,
which they buried Apud Eusebius. lib. 4 cap. 15 p 135.
(...), (...) decebat, where they ought, as Valesius renders it; that is, as
seems most probable, at the common Burying Place of the Christians.

Now it was at these Tombs and Sepulchers that the Memories of the Martyrs were
solemnized. Thus in the forecited Letter of the Church of Smirna to the Church
of Philomilium, they write, that (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. p. 135.
in that place where they had interred the Bones of Polycarp, they would by the
Blessing of God assemble together, and celebrate his Martyrdom; which was a
Practice so usual and constant, as that the Heathens observed it: So that as on
the one hand, under the Persecution of Valerian, AEmilian the Prefect of Egypt
threatened Dionysius Alexandrinus and his Fellow Sufferers, that for their
Obstinacy and (...), as he termed it, he would send them into Lybia, to a
desert place called Cephro, (...). Dion. Alex. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 11. p.
258.
where they should not meet together, or go to those places called Cemeteries.
That is, the places where the Martyrs and the rest of the Faithful were buried;
so on the other hand when Galienus Valerian's Son restored Peace to the
Churches, he published an express Edict (...). Apud. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 13. p.
262.
for returning to the Christians the Cemeteries that were taken from them.

10. If in the next place it shall be enquired, how they observed these
Festival Days. I answer, that they did not, according to the fashion of the
Heathens, spend them in Riot and Debauchery, in Bacchanalian Revellings and
Luxury, but in Religious Exercises and Employments, in Prayers and Devotions.
(...). Contra Celsum, lib. 8. p. 392.
He, says Origin, truly keeps a Festival, who does what he ought to do, always
praying, and by his Prayers offering up unbloody Sacrifices unto God.

The Solemnites of these Feast Days were not Drunkenness and Gluttony, but Acts
of Piety and Charity. Now they publicly assembled, as the Church of Smirna
writes in her Letter concerning the Death of Polycarp, (...). Apud Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 15. p. 135.
to commemorate the Martyrs Courage and Triumphs, and to exhort and prepare
others to the same glorious and renowned Actions. Or as Tertullian expresses
it, Oblationes facimus. De Coron Milit. (...) 339.
now they offered Oblations. as Cyprian, Celebrentur hic a nobis oblationes and
Sacrificia Epist. 37. 2. p. 88.
They offered Oblations and Sacrifices; that is, they offered Thanks and Praise
to God, that had given Grace to those Martyrs, to Seal his Truths with their
Blood, and in evidence of their Gratitude distributed of their Substance to the
Poor and (...).

CHAP. X.
1. Of the Rights and Ceremonies: The difference between them. 2. Of
Ceremonies: Many used by the Ancients, which through various ways crept into
the Church. 3. Of Rites: Every Church followed its own Rites without imposing
them on any other. 4. The Members of every Church obliged to observe the Rites
of that Church where they lived. 5. The Conclusion of this Enquiry, with an
earnest Persuasion to Peace, Unity and Moderation.

1. HAving in the precedent Chapters enquired into the several Parts of Divine
Worship, and the Circumstances thereof, I now come to close up all with a brief
Appendix concerning Rites and Ceremonies, by which I mean two different things:
By Rites, I understand such Actions as have an (...) Relation to the
Circumstances or manner of Worship: As for Instance. The Sacrament was to be
received in one manner or other, but whether from the Bishop or Deacon, that
was the Rite. Lent was to be observed a certain space of Time, but whether One
Day, or Two Days, or Three Days, that was the Rite thereof. So that Rites (...)
necessary Concomitants of the Circumstances of Divine Worship, Appendages to
them; or, if you rather please, you may call them Circumstances themselves.

By Ceremonies, I mean such Actions as have no regard either to the Manner or
Circumstances of Divine Worship, but the Acts thereof may be performed without
them; as for instance, In some Churches they gave to Persons Suscepti lactis
and mellis concordiam proegustamus. Tertul. de Coron. (...). p. 337.
when they were baptized, Milk and Honey. And, Manibus ablutis -- Orationem
obire. Idem De Oratione, p. 659.
Before they prayed, they washed their Hands. Now both these Actions I call
Ceremonies, because they were not necessary to the Discharge of those Acts of
Divine Worship, unto which they were affixed; but those Acts might be performed
without them; as Baptism might be entirely administered without the Ceremony of
giving Milk and Honey, and Prayers might be presented without washing of Hands.

Now having explained what I intend by those two Terms of Rites and Ceremonies,
let us in the next place consider the Practice of the Primitive Church with
reference thereunto. And first for Ceremonies.

2. It is apparent that there were many of that kind crept into the Church, of
whom we may say, that from the beginning they were not so: For when (...). Apud
(...). lib. 3. cap. 32. p. (...).
the Quire of the Apostles was dead, till which time, as Hegesippus writes, the
Church remained a pure and unspotted Virgin; then the Church was gradually
(...) and corrupted, as in her Doctrine, so also in her Worship, an Infinity of
Ceremonies by degrees insensibly sliding in, very many of which were introduced
within my limited time, as Suscepti lactis and mellis concordiam praegustamus,
exque ea die lavacro quotidiano per totam (...) abstinemus. Tertul. de Coron
Milit. p. 337.
the eating of Milk and Honey after Baptism, the abstaining from Baths the Week
after, Manibus ablutis -- orationem obire -- adsignata oratione assidendi mos
est quibusdam Idem de Orat. p 659 660.
the washing of their Hands before Prayer, their sitting after Prayer, and many
other such like, which through various ways and means winded themselves into
the Church; as some came in through Custom and Tradition; one eminent Man
perhaps invented and practiced a certain Action, which he used himself, as
Judging it fit and proper to stir up his Devotion and Affection; others being
led by his Example performed the same, and others again imitated them, and so
one followed another, till at length the Action became a Tradition and Custom,
after which manner those Ceremonies were introduced, Suscepti lactis and (...)
concordiam praegustamus, exque ea die (...) quotidiano per totam hebdomadem
(...) -- Die Dominico nefas ducimus de geniculis adorare, eadem (...) a die
Paschae in (...) usque gaudemus ad (...) atque promotum, ad omnem aditum and
exitum -- quacunque nos (...) exercet frontem crucis signaculo terimus. Harum
and aliarum ejusmodi Disciplinarum si legem expostules (...) nullam invenies,
(...) tibi praetendetur auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix. Idem de Coron Milit.
p 337, 340, 341.
of tasting Milk and Honey after Baptism, of abstaining from the Baths the whole
ensuing Week, of not kneeling on the Lords Day, and the space between Easter
and Whitsuntide, of the Signing of themselves with the Sign of the Cross in all
their Actions and Conversations, concerning which and the like, Tertullian
writes, That there was no Law in Scripture for them, but that Tradition was
their Author, and Custom their Confirmer. Of which Custom we may say what
Tertullian says of Custom in general, that Fere consuetudo initium ab aliqua
(...) vel simplicitate sortita in usum per successionem corroboratur, and ita
adversus veritatem vindicatur, sed Dominus noster Christus veritatem se, non
(...). Si semper Christus and prior omnibus aeque veritas sempiterna and
antiqua res -- Haereses non tam novitas quam veritas revincit, quodcunque
adversus veritatem sapit hoc erit Haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo. De Virgin.
Veland. p. 385.
commonly Custom takes its rise from Ignorance and Simplicity, which by
Succession is corroborated into use, and so vindicated against the Truth: But
our Lord Christ has called himself Truth, and not Custom; wherefore if Christ
was always, and before all, then Truth was first and ancientest; it is not so
much Novelty as Verity that confutes Heretics: Whatsoever is against the Truth
is Heresy, although it be an old Custom.

Others again were introduced through a wrong Exposition or Misunderstanding of
the Scripture; so were their Exorcisms before Baptism, and their Unctions after
Baptism, as in their proper places has been already shown.

Finally, Others crept in through their Dwelling amongst the Pagans, who in
their ordinary Conversations used an Infinity of Superstitions; and many of
those Pagans, when they were converted to the Saving Faith, Christianiz'd some
of their innocent former Ceremonies, as they esteemed them to be; either (...)
them deceut and proper to stir up their Devotion, or likely to gain over more
Heathens, who were offended at the plainness and nakedness of the Christian
Worship of which sort were Manibus ablutis -- orationem obire -- adsignata
oratione assidendi mos -- gentilibus adaequant. De Orat. p. 659, 660.
their washing of Honds before Prayer, their sitting after Prayer, and such
like. Concerning which Tertullian affirms, that they were practiced by the
Heathens.

So that by these and such like Methods it was, that so many Ceremonies
imperceptibly slid into the Ancient Church, of some of which Tertullian gives
this severe Censure, Quibus merito vanitas exprobanda est, siquidem sine ullius
aut Dominici aut Apostolici praecepti auctoritate fiunt, hujusmodi enim non
Religioni, sed Superstitioni deputantur, affectata and coacta and curiosi
potius quam rationalis officii. Certe vel eo coercenda quod gentilibus
adaequent. De Orat. p. 659.
That they are deservedly to be condemned as vain, because they are done
without the Authority of any Precept, either of our Lord, or of his Apostles;
that they are not Religious, but Superstitius, affected and constrained,
curious rather than reasonable, and to be abstained from because Heathenish.

3. As for the Rites and Customs of the Primitive Church, these were
indifferent and arbitrary; all Churches being left to their own Freedom and
Liberty to follow their peculiar Customs and Usages, or to embrace those of
others, if they pleased; from whence it is, that we find such a variety of
Methods in their Divine Services, many of which (...) be observed in the
precedent part of this Discourse; as, some received the Lords Supper at one
time, others at another; Some Churches received the Elements from the Hands of
the Bishop, others from the Hands of the Deacons; some made a Collection before
the Sacrament, others after; some kept Lent one Day, some two days, and others
exactly forty Hours; some celebrated Easter on the same Day with the Jewish
Passover, others the Lords Day after; and so in many other things one Church
differed from another, as Firmilian writes, that Circa celebrandos dies
Paschae, and circa multa alia divinae rei Sacramenta videat esse apud alios
aliquas diversirates, nec observari illic omnia aequaliter, quae Hierosolymis
observantur, secundum quod in caeteris quoque plurimis provinciis multa pro
locorum and nominum diversitate variantur. Apud Cyprian Epist. 75. 5. p. 237.
at Rome they did not observe the same Day of Easter, nor many other Customs
which were practiced at Jerusalem; and so in most Provinces many Rites were
varied according to the Diversities of Names and Places.

So that every Church followed its own particular Customs, although different
from those of its Neighbors, it being nothing necessary to the Unity of the
Church, to have an Uniformity of Rites; for according to Firmilian, the Unity
of the Church consisted Fidei and veritatis unanimitatem. Apud Cypr. Epist. 75.
2. p. 236.
in an unanimity of Faith and Truth, not in an Uniformity of Modes and Customs;
for on the contrary, the Diversity of them, as Irenaeus speaks with reference
to the Fast of Lent (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24. p. 193.
did commend and set forth the Unity of the Faith.

Hence every Church peaceably followed her own Customs, without obliging any
other Churches to observe the same; or being obliged by them to observe the
Rites that they used; yet still maintaining a loving Correspondence, and mutual
Concord each with other; as Firmilian writes, that Plurimis provinciis multa
pro locorum and nominum diversitate variantur, nec tamen propter hoc ab
Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atque unitate (...) discessum est. Apud Cyprian.
Epist. 75. 5. p. 237.
in most Provinces many Rites were varied according to the Diversities of Names
and Places; but yet, says he, never any one for this broke the Peace and Unity
of the Church. One Church or Bishop did not in those days Anathematize another
for a disagreement in Rites and Customs; except when Victor Bishop of Rome,
through his Pride and Turbulency, excommunicated the Asiatick Bishops for their
different Observation of Easter from the Church of Rome; which Action of his
was very ill resented by the other Bishops of the Christian Churches, and
condemned by them as alien from Peace and Unity, and contrary to that Love and
Charity, which is the very Soul and Spirit of the Gospel; even the Bishops of
his own Party, that celebrated Easter on the same Day that he did, censured his
(...) and violence, as unchristian and uncharitable, and writ several Letters,
wherein (...). Lib. 5. cap. 24. p. 192.
they severely checked him, as Eusebius reports, in whose time they were extant,
all which are now lost, except the Fragment of an Epistle, written by Irenaeus,
and other Bishops of France, wherein (...). Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. p.
192, 193.
they affirm, that Victor was in the right with respect to the time of Easter,
that it ought to be celebrated, as he said, on the Lords Day, but that yet he
had done very (...) to cut off from the Unity of the Church those that observed
it otherwise; that it had never been known, that any Churches were
excommunicated for a disagreement in Rites, (...) of which there was not only
in the time of Easter (...) self, but in the Fast that preceded it: Some fasted
one day, others more; some forty hours, which variety of Observations began not
first in our Age, but long before us in the times of our Ancestors, who yet
preserved Peace and Unity amongst themselves, as we now do; for the Diversity
of (...) commended the Unity of Faith: And as for this (...) concerning the
time of Easter, the Bishops which governed the Church of Rome before Soter,
viz. Anicetus, Pius, Higynus, Telesphorus, and Xystus, they never celebrated it
the same time with the (...), neither would they permit any of their People so
to do; but yet they (...) kind and (...) to those who came to them from those
(...), where they did otherwise observe it, and never any for this Cause were
thrown out of the Church; even your Predecessors, though they did not keep it,
yet they sent the Eucharist to those that did keep it; and when in the times of
Anicetus, blessed Polycarp came to Rome, and there were some Controversies
between them, they did not separate from one another, but still maintained
Peace and Love: And though Anicetus could never persuade Polycarp, nor Polycarp
Anicetus to be of each others mind, yet they communicated one with another; and
Anicetus in Honor to Polycarpus, permitted him to Consecrate the Sacrament in
his Church, and so they departed in mutual love and kindness; and all the
Churches, whether observing, or not observing the same Day, retained Peace and
Unity amongst themselves.

4. But though one Church could not oblige another to a Conformity in Rites and
Customs, yet a particular Church or Parish could enforce its own Members to
such a Conformity, an instance whereof we meet with in that famous Controversy
about the Time of Easter. It was the Custom of the Asiaticks to celebrate that
Feast at the Full Moon, or at the same time with the Jewish Passover, on
whatsoever day of the Week it happened. It was the manner at Rome to observe it
the Lords Day after, and both these Churches quietly followed their several
Usages, without imposing them on each other. But yet the Churches of Asia
permitted none of their Members to solemnize it after the Roman manner; neither
did the Churches of Rome, or of the West, license any of their Inhabitants to
celebrate it after the Asiatick manner; for if either of them had granted any
such thing, there must have ensued Confusion and Disorder, to have seen Easter
differently observed in one and the same Church; whilst some Members of a
Parish where Fasting, to behold others Feasting, would have been a perfect
Ataxy and Irregularity: Therefore though Anioetus Bishop of Rome retained Peace
and Unity with Foreign Churches, that differed from him as to the Time of
Easter, without obliging them to a Compliance with the Roman Custom; yet he
peremptorily required it of the Members of his own Church, and (...). Iren.
apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. p. 193.
would never permit them to Solemnize that Feast on the same time with the
Asiaticks.

So that though every Church had the Liberty to use what Rites she pleased, yet
every particular Member had not, but was obliged to observe the Manners and
Customs of that Church where he lived, or where he occasionally communicated. A
Church Collectively, or the Majority (...) a Church with their Bishop could
change their old Customs, and introduce new ones, as was done in the Affair of
Easter, the Asiaticks at length submitting to the Roman Usage; but till that
was done, every particular Member was required to follow the old Customs of
that Church, to which he belonged, and not to bring in any Innovations or new
Rites, because, as was said before, that would beget Tumults and Disorders, and
the Persons so acting would be guilty of that Strife and Contention, which is
condemned by those Words of the Holy Apostle 1 Cor. 11. 16. But if any Man seem
to be contentious, we have no such custom; neither the Churches of God. Which
is, as if the Apostle had said, If any Men, either to show their Wit, or to
head and strengthen a Party, will contradict what we have said, and affirm it
to be decent and comely, either for Men to pray covered, or Women uncovered,
This should silence such Contentious Opposers, that there is no such Rite or
Custom in any of the Churches of God, but their Practice is the very same with
what we have directed unto, and therefore to that they ought peaceably and
quietly to submit and yield.

Thus now I have finished this Enquiry, and have as far as I could, searched
into what was first proposed. If I have not illustrated any Point, as clearly
as might be expected, the reason is, because I found nothing farther pertinent
thereunto in those Writings to which I am confined; if I had, I should freely
have mentioned it. Whether I have been mistaken in the Sense and Meaning of any
Passage, I must leave unto my Readers to judge; all that I can say is, that I
am not conscious to my self of any wilful and designed Mistakes, having
throughout this whole Discourse endeavored deavoured to find out the plain and
naked Truth, without being biased to any Party or Faction whatsoever; and that
if any one shall be so kind and favorable as to convince me of any Slips or
Errors, which I may have committed through Inconsideration, or want of a due
Understanding, I shall thankfully acknowledge them, and willingly renounce and
leave them.

5. What has been related concerning the Constitution, Discipline, Unity and
Worship of the Primitive Church shall suffice, I have nothing more to add, but
mine earnest Entreaty and Persuasion unto all those, into whose Hands this
little Treatise shall fall, to imitate and follow the Primitive Christians in
their Moderation and the Peaceableness of their Temper and Disposition. In
those happy days the Christians were so eminent above all other Sects for their
mutual Love and Charity, that the Heathens observed it with astonishment, and
cried out with Admiration, Vide, inquiunt, ut invicem se diligunt. Tertul.
Apolog. cap. 39. p. 709.
Behold, how they love one another! Pro alterutro mori sant parati -- (...) nos
vocamus -- quia unum patrem Deum (...), qui unum Spiritum biberunt sanctitatis,
qui de uno utero ignorantiae (...) ad unam lucem expiraverunt veritatis.
Ibidem, p. 709.
We are, says Tertullian, ready to die for each other; and we call one another
Brethren, because we acknowledge one and the same God the Father, and have been
sanctified by the same holy Spirit, and have been brought from the same state
of Ignorance, to the light of the same mavelous. Truth. But alas! Lam. 4. v.
1.
How is the Gold become (...) How is the most fine Gold changed! How is that
Love and Charity now turned into Malice and Cruelty! Pity, Compassion, and
Tender-heartedness have left the World, and Envy, Hatred and Rancour are
succeeded in their Places; Love is now exploded as ungenteel and mean, Charity
is condemned as abject and base, whilst Hatred, Revenge and Fury are esteemed
as Noble and Generous.

But, O Lord, how loug? Shall Malice and Envy, Wrath and Pride for ever ride
Triumphant and uncontrolled? When (...) thou, O Prince of Peace, and God of
Love, heal our Breaches, and compose our Differences, and cause us Ephesians. 4. 2,
3.
with all lowliness and meekness, and long-suffering to forbear one another in
Love, endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace?

We have too too long unnaturally quarrelled already, and to the Dishonor of
God, and the Scandal of Religion, have most unchristianly abused each other: I
speak not this only of one Party, but of all; we have all been guilty as to
this matter, we have all erred and gone astray from the most Holy Commandment,
and have been deficient every one of us in this great and necessary Duty of
Love and Unity: We have loathed Concord, and loved Jarrs and Divisions, and
have been always backbiting, persecuting and maligning one another to this
very day, never at all remembering that we were Brethren, and Professors of the
same blessed and glorious Religion.

But what shall I say? This Theme is too harsh and displeasing; if it is an
unpleasant Work to rip up those uncharitable Actions, may they be buried in
perpetual silence and oblivion, and never more be remembered, so as to stir up
Anger and Revenge, but only so as they may produce in us all Humility,
Repentance, and mutual Forgiveness; let us now with our Floods of Penitential
Tears at once quench God's Anger for our past Divisions, and the Flames of our
present Fire and Heats, that so there may be no Fuel for future Contentions;
and being grieved that we have played the Fool so long, we may now the more
firmly resolve by the Grace of God to do so no more, that so however infamous
we have been heretofore for our blind Zeal and unaccountable Animosities, we
may for the time to come be highly renowned and conspicuous for our ardent Love
and fervent Charity, Ephesians. 4. 32, 33.
Putting away all bitterness and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and evil
speaking, with all Malice, being kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Colos. 3. 12, 13.
Putting on (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved) Bowels of Mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness; long suffering, (...) one another, and forgiving
one another.

Certain I am, we need no Arguments to induce us hereunto; both the necessity
and Facility of Love and Unity require it at our hands; its necessity is
evident from hence, that whilst we spend our Zeal and Heat about these
inconsiderable matters, the very Foundations of Faith and Morals are attacked
and shaken, Atheism increases, Immorality prevails, and those damnable
Heresies, which for many Ages have been silenced and abandoned, are now revived
by Men of a corrupt Faith, who take an occasion from the Lawlesness and
Licentiousness of this present Age, to vent those cursed Tenants, which
eradicate and destroy all Religion; it is to be feared, that unless we hasten
to compose our Differences about the Skirts and Fringes of Religion, the very
Vitals and Essentials thereof will be corroded and devoured by Heresy and
Profaneness.

And as for these and the like Reasons the necessity of an Union or
Comprehension is manifest on the one Hand, so the Facility of such an Union is
as apparent on the other hand; for, thanks be to God, our differences are
neither about Faith nor Manners; we all believe in one and the same God, hope
to be saved by one and the same Redeemer, desire to be sanctified by one and
the same Sanctifier, receive one and the same Scriptures, assent to the same
Doctrins, and acknowledge the necessity of the same Duties: Our Disputes are
only about lesser matters, about Modes and Forms, about Gestures and Postures,
and such like inferior matters, about which it should grieve a wise Man to
quarrel, and which with the greatest ease in the World might be composed and
settled, if managed by Men of Prudence and Moderation; and such Men, it is hoped,
are the Reverend Bishops advanced by their Majesty's, whose Promotion to those
Places of Dignity and Trust many honest and peaceable Men look upon as a good
Omen and Prognostic of our Future Union and happy Establishment.

With these two Considerations let us remember those solemn Vows and
Engagements which we made to Almighty God, and to one another in the day of our
late Distress; how we then vowed and promised, that if God would be pleased to
deliver and rescue us, we would forget our Differences, and mutually condescend
and abate of our Rigor and Severity: Wherefore now since God has so
wonderfully saved us, let us not be so perfidious and faithless, as to neglect
to perform what we then obliged our selves unto; but let us willingly and
conscientiously discharge it, lest God bring severer Judgments on us then ever,
and at once utterly destroy us both Root and Branch, for our Lying, Perjury and
Hypocrisy.

Many other such cogent Arguments I might (...) produce; but that I may avoid
too great Prolixity and Tediousness, I shall urge but one more, which is, that
unless we have an uniting Spirit, and a peaceable Disposition, we are no true
Christians, we unjustly arrogate that glorious Name; for the very Soul of
Christianity is Love and Charity, Romans 14. 17 18.
The Kingdom of God, says the Apostle, is not Meat and Drink, not zealous
Disputes and Strifes about lesser Points, but righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the Holy (...); for he that in these serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
and approved of Men. It is an Absurdity and a mere Contradiction, for a Man to
say that he is Religious, and yet to be malicious and uncharitable. Our Savior
flatly tells us, that John. 13. 35.
by this all Men shall know that we are his Disciples, if we have Love one to
another. We may talk what we please of Religion, and profess what we list; the
Word of God is plain, that whosoever has not Love and Charity, is no
Christian; but to allude to that of Christ, John 10. 1. He is a Thief and a
Robber, he has not the Spirit of God abiding and dwelling in him; for Gal. 5.
22. 23.
The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. And James 3. 17.
The Wisdom from above is peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy and good Fruit. So that the very Soul and Spirit of Christianity consists
in Unity, Love, and Amity.

Wherefore let my Entreaties be prevalent with you to endeavor for a mutual
Compliance and Comprehension, as you have any Regard to the Honor of God, and
the Credit of Religion; as you would hinder the Growth of Damnable Errors, and
abominable Debaucheries, and do what in you lies to prevent the Ruin and
Damnation of Multitudes of poor Souls; nay, as you would secure your own
Salvation, and be able with Confidence to appear at the dreadful and impartial
day of Judgment, let me conjure you in the Name of God 1 Pet. 1. 22.
to love one another with a pure Heart forvently, 1 Timothy 6. 11.
to follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness; to
forget and pardon all former Injuries and Affronts, 1 Phil. 3. 14.
doing nothing for the time to come, through Strife or Vainglory, but in
lowliness of Mind, each esteeming others better than themselves, doing all
things without Murmurings or Disputings, 2 Timothy 2. 23, 24.
avoiding all foolish and unlearned Questions, knowing that they do but gender
Strifes, behaving your selves like the Servants of the Lord, who must not
strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach, patient, mutually complying
with each other, doing all things unto Edification, laboring after Peace and
Unity, that so we may at length Romans 15. 5.
with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

And for the Accomplishment of this blessed and glorious Design, let us above
all things avoid Pride and Vainglory, which, as it is to be feared, has had
no small share both in the causing and increasing of our Divisions: We have
been so stiff and self-conceited, and stood so much upon the pitiful
Punctilio's of Honor, that we have refused to condescend to one another, or to
join in a way of Comprehension, or mutual Relaxation, which seems to be the
only way left for Union and Agreement, if ever we hope, or intend to have it.
Wherefore let me address my self unto you in the Words of the Reverend and
Moderate Bishop Hall, Passion Sermon.
Men, Brethren and Fathers help, for Gods sake put to your Hands to the
Quenching of this common Flame, the one side by Humility and Obedience the
other by Compassion, both by Prayers and Tears. And as he, so let me Ibid.
beg for Peace as for Life by your Filial Piety to the Church of God, whose
Ruins follow upon our Divisions, by your Love of God's Truth, by the Graces of
that one blessed Spirit, whereby we are all informed and quickened, by the
precious Blood of that Son of God, which was shed for our Redemption, be
inclined to Peace and Love, and though our Brains be different, yet let our
Hearts be one. Let us all endeavonr by a Compliance and a Comprehension to
promote Love and Charity, Peace and Unity, that so being Children of Peace, and
obedient Subjects of the Prince of Peace, the God of Peace may Bless us with
Peace, Quiet and Serenity here, and at the end of our Days receive us into his
Eternal Peace, and everlasting Rest; which God of his infinite Mercy grant may
be the Portion of us all, through the Merits of his only Son our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen, and Amen.

POSTCRIPT.
BEcause some Practices and Customs mentioned in the precedent Treatise, were
not from the first Plantation of Christianity, but were afterward introduced;
and others might not be universal, but only followed in some particular
Churches, it will not be unnecessary to add a Table of the Names, Age, and
Country of those Fathers, and of their Contemporaries, who have been cited by
us, that so we may guess at the time when such Customs were brought in, and
know the Places where they were chiefly practiced.

Names. Countries. Age. Several Synods held in Africa between Anno Christi 250
and 260. Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, Anno 228 Anonymus apud Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 16. p. 182. Lesser Asia, 170 Anicetus Bishop of Rome, 154 The Synodical
Letter of -- the Council of Antioch, held Anno 265 Apollinaris Bishop of (...)
in Lesser Asia, 170 Apollonius -- 200 Asturius -- Palastina, 260 Aurelius --
Carthage, (...) Artemon -- 196 Babylas Bishop of Antioch, 246 Saint Barnabas 50
Basilides the Heretic Alexandria, 134 Basilides a Bishop in Spain, 258
Celerinus -- Carthage, 253 Letters of the Clergy of Rome, to the Clergy of
Carthage, writ between. Anno 250, and (...) Clemens Bishop of Rome, 70 Clemens
of Alexandria, 204 Cornelius Bishop of Rome, 252 Crescens Bishop of Certa in
Africa, 258 Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, 250 Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, 172
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, 260 Eusebius a Deacon of Alexandria. 259
Fabianus Bishop of Rome, Anno 236 Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in Cap padoeia,
250 Fortunatus a Schismatic in Africa, 255 Fortunatus Bishop of Thucabori in
Africa, 258 Gregory Bishop of Neoearsarea, 250 Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, 109
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, 184 Justin Martyr. Samaria, 155 Lucius Bishop of
Thebeste in Africa, 258

Names. Countries. Age. A Letter of the Churches of Lions and Vienne. to the
Churches of Asia, Anno 177 Minucius Felix Rome, 230 Martialis a Bishop in
Spain, 258 Natalis Rome, 210 Nemesianus Bishop of Thubunic in Africa, 258
Novatian Rome, 252 Origin a Presbyter of Alexandria, 230 Palmas Bishop of
Amastris in Pontus, 196 Paulus Samosatenus Bp. of Antioch, 265 Plinius an
Heathen. 110 Polycarpus Bishop of Smirna, 140 Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, 196
Pontius a Deacon of Carthage, 260 Privatus Bishop of Lambese in Africa, 254
Sabinus Bishop of Emerita in Spain, 258 Sedatus Bishop of Turbo in Africa, 258
Secundinus Bishop of Carpis in Africa, 258 An Epistle of the Church of Smirna
to the Church of Philomilium, 168 Stephen Bishop of Rome, 258 Tatianus Syria,
180 Tertullian a Presbyter of Carthage, 200 Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea in
Palaestina, 228 Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestina, 196 Victor Bishop
of Rome, 196 Victorinus Petavionensis Hungary, 290 Vincentius Bishop of (...)
in Africa 258 Zoticus Bishop of Comane in Lesser Asia 168


