A SERMON Preached at Lewis in the Diocese of CHICHESTER, By the Lord Bp of
CHICHESTER, At His VISITATION Held there, October. 8. 1662.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1663.

A SERMON Preached at a VISITATION, etc.
The Text, Tit. 2.1. But speak Thou the things which become Sound Doctrine.
THIS Text is a short View of the Priests Duty, made up into a Monition or
Directory,

In which you have

1. The Person admonished, Thou.

2. The Advice, which contains in that one word Both his Commission and his
Charge, Speak.

^. The Matter of his Discourse, Things.

4. The Form of it, Which become.

5. The End unto which all Circumstances are intended, Sound Doctrine.

1. The Person, Thou.
Each Minister is an Apostle, sent out to Preach the Gospel of Peace, (...).

In what better Language therefore can I speak to Ministers, than in the words
of an Apostle?

Nay, he is Episcopus Animarum, a kind of Bishop set over the Souls committed
to his Charge: What fitter Compellation therefore can I find for you, than that
which was addressed to Titus, the first Bishop of Crete?

If St. Paul thought it not unneedful to advertize Him who was advanced to that
high place of Government in the Church, ye cannot think it an Impertinent
Custom, which thus assembles and advises you for the discharge of that Duty
which concerns All who have any Share or Title to the Ministry.

We are slack and dull by Nature, therefore need Admonition to quicken us.

The most active Ambassador betwixt Prince and Prince might sometimes need a
Letter of Advise to refresh his Memory; Much more we, who are Ambassadors sent
to treat betwixt God and his People.

Some there are so well-conceited of themselves, that they disdain Admonition,
as Upbraider of Defect in them

The Bishop of Rome, when he is in Cathedra, thinks himself Inerrable, and by
his Place can neither need Advise nor Exhortation. But St. Augustine, a better
Bishop than he, though not of so large a Diocese, writing to Auxilius, a Bishop
also, touching a Rash Excommunication passed upon Classicianus and his Family,
desires him not to take ill Advise from his hand, Aug. Epist* 7.
Nec arbitreris ideo non posse subrepere injustam Commotionem, quia Episcopi
sumus, Think not that because we are Bishops we cannot do amiss, or are
exempted from receiving their Advise, who fairly admonish us of our Duties.

Hieron. Lib. 1. Ep. 51.
Theophilus Alexandrinus writing to Hieron, tells Him, Quanquam ex superfluo
faciam haec tibi scribere, qui errantes potes ab errore revocare, tamen nihil
nocet and eruditos and prudentes viros pro sollicitudine fidei common^ri: The
best men are subject to Error and Infirmity, therefore want Remembrancers to
put them in mind of their Defects, I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.
though ye be stablished in the present truth.

Far be it from any then, who have rightly learned Christ, to spurn against the
Word of Exhortation, when seasonably uttered, or to think meanly of that Office
which Christ entrusted to the holy Ghost.

He told his Disciples, when he promised to send the Comforter, that amongst
many other blessings, He would be their Remembrancer, Joh. 14.25
showing them all these things, suggerendo, by quickening their Memory, and
bringing his Sayings back to their knowledge.

So that Exhortation or Admonition do not upbra^d the Infirmity of the Man, or
Slack performance of his Duty, but rather animate him to go on in what he has
well undertaken. As Ignatius told the Trallenses, Ignat. Epist. ad Trallens.
(...), I strengthen you by my Admonitions.

And St. Augustine told Eudoxius, August. Epist. 81.
Non hoc vos monui, quod vos non arbitror facere, I write not to Chide or Find
fault, but rather to Commend, and desire you to do what you do.

Indeed, he who Exhorts and Admonishes what should be done, is so far from
Diminishing or Disparaging, that he rather Dignifies him whom he Admonishes.

A Remembrancer is but an Index, which refers to a man's own Abilities, telling
him how Able he is, and how VVilling he ought to be in discharge of the Duty
required from him.

Ovid. Trist. Lib. 5. Eleg. 5.
Qui monet ut facia^quae jam facis, ipse monendo
Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
In this Sense and Style does St. Paul excite Titus, who was a Bishop, And in
this sense do I excite you: Here only is the difference, St. Paul spoke to
Titus as one who stood for all Crete, I, in his words, speak to all you as One.

It were ill Grammar, but worse Divinity, to consider Those that should be of
One Spirit, knit fastest In vinculo pacis, Ephesians. 4.3,
In the bond of peace, whose Office is to preach a Religion consisting of
Unity, 5, 6.
One God, One Faith, One Baptism, As a Multitude; Or to speak unto Them, who in
the Service of God's Church should go together (as Israel to the Battle against
Gibeah, Judge. 2.11.
As one man) in the Plural: We are met here, in One place, And I hope (...),
with one mind, Act. 2.1.
as the Apostles on the day of Pentecost; why should not I then speak to you as
One?

Such Meetings as these are unto the People Exemplary Sermons, and Instances of
that Brotherly Agreement and Union which we Preach.

Ill men have their Combinations, and Factious men have their Conventicles, but
these (St. Augustine says) Vnitatem faciunt contra Unitatem, Unite and band
themselves to break this Union, Aug.
and so become a Conspiracy rather than an Union.

Only good men properly have their Union, Cum boni coeunt, cum Pii cum Casti
congregantur, non est factio dicenda, Tertull. Apologet. ^ap. 40.
sed Curia; When good men are Congregated and met to good end, you cannot call
that Assembly a Factious Conventicle, but a Council.

May we all conspire as happily in Doctrine, and in Endeavor to settle the
Divisions in our Church, as we do in Pla^e, And then, as by the Act of a Synod,
we shall establish that Canon, which bids us be of one Mind, as our Father is
one.

This Union is an happy Qualification, and makes us capable to discharge the
Duty of Apostles. When the Spirit fell upon them in Tongues, 'twas when They
were in One place, and met with One Mind. These Capacities fit us for the
receiving of the Holy Ghost in Tongues, and then for the Exercise of Those
Tongues, Loquere Tu, Speak Thou.

Which implies both a Commission and a Charge. 2. Speak.


1. Commission.
If it be Treason in Ambassadors to forge their Message, or Treat without
Letters of Credence, by what name shall I style their Insolent Usurpation, who
enter upon this high Calling without Commission?

The Ministry was not an Office Rashly Instituted, Therefore ought not to be
Unadvisedly Undertaken.

In the 6 of Esaias, you find God in a Deliberation what Prophet to choose, Isa.
6.8.
Whom shall I send? It Is true too, that Esaias there obediently offers himself to
the Task, Send me, and is accepted: But before his setting forth He has his
Mission, ve^s. 9.
Go and say unto the People.

The Reason is given by St. Paul, No man ^aketh this Honor to himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he who is called of God, as was Aaron: Nay, (says he) Christ took not to
Himself this Honor to be made the High priest, But He who said to Him, verse. 5.
Thou art my Son, This day begat I thee, Gave it to him.

I fear there be some Straglers in our Church, who, as they speak, what Christ
and his Apostles never taught, so they have done what they did not; I mean*
Invested themselves in the Ministerial Function before Lawfully Ordained, and
Run on God's Errand before he sent them.

Of which sort were Those Obscure men Hierom speaks of, Hieron. Lib. 1. Ep. 55.
Qui de cavernis cellularum damnant orbem, who from their dark Corners and
close Angles, wherein they lurk, breathe out the Sentence of Damnation against
all that are not of their Opinion and Sect.

Would that unruly violence which transports them stop a little at the Book of
Jeremy, They should find their giddy zeal waited on by as much rebuke and
danger, Jer. 14.14, 15.
as the false Prophets, who are first Degraded, and then Cursed: God disclames
their service, I have not sent them, neither did I command them, neither spoke
unto them; And after condemns them to Sword and Famine.

I am sure that Prophet was so tender of himself in this particular, That lest
he might be suspected for an Intruder upon his Office, He makes a voluntary
protestation, He had not thrust in himself for a Pastor. Jer. 17.16.


So St. Paul, before he delivers any Message by his Pen to the Corinthians,
opens his Commission, Vocatus ad Apostolatum, 1 Cor. 1.
Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God.

Nor does he keep it back from Timothy, but shows it, although he required it
not, Whereunto I am appointed a Preacher. 2 Timothy 1.11


The Minister is, Sagitta electa, a chosen Shaft drawn from the Quiver of God*
Esa. 49.2.
An Arrow does not fly of it self, unless sent from the Bow by that hand which
fits it to the String.

How disordered then must their motion need^ be, who leap out of the Quiver,
and fly without their Mission?

St. Paul does not only ask why any should do this, but how they should
perform the scope of this Message, Quomodo praedicabunt nisi missi? Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach unless they be sent?

The Apostles never spoke with power until they had received the holy Ghost,
And then* see how St. Peter's first Sermon, like a sharp Sword, peirces to the
quick, The Hearers were pricked to the heart, and said to the Apostles, Act.
2.37.
Men and brethren, what shall we do?

Those who preach without this Spirit, may preach the dead Letter, or rather
not Praedicare, but Sonare, not Preach, but make a noise.

We are persuaded, that in the Lawful Ordination in our Church, the Spirit of
God is imparted in those words, Accipite Spiritum Sanctum, Receive the holy
Ghost.

Nor must we judge them Ministers who want these Seals of Ordination to their
Patent.

Esa. 6.7. Ezekiel. 33.22.
God touched the lips of Esaias; And Ezekiel must have remained still dumb, had
not the hand of God opened his mouth.

Christ our Blessed Savior signed the Apostles Commission in his Gospel, Go
out and preach to all Nations; Mat. 28.19.
But he sealed not that Commission until the day of Pentecost, wherein He gave
the Holy Ghost, as the Seal of his love and favor to them.

Those Preachers who have this Hand to their Patent, and this Seal to their
Commission, can only call themselves Preachers.

When they have this warrant, it will not only be seasonable to speak but
necessary: For their Commission then becomes a Charge, and this Loquere, speak
Thou, is not so much a License as a Mandat*

There was no Vessel of the Sanctuary but had its peculiar use. 2. Their Change.


There is no Priest but is, or should be, a Sanctuary like it holy, and
furnished like it.

I know my Heart is my Portable Oratory, but if my Tongue be tied up to the
Roof of my mouth, I am only a Chapel without the Service, and an Altar
without the Sacrifice.

The Praise and glory of God is a Stock entrusted to the world; Every Creature
has a Talent from this Treasury, and with it drives this precious Trade*
Therefore David musters up the Elements, Psalm. 148.
as well as the Bodies formed out of them, and will have every Letter in the
Creature's Alphabet, as well as the Words made out of those Letters, to Praise
God.

Shall every Creature in his way, and every Beast in his Dialect, Praise God,
And shall the world's Interpreter, Man, be mute? If God will not dispense with
this want of service in those Creatures which want Speech, how can he, whom
alone he has made Vocal, excuse his silence? Where is the Tribute of the
Tongue due but from him who is endued with Organs of speech? Or where is speech
significant, as when the Tongue is prompted by a knowing heart? The Prophet
says, that the Lips of the Priest preserve knowledge: Mal. 2.7.
And therefore Speech, as it is most profitable, so most warrantable from Him.
He who lets not down his Pitcher into this Well, As he refused now to draw
water for the Thirsty's relief, so he must hereafter look to thirst for his
punishment.

The first thing Christ did when he came to Jacob's well, was to ask the
courtesy of the Samaritan's pitcher, Give me water: Joh. 4.7.
And Abraham's Servant concluded from the ready letting down of Rebekkah's
Pitcher into the well, that God was with his Errand. Genesis 24.21.


God's Messages are like refresh^^g Dews to a barren and thirsty Land. There is
none then that derives himself from Christ, who is not as liberal of his
Comforts as Christ of his Living waters, when he proclames, Qui s^it veniat,
Let every one that thirsts come.

Rev. 22.17
God grant our Wells never want these Waters, nor that the Wells prove so
illiberal to deny them.

When Fountains of knowledge restrain their waters, not pouring out* by the
Tongue, which is the Conduit of speech, to fill the Cisterns, I mean, the ears
and hearts of the Congregation, that dearth threatens drought to the Fountain
it self

The Preacher says, There is a time to speak, and a time to be silent. Eccles.
3.7.


But the Apostle brings not the Minister within the compass of this
Interpretation; No time must silence him, no respite, no privation of speech,
but he must preach in season and out of season. 2 Timothy 4.2.


Or if he do make any pause in this service, it must be only Caution must stop
him, not Silence. Gregor. Pastoral. ^a^t. 2. cap 4.
Sit Rector discretus in silentio, utilis in verbo, ne aut tacenda preferat aut
proferenda reticescat, is Gregory's Rule.

There is no Law bids him repress his words, But both the Law of God and the
Law of Reason bids him weigh them before he speaks.

When David resolves upon his Dixi Custodiam, St. Ambrose glosses upon it,
Psalm. 39.1.
Recte David non sil^ntiam sibi sed Custodiam indixit, Amb^os. O^^^c. 11.3.
He does not silence, but bridle his tongue from offense.

The Prophets Charge was the same, Clama ne cesses, Esa. 5.1.
Cry and cease not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet; Chrysostom. Homil. ad Pop.
Antioch
so must a Preacher, who is (...), an Apostolical ^rump; And he must remember,
that whosoever shall give an account for an idle word, must render it also for
a slothful silence. St. Ambrose tells Him, Si pro otioso verbo reddemus
rationem videamus ne reddamus pro otioso silentio. Ambros.


If Hierom in his Epistle to Damasus approves that speech of Damasus for good,
Qui lectionem sine stylo somnum putet, Hieron. Lib. 1. Epist. 28.
That held reading without making use of it only a studious Sleep, or rather a
learned Lethargy; sure I may term a speechless Calling such a sleep, which is
next of kin to Death. Silent folly is better than concealed wisdom, (says the
Son of Syrach) and safer it is never to have known any thing, Eccl^s. 41.15.
than to lock up that gift of knowledge in the breast, and either wilfully lose
the Key of that Cabinet, or let it, for lack of use, Rust in neglect and sloth.

Well did St. Bernard call the Ministry Opus Angelicis humeris formidandum, A
fearful and weighty task, Bernard.
which would make an Angel shrink under it. Indeed it is as full of danger as
of burden. The Lips are the Soul's snare, Prove. 18.7.
and oft-times words are like nets to ensnare the speaker.

So that which to other men is only a single danger, is doubled to us:

We are in equal hazard to betray our selves by silence, as by our speech, And
our not speaking contracts as certain ruin to us as our speech.

Miserable straight wherein our Calling is concluded, we can neither speak
safely, nor yet with safety hold our peace.

When we speak, every hearer is a Judge, to arraign, or censure, or traduce
our meaning; And when we speak not, God threatens to condemn us. Yet we must
on, Resolving with our selves, that though it be sometimes Offensive to speak,
it is ever Dangerous to hold our peace, for, There is a necessity laid on me,
Woe to me if I preach not. 1 Cor. 9.16, 17.


Where speaking is so needful, there can be no greater sin than silence, nor
Solecism than to speak vainly.

To prevent which, the next Circumstances direct both What and How to speak,
Speak Thou the Things.

3. Things.
When the Voice bade the Prophet Cry, It there directs him what he should Cry:
Esa. 40.6.
'Twas the same Spirit which commanded the Prophet there to write, and the
Apostle here to speak* And he who gave Authority to his Calling, teaches him
to give weight to his words.

As Judgment is the Ballast of Wit, so Matter of Words. A Vessel at Sea, which
bears more Sail than Ballast, is ever apt to over-set: so they whose Fantasy
is stronger than their Religion, whose words more full of sound than devout
sense, for want of just poise lose their own Adventure, and endanger others.

There is a great deal of difference between (...) and (...), to Speak and to
Prate, The one has Reason on its side, The other only Noise.

The first part of the Preachers care must therefore be to avoid that Scoff,
which Lactantius gives those idle Philosophers, Multa loquantur nihil dicunt,
who though they spoke much, Lactant.
yet they said nothing, because nothing to purpose.

Words are excellent tinctures, so that like Metalls in the Alembeck they have
their just fixation* else, like unclosed Distillations, They breathe out in
Fume.

In our Alchimy, wherein we labor to make Gold out of Clay, and by persuasions
to prepare that Earth which we bear about us for final glory, The subject we
undertake must fix our words, else we do but beat the air* forming those empty
shadows which vanish as they appear* and expire with the voice which delivered
them.

This were to assail the Auditory Verbis ti^nulis and emendicatis, Hier. Lib.
1. Ep. 55.
with tinkling words.

Those who affect them are ill husbands for the Church, instead of Corn only
sowing Chaff, and instead of Devotion, Words, truly Semini-verbii (as Gregory
calls them) Sowers of words, Gregor. Pastor. part. 2. cap. 4.
whose fruit, like that in the Parable, perishes for want of Root*

It teaches not farther than the Ear, but as it springs up in the present
delight of the hearers, so it vanishes with their Applause, (...), Isidor.
Peleus. Lib. 1 Epist. 62.
as Isidor Peleusiot.

Such as these may be good Grammarians, not good Preachers, good Critics, not
good Apostles.

Christ told Peter, when admitted his Disciple, (...)* That He should from
thenceforth catch men. Luc. 5.10.


But the Commendation of Those I speak of, as that they are at best (...)*
Hunters of words.

Isidor. Peleus. Lib. 2. Ep. 101.
To say no more, As our Religion consists not in Saying, but Doing, so the
subject of those who are Agents for the Establishment of Religion, must not be
words but matter.

Though Philosophy might allow the divided Sects of Nominals and Reals,
Divinity owns none but Reals; Men so sincere, and real, and material in their
Discourses, That speak Things; yet Bodies are allowed their Shadows, nor does
Divinity disprove a Dress of Decent Circumstance. Therefore it follows, Loquere
quae decent, Speak things which become.

To apparel our Discourses in more Ceremony than becomes the subject, 4. Which
become.
or to use none at all, are Extremes alike culpable.

To put upon a small body more clothes than it can bear, is to smoother our
Conceptions, and stifle the Argument we preach with multiplicity of words; yet
to put on None at all, were to establish the Heresy of the Adamites in the
Pulpit, and to dogmatize Nakedness; Good matter clad in very thin or ill words,
is one of the strangest most misshapen things that may be.

Adam knew not He was naked until he had eaten of the Tree of Knowledge, and
then his Knowledge made him ashamed of his Nakedness.

Ignorance may without blushing walk naked; for darkness needs no Mantle, and
night is Covering to it self.

But knowing Arguments sent abroad without a decent apparel, like Tapers set up
in sluttish Candlesticks, bear Light about them only to shame the Author.

Words are the Interpreters, nay, the Robes of Knowledge, without which it will
not appear unto the world, and being best clad is most amiable.

Knowledge in its own disposition is very coy and reserved, like the nice
Venetian, who never shows Himself undressed.

If it be presented naked, not clothed in fit words, It is so bashful, or so
disdainful, that it hides it self from every Apprehension.

For mine own part, I never liked him, who served up more Sauce than Meat, more
Words than Matter, or Wit than Religion. But yet I have ever thought Choice
Matter ill dressed, like good Meat ill Cooked, which neither credits the
Bidder, nor pleases the Guest.

Truth is the Pulpit's object, Decency the Attire of Truth: yet as I would not
speak all truths, so neither apparel the truth I speak in every dress.

An Egyptian Mantle, or a Babylonish Garment were sin to an Israelite.

As every Light Tune would not go well with the Grave Dorick Harp, so every
Dialect would not fit the Church.

That Language which commends the Stage would misbecome the Pulpit: Light
conceits or flashes of unseason'd wit profane that holy ground.

And again, that bitter Style which in a Declamation were an ingenious Satyr,
translated into a Sermon might prove a Libel.

That Rule which St Paul gave the Church, must be as well observed in the
Pulpit, 1 Cor. 14.40
Let all things be done decently and in order.

If you ask, by what Rule we must measure this Decency; Surely not by Theirs,
who condemn or laugh at all the world who are not in their fashion. Decency was
never measured by Singularity or Affectation.

Many have been more factiously proud and fantastical, and therefore more
ridiculous in an affected Plainness, than others in their studied Curiosity.

Hierom says, Superba Rusticitas was the garb of some in his time, who had
nothing but a rude Insolence to bear out their want of Knowledge, for Ignorance
and Boldness commonly go together. (...). Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 26.


The most unexcepted and safe Rule of Decency is Religious discretion; When
God's Messages want neither fit Ornament to set them forth, nor Integrity to
apply them: I have it from the Prophet David, This is that Beauty He loves, and
Holiness that He commends, Psalm.
when he tells you, both these conjoyning become the House of the Lord.

For those therefore who quarrel with Learned Elaborate Sermons, And are so
Umbragious to boggle at any thing which is not presented to them in their
Mother Tongue, Who give Sentence against a Preacher for a Latin Sentence, or
Authority out of a Father alleged in a Sermon, I shall truly pity them, for
that they disallow what St* Paul in his practice justified.

Though that Spiritus Anabaptisticus, Anabaptistical spirit that reigns amongst
many in these latter days, dares affirm, Qui in Scholis and Academiis
Theologiam discunt, Hinckel man: Err^: Anabaptism. cap. 2 Error. 1, and 2.
tantum tenent Literam mortuam non etiam Spiritum vivificantem. Quare nec
possunt esse Ministri Novi Testamenti, quos Paulus dixit esse Ministros non
Literae sed Spiritus, Those who in our Universities and Schools study Divinity
grasp only the Dead Letter, attain not the Quickening Spirit, and therefore
cannot be Ministers of the New Testament, who are styled by St. Paul,
Ministers, not of the Letter, but the Spirit: Yet they may see, that St. Paul
Himself (whom they dare not deny to be a Minister of the New Testament) makes
use of Human Learning, and cites some Verses out of Epimenides, Ara^us, and
Menander; which showed, that He had studied the Greek Poets, as Moses the
Learning of the Egyptians, and Daniel the Wisdom of the Caldeans; ( Moses
disciplinas Egyptiorum; Daniel sapientiam Chaldaeorum, Beatus Paulus
Epimenidis; Arati and Menandri carmina didicerunt, ut his veram Religionem
locupletiorem redderent) supposing Religion to receive much advantage by the
study of Human Learning.

For which cause Petrus Cunaeus writes, Petrus Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr. lib. 2.
cap. 9.
that the Old Levites challenged as their right an universal knowledge of all
Laws, and all Sciences, Humane or Divine. Legum omnium and ^erum Humanarum
Divinarumque summam scientiam sub quodam sibi jure Levitae vendicabant.

Indeed St. Augustine invites us to the reading of Ethnic Authors, upon this
motive, That they were Usurpers and unjust Possessors of Knowledge, whereof
Christians only could make the best use.

This apprehension caused Porphyrius (as Eusebius tells) to complain of Origin,
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 13.
That he had robbed the Greek Philosophers of their Treasure to enrich his own
Religion. Therefore Julian the Apostate, observing the great advantage
Christians made by reading the Works of those Learned Heathens, who in many
things were by Them confounded and wounded by their own Pens, Socrat. Hist.
Ecclos. lib. 3. cap. 10.
peremptorily forbad all Christians the use or study of Human Authors.

How well does this suit the humor of our late Levites (quite differing from
those Elder by me alleged) who account Ignorance a mark of the Spirit, and none
so fit for the Ministry as those who never took Degree in the Schools?

I shall not trouble my self or you with more words in this Argument, but only
say, If there be any who so much dote upon their lack of Learning, accounting
it an Holy Ignorance to know nothing which belongs to worldly Science; If there
be any so wedded to their sudden Conceptions, or praecipitate Barbarism, that
they cry down all Learning or Elegance in Pulpits; Or imagine, that the spirit
of Elocution speaks best from the worst Interpreters, As if Gods Messages could
be delivered in too good Language, God forgive them.

I have heard a woe denounced against Those that do the work of the Lord
negligently, Jer. 48.10
but never against any who perform it with too much care.

Erasmus well said, Eloquentiam non pugnare cum simplicitate Religionis,
Eloquence is not inconsistent with Religion.

And Severus Sulpitius gratulated the accurate and elegant Style of St.
Augustine, Aug. Epist. 37.6.
as an improver of that devout Subject whereon he treated, Quicquid de ejus
plenitudine ad nos usque redundat jucundius efficitur and gratius per tuum
elegantem famulatum.

Nay, St. Ambrose is said to have converted St. Augustine, then a Manichee, to
the Christian Faith, by his great Eloquence; which wrought so powerfully, when
he only out of curiosity went to hear Him at Millain, That taken by the bait
of his Elocution, this great Champion was drawn into the Net of the Church.

Nor is this strange, As St. Paul told the Corinthians, 2 Cor 12.16
That he had taken them by deceit, so oft-times it falls out, that the
Preachers Eloquence by persuasion wins the Auditory to the Confession of some
Truths, which plain reason or force of Argument could not before evince.

It Is true, David says, Psalm. 44.14.
The King's Daughter is all glorious within, and yet in that place she is
presented in Garments embroidered, and wrought with the needle.

Indeed it had been an unsuitable mismatched Beauty, had not Her outward
Ornaments held some proportion with Her inward Perfections.

I apply it thus, Good Matter and sound Doctrine were unfashionable Virtues, if
not set out so as Becomes Sound Doctrine.

5. Sound Doctrine.
This is our Issue and your Fruit, That Fruit whose Leaves under which it grows
are our Words

For this cause is Paul a Planter, Apollos a Waterer, that the Congregation may
gather the Blessings of this Husbandry.

And as the Tree whereon it grows has many Branches, so the Fruit has many
Species, even so many as there be Virtues Moral or Theological.

This is the Treasure for which we dig, whose Mine is the Scripture, whose Mint
the Church, whose Stamp Christ Himself, By whose Impression in our Baptism we
are coined, and become Current Christians.

As every Vein of Ore has a Test to try it, so this has a Touch stone joined
to the Metal, which warrants both the Value and the Truth. St. James defines
Pure Religion by Charity and Cleanness, Jam. 1.27.
To ^eep ones self unspotted from the world

And whatsoever conduces to This is that sound Doctrine St. Paul here means.

This is that Christian Building, whose Foundation is Christ and his Apostles.
Ephesians. 2.20.
The Religion which stands not on these Bases is weak and false* the Apostle
testifying, Aliud fundamentum nemo ponit, 1 Cor. 3.11.
The saving Truth never had any foundation but ^his.

This is the Genealogy of Faith, whose extraction is the Sacred Scri^ture; That
Volume which reveals Him* who came to do the will of God, Psalm. 40.8.
and instructs us to conform our Lives according to that Revealed Will.

This Book has too many Leaves now to read over; but if you will have the
Analysis and sum of all, the Preacher has gathered it, Eccles. 12.13.
Let us here the Conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments. He who teaches this Lesson teaches Sound Doctrine, And he who
Learns it thoroughly has all we can Teach.

To speak beyond this I cannot, I may with Jonathan shoot Wide, or Short, or
Over; and by that a little better direct your aim, not inform you better. I may
dissolve this Mass, or melt this Ingot to make it more portable; but I cannot
alter the Metal, or put any better Stamp upon it than Doctrina sana, Sound
Doctrine.

This Doctrine therefore (...) Sound, that is, 1. Pure.
Pure, not adulterated with Fables, or mingled with Traditions, which have
imbased Religion, and brought down the price of Truth in all those parts of
Christendom where this false Coin is Current, this Counterfeit Stuff vendable,
And their Practice allowed, who teach for Sound Doctrine, Commandments of Men.
Matthew. 15 9


The Doctrine of Christ is refined from this Dross, Hear it from the Psalmist,
Psalm. 18.31.
Thy words are pure, like silver seven times tried in the fire.

This is that (...), Sincere milk, which the Children of God suck from the
Breast of the Church their Mother. 1 Pet. 2.2.


Or Sound, that is, Wholesome, (...), 2. Wholesome 2 Timothy 2 13
A word which heals the Soul, yet not so as the Prophet complains of those
Mountebanks, who heal the hurts of the people with sweet words. Jer. 6.14.


Popular Flatteries d^stilling from Sermons, fall down upon the Congregation
like Mill-dews, whose unwholesome sweetness corrupts the Pasture, and Rots
those who feed upon it. This Doctrine is no suppling Plaster, no Balm to break
the head with smiles: Psalm. 141.5.
No Reteining Divinity, which takes Pension to serve any ones humor, or is
content to wait upon the ^hantasie of the Patron, but free and open, whose End
is not to delight the Times, or serve Turns, but to Cure the Men.

Or Sound, that is, Entire, spun out of an even Thread, 3. Entire.
which has no Cross Opinions interwoven, no Party-colored skeins of Faction,
no coarse Woollen made out of gross Fleeces shear'd from the Flock of Rome, No
Relics, nor wonder-working Rags torn from any Shrine, and then patched to that
White Robe of Truth, which was the first Garment Christ gave his Spouse, and
has ever since been the Church's Livery.

Such ill-fashion'd Attire puts Her forth as for Her Penance in a died Coat,
and clothes Her in that motly Habit which makes Her ridiculous to the
Christian world.

4. Plain.
Or Sound, that is, Plain and Perspicuous, not muffled up in dark Conclusions.
The old Proverb tells us, Via Plana est Via S^na, the Plain way is the Sound
way, And sure the Plainest Religion is the soundest, as in Heraldry, the
Plainest Coat the best.

Wheresoever you find Obscure subtilties thrown over Truth, it is to be feared,
that Curtain is hung before it for no good purpose; but merely to disguise
somewhat which the Inventor could wish the world might not know.

As the true Church is seated on a Mount, where it cannot be hid, so it is
built, like Drusus his house, All Window, That by Her Tenets, as so many
Casements, Each devout Eye may look clearly through, and freely survey the
simplicity of the Fabric.

Or Sound, that is, Firm, firm at the Foundation, 5. Firm.
and smoothly laid. The most firm Figure and Base for Building is the Plain; A
Complete Geometrical Building admits no Stones but what are hewn from the Rock,
and Squared; If the Foundation be rugged or uneven, full of pointed Scruples,
and craggy Doubts, the Building must needs lean on one side; And if once it
leans, it will be an hard matter by any new devised Distinction, to skrew it
up, or set it right again.

When Curiosities are applied to underlay a mis-treading foot, they commonly
cast it more awry.

Or Sound, that is, Solid at the heart; 6. Solid.
And commonly the most solid is still most plain. I know the Knotty piece of
Wood is hard, but that Hardness inclines to Brittleness, which does not prove
it sound, but hard to work upon.

But the heart of Oak, as it is most sound and durable, so most smooth. This
Soundness and this Plainess makes it both apt for Building, and promise
Strength.

Knots tied upon a Cord were devised for a scourge to Torture, not for
strength. Hard and Intricate Riddles in Divinity have no use but to rack the
Brain, Not to Inform, but to Pose the Understanding.

To deliver my full meaning, The Plain, Positive, Catechestical Doctrine of the
Church, as it is most Easy and Familiar, so most Sound and Orthodox.

How many by over-bold searches after the Abstruse Mysteries of Faith, and Hid
Decrees of God, have quite blinded themselves, and perplexed others?

How many in seeking to solve unnecessary scruples, have raised doubts, and
tied knots in many a Conscience, which they are not able to untie again?

How many have accounted it their glory to Trade in subtle Questions, and
preach Pol^micks to the People, when they might have Edified themselves and
their Congregations better by a Catechism than a Controversy?

I have lived, and shall die in this Opinion, That there can be no greater
danger to a settled Church, than Liberty to dispute and call in question the
Points and Articles of an Established Religion.

I grant, Disputes amongst the Learned are sometimes useful Triturations, which
by the Flail of Argument separate Truth from Error;

But the pressing of those Arguments in the Pulpit, in Popular Congregations,
oft-times suspend Religion, and make weak Apprehensions stagger from their
first Conclusions.

The Reason is Evident, for when Arguments are pressed, and Objections for the
Other urged, That which is most plausible sways the Hearer, and commonly
carries the Cause.

Nothing therefore could more conduce to the Peace of the Church, and
Confirmation of Religion, than the laying Controversies asleep, and silencing
Disputes, which hang so many doubts upon the Cause, that like wrong Biasses,
they draw men from the Mark.

It Is piety to Believe what were not safe to Question; And besides, men would
want cunning to suspect the Truth of their Religion, who never heard Objections
framed against it.

Those who are put to wade unto the Articles of their Faith through Disputes
and Logic, sometimes ingulph themselves in Depths which drown, but often
strike on Rocks which break them into Irresolution. St. Paul therefore steers
us from this Rocky Coast, Put away vain Questions, 2 Timothy 2.23.
knowing that they engender strife.

These are (...), The fomenters of vain Curiosity, Multum in disputando
habentia vanitatem, Eccles. 6.11.
(so the Vulgar reads.)

Positive Divinity contains abundantly enough for the satisfaction of the
Knowledge, and salvation of the Soul. A little Logic serves a Christian, And a
man may go to Heaven without quaint Distinctions. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Without Controversy great is the mystery of godliness, which is God
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, Believed on in the world, and taken up into Glory.

This is the Scheme of Christian Religion, the Scale of Faith, whose Mysteries,
though great, yet without Controversy or Dispute. The Original is (...),
Confessedly.

He therefore who loves God, and Believes in Him whom he has sent Christ
Jesus; Joh. 17.3.


He who is able to distinguish Conversation which may corrupt his Manners and
Opinions, which may corrupt his Faith; He who makes Faith his Major, Greatest
Proposition, and a Religious fruit of that Faith exhibited in the Actions of
his Life his Minor Proposition;

He who Syllogizes in this Figure, this perfect form of Living, and then
Concludes according to these Premises, I mean, Ends according to this
Beginning, has Logic sufficient to save his Soul, and School Divinity enough
to bring himself to Heaven.

I must yet add one Condition more necessarily required to sound Doctrine, 7.
Sano modo.
That it be delivered Sano modo, In sound terms: That there be not only no
Contradiction In Terminis, That the terms be not only not Repugnant to the
Truth of the Position, but not Ambiguous or Innovated, so as they either darken
or distort the meaning of it.

For which Reason the Council of Carthage appointed, that at the Consecration
of a Bishop, one part of the Examination should be, Ante omnia si fidei
documenta verbis simplicibus asserat, Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 1.
If in the first place he assert the Doctrine of Faith in plain words and
simple terms. An Old truth presented in New terms, has oft-times raised new
Senses, and another Construction, And so by a varied delivery made it
suspected. Error has many faces, Truth possesses no shape but one.

For a man to keep within this Circle, that he speaks nothing Contrary to sound
Doctrine, or nothing but what may be reduced to It, Is safe Discretion, but not
sound Religion.

Pol^cy, or cold Neutrality, use to lie at this Guard: Esse Direct and esse
Reductive in Praedicamento, are Two things in Logic: That which may be
Reducible to a Praedicament is Oblique or Collateral, not Directly in it, Nor
can we call what is Reducible, Direct Truth.

Sound Doctrine conveyed in Dubious or Indirect Phrase, is not sound Doctrine,
but lame and crazy.

The best that can be said of It, It Is Doctrina sana, non sano modo, Sound
Doctrine delivered in unsound sick Terms, which like infected clothes Infect
the Body that wears them.

Axitheus tells Theophrastus, (...): Aenaeas Ga^^dus page 14
There is much Error in those Discourses which are delivered in doubtful, or
different, or unsound Phrase.

St. Paul requires Soundness as well in the Form as in the Matter of Doctrine,
Therefore he writes to Timothy thus, Formam habe sanorum verborum, 2 Timothy 1.13.
Hold the form of sound words, (so the new Translation) Or as the Greek, (...)
(...), which another renders, Keep the true Pattern of the wholesome words,
That is, Deliver sound Doctrine in sound words.

To wind up all. It is Magalian's useful Application, Conclusion.
and shall be Mine. St. Hierom interprets this soundness of Doctrine in Truth
of Learning confirmed by Integrity of Life, Hierom.
Tunc doctrinae sanitas, cum doctorum doctrina pariter and vita consentiant;

For which cause St. Paul more fully interpreting this Charge, bids Titus show
himself a Pattern of good works.

Tit. 2.7.
Example is the most powerful Sermon, And a Blameless Life the best Comment upon
the Text of Christ.

It was the advice of Nilus Martyr, (...); Nilus Paraen. 11.
And justly, for he persuades strongest whose Life is as Eloquent as his
Tongue, preaching in his Conversation no less than in his Words.

This indeed is sound Doctrine, and (as the Apostle styles it) sound speech
that cannot be condemned. Tit. 2.8.


This is the End of our Sermons, this is the Fruit of your Patience.

For this cause we preach, and the People hear, That by the Rule of sound
Doctrine they may rectify their Crooked lives.

All sin is an Obliquity, 1 Timothy 9.10.
and the habit of Vice* Profaneness, Adultery, Murder, Lying, etc. are
contrary to sound Doctrine.

Whatsoever therefore teaches the Unmarried Continence, the Married Chastity,
Children Obedience to their Parents, Subjects Loyalty toward their Sovereign;
Whatsoever teaches the Afflicted Patience, the Happy Temperance, the Faithful
Perseverance, and all sorts of People Charity, is Doctrina sana, That sound
Doctrine which we must preach, the Congregation learn.

When St. Paul had delivered his perfect Charge to Timothy, He concludes with
Haec doce and exhortare, 1 Timothy 6.7.
These things teach and exhort.

I cannot make a better close than to exhort you to Receive what we are
commanded to Teach.

These Lessons digested into a Religious practice, will approve the Teachers of
the Congregation True Disciples of Christ, and you not Hearers only of the
Law, Jam. 1.22.
but Doers of it.

When we have taken this Degree in Faith, it will derive on Us the Reward of
Laborers, on You the Reward of the Righteous. Which the Righteous Lord will in
due time give us for His Dear Son's sake: To Whom with the Blessed Spirit, the
Assurer of this Mercy to us, Be all Honor, and Glory, and Thanksgiving for
ever: AMEN.

FINIS.
Errata, Page 5. line 5. Does. page 13. line 13. Creatours. page 20. line 22.
is. page 22. line 20. Hirself. page 24. in Marg. (...). page 24. line 2. Marg.
29.


