Benjamin Keach Minister of the Gospel Aetat. 57.
School J. Drapentier del in: et sculp.



THE DISPLAY OF Glorious Grace: OR, THE Covenant of PEACE, OPENED. In FOURTEEN
SERMONS Lately Preached, In which the Errors of the present Day, about
Reconciliation and Justification, are Detected.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

PSALM. Lxxxix. 34. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my Lips.

LONDON, Printed by S. Bridge, and Sold by Mary Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel in
Cheapside; and Joseph Collier, at the Golden-Bible on London Bridge, by the
Gate; and William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street, School.

TO THE Unprejudiced Reader.
AS I Preach not to please Men's Ears, so but little regard ought to be had to
the Scoffing Reflections of such Men, who contemn every thing of this kind,
unless it consists of a Fancy-taking Modelation of empty Rhetoric, or a high
Florid Style, mixed with Wit, Learning, and Philosophical Notions. Sad it is to
see that in Divine Matters, nay, in Preaching, Persons should affect New Modes
and Fashions, (as to the shame of the present Generation, they do in respect of
Garbs and Dresses:) I am not for Airy and Florid Orations in the Ministration
of the Word of God, but for that plain Way of Preaching used by the Holy
Apostles, and our Worthy Modern Divines. Besides, could I so Preach or Write,
as is the Flesh-pleasing, Eartickling A-la-mode of the Times, of such who study
Words more than Matter, it would be utterly disliked by all such Pions
Christians, for whose sake, and at whose Importunity these Sermons are
published. The Holy Apostle (who tho profoundly Learned) disclaims any
Rhetorical Flourishes, or persuasive Oratory, but professes that his Speech and
Preaching, was not with the Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power, 1 Cor. 2.4 -- I may say of some
Men's Orations, or Elocutions, as Plutarch speaks of the Nightingale, who was at
first taken with his delicate Notes, but when he saw him said, Thou art a Voice
and nothing else. But alas, since the Sacred Scripture it self cannot escape
some Men's Censure, as if the Style was rude and unpolished, (they being
destitute of that Spirit which gave them forth;) What can I expect to meet with
from such?

Reader, The great Joy that generally appeared amongst all People upon the
Conclusion of the late Peace, put me upon Preaching on this Subject; and when I
found so great a Number of Books Subscribed for, I thought I had a Call to
Print and Publish them, which was the least of my Thoughts when I first entered
upon this Work: And indeed I greatly fear, many will see their Expectation
frustrated, (I mean such who did not hear the Sermons Preached, but only had
some small account of them;) yet they knowing the Author, I may see cause to
recall what I speak of my Fears. I must confess, diverse Worthy and Learned Men
have wrote most excellently upon the Covenant of Grace, yet perhaps hardly any
in the Method here used, nor under the Notions of a Covenant of Peace -- In
some things thou will find that I do differ from many Learned Men, who make the
Covenant of Redemption, a distinct Covenant from that of Peace and
Reconciliation, yet I desire thee to read the tenth Sermon before thou judge
who is in the right -- By the Baxterian Party I expect to be called an
Antinomian, for that has been their Artifice of late, to expose the True
Ancient Protestant Doctrine about Justification, etc. but others who are sound
in the Faith, will (I am sure) acquit me of that Charge. My main design in all
my Preaching (if I know my own Heart) is wholly to advance the Free Grace of
God, through that Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, and utterly to abase the
Creature, tho it may seem a hard thing to keep in an even Line, and not fall
into either Extreme: May be some may stumble at some Expressions about God's
being Reconciled in Christ to the Elect whilst Sinners -- But sure they cannot
think that I mean because he is reconciled in the Second Adam, that therefore
he is actually Reconciled to any as they are considered in the First Adam, and
abide under God's denounced Wrath and the Curse of the Law: I know I have been
abused of late in Print, by some on the other Hand, but let all well weigh what
I have said in my Medium betwixt two Extremes, and what is here said, and so
receive Satisfaction [if in the Judgment of any I have missed the Truth in any
material Case] I shall gladly receive Information from such, and readily
embrace it upon the Evidence of Truth: For, I confess, I see but a little, and
the Best know but in part -- That which possibly may seem most distastful, is
the frequent repeating of some things; yet in so doing, I have followed the
Directions of a very great Man, viz. That such Things that are Emphatical,
should be often repeated to fix the Matter the better on the Mind of the
Hearer, or Reader. Besides, they come in occasionally upon different Heads: And
also I find the very same has been done by others, who are looked upon as Stars
of the first Magnitude: See the Epistle to Dr. Manton's Fourth Volume, p. 8.
where you have these Expressions, viz. Let it not offend thee that some things
are repeated, which frequently happens in the Course of any Man's Ministry,
when the same Subject has been formerly handled. Moreover one Reason of it
might be, because of the different Times of my Preaching these Sermons; I being
called often to Preach upon other Subjects betwixt them; neither do I think any
thing is Unprofitably repeated, it being chiefly to Refute the New prevailing
Errors about Justification.

Reader, Thou will find many of the Essential Points of the Christian Religion
are handled in these Sermons, (tho but weakly, according to that small
Gift-received;) And also thou will see how Unjustly I have been misrepresented
in an Epistle to a certain Book lately Published -- I do not say that thou have
all the Enlargements here Printed, as Delivered when these Sermons were
Preached, especially in some of them, for if I had so done, the Book would have
swelled too big, and indeed it exceeds now what I first proposed --

But to Conclude, If thou do receive any Light, Spiritual Profit, or
Advantage by thy perusing of these Sermons, let thy care be to return the
Praise to the God of Truth, and with Charity to cover my Weaknesses, and forget
me not in thy Prayers, who am now drawing toward the Period of my Labors and
Days. -- But yet through God's Grace at present remain thy Servant in the
Gospel for Christ's sake,

From my House at Horslydown, in Freeman's-Lane, this 12th of the 3d Month,
called May 1689. B. Keach.


Reader, there are some Faults escaped the Press, which thou art desired to
mend with thy Pen before thou read.
Page 76. lin. 13. for Author read Orthodox. p. 10. l. 11. a Figure is false
placed, and also a false Break, it should be 2. This Oath, etc. p. 114. l. 5.
r. which the Law, etc. p. 119. l. 4. blot out thus, and l. 7. for win r. will,
and l. 13. for Creatures r. Creature, p. 120, l. 26. for great r. greater, p.
152. l. 15. blot out the Father, p. 184. l. 29. blot out the, p. 184. in the
Marginal Note for it is read this, p. 189. l. 17. there is a General Head left
out, r. 2. In opposition to that of Works, and l. 18. blot out because; the
next General Head is false also, for Fourthly r. Thirdly, and so for Fifthly r.
Fourthly, etc. p. 287. l. 20. for his r. his Wrath, Wrath is left out.

THE TABLE OF The Chief Heads contained in this BOOK.
SERMON I.
I. THE Occasion of the Author's Preaching upon this Subject, p. 1, 2, 3, 4.
II. The Text divided, and the Terms explained, p. 5, 6, 7, 8. III. The Doctrine
raised, and the General Method proposed, containing Six Heads, viz. 1. Eight
Explanatory Propositions laid down by way of premise. 2. To open all the main
Covenant Transactions concerning God's Reconciliation to Man, and Man's
Reconciliation unto God. 3. Open the Nature of the Covenant. 4. To show what is
given or granted to all Believers in the Covenant. 5. To open the excellent
Nature of the Peace of the Covenant. 6. The general Application, p. 9.
I. Proposit. That God foresaw from Eternity that a Breach would arise between
himself and Mankind, p. 9. II. Prop. That this Covenant was entered into
betwixt God the Father, and God the Son, in behalf of the Elect, p. 10. III.
Prop. That the Breach God foresaw would rise, would be very great, opened on
Man's part in 4 Particulars; on God's part in 5 Particulars, p. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. IV. Prop. That the Breach was occasioned by Man's breaking the Law of his
Creation, or the first Covenant, p. 14, 15, 16. V. Prop. That there was none in
Heaven or Earth that could make up this Breach save Jesus Christ, p. 16. VI.
Prop. God not irreconcilable, yet acts in a way of absolute Sovereignty, p.
17, 18, 19. VII. Prop. That this Covenant alone proceeded from the Grace of
God, p. 20. VIII. Prop. That it also results from God's Mercy to such as were
considered in Misery, p. 21
SERMON. II.
Secondly, The Covenant Transactions proposed to be opened, in 6 general Heads.
I. A Treaty held between God the Father and the Son about it. II. An agreement
between them in Eternity. III. The Mediator of the Covenant chosen, viz. Jesus
Christ. IV. The Ratification of the Covenant. V. The Proclamation, or
Proclaiming this Peace. VI. When this Peace did commence, and who are included
in it, p. 23, 24.
Of the first of these, viz. the Treaty, p. 24, 25, 26 Christ our
Covenanting-Party, or Representative in this Treaty; showing why he is called
the Messenger of the Covenant, in 4 Respects, p. 25, 26. Secondly, Why a
Mediator was chosen, and the Necessity thereof, opened in 6 Particulars, p. 35,
36. The Son of God did actually consent to answer all those Proposals made by
the Father, p. 30. Christ the Mediator must be God, he must be Man, he must be
God-man, p. 38. to 42. What a Mediator signifies, p. 45. And how Christ was
qualified; with his whole Work and Office, in 9 Partic. p. 41. 55.
SERMON. III.
Further opening Christ's Work as Mediator, in 5 particulars, which makes the
whole 14, p. 57, 58, etc. The Application, p. 62, 63, 64. The Offices of
Christ, King, Priest, and Prophet, etc. opened, p. 66. to 74. The Baxterian
Errors what, and also Answered; Christ paid our Debts as a Surety, and not as a
Priest, p. 71. Mr. Clark's Errors detected, a Grand Baxterian, p. 77. to 84.
SERMON. IV.
The Suretiship of Christ opened in eight Things, p. 84, 85. Two Grand
Objections Answered, p. 90. 1. What Suretiship imports, p. 86. to 89. 2. Why
Christ became our Surety, showed for 5 Reasons, p. 92. 3. What he was to do, as
our Surety, showed in nine Particulars, p. 93. to 102. 4. Showing how his
Suretiship differs from Suretiship among Men, in three things, p. 102, 103,
104. A grand Objection answered, p. 103. Our Debts are paid, and yet freely
forgiven, showed in 7 Respects, p. 104, 105.
SERMON. V.
The Ratification of the Covenant, (1.) How between the Father and the Son, p.
109, 110. (2.) By the Death of Christ, p. 111, 112. Christ a Testator; what a
Testator signifies, p. 111. Showing why the Covenant comes under the Notion of
a Testament, or Christ's Last Will, p. 112. A Sevenfold Use of Christ's Death,
p. 113, to 116. The Use, p. 117, etc. 1. The Proclamation of Peace, what. 2.
Who God has appointed to proclaim it. 3. The Nature of the Proclamation. 4.
The Terms upon which it is proclaimed, p. 119, 120.
It Is the Gospel, why it may be so called, opened in 10 Particulars, p. 120. to
125. What a kind of Book the Gospel is, showed, in 7 Particulars, p. 125, 126.
The Use, p. 128, etc.
SERMON. VI.
Who the Ambassadors of Peace are, viz. (1.) Christ himself the Chief. showed
in 6 Particulars, p. 131, 132, 133. Christ excellently qualified for an
Ambassador, showed in 6 Particulars, p. 134. (2.) Christ's Ministers are
Subordinate Ambassadors; Six sorts of Preachers are none of Christ's
Ambassadors, p. 135, 136. Proving Christ's Ministers are his Ambassadors, and
what their Work is, opened in 11 Particulars, p. 135. to 144. Ambassadors when
welcome, showed in 4 Respects, p. 137. to 140. The Application, p. 146, etc.
SERMON. VII.
The Nature of the Gospel, or Proclamation of Peace, p. 151. 1. What it
declares, showed in five Particulars, p 152, 153. 2. What it proclaims, viz.
Peace and good News by Jesus Christ, God in him being Reconciled, p. 155. 3. To
be proclaimed to all Nations, p. 156. 4. Free Pardon for all Sins save that
against the Holy Ghost, p. 157. 5. A Universal Proclamation. An Objection, Did
not Christ die for all, largely answered, p. 158, 159, etc. Christ no
Conditional Redeemer, p. 160, 161 Why the Proclamation runs so Universal, p.
164. (6.) Showing on what Terms Peace is offered to Sinners, p. 164, 165, 166.
The Application, p. 167.
SERMON. VIII.
1. Showing the Date of the Covenant, or when it did commence, p. 170, 171. 2.
And who comprehended in it. 3. The third general Head of Discourse, viz. The
Nature of the Covenant opened. I. Proving it is the Covenant of Grace, as well
as of Redemption, p. 172, 173. (1.) In it self. (2.) In opposition to the
Covenant of Works, p. 175, 176. The difference between the Covenant of Grace,
and Covenant of Works, opened in 9 Particulars, p. 177, to 182. II. It Is an
absolute Covenant, showed in 5 Things, p. 182, to 185.
SERMON IX.
III. It Is a well ordered Covenant, showed in 5 Things, p. 190, 191. IV. It Is a
Glorious Covenant, showed in 6 Things, p. 192, 193, 194. V. It Is a full
Covenant, showed in 10 Things, p. 194, to 198. VI. It Is a seasonable Covenant,
showed in 3 Things, p. 198. (1.) As to the time when provided, before Man
sinned. (2.) As to the first revelation of it. (3.) As to the time of the
application of the Balm of it to a Convicted, or Wounded Sinner, p. 198, 199.
VII. It Is a sure Covenant, showed in 6 Respects, p. 199, 200. VIII. It Is a Cov.
of Peace, p. 201, to 203.
SERMON. X.
IX. It Is a tried Covenant, showed in 4 Respects, p. 206. X. It is one entire
Covenant, largely proving the Covenant of Redemption, and Covenant of Grace
essentially one and the same Covenant, p. 207, to 222. The Covenant of Peace a
Covenant of greatest Consolation, p. 222. Also an Everlasting Covenant, p. 223.
SERMON. XI.
Showing the Gifts, Grants, and Privileges in the Covenant to Believers, p.
224. 1. God himself given as a Cov. Blessing, p. 225. How God comes to be our
God, negatively showed, in 3 Respects, p. 226. Affirmatively, p. 227. What an
amazing Gift this is, showed in 9 Particulars, p. 228, to 236. First, The Good
in God's Communicable Atbutes given and let out to us, p. 229, etc. Secondly,
The Son is given to Believers, p. 237 Thirdly, The Holy Spirit is given, all
Grace is given, other Privileges given, p. 238, 239.
SERMON. XII.
Believers are God's People by virtue of the Covenant, p. 240, 241. 1. In what
respects called God's People, negatively in 3 respects, p. 242, 243. In the
Affirmative, in 7 respects, p. 243, etc. 2. What kind of People God's
Vovenant People are, showed in 11 Partic. p. 246, to 252. 3. What a Blessing it
is to be God's People, in 12 Particulars, p. 255, 256. The Application, p. 256,
257.
SERMON. XIII.
This Peace opens a Free Trade to Heaven, p. 259. Sin stopped up or interrupted
all Trade betwixt God and Man, what this implies showed, p. 259. What meant by
a Free Trade showed in 3 Things, p. 260, 261. This Spiritual Trade is opened by
the Peace made by Christ, p. 261. We Trade by or through a River, viz. the
Spirit, this River Christ opened, p. 262. This Trade the best Trade, showed in
4 Respects. (1.) in the respect of the Subject these Merchandises enrich. (2.)
In respect of the things Traded for. (3.) In respect of the Correspondent we
Trade with, p. 263* 4. In respect of the Terms upon which we Trade, p. 264.
(1.) In respect of the Subject, viz: the Soul, showed in 7 Things, p. 265, etc.
(2.) In respect of the Nature of the Things showed, in 8 Particulars, p. 268,
etc. 5. In respect of Christ we Trade with, showed in 6 Things, p. 271, 272.
(1.) Christ makes great Returns, p. 272. (2.) Sure Returns. (3.) Quick Returns.
(4.) It Is a Free Trade without Money, p. 275. The Application, p. 276. All
False Dealers will break, and why, showed in 6 Things, p. 277. Who are Rich
Traders, showed in 9 Things, p. 279, 280.
SERMON. XIV.
A Summary Account of what is requisite to God's being at Peace with Man, and
Man with God, p. 281, etc. The Nature of this Peace opened, in fourteen
Particulars, p. 286, to 291. The general Application, p. 293. Christ the
Covenant, or the Sum of the Covenant of Grace, showed in eight Respects, p.
293, to 296. How to know we have actual Peace with God, showed in 8 Particular,
p. 299. 300. A needful Caution about the Elect being Reconciled to God in
Christ whilst Sinners, p. 300, 301. The Blessed State of Believers that possess
Peace, or are in a State of Peace, p. 303, 304. The Conclusion.
THE DISPLAY OF Glorious Grace OR THE Covenant of Peace Opened: In Several
SERMONS.
SERMON I.
ISA. Live. x. Latter Part. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed,
says the Lord, that has Mercy on thee.


The Occasion of the Preaching on this subject.
I Have promised some Brethren to Enter upon the Great Subject of Peace: Not to
Treat of Peace with Men, but Peace with GOD; not National Peace, but Spiritual
Peace; And that which partly put me upon the Thoughts hereof, was, To see, and
hear what Great Joy there is among us in this Nation, and in other Kingdoms and
States, upon account of the Peace lately concluded betwixt the French King and
the Confederate Princes.

I must confess National Peace is a great Blessing, when it is given in Mercy,
and it is sanctified, and well improved by those Kingdoms and People that enjoy
it But whether the Present Peace may be in Mercy (to the Nations) or in
Judgment, I know not; Time must discover that: Alas! What Peace can such
expect, who continue in Rebellion against the GOD of Heaven and Earth? What
Peace can such a People expect who are not humbled for those Sins and
Abominations which caused the righteous and holy God to bring the Plague of War
and Devastations upon them? When the Cause is not removed, what reason have we
to think the Effect will cease? GOD may it is true, take off one Rod, and yet
chasten us with another; if War and the Pestilence humble us not, Famine may be
looked for. See what God speaks in Levit. 26.21. And if you walk contrary unto
me, and will not hearken unto me, I will bring seven times more Plagues upon
you, according to your sins; and ye shall eat the flesh of your Sons, and the
flesh of your Daughters shall you eat, v. 29. A People may cry Peace, Peace!
when sudden Destruction is just coming upon them. I may say of the Nations of
the Earth, 2 Kings 9 18.22.
as Jehu said to Joram's Messenger, What have thou to do with Peace? What Peace
so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother Jezzabel, and her Witchcrafts are so
many? What Peace can such a Nation or People look for, long to continue, whilst
their horrid Wickedness, Profaneness, cursed Oaths, Blasphemy, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Pride, Treachery, Cruelty, Cotousness, Heresies, Superstitions, and
all manner of abominations abound amongst them? know this assuredly God's Anger
is not yet turned away, but his hand is lifted up still. The Seven last Plagues
will over a short time be poured forth; and whatsoever you may think of the
present Peace, I fear worser things are near than what the Earth has seen or
felt yet; we are not fallen in such an Age as to expect any long time of Peace;
No, No! God has a fearful Controversy with the Kingdoms of the Earth; Babylon
must fall, and Sion must rise, and Jesus Christ shall Reign and Possess his
Visible Kingdom. And tho Reverend Mr. Beverly, in some respect, has
acknowledged himself mistaken, yet the Church of God is greatly obliged to him
for his elaborate Pains, Things look as if this may be the last Year in which
the Turks may be a Plague to the Antichristian state.
in his careful searching out the Mystical Numbers, so as to know the time of
the end of the Beasts Reign and Tyranny, and the passing away of the Second Woe.
Moreover, I am persuaded he has outdone all that went before him, and may be
the World will see in a short space, that he was not much mistaken as to the
Time.

Therefore it will be Wisdom in all to forbear too hard Censures of this Worthy
Person: Let us wait to see what will be produced by Divine Providence between
this and the end of the Year 1700. No doubt but amazing Revolutions are ready
to break out in the Earth. God will overturn, overturn, overturn, Ezekiel. 2.27
till he come whose right it is, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ, and it shall be
given unto him.

Things look abroad as if we may expect a Religious War, Rev. 17.16, 17.
and such an one doubtless, will be produced when God puts it into the hearts
of the Ten Kings (or some of them) to hate the Whore. So that from the whole we
may expect God will yet take Peace from the Earth, tho blessed be his Name, we
enjoy a little repose at this time. But what may such Princes and People
expect, who having got Peace from abroad, continue, or raise an Open War
against the Lord and his People at Home; nay, show their Rage and Malice (more
since) in persecuting them than before. Oh! That all of us may be stirred up to
cry to the Lord mightily for those poor People, and against their Enemies, as
they are Foes and Opposers, and make War against the Lamb, and those that
follow him: These things tend to cause me to conclude that the Present Peace in
the European World may not last long.

My Brethren, Peace made between Kingdoms and Nations may soon be broken or
removed: But there is a Peace which being made shall be lasting, and never be
removed: And this brings me to the Words of my Text:

For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed,
says the Lord that has mercy on thee The Text opened.
The Text contains a most Gracious Promise, in which are Five Things to be
considered.

I. Who it is that makes this Promise. II. To whom the Promise is made. III.
What is contained in the Promise. IV. The Spring or Rise of the Promise. V. The
Stability of the Promise.
I. It is GOD, Who makes this Promise.
the great God and Father of Mercy which makes this Promise; he that made and
created us, see verse 5. For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called; A Promise of Peace from
such a King is worth regard, and to be prized by all to whom it is made.

II. To whom this Promise is made.
This Promise is made unto the Gentile Church, and therefore it wonderfully
behooves us to consider it, and lay the matter to heart; some of those great
Promises contained in the Writings of the Prophets, do peculiarly refer to the
Jews, the Natural Seed of Abraham, but this wholly and particularly respects
the Gentile Church, as you may see if you read v. 1. Sing O barren, thou that
did not bear, break forth into Singing, and cry aloud thou that did not
travel. The Jewish People were in a Legal Covenant Married to the Lord, and
many among them were spiritually espoused unto him, and brought forth blessed
Fruit, the Church of Israel had a numerous Offspring; but for a long Period of
Time we poor Gentiles were passed by, God espoused us not; the Gentiles were
not Married, or taken into a Covenant Relation with God until the Times of the
Gospel, and it was upon the Rejection, and casting off of the Jews, that they
were grafted in, as Paul shows at large, Romans 11.

Now the Reasons why the Gentile People are called, or excited here to Rejoice
and Sing, may be these.

1. From what precedeth in the 53 d. Chapter, where mention is made of the
Sufferings, Humiliation, and Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Surely he has
born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, etc. ver. 4. He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities. For our Iniquities, that is,
for all the Iniquities of Gods Elect, not only for them among the Jews, but
them also amongst the Gentiles. Therefore, Sing O Barren, sing ye Poor
Gentiles, for Jesus Christ Dyed for you, he bore your Transgressions.

2. Upon the Consideration of the Promise of the Father to Jesus Christ in
respect of them as well as any other, Chap. 53.10. He shall see his Seed, or
the Travel of his Soul, even them amongst the Gentiles, as well as them amongst
the Jews; i. e. He shall see all them for whom he Died, brought into a Covenant
Relation with himself, even Married to him, and his own gracious Image stamped
upon them; they shall be called, he shall see them Converted, he shall enjoy
them, and embrace them in his Arms, and they shall lie in his Bosom.

They are called upon to Sing (as I conceive) in respect of that great and
glorious Privilege of there being thus Married to Jesus Christ, who before had
no Husband, For thy Maker is thy Husband.

3. From the Consideration, she is delivered from the shame of being Barren;
see ver. 4. Cry aloud thou that did not Travel, etc.

4. Upon the Consideration of her numerous offspring; For more are the
Children of the Desolate, than the Children of the Married Wife, says the
Lord, verse 1. Enlarge the Place of thy Tents, and let them stretch forth the
Curtains, etc. verse 2. For thou shall break forth on the Right Hand, and on
the Left. This shows, that there should be a Multitude of the Gentiles
Converted unto Jesus Christ; yea, a far greater number than of the Jews, which
has been made good in the Gospel Days, and will yet more abundantly in Times
that now draw very near, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in:
But O! How barren is she now, that once was the Darling of Heaven, and the only
Church and People of God? hardly one Jew to be found throughout the Earth, that
owns the true Messiah, or is a Believer, or a true Christian.

5. Because she shall never suffer shame any more, though for a short Time she
was forsaken, and seemed not to be regarded by the Lord; but being now
Espoused, she shall perpetually be Beloved, and enjoy Christ's special Favor.

6. From the Consideration of the Covenant, that God has made with Christ's for
them; For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my Kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed,
etc.

This brings me to the next Thing.

What is contained in this Promise.
III. Which is, that which is contained in the Promise, viz. Peace, Peace is a
sweet Blessing, Peace with Men is highly esteemed; but this is Peace with God
which is far better, and exceeds all kind of Peace whatsoever. Yea Peace by
Virtue of a Covenant, a Covenant made by God himself, The Covenant of my Peace,
says the Lord.

The Rise or Spring of the Promise.
IV. We have the Spring or Rise of this Promise, or the grand Motive that moved
God to enter into this Covenant of Peace, or to make this Promise; viz. His
Love and Mercy, Says the Lord, that has Mercy on thee. This shows, that the
Covenant of Peace was founded for poor Creatures who were in Misery, or in a
deplorable Condition, Man before his fall needed not Gods Mercy, he was the
Object of Gods Love and Favor, but not of his Mercy: For Mercy extended to any
Person, denotes he was in a forlorn and Miserable Condition before; and at that
Time when Bowels of Pity and Compassion were moved toward him.

V. We have here also the Stability of the Promise, the Mountains that stand so
fast shall, or may sooner depart, and the Hills be removed, than this Covenant
of Peace can be broken or he removed; nay, and he that says this, is the Lord,
the faithful, and true God, that cannot lie; but to make it yet more firm, he
has sworn to his Promise; Isa. 54.9.
for as I have sworn that the Waters of Noah shall no more, go over the Earth,
so have I sworn that I would not be Wrath with thee nor rebuke thee; that is,
not to forsake her utterly.

So much shall suffice as to the Parts, and Explanation of the Words of our
Text.

I shall only raise, and prosecute one Point of Doctrine from hence, viz.

The Doctrine raised.
Doct. That there is a Covenant of Peace made or agreed upon, and it stands firm
ui behalf of all Gods Elect.

In the speaking unto this Proposition, I shall take this Method following, viz.

1. Lay down eight Explanatory Propositions by way of Premise.

2. I shall endeavor to open the main or chief Transactions about the bringing
in, and establish-of this Covenant of Peace

3. I shall open the Nature of this Covenant of Peace.

4. I shall show you what is contained, granted or given in this Covenant.

5. Show the Nature of the Peace comprehended in this Covenant.

6. Apply it.

Proposit. I. That God foresaw from Eternity, Explanatory Propositions.
that Man would fall from that happy and blessed State in which he was Created;
and that a fearful Breach would arise betwixt himself and Mankind. Thereby,

Had it not been thus, there would have been no room, no need, no occasion for
God to enter into a Covenant of Peace with his own blessed Son, in behalf of
Mankind without a War foreseen, there could I say, be no occasion of a Covenant
of Peace and Reconciliation.

II. Proposition, That this Covenant of Peace was entered into between the
Father and the Son before the World began. Hence the Apostle says, (aluding to
this Covenant)* God has saved us, 2 Timothy 1.9.
and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our Works, but according
to his own purpose and Grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
World began. Pro. 8.23.
Moreover, Our Lord Jesus says, that he was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the Earth was. That is ordained, substituted and anointed to
be the great Representative and Covenanting-Head in behalf of all the Elect of
GOD.

III. Proposition, That the Breach which God foresaw would arise, would be very
great, or a most amazing or fearful Breach betwixt himself and lost Mankind,
and that it was so might abundantly be demonstrated.

The Nature of the breach betwixt God and Man opened.
It was a Breach occasioned by Sin, God did not first fall out with us, or
proclaim War against Mankind; but we first broke that League and Covenant of
our Creation with God; Man rebelled against his Creator, casting off his
Obedience and Allegiance, and subjected himself to Sin and the Devil, Eccl.
7.29.
Lo this only have I found, that God has made Man upright, but they have
sought out many inventions. Tho all the Wickedness that is in Man's Heart, that
Deceit, Hypocrisy, and streams of Filthiness that is there, Solomon, the
Wisest of Men could not find out: Yet this he had discovered, viz. the Fountain
of it, namely Original Sin; or what it was that first caused that Breach and
War which is between God and all Unconverted Men, or all ungodly Ones in the
World. And now, That it is a fearful Breach appears,

1. In that Man run away from God, and hid himself, Genesis 3.9, 10.
And the Lord God called unto Adam and said unto him, Where art thou? And he
said, I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked,
and I hid my self. That God who was before the Object of his Love and Delight,
was now become Terrible unto him because of his horrid Sin and Guilt which lay
upon him.

2. It was an unreasonable act of Disobedience, and most horrid Rebellion,
considering what God had done for Man, and how Great, Noble and Honorable God
had made him; he formed Man in his own Image, and made him capable of enjoying
sweet Fellowship and Communion with his Creator; he made him Lord and Governor
of all things on Earth, and gave him a lovely, beautiful Spouse to be a sit
help meet for him; he gave him power to stand in that happy Estate, tho he left
him in a possibility of Falling to prove his Fidelity and Obedience to his
Maker. But Man cast horrid Contempt upon God by his Unbelief. He disbelieved
the true and faithful God, and believed the Devil, that Father of Lies, and so
gave more Glory to Satan, than to his blessed and most rightful Sovereign.

3. The Dismal Nature of this Breach further appears on Man's part, by
considering of that vile and abominable Enmity which is in the Hearts of all
Mankind (who abide in that old Nature) against God as the effects of that first
Sin, Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto the Law of
God, neither indeed can be; he does not say, it is an Enemy, but in the
abstract, it is Enmity; an Enemy (as one observes) may be reconciled, but
Enmity can never be reconciled: Man by this Sin came to be alienated in the
highest degree from God, Ephesians. 4.18.
having the Understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God: And in
another place, says the same Apostle, Col. 1.21.
And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked
works, yet now has he reconciled.

The fearful state of Man by Nature. Acts 7.51.
4. This still further appears, In that all Men naturally resist God and his
good Spirit, they fight against God, Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart
and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye.
Nay, they are called haters of God, The haters of God (says David) should have
submitted themselves. Ye have both hated me and my Father, Joh. 15.24
says our blessed Lord. What can render Sin more evil, or Man more vile than
to be called a Hater of God, Romans 1.30. Zech. 11.8.
they are haters of God and despightful; Their soul, says the Lord, abhorred
me, and my Soul loathed them. Moreover, They are said to be Contemners of God,
they even dare God to his Face, and harden their Hearts against him, Ps. 10.13.
Wherefore does the wicked contemn God? He says in his heart, thou will not
require it; They fear him not, they atheistically deny his Providence, nay, his
very being; or wish at least there was no God. And all this is the fruit and
effect of Man's Rebellion or of his First Sin.

II. As this in part sets out the Nature of this fearful Breach by reason of
Sin on Man's part; so also hereby God is become an Enemy to Man; and hence
David says, Ps. 34.16.
The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance
of them from the Earth.

Some conceive by the Face of God here, is meant his Anger, because Anger
discovers it self in the Face; others think by the Face of God in this place,
is meant all his Attributes, his Justice, Wisdom, Power, Holiness, etc. are set
against them.

2. GOD is said to abhor the ungodly, and 10.3.
the wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous whom the
Lord abhors. This is an amazing Text, and enough to terrify all greedy
Worldlings, or covetous Persons, and such that commend and bless them. True,
all Sinners are abhorred upon the account of Sin, 'yet none more hated and
abhorred than the covetous Person is, Covetousness is Idolatry.

3. It is said, Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13.
That God is angry with the wicked every day, if he return not he will whet his
Sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has also prepared for him
the instruments of Death, he has drawn his Sword, his Bow is bent, and his
Arrows are on the string ready to shoot. Ah! Who is able to Encounter with such
an Enemy, or to stand before his Indignation

4. He has laid all Mankind, as considered in the First Adam, Gal. 3.10.
under the Curse of the Law, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them; Ephesians. 2.2.
yea, the Elect themselves by Nature are Children of Wrath as well as others:
All the World is become guilty before God; such is the Nature of the Breach
through Man's Sin and Disobedience in breaking the Law of the First Covenant.

Joh. 3.36.
5. The Wrath of God abides upon all them that believe not: Brethren, the
Sentence is past upon all the whole Race of Mankind, in the First Adam, even
the Sentence of Everlasting Death: Joh. 3.18.
They are all condemned already, tho the Sentence is not presently executed.

The cause of the great Breach betwixt God and Man.
IV. Proposition: That the Breach betwixt God and Man, was occasioned by the
violation of the First Covenant which God entered into with Adam, as the Common
or Public Head and Representative of all Mankind; which Covenant was a
Covenant of Works; I say, God gave a Law, or entered into a Covenant of Works
with the First Adam and his Seed, and in that Covenant he gave himself to be
our God, even upon the strict and severe condition of perfect Obedience,
personally to be performed by Man himself, with that Divine Threatening of Death
and Wrath if he broke the Covenant, Genesis 2.17.
In the Day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Petto.
Yet some may doubt (as one observes) whether this was a Covenant of Works,
because here is only a threatening of Death upon his Disobedience to this one
positive Law.

Answ.
Answ. (But as he well observes) Man in his First Creation was under a Natural
Obligation to universal compliance to the Will of God, and such was the
Rectitude of his Nature, it imports an exact Conformity to the Divine Will,
there being an inscription of the Divine Law upon Adam's heart, which partly
still remains, Romans 2.14, 15. and 3.19, 20. and 4.13, 14 15. and 7.13 Heb.
7.16. and 8.7, 8. and 9.13.
or is written in the hearts of the very* Gentiles (tho much blur'd) which is
that light which is in all, or that which we call The light of Nature.

Tho evident it is that God afterward more clearly and formally repeated this
Law of Works to the People of Israel, it being written into Two Tables of
Stone, tho not given in that Ministration of it for Life, as before it was to
Adam; yet as so given, it is by St. Paul frequently called the Old Covenant,
and the Covenant of Works, Gal. 3.19.
which required perfect Obedience of all that were under it, to their
Justification at God's Bar, and so made Sin appear exceeding sinful, and tended
to aggravate Man's Guilt and Misery upon his Conscience, tho the Design of God
hereby was to discover unto Man how unable he was in his Fallen State to fulfill
the Righteousness of God, Romans 5.20. and 3.19. and 8.3. Gal. 3.24.
that so that Law, together with the Types and Sacrifices, might be a
Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ.

Now in that Ministration of the First Covenant given to Israel when they came
out of Egypt, there seemed to be a mutual Contract and Stipulation betwixt God
and them, God enjoined perfect, universal and continual Obedience of them, and
they promised and covenanted formally so to do.

2. Brethren! Pray consider, The First Covenant required Perfect Righteousness
of Man as the condition of his Justification, etc. and that not enjoined by the
Holy God as a simple act of his Sovereignty (as some conclude) but as it
resulted from his Holiness, and the Rectitude of his Nature: It being
inconsistent with the Justice, Holiness or Purity of God's Nature, to justify
any Man who is not perfectly righteous, or wholly without sin, even in Thought,
Word and Actions.

3. That Adam before the Fall had Power to answer this Covenant of perfect
righteousness, and which he was obliged to do; yet had no Surety to engage to
God for him.

4. Moreover, he breaking this Covenant (as you have already heard) he was
utterly undone, and all his Offspring in him, and his Credit being lost for
ever with God, the Lord will not Treat with him any more, nor enter into any
Terms of Peace without a Surety, and that too upon the Foundation of a better
Covenant, or not at all.

No mere Man nor Angel could make our Peace.
V. Proposition. That there was none in Heaven nor Earth, I mean neither Men nor
Angels, that could make up that Breach which Sin has made between God and Man.
And as no Man nor Angel could do it, so no Repentance, no Tears, tho Tears of
Blood, no Reformation, nor any Sacrifice, no not a Thousand Rams, nor Ten
Thousand Rivers of Oil, nor the fruit of the Body. I say, none of these could
atone for the Sin of the Soul, or make our Peace with God. It is not enough for
a Man to say, he will sin no more, for he has sinned, and stands obliged to
God to pay Ten Thousand Talents, and yet has not one Farthing to repay;
neither will God forgive one Rebel or any Debtor the least Mite, as a simple
act of Mercy, but does require a Full Satisfaction for the whole Debt.
Moreover, Man is both a Debtor and a Criminal.

VI. Proposition, Concerning God's sovereignty in the display of his Grace.
That God presents himself not as an unreconcilable Enemy, for tho he be
Just, yet he is gracious; Mercy and Goodness are a like glorious Attributes, or
Properties of his Nature, as Justice, Holiness, etc. Yet the Display of his
Favor, Love, Mercy and Goodness, ought to be considered with respect had to
his absolute Sovereignty. He was, my Brethren, No more obliged to magnify his
Mercy in a Surety and Savior to Mankind, than he was to the Fallen Angels; he
had not been unjust if all Adam's Posterity had* been cast into Hell, and not
one Soul saved; as he is not unjust in throwing all the fallen Angels into Hell
for ever, without affording one of them any Relief, Redemption, or hope of
Recovery; neither is he obliged to save the whole Lump of Mankind, either in a
way of Justice or Mercy, because he is pleased to save a remnant of them. God
was at the liberty of his Will whether he would make this World or not; it was,
I mean, the only Act of his Sovereignty; its actual existence in time, was
according to his absolute Decree and Purpose from Everlasting; and according to
his absolute Sovereignty he governs and disposes of all things, and may do what
he will with his own: Dan. 4.22.
All Nations tremble before him, whom he would he slew, and whom he would he
kept alive. The most High does according to his Will in the Armies of Heaven,
cap. 5.19.
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or say
unto him, Exodus 4.11 Romans 9.17, 18.
what do thou? So he has mercy upon whom he will have mercy, and compassion
on whom he will have compassion, and whom he will he hardens. He called
Abraham, and revealed himself to him, and let the most of Mankind in his days
remain ignorant of him as to Salvation by Jesus Christ: He also entered into a
Covenant with the Seed of Abraham, and gave them his Laws and Ordinances, he
did not do so to any other Nation: And in Gospel Times he called a few poor and
illiterate Fishermen, and such like Persons, and let the Pharisees and Learned
Rabbis remain under the power of Sin and Satan; and all this as the act of his
own absolute Sovereignty, and Good Pleasure of his Will, as our Lord shows,
At that time Jesus answered and said, Mat. 11.25 26.
I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Babes: Even so
Father for so it seemed good in thy sight.

So now, at this day, he sends the Gospel into one Nation, and not into
another; and then also in such Nations where the Gospel is Preached, it is but
here and there clearly opened; Nay, and many who come under the powerful
Ministration of the Gospel, have it only come unto them in Word, that which is
the savor of life unto life to some, 2 Cor. 2.16
is the savor of Death unto Death to others. Now from whence is all this? but
merely from the Sovereignty of God, or good pleasure of his Will, Romans 9.16.
for It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy.

God's special Love and Election is not from any Man's willing, or running; it
rises not from Natural Powers emproved, not from his Desires, Good Deeds, or
Good Inclinations, chap. 9.11. and 11.5, 6.
or from the foresight of his Faith and Obedience; but from and of God's mere
Mercy, Sovereign Grace and Favor: The Truth is, Titus 3.5.
to deny God to have the power of his own Free Act in dispensing his own
Sovereign Bounty, is to Eclipse his Glory, and to render him to have less
Sovereign Power than that which he has given, and allows to Mankind: May not
a Man show his Favor and Goodness in redeeming a few Captives, out of a
Multitude, who wilfully brought themselves into Bondage, but he must redeem
them all, or be unjust? Or cannot a Man give a bountiful Gift to One or Two
poor Men in a Parish, but he must bestow like Bounty to all the Poor in the
said Parish? Or, cannot a King contrive and enter into a Covenant of Peace for a
few Rebels that have (with a Multitude of others) taken up Arms against him,
but he must be charged with Injustice, because he did not extend like Favor in
the said Covenant to them all; sure, no Man, in his right Senses, will deny him
this Liberty: And now, Shall not GOD have like power to dispense his Sovereign
Grace to whom he pleases, who is said to do all things according to the
pleasure of his own Will, and eternal purpose in Jesus Christ?

Tho I enlarged on this Proposition when I preached this Sermon, yet I shall
refer it to another Head now. Joh. 5.16.
Proposition VII. And from hence it appears, That the Covenant of Peace is
the Covenant of Grace. For tho the Covenant of Peace, in respect had to Christ,
as our Mediator, Head and Surety, was upon the Condition of his Merits; yet as
to the Design, End and Purpose of it, in respect of us, it was only an act of
Pure Grace; hence said to be according to the good pleasure of his Will, Ephesians.
1.5. And to the praise of the glory of his Grace, v. 6.

1. It was the Free Grace of God the Father to vouchsafe us a Substitute, a
Savior, a Mediator of this Peace, and to Choose, Ordain and Appoint his own
Son to be the Person, and to accept him in our stead. Oh! What Favor is this?
God so loved the World, etc.

John 3.16
2. And it was the Free Grace of God the Son to engage himself to the Father, to
enter into this Covenant to make our Peace; the Glory of Both Persons equally
shine forth to the amazement of all in Heaven and Earth, the Counsel of Peace
was between them both. Za^h. 6.13


3. Nay, my Brethren, the Free and Rich Grace of God in this Covenant is to be
adored, even as to the Main and Ultimate End and Design thereof, Not according
to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, 2 Timothy 1.9.
which was given to us in Christ before the World began. The whole Contrivance,
Foundation and Rise of this Covenant of Peace, is of love and Grace; Neither do
we receive any Grace from God in Time, but as it results from the Covenant of
Peace made with us in Christ before all Time; But this I purpose to enlarge
upon further when I come to open the nature of the Covenant.

Proposition VIII. And as the Covenant of Peace is the Govenant of Grace; so it
results from God as an act of Infinite Mercy; It is therefore a merciful
Covenant; it was not made with Man considered in his State of Innocence; for
Man, as so considered, could not be the Object of God's Mercy; for tho God
appeared very good and gracious to us in our First Creation, and as we came out
of his Hands, and that many ways; Yet such was our Happy State, that we stood
then in no need of Mercy; for where Mercy is showed, it is to such that are in
Misery; but before Man fell he knew no Misery, Pain or Sorrow; but when God
first cast his Eyes upon us, and entered into this Covenant of Peace with his
own Son for us, he saw us lie in our Blood, and fallen under his Divine Wrath
and Anger; and this indeed the very name of the Covenant of Peace does import:
There was no need of Peace had there not been a War, or a fearful Breach
between God and us; and that this Covenant results from God's great Mercy, read
again my Text, Says the Lord that has mercy on thee. Ez. 16.4, 5
God foresaw us cast out like a wretched Infant in the day of its Nativity,
whose Navel was not cut, neither washed in Water, nor salted, nor swadled at
all; and what does God say more, None Eye pitied thee to do any of these things
for thee, but thou wast cast out in the open Field, to the loathing of thy
person in the day thou wast born. This was the time of his Love, and also of
his Pity and tender Mercy; And when I passed by thee I saw thee polluted in
thine own blood, ver. 6. that is, when he was first concerned for us, in this
Covenant of Peace, and entered into that holy Compact with his own Son: Behold,
thy time was a time of love, and I spread my Skirt over, and covered thy
nakedness; yea, and I swear unto thee, and entered into Covenant with thee,
says the Lord, and thou becamest mine. This was the time of God's entering
into Covenant with his Elect, viz. it was with them in Christ, and what of this
is actually accomplished on us in Time, in our own Persons, is but the
execution of all that Grace, Pity and Mercy manifested to us in Christ from
Eternity; he then showed his Eternal Purpose of Compassion toward his Chosen,
and he then said in his blessed Covenant to them live.

I should now proceed to the next general Head, but shall say no more at this
time.

SERMON II.
ISA. Live. x. the last part of the Verse. Neither shall the Covenant of my
Peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant of Peace made and agreed on, and stands firm
in behalf of all the Elect of God.

The last Day we spoke to those Explanatory Propositions proposed to be opened
by way of premise. And now to proceed to the next General Head.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to open the main or chief transactions about the
bringing in this Covenant of Peace.

There are my Brethren, Six Things to be considered in a Covenant of Peace
among Men, and so also in and about this Covenant.

I. A Treaty, or a Solemn Consultation, or a Treating about the Terms of Peace.

II. An Agreement upon the Terms proposed.

III. Who the Mediator is of this Covenant of Peace, together with his Work and
Office.

IV. The Ratification of the Covenant.

V. The Proclamation or proclaiming the Peace.

VI. The Time when the Peace shall commence, and who are included in it, and
what is required in order to their actual possession and enjoyment thereof.

My Brethren, These are the main things that are contained in, and about a
Covenant of Peace among Men, as the chief Covenant Transactions; and my Purpose
is to speak unto these Six things particularly: Tho I grant there is some
difference between a Covenant of Peace between Kingdoms and States among Men,
and this Covenant; especially concerning the Work of the Glorious Mediator of
this Covenant, and a Mediator of Peace concluded between Earthly Princes and
States: As we, God assisting, shall make appear.

But to proceed:

I. Concerning the Treaty, or Treating about this Covenant. My Brethren,
Commonly Princes and States appoint their Extraordinary Ambassadors or
Plenipotentiaries to Treat about the Terms upon which they design and are
willing to conclude a Peace after a ruinous and destructive War: They do not
Treat about it in their own Persons; but the Treaty of Peace in this Covenant
was only between God the Father, and God the Son; Sinners then had no actual
Being, or did not exist, and therefore could not send any Plenipotentiary to
agitate Matters on their behalf.

It is true, Mal. 3.1.
Our Lord Jesus Christ is called The Messenger of the Covenant whom we delight
in. He is indeed our Delegate, Messenger or Trustee; but the Father alone, and
not we Delegated that Office and Power to him, for us, and on our Behalf, out
of his own Sovereign Grace and Goodness before the World began. This Name of
Messenger of the Covenant does

1. Denote Christ's Dispensatory Employment, Work and Office, and his free and
voluntary condescension to undertake in this Treaty, according to the Design,
Purpose and Will of the Father, as our great Trustee, Ambassador and
Plenipotentiary. And

2. He may not only be called The Messenger of the Covenant, as our great
Representative to Treat with the Father in Eternity, upon the Terms of our
Peace; but also in his being sent from Heaven to Earth, actually to work about,
and accomplish all things that were agreed on between them both; concerning the
making of our Peace. He traveled from Heaven to Earth on this Errand, and to
effect this blessed Work.

3. He may be so called, because he is the Messenger that published the Happy
News of the Peace contained in this Covenant, in the clear and glorious
Ministration of it: Hence it is said, Heb. 2.3.
it was first began to be spoken by the Lord. Our Lord Jesus is the great
Apostle, and Chief Minister and Messenger of the New Covenant, a Minister of
the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, c. 8.2, 6, 10
and not Man.

4. He is the Messenger who does interpret, open and explain all those dark and
obscure Mysteries contained in the Covenant of Peace, that were kept secret and
hid from the beginning of the World; He is that Messenger, one of a thousand:
Joh. 33.23
All things (says he) are delivered unto me of my Father; and no Man knows
the Son but the Father; neither knows any Man the Father, Mat 11.27
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. No Man has seen
God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, 1 John 1.18
he has declared him: But no more as to this now.

1. I shall prove that there was a Covenant between God and Christ, or a
blessed Treaty about our Peace before the World began, see Psalm 89. v. 3. I
have made a Covenant with my chosen. God first chose his Son as the
Representative, Covenanting Head and Surety of his Elect, and then Treated with
him about the Terms of our Peace. It is said to be made with David, but no
otherwise than as he was a Type of Christ. It is Jesus Christ who is the true
David, Psa. 89.28
My Mercy will I keep for him evermore, and my Covenant shall stand fast with
him: Hence our Blessed Lord, it is said, was delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God. Acts 2.23.


2. Here are the two Covenanting Parties the Covenant of Peace is between them
both: Zech. 6.13
that is, between the Lord of Host, and the Man who is the Branch; betwixt them
it was consulted, agreed to, or concluded, I was set up from everlasting, from
the beginning, or ever the Earth was: that is, as the Covenant-Head of all
God's Elect, or as Mediator and Peacemaker between God and them, and this
setting up that, clearly implies a Covenant or holy Compact that was between
them both.

3. The consent of two Parties, or more, upon the Proposals made by the one
Party, and the agreement of the other, tends to make a formal Covenant, so here
was, my Brethren, a mutual re-stipulation betwixt God the Father and Christ
about our Peace and Redemption.

For here were things commanded by the one, and agreed to be done in obedience
by the other: In these Transactions the Father makes Proposals to the Son, and
showed him what he will have him do, if ever our Peace succeed and is made. And

4. Moreover, Upon the doing of which many great Promises are made to Christ
for the Merit or Desert of his Work, and to the Elect in him, out of mere
Grace, for Christ's sake, or for his just deservings; hence our Lord says he
came to do the will of his Father, This is the Will of him that sent me, Joh.
6.40.
etc. he laid down his Life as his Father commanded him; he knew it was
according to the Eternal Compact, Purpose* and Decree of his Father, unto which
he consented; God the Father agreed to prepare the Son a Body, the Son
consented to assume our Nature, or take that Body, Heb. 10.9.
Then said I, lo, I come to do thy Will O God! and in that body he was enjoined
to die, I have power to lay down my life, and power to take it up again, this
Commandment have I received of my Father. Also these Faederal Transactions
betwixt God the Father and Jesus Christ are held forth in Isa. 53.10, 11, 12.
He shall make his Soul an offering for Sin, this was that which Christ was
obliged to do; and then we have the Promise of the Fathers to him, (1.) Of
justifying of many. (2.) Of seeing his Seed, He shall see his Seed. (3.) That
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand; he shall have them all
united to himself, pordoned and saved for ever. Again Isa. 42.6. The
Covenanting Parties are mentioned, the Father says, I. will give thee (that
is, thee my Son) for a Covenant to the People. Here Is the Father's Designation
and first Sealing of our Lord Jesus Christ to the Mediatorial Office and
Employment.

Moreover, Our Lord Jesus readily complied with the Father's Purpose and Will
herein, The Lord God has opened mine Ear, Isa. 50.5, 6
and I was not rebellious, I gave my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them
that plucked off the Hair; I hid not my Face from shame and spitting. I gave
consent thus to do, I readily yielded to my Father's Pleasure herein; and in
the Fullness of Time he actually thus suffered to fulfill and answer the Terms of
this Covenant.

I will declare the Decree, (or as Dr. Hammond reads it) the Covenant: that is,
I will publish or manifest that which was agreed upon betwixt God the Father
and me This my Brethren, was long kept secret, but it is now clearly revealed,
The secrets of the Lord is with them that fear him, Ps. 25.14.
and he will show them his Covenant. The Hebrew Word Decree, the Learned in
that Language render Statute, Decree, Agreement, Pact, Covenant; the Word (...)
that is here used (says a Learned Author) is in the Scripture sometimes
promiscuously, Ark of the Page p. 11. Buxt. Rab. Tal. p. 818.
or synonimously used with the Word (...) that is usually rendered Covenant;
Covenant is taken either properly or figuratively. First Properly, for a mutual
Contract, Compact or Agreement between two Parties, which differs from a Law
which is without Obligation on the Lawgiver; and also from a single Promise
which is without Stipulation. Covenant may be thus taken (as one Notes) i. e.
in a proper sense when applied to the whole Covenant of Peace or Grace. between
the Father and the Son, because there was a mutual Stipulation.

2. Figuratively, For a bare Promise; The Covenant made with Believers is only
a free promise, not upon mutual stipulation.
so it was to Noah, Genesis 9.9. and so the Covenant of Grace run to Abraham, viz.
being no more than a free Promise of God; and thus we are to take the Word
Covenant when it refers to us in Christ, for we receive no Covenant-Blessings
upon any mutual Stipulation betwixt God and us, upon or from the Merit of our
Work, but all upon the account of Free Grace, and of Christ's Covenant with
God, and by virtue of that Faederal Union we had then with him; for all things
which we receive in Time, was promised to us in Christ from Eternity; 2 Timothy
1.9. Titus 1.2, 3
therefore the Elect must faederally be considered in Christ from everlasting:
The Covenant of Peace with Christ, my Brethren, was not made simply for
himself, but for the Elect; he merited that we might possess: True, all is to
him of mere Desert and Merit; but to us in him, of mere Grace and Favor. So
much as to the first thing that was proposed to be opened, viz. That there was
a Treaty or Treating between the Father and the Son about this blessed Covenant
of Peace.

II. I shall show you more fully, That there was an Agreement upon the Terms.
Or, That the Son of God did consent to what the Father proposed.

1. It is very evident from what has been said, Christ consented to the
Fathers proposals in the Covenant of Peace. Isa. 42.6, 7
That God proposed Matters to his own Son; or what he must do to procure, and
establish the Covenant of Peace; but let me add here one or two Scriptures more
to show you that Christ consented unto those Proposals made by the Father, I
the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will
keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a light unto the
Gentiles: to open blind eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and
them that sit in darkness out of the Prisonhouse. And in Isa. 49.5, 6. it is
said, And now says the Lord that formed me from the Womb to be his servant, to
bring Jacob again to him, tho Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious
in the eyes of the Lord, And my God shall be my strength: And he said it is a
light thing that thou should be my Servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
to restore the preserved of Israel, I will give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth. These
things all Expositors that are Orthodox agree were spoken by Jehovah to Jesus
Christ, and do contain Proposals concerning the Covenant of Peace. And now

2. Let us in the next place consider of such Scriptures that prove that Christ
did consent unto these Proposals. To this effect, see Prove. 8.22.23, 24. The
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his work of old. I was
set up from everlasting, from the beginning, before ever the Earth was. When
there was no depths I was brought forth, when there was no Fountains abounding
with Water, 30, 31. Then was I with him as one brought up with him, and was
daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, rejoicing in the habitable part
of the Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men. As this Text proves
the Eternity of the Son of God, who is the substantial, eternal Wisdom of God;
so also it shows there was a voluntary and ready consent in our Lord to
undertake in the Work of our Peace and Redemption, that he was set up and did
agree to undertake, as our Mediator, to make our Peace with God; and also, that
he took pleasure in his so engaging on our behalf; To this, let me add what
David in the Person of Christ speaks, Psa. 40.6.7, 8.
Sacrifice and Offerings thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened;
Burnt Offerings and Sin Offerings have thou not required, then said I, lo I
come to do thy Will O God. This place is cited by the Apostle, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
Wherefore when he comes into the World he says, Sacrifice and Offerings thou
would not, but a Body have thou prepared me. In Burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure. Then said I, lo I come, in the
Volmn of the Book it is written of me, to do thy Will, O God. Nothing can more
fully show Christ's cheerful Consent; What God the Father required, Jesus
Christ yielded to do, which was, to make satisfaction for Sin, in his Body on
the Tree, and so to make our Peace with the Eternal Jehovah.

I. Consider who the Persons transacting and treating with each other were,
even God the Father, and God the Son; the Father stands upon satisfaction to
his Law and Justice, or demands the whole Sum or Price of our Redemption, that
so our Peace might be made, and Christ engages to give it.

II. The business or grand Matter transacted, I say, betwixt them was our Peace
and Reconciliation unto God, and so to recover all God's Elect from Sin, Wrath
and Misery, and work about their Eternal Happiness; the Elect, tho not then in
Being, yet are here considered as fallen, wretched and forlorn Creatures.

III. That the Manner or Nature of these Transactions were faederal, or in a
Covenant-way, one Person mutually engaging and stipulating with the other: The
Father stands upon the strict demands of Law and Justice, the Son consents to
glorify the Father therein, and raise the honor of all the Divine Attributes,
which in time he did do, I have glorified thee on Earth, Jo. 17.4, 5
I have finished the work thou gave me to do. And now Father, glorify me
with thine own Self. As if he should say, the Terms agreed upon, or thy Demands
are done, therefore let me have my Reward, and let mine Elect be made one in
us; Let me not only Personally be one with thee, but also Mystically one, and
so be glorified, as it is due to me, as the Hire or Reward of my Work.

IV. The Covenant of peace was made from all Eternity
If any ask when this Covenant or holy Compact was made, I told you, and say
again, it bears Date from Eternity, or before the World began, when we had (as
I said before) no Existence but only in the Eternal Decree and Purpose of God.
Moreover, Remember this Covenant was made with Christ for us, and in him with
us, for all that Grace which is given to us in time, was promised unto us in
Christ, nay given to us in Christ from Eternity, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.1, 2, 3. as
our Surety, Covenanting-Head, and blessed Representative.

As to the special and particular Articles agreed upon, on which the Covenant
of Peace was made and concluded, I shall open them under the next Head of
Discourse.

V. Commonly in all Treaties, Christ is the only Mediator of the Covenant of
peace.
or Covenants of Peace amongst Men, there is a Mediator chosen. So God chose a
Mediator of this Covenant; yet his Work as Mediator, greatly differs from the
Work and Office of all other Mediators, as I might make it appear: For Christ
is not only Mediator of the Covenant, but Surety, Messenger and Testator of it
also: And as he is considered Mediator, he is invested with a Threefold Office
more particularly, which Offices he faithfully executes in order to the making
our Peace with God, in reconciling God to us, and us to God, which I purpose to
treat of and open in order.

The Work of our Mediator is not barely to see our Peace made, or to labor by
Entreaty to bring each Party to Moderation, and pliable Terms, and to see every
thing done according to the Preliminaries agreed upon; but the whole Work of
making Peace is solely committed to our Lord Jesus Christ, not to see others do
it, but he himself does it all, even all that God requires on his part, and
what is necessary to be done for us, in us, and by us also.

I. Let it be also considered, That God would not make any Covenant of Peace
with us without a Mediator, without such a Mediator; and that Jesus Christ
alone is the Mediator, is evident, ^ Tim. 2.5.
There is one Mediator between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. I say,
God chose his Son to be the Mediator of this Covenant of Peace: and hence he is
said to be given for a Covenant unto the People, Isa. 42.6.
that is, as some conceive, To be the Mediator thereof.

II. God the Father's Demands must be granted; he will not suffer his Just
Right and Honor to be invaded, nor his Glory eclipsed, therefore was this
Mediator chosen; besides the Sanction of his Holy Law must be preserved;
Private Persons may forgive Offenses, as they please; but the Just and Holy
Governor of the World, will not, cannot pass by Offenses till the end of
Government be secured, that so his Holiness and Justice be not stained, nor his
Law fall to the Ground: Hence one main Article proposed was, That the Mediator
of our Peace do make full Satisfaction, and if he does not this, there could be
no Covenont of Peace concluded; this therefore was the result of that Counsel
of Peace held in Eternity.

III. There was I say, a necessity for the Son of God to be both Mediator and
Surety of this Covenant: I do not say, that there was a necessity laid either
upon the Father or the Son to enter into this Covenant of Peace for us: No, no!
But if God will in a way of Free and Sovereign Grace enter into such a Covenant
for Mankind, there was a Necessity for Christ to be the Mediator and Surety of
it; I say, Necessity, so far as we can, or are able to conceive, in respect of
this Matter.

1. Because God has not revealed, The necessity of a Mediator of the Covenant
of Peace, and that Christ is he.
or made known any other way by which our Peace could be made, but by a
Mediator, I do not say, that God could not any other way make our Peace, but
that he could not in reguard of his own Honor (so far as it appears unto
us.) Moreover, if God has not made known any other way, then there is no other
way for us to obtain Peace with him: But no other way is made known.

2. There could be no other way, as we can conceive, because the breach that
was between God and us, must be made up by a full satisfaction to the Law and
Justice of God, God being Just as well as Gracious; and hence one end why
Christ was made a propitiation through Faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.
was To declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God, v. 25. To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness, that he might be just, and the Justifier of him that believes
in Jesus, verse. 26. that is, That no wrong might be done to the Essential
Purity of God's Nature, or Rectitude of his Will; nor yet to his immediate
Justice, by which he cannot but hate Sin, and for it require a Satisfaction.

3. In regard of the Truth of God's Threatening pronounced against all Mankind
in Adam, upon his Disobedience, legal Threatenings are such, that they admit of
no Pardon, without Satisfaction be made to the Justice and Holiness of God; and
this was signified by all those Typical Sacrifices and Offerings under the Law;
therefore in vindication of the Truth or Veracity of God, together with the
Honor, Equity, and Sanction of the Law, there must be Satisfaction made, or no
Peace with God, for fallen Mankind; and this could not be done but by such a
Mediator as Jesus Christ is.

For that which could not be done by Men or Angels, nor as a simple Act of
God's Mercy, without the Impeachment of his Holiness, Truth, and Justice, etc.
could not be done at all: But no pardon, no Peace could be procured by Men nor
Angels, nor as an absolute or simple Act of Mercy, without the Impeachment or
eclipsing the Glory of the Attributes of God's Justice, Truth, and Holiness,
etc. therefore it could not be so done at all.

4. To say God might have entered into a Covenant of Peace for us any other way
than by the Mediator Jesus Christ, or through his Death and Atonement would (as
one observes) reflect upon his Love to his own dear Son: For why should the Son
of God be made a Curse for us, or suffer the cursed Death of the Cross, to make
our Peace, if Peace could be made any other way, without the least injury to
the Justice, Law, or Holiness of God, etc. No doubt my Brethren, but that the
Son of God had been spared, if he had foresaw that our Peace might have been
made some other way.

Moreover, would it not then follow that there might have been two Ways to
obtain Peace and Reconciliation with God, which is contrary to what our Blessed
Lord says, Joh. 14.6.
No Man comes to the Father but by me; that is, cannot come to have Peace with
God any other way, but by me, by my Death, or through my Blood, nor without
believing, or depending upon me: For thus it is with the adult.

5. There is no other way of Peace with God, and therefore a Necessity of
Christ's Mediation; because without the shedding of Blood, Heb. 9.22.
there is no Remission; no Pardon, and so no Peace; there could be no discharge
from the guilt of Sin, no removal of the Punishment of Sin, nor any Purgation
from the filth and pollution thereof, without the Blood of Christ be shed.

6. Because it is positively said, Act. 4.12.
There is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we must be saved: If there
is no other Name, Way, or Means given, but by Jesus Christ; then there is a
Necessity that our Peace be made alone by him: But this is so, therefore there
is a Necessity of Christ's Mediation.

In the next place we will enquire what is absolutely necessary for the
Mediator of our Peace to do, or were Requisites in him, according to the
Articles agreed on in this Covenant, to make our Peace with God.

The Requisites in Christ as a Mediator.
1. A Mediator of this Covenant of Peace, must understand the Nature of that
difference, or breach which was betwixt God and Man; and what Terms the Holy
God, who is the Injured Party) stands upon; and must have granted him if ever
our Peace be made; and who but Jesus Christ, who is God, knew this? It was he
only that well knew what it was that could satisfy Infinite Justice: Had it
been proposed either to Men or Angels to resolve this Question, i. e. By what
Means shall fallen Man come to be reconciled to God, and God be righted as
touching all that wrong Sin and Sinners have done him? What Answer think you
could they have made? Alas! no mere created Being could resolve such a Question.

2. He that is the Mediator of this Covenant, or that makes our Peace, must
not only know what will do it, but also he must be able to answer all God's
Demands, both in respect of his Law and Justice; and also be able to supply all
our Wants and Necessities: He must seek the Honor of the Blessed God, and
equally seek and be able to relieve poor Sinners; and none but Jesus Christ
could do this, who is an indifferent Person, or one equally related unto both,
he being both God and Man in one Person.

(1.) He being God, the one and the same Eternal God, he could not know what
concerned the Glory of his Father; and therefore would not, could not eclipse
his Glory.

(2.) And he being Man, he could not but sympathize with the poor Creature; and
as being God he did not only know all our Wants, but he is able also to supply
them. This brings me to the next particular.

III. Christ is every way qualified to be Mediator of the Covenant.
The Mediator of this Covenant must therefore be every ways suitably qualified,
or capacitated for this Work and Mediatorship; and to this end I say, he must
be God; nay, God in our Nature, (for a mere Man could not satisfy Infinite
Justice); his Obedience or Sufferings else could not therefore have been
meritorious: For it was from the Union of the Divine Nature with the Humane,
that put such a Worth or meritorious Efficacy in his Sacrifice.

I say, Jesus Christ our Mediator must be God, Why Christ must be God.


1. Because those Evils which he was to expiate, could never be taken away by
any Person that was not God, or whose Sacrifice or Atonement had not an
infinite Worth and Satisfaction in it; because Sin is against the Infinite
Majesty of Heaven.

2. Jesus Christ as Mediator must be God, because otherwise he could not
sustain, or bear in his Body and Soul that great weight of Sin and Wrath laid
upon him; for if but the guilt of one Sin was laid on any mere Man, it would
sink him down to the lowest Hell; much more then would the weight of all the
Sins of God's Elect have sunk down the Lord Jesus Christ, when laid upon him,
had he not been God, but a mere Man. How does David cry out of the burden of
his Sins? Psalm. 3 and 4.
Mine Iniquities are gone over mine Head, as an heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me. Nay, my Brethren, when our Sins were laid upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, and he began to bear, and feel the weight of them, tho he was God, how
did he cry out? and he began to be sore amazed, Mark 14.33, 34.
and said, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death: Tarry ye here and
watch, and he went forward a little, and fell on the Ground: The weight of our
Sins and Divine Wrath, brought him down to the Earth.

3. Christ our Mediator must be God, otherwise his Suffering, or the purchase
of his Blood could not have merited all that Grace and Glory for all God's
Elect, which indeed it did. Brethren there is a difference between a full
Satisfaction or Payment of Debts, and a Price that is laid down not only to do
that, but also to merit and purchase a Right to great Riches, high Privileges
and Honor.

Now if Christ had only paid our Debts, or satisfied the Justice of God as to
his vindictive Vengeance, tho we thereby had been delivered from Hell, yet that
Payment could not have raised us up to Heaven; no, it is through the Merits of
that Infinite Price Christ laid down, that we come to be the Sons of God, and
Heirs of Glory; and all this is through the Dignity of his Person, and infinite
Value and Worth of his Purchase, as being God; and also as it was the Grant of
God the Father to Christ, in the Covenant of Peace, as the result of those
Transactions.

4. He must be God, because otherwise he could not have subdued, and overcome
all his and our Enemies: What mere Man is able to wrestle with, and overcome
Satan, and all the Powers of Darkness? Or how could he have prevailed against
Death? Hos. 13.14
Overcome and have subdued Death? I will ransom them from the Power of the
Grave: I will redeem them from Death: O Death, I will be thy Plague; O Grave, I
will be thy Destruction. And hence Christ says, Destroy this Temple, Joh. 2.19.
awd in three Days I will raise it up again. This he could not have done except
he had been the Eternal God. Now this is sometimes attributed to the whole
Trinity, sometimes to the Father, sometimes to the Holy Ghost, so it is
sometimes attributed to Jesus Christ, which shows, that the three Persons are
all but one and the same God.

5. He must be God, in respect of his Work as Mediator in reference to Man; for
he was obliged to quicken all God's Elect, (who in the first Adam were dead in
Sins and Trespasses) and raise them from that Spiritual Death, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
and overcome the Power of Sin and Satan in them, as well as for them. This
brings me to the next Thing.

II. Jesus Christ also as Mediator of Peace, Christ must be Man.
must be Man.

1. He must be Man, because he must work out a Righteousness in the same Nature
that had sined, Man was obliged to keep the Law perfectly; and this must be
done by Man, if ever he be Justified with God; Exodus 34.7
(for God will in no wise clear the Guilty.) True, this is not required in the
Covenant of Peace to be done in the Person of every elect Sinner,' but in the
Person of Christ, who is the Representative of every one of them. For as we
were all made Sinners by one Man, as the Head and Representative of all his
Seed, so we became Righteous by the complete and perfect Obedience of one Man,
as the Head and Representative of all his Seed; for as the Law being broken by
one Man, is imputed to all his Seed, so the Law being completely kept by one
Man, Jesus Christ, is imputed to all his Seed: For as by one Man's Disobedience
many were made Sinners; Romans 5.18, 19.
so by the Obedience of one, shall many be made Righteous. Moreover, Justice
required that the same Nature that broke the Law, should keep the Law, tho room
for a Substitute, or Surety, was reserved in the Wisdom and Council of God.

2. Christ must be Man, because he must die; now God as God (I mean the
Godhead) could not die; Man must die to satisfy offended Justice for the
Breach of the Law; therefore Christ must be Man and die: And by Virtue of the
Union of the Divine Nature with the Humane Nature in his Person, the Death of
Christ was a full Satisfaction to the Justice of God.

3. He must be one with us, or else how could his Obedience be imputed to us?
For as our Sins was imputed to him, so his Righteousness is imputed to us.

4. He must be Man, that he might be a Merciful High Priest, being touched with
the feeling of our Infirmity, he must have access to both, he was to deal with
God for Man, and for God with Man.

Jesus Christ ought to be of the same Stock with those he Redeemed or
Sanctified to God, (...), of one Stock, of one Blood says a worthy Author; Dr.
Manton, 4 Vol. p. 1084.
That by the Law of Propinquity of Blood, he might have right to redeem us;
Goel the next of Kin, had an Obligation upon him to redeem his Brother's Land
if Mortgaged: If thy Brother be waxen poor, Levit. 25.23, 26.
and has sold away some of his Possession, and if any of his Kin come to
redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his Brother sold.

So of Persons, If sold, Ver. 47.48.
after he is sold he may be redeemed again, one of his Brethren may redeem him:
So Christ is called Goel, Job 19.25. For I know that my Redeemer lives: Christ
is our Kinsman, not only true Man, but the Son of Man; true Man he might have
been, if God had created him out of nothing, or he had brought his Substance
from Heaven; but he is the Son of Man descended from the Loins of Adam, as we
are, and so does redeem us, not only Jure proprietatis, by virtue of his
Interest as our Creator, but Jure propinquitatis, by virtue of Kindred, as one
of the same Stock and Lineage, as the Son of David, The Dr. says Adam.
as well as the Son of God, for Christ Jesus, of all the Kindred, was the only
one that was free, and able to pay a Ransom for us.

5. He must be Man, as the said Author notes, That we might find a Fountain of
Holiness in our Nature, God has poured out upon his Humane Nature, such a
measure of Holiness, that he might be a common Fountain to all the Elect; Joh.
1.16.
of his Fullness have all we received, and Grace for Grace. Christ, as God-man,
is the Fountain from whence we receive all Grace.

6. To give us a Pledge of that Tenderness of his Love and Compassion toward
us; for he that is our Kinsman, Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh, will
not be strange to his own Flesh; especially since he is one that is so not by
necessity of Nature, but by voluntary Choice and Assumption, we could not have
such familiar and confident recourse to an Angel, or to one of another or
different Nature from ours; this made Laban, tho otherwise a churlish Man, kind
to Jacob; Surely thou art my Bone and my Flesh. Genesis 27.14.


III. Christ must be God and Man, if he be a fit Mediator betwixt God and Man;
i.e. he must take our Nature into Union with his Godhead, and that

(1.) That we might mystically be united to God, or draw near to God, and so be
raised up into a glorious and happy State; for the Spring or Foundation of our
Happiness rises from the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in the Person
of Christ; we had never been able to have drawn near to God, nor have been
united mystically to God, had not there been such an Hypostatical Union of our
Nature to the Divine Nature in Christ's Person; for that was the Spring, I say,
and Foundation of our Union.

(2.) Moreover Christ must be God-man, because the Covenant of Peace was
transacted with Christ, not as God, simply so considered, but as God-man, or as
Mediator; and as so he struck Hands with God, Christ-God, (as one observes)
could not be under the Law, nor represent Man, and take his Law-place; nor
could the Godhead suffer, and pay the price of Blood, nor receive a Mission,
and Mandates; Christ simply considered as God, could not be a Messenger, nor be
sent, nor as God could there be Promises made to him, nor any Rewards given
him, but as Mediator this was done.

(3.) Had Christ not been God-man, how could there been two Parties Covenanting
with each other about making of our Peace: For Christ-God, the second Person,
could not constitute a Party distinct from God, considered essentially one: I
and my Father are one; Ark of the Covenant, p. 76.
but a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one: Joh. 10.30
Therefore the Covenant of Peace was made with Christ as God-man, God in our
Nature.

I shall now proceed to show you what a Mediator signifies, and so open the
Work of Christ as Mediator.

1. A Mediator properly signifies a Midler, a middle Man, a Reconciler, Job
9.33. The Work of Christ as Mediator.
or a Days Man that lays his Hands upon both, (...), one that interposeth, to
make up the Breach, or Difference that is between disagreeing Parties: Now
Jesus Christ is a middle Person, and fit every ways to be a Mediator betwixt
God and Man, he is at an equal distance, and equally drawing near to, and a
like related unto both, he being God and Man in one Person, he is a meet and a
proper Reconciler of God to Man, and of Man to God. For there is one Mediator
between God and Men, 1 Timothy 2.5.
the Man Christ Jesus; Heb. 9.15.
and for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, etc. For as he is
God's Son, so also he is our Brother or Kinsman; and so the Right of Redemption
falls upon him.

Christ called, or authorized to be a Mediator.
2. A Mediator must have a legal Call to this Office, or be authorized to manage
this great Trust, as well as be every ways fitly qualified so to do, and must
be allowed to undertake herein by the Injured Party. Now, my Brethren, Christ
was Chosen, Called, Authorized, and Anointed by the Father to be Mediator, and
willingly, as I have showed you, he accepted of this Work and Office.

He did actually interpose, or step in betwixt God and Man, and acted and
executed the Mediator's Office, as a Days-man's part, in this Treaty of Peace,
by the Appointment, Call, and Authority of God, God accepts him for us to
make our Peace; Psalm. 89.3.
I have made my Covenant with my Chosen: He was chosen, Behold mine Elect --
Again God says, Isa. 42.1, 6
I have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thy Hand, etc. God did with
him strike Hands; with us, the Stipulation on our part was made by him. I have
laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the People.

In Christ we were represented by mutual Agreement in those Covenant
Transactions with his Father.

3. A Mediator must comply with the just demands of the wronged Party, Christ
complied with the Father's Demands.
and do that which he requires, without which he will never make Peace.

Jesus Christ therefore must be Man, because the shedding of his Blood is
absolutely necessary, in order to the making of our Peace the just Right of the
offended Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, must be vindicated; and to this End the
Son of God took our Nature upon him, that he might offer up, or Sacrifice that
Body to the Justice of God, he laid down his Life, Joh. 10.18
as the Father gave him Commandment, for he is our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14, 16.
who has made both one -- And that he might reconcile both unto God, in one
Body, by the Cross, having slain the Enmity thereby; and having made Peace by
the Blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20.
by him to reconcile all things to himself, etc.

4. A Mediator must be a Person that has interest in both Parties, Christ as
Mediator, has interest in both Parties.
and be one whom both Parties may trust, being equally affected unto both,
seeking to do all just right to one, and to relieve the offending Party, so far
as he is capable to do it.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ has interest in God, being his own Son, and one and
the same God; and being Man he is nearly related unto as, God therefore can
trust him as his most Faithful Servant; and God in Mercy and Infinite Love
chose him as our Trustee, knowing that he would not, could not fail us;
therefore he committed our Interest and Concernments of our Peace to him, we
having no other Friend in Heaven nor Earth. And this, Brethren, was before we
had any Being, or were able to dispose of our Interest or Concernments.

Christ a Well-wisher to Peace.
5. A Mediator ought to be a Person that is a Well-wisher to Peace, or one that
loves Peace, longs after it, there being nothing more acceptable to him than
Peace.

Isa. 9.6.
Jesus Christ is called the Prince of Peace; not only a peaceable Prince, but
the Prince of Peace, the only Person of Peace, or Peacemaker.

Never did any Person give such clear, full, and undeniable Proofs, and
Demonstrations of his being a Well-wisher to Peace, or a Lover of Peace, as
Jesus Christ has done. As,

I. Witness how freely he offered himself to the Father, in our behalf, to
treat about, and yield to the terms of, and sign this Blessed Covenant of Peace.

II. Witness the Glory he was willing to leave, in order to his actual
accomplishment thereof.

III. Witness the long Journey he took from Heaven to Earth, that he might
reconcile God and Man.

IV. Witness his great Abasement, and wonderful Condescension for being in the
For^ of God, Phil. 2.6, 7
he thought it not Robbery to be equal wi^^ God: (not equal by a delegated
Power from God for in Essence he is Coequal, Co-essential, and Coeternal with
the Father,) but made himself of (...) Reputation, and took upon him the Form
of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of sinful Man* his Condescension was
free, and voluntary, o^ unconstrained (unless it was by Love) he suffered his
Glory for a time to be eclipsed, yet he did not lay down the essential Form of
God; no, that was impossible; but he assumed the Form of a Servant, by taking
our Nature into Union with his Divine Nature, and all this to make our Peace.

V. Witness how desirous he was of Peace, by considering what in that Body he
past through from first to last, that he might make Peace.

(1.) Consider his Bloody Agony: Divine Wrath touched his Soul, he sweat great
Drops, (or congealed Clots) of Blood, tho it was in a cold Night; he prayed, he
feared, he cried with strong Crying and Tears, Heb. 5.7.
the Pangs of Hell took hold of him; no Man ever felt what he felt in his Soul;
he poured forth his Soul to Death, or came under a Spiritual Death, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me?

(2.) Consider what an Ignominious Death he suffered; to be hanged on a Tree,
was a Death which none but Slaves and notorious Malefactors endured, the Lord
of Heaven and Earth suffered the Punishment of a vile and cursed Offender; and
all this to make our Peace.

(3.) Consider how painful this Death was, ^y Brethren, it was not only a
shameful and ig^ominious Death, but also a very painful and ^ingering Death;
for from his Scourging by Pilot, to his giving up the Ghost (it is observed) it
was six Hours, all which time he was in bitter Torture and Anguish, both in
Soul and Body too; he suffered from Heaven, from Earth, and from Hell.

(4.) Consider it was also a cursed Death; He was made a Curse for us, Gal.
3.13.
as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree; and all this to
make our Peace.

(5.) Consider when this was done, even at such a time when Multitudes were
come out of the Countries round about to Jerusalem, to keep the Feast; who, no
doubt, had heard of the great Fame of Christ, and of his mighty Miracles, and
longed (it is like) to see him; and now for them to behold this Person thus
Mocked, Scourged, and Hanged on a Tree as a Miserable Wretch, must needs wound
his tender Heart; but all this he bore to make our Peace, which abundantly
proves he was inclined to Peace, willing to make our Peace, and appease God's
Wrath.

(6.) Consider his most importutate Endeavors to bring poor Sinners to accept
of that Peace which he has made.

1. What Arguments does he use.

2. How long he does wait knocking at their Doors.

3. And what Repulses does he daily mee^ withal and sustain, and what
abominable Affronts does he suffer from Unbelieving, and Hard-hearted Sinners:
O how much is he for Peace!

Christ as Mediator of a yield-and condescending Spirit.
VI. A Mediator must be of a yielding and condescending Spirit, one that can
comply with each Party, not Self-willed, nor seeking his own Honor, etc.

Our Lord Jesus Christ condescended in every thing to do his Father's Will;
nevertheless, Not my Will, but thy Will be done; tho he was a Son, Heb. 5.8.
yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered: He stuck at nothing;
I did not withhold my Face from Shame and Spitting. No Mediator ever
condescended as Christ did, Joh. 7^*8.
He that speaks of himself seeks his own Glory, but he that seeks his
Glory that sent him, the same is true, and there is no Unrighteousness in him:
All his whole design in his working about our Redemption and Reconciliation,
was to advance his Father's Glory; and he complied to do whatsoever was
requisite in order thereto.

VII. A Mediator ought to be clothed with Power, Christ as Mediator clothed
with power
(I mean not only with a legal Authority, for that I have spoken to already)
but to be one that has Ability, Wisdom, and Discretion to make up the Breach
that is between Parties at variance; every one is not in a capacity to become a
Mediator, were they called to that Office, for want of Ability.

Now our Lord Jesus Christ is mighty in Power; He is mighty to save.

(1.) He is every way capable to accomplish the Work of making Peace and
Reconciliation with God: He is the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
and the Wisdom of God. He is called God's Arm, and the Man of his Right Hand.
Ps. 80.17.
Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy Right Hand, upon the Son of Man, whom thou
made strong for thy self. Let thy Hand of Justice be upon him, take
Satisfaction in him: Beloved, whatever Justice required, the Holiness of God
required, the Veracity of God required, or the Law of God required; in order to
our Peace, Christ is able to answer all: Isa. 63.1.
I that speak in Righteousness, mighty to Save.

(2.) Moreover, whatsoever our deplorable Condition and Necessities do require,
in order to our Peace and Restoration, he is able to answer it fully also.

1. He is able to encounter and overcome Satan; and as he has done this in his
own Person for us, so he also does it in us; for naturally we were in Satan's
Chains, even Captives to the Devil, the strong Man armed held us fast, but
Christ being clothed with greater Power, has delivered us out of Satan's
Hands: He was Anointed to set at Liberty those that were bound. Isa. 61.1.


2. He has overcome Sin, or destroyed that Enemy: Dan. 7.24.
This was part of his Work, i. e. To make an end of Sins, and to make
Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, etc.

That is, to make an end of Sin as to the Guilt, Condemning Power, and
Punishment thereof; and at last he will make an end of the very Being of Sin
also, in all his People.

Joh. 16.33
3. To overcome the World: In the World y^^ shall have Tribulation, but be of
good cheer, I have overcome the World. As he overcame the World in all its
Snares, Temptations, Flatteries, and Frowns for us, so through him we shall
overcome the World also. We overcome in him, and shall by him, or through his
Aid and Assistance at last, Rev. 2.21.
and so sit down with him on his Throne.

4. He is able to open blind Eyes: This he was also Anointed to do, even not
only to proclaim Liberty for the Captives, But the recovering of Sight to the
Blind; Luke 4.18.
for we by Nature were all born Blind, and none but Christ can give us Sight,
or open the Eyes of our Understanding.

5. He has Power to raise the Dead, John 5.25.
The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live: Ephesians. 2.1.
You has he quickened that were dead in Sins and Trespasses: Not one Soul could
receive any benefit by his Mediation, unless he had been clothed with power to
raise dead Lazarus from the Grave. I mean every elect Sinner dead in Sin.

6. To change our Rebellious Hearts, or bow and bend our stubborn Wills, or to
make the Unwilling Will willing, which he does in the Day of his Power. Ps.
110.3.
And so to take away that Enmity that naturally was in our Hearts against God,
or remove all our Vicious Habits, Romans 8.7.
or that averseness that was in us to God, and to the things of God, or to
Circumcise our Hearts to love the Lord our God, which could not be done by any
but by one clothed with a creating Power, for it is he that forms the Image of
God again in us.

7. To cloth the naked Soul, by putting on the Robe of his own Righteousness
upon it.

Hos. 13 14
8. To raise us up from the Dead at the last Day: I will ransom them from the
Power of the Grave, I will redeem them from Death: O Death, 1 Cor. 15 55.
I will be thy Plague; O Grave, I will be thy Destruction -- Moreover*

9. He is able not only to bring us to God, or into the Bonds of his Covenant,
but also to keep us in a State of Peace, so that we shall not break Covenant
with God any more for ever, so as to lose his, Love and Favor: And as Jesus
Christ has power to do this, so he also in this Covenant of Peace engaged to
do it.

He is able, I say, and will do it: Brethren, shall he shed his Blood to make
our Peace, and shall he not secure that Peace to us, or not preserve us in a
State of Peace? I shall, before I have done, show you that he is not only
Mediator, but Surety also of the Covenant of Peace, and he is bound or obliged
to perform all these things, for all that are given unto him by the Father,
Jude 1.
and he will lose not one of them; we are the Preserved in Jesus Christ, as
well as Called.

Christ as Mediator, is to reconcile both Parties one to the other
VIII. A Mediator is not only to bring one Party to Terms of Peace, but to
reconcile both Parties if possible.

Jesus Christ is not only to reconcile God to Man, but also Man to God. A
Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one. God is the offended and
injured Party, and Jesus Christ reconciled God by that Satisfaction he made to
his Holy Law and Justice, but he has another Work to do, which is to reconcile
the Elect unto God: Some Men intimate, that although God on his part in Christ is
reconciled, yet Man is to reconcile himself to God, or make his own Peace as
well as he can, See Mr. Dan. Williams's Book.
and that he is to enter into a Covenant himself with God, and labor to
perform these things upon the pain of Damnation, but this Gospel I understand
not; I know no Covenant of Peace but that which Christ made with the Father;
and it is his Work as Mediator to bring poor Sinners to accept of the Terms of
Peace agreed on in order to their personal and actual Interest in the Blessings
of the said Covenant, Christ must change the Sinners Heart by the infusing of
his Spirit, and so unite the Soul to himself, by which means he brings the
Sinner into the Bonds of the Covenant: The outward means is indeed the
Preaching of the Gospel, but the inward and effectual means, is the efficacious
Operations of the Holy Spirit; and he that says it is in the Power of Man's
Will to make his Peace, or to lay hold of the Covenant, takes the Work of
Christ's Mediation out of his Hand, and the Crown from off his Head.

IX. A Mediator many times meets with great trouble, and Difficulties in
undertaking to make Peace; and what trouble has Jesus Christ met with? And
what Sorrow has he undergone from Devils, from Men, nay, and from Divine
Justice, and incensed Wrath, when he put himself in our Law place? What
Reproaches and Temptations did attend him? What Tears did he shed? What Anguish
did he feel? And what a Bloody Agony did he pass under? And what a Painful und
Shameful Death did he Die? And also what Opposition and Resistance, Scorn and
Contempt does he daily still meet with from Sinners? Oh! how averse are Men to
accept of Peace and Reconciliation with God by Christ? Some contemn his Blood,
rendering it as an empty and carnal thing, and think to obtain Peace by another
Christ; a Christ within, even by the Law or Light in their Hearts: Others by a
new Law, or by their Faith and Sincere Obedience. -- Moreover, some value the
League they have made with Sin, Hell, and Death, and will not nullify that,
but esteem that Covenant before and above this Covenant of Peace, made between
the Father and Son, and confirmed by Christ's Blood. But I can proceed no
further at this time.

SERMON III. Further opening the Work of Christ as Mediator: Together with the
Exercise of his Offices, as King, Priest, Prophet, Surety, Testator, etc.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


THE Doctrine I have raised from these Words, is this, viz.

Doct. That there is a Covenant of Peace, made or agreed upon, and stands firm
in behalf of all God's Elect.

I am, my Brethren, upon the Work and Office of Christ, as Mediator of this
Covenant of Peace; I have gone through an Induction of Nine Particulars, and
shall now proceed:

Christ a patient Mediator.
X. A Mediator ought to be endowed with much Patience and Long-suffering for
Peace sake, either from the one or the other Party.

Now, my Brethren, Jesus Christ, the Mediator of Peace in this Covenant, has
showed wonderful Patience, he endured the Anger and Wrath of God; the Father
smote him, Romans 8.32.
and hid his Face from him, he spared not his own Son. And he was also despised
and rejected of Men, yet bore it all patiently; Isa. 53.7.
He was oppressed and afflicted, and yet opened not his Mouth; 1 Pet. 2.23
who when he was reviled, he reviled not again, but committed himself to him
that judges righteously.

XI. A Mediator must be undaunted, Christ an Undaunted and Courageous Mediator.
and very courageous, and not tired nor wearied out.

Jesus Christ, my Brethren, is full of Courage; He shall not fail nor be
discouraged, Isa. 42.4.
till he has set Judgment in the Earth.

Tho his Work was heavy and amazing which he was to do, yet he fainted not; God
the Father having promised to uphold him, I will uphold thee; indeed it was
impossible that he should want courage who was the Mighty God, the Lord that
faints not, neither is weary, he has the fullness of the Godhead dwelling
Bodily in him, Col. 2, 9. Isa. 63.1.
I that speak in Righteousness mighty to save: He never fainted under his
Burden so as to cast it off, but faithfully finished the Work his Father gave
him to do; Joh. 19.30
It is finished, and he bowed his Head and gave up the Ghost.

Christ a Mollifying Mediator.
XII. A Mediator must be of a mollifying Temper, endeavoring to bring both
Parties to terms of Peace, the one not to stand up to the uttermost rigor of
Justice further than is absolute requisite, nor the other to remain stubborn
and obstinate.

Now Jesus Christ the Mediator of this Covenant of Peace in this infinitely
excelled all that ever undertook such an Office.

1. How Mollifying was his Temper toward God? True, he well knew God could not
in point of Justice, considering his Infinite Holiness, Rectitude of his
Nature, and the Sanction of his Law, abate any thing; no, not one Farthing of
the whole Debt, but must have full Satisfaction; yet Christ brought the Majesty
of God to accept of his Mediation and Suretiship for us; and O how did God
condescend to him herein, who might have vigorously exacted a full Satisfaction
from the Sinner himself, and not to have admitted of a Substitute for him! But
the Blessed Mediator prevails with God to accept of Payment from his Hands
instead of a Personal Satisfaction made by the Sinner; God yields to Jesus
Christ, and accepts of Payment or Satisfaction from his Hands; not in our
Persons, but in the Person of his Son as Mediator; for tho the Father might
make the first Proposal of this to his Son, yet it is by Christ's Undertaking
that God is pacified, etc. Gal. 3.13.
He was made a Curse for us, therefore as by the Offense of one Judgment came
upon all Men to Condemnation, so by the Righteousness of one, the Free-gift
came upon all Men unto Justification of Life. Romans 5.18, 19.
For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience
of one shall many be made Righteous. As Adam brought us into Debt, and made us
obnoxious to Divine Wrath, so Jesus Christ has paid our Debts by his active
Obedience to God's Law, and by bearing that Wrath on his Soul and Body which
our Sins had brought upon us; Isa. 53.8.
For the Transgressions of my People was be stricken.

2. See how the Mediator prevails with God, for instead of God's demanding an
inherent Righteousness, a Righteousness wrought out in our Persons; he accepts
of an Imputed Righteousness wrought out in the Person of his own Son in our
Nature as Mediator, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Who of God is made unto us, Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption -- In the Lord, shall one say, have I Righteousness and Strength.

And then on the other side.

(1.) Christ is of a mollifying Temper toward Man, for he brings Man that he
might partake of the Blessings of Peace, to forego or give up all his own
Righteousness as good for nothing; nay, to account it as Dung in point of
Justification at God's Bar, Psa. 3.8, 9.
or when it is compared to the Righteousness of God in Christ, and instead of
seeking Justification by our own Righteousness, or by our Faith and sincere
Obedience, utterly to renounce it, and to submit to the Righteousness of God,
That we may be Justified freely by his Grace, Romans 10.3.
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

(2.) Not to work to be Justified, not to repent or love God to be Justified,
Romans 4.5.
But to work not, but believe in him that Justifies the Ungodly.

(3.) Not to work for Life, but from Life, i. e. from a Principle of Life
wrought in the Soul, not to change one Work or Act of the Creature in
Justification to another Work or Act of the Creature; I mean not to renounce
all Works of the Law in point of Justification, and to include Gospel-works, or
Faith and Obedience as part of our Justifying Righteousness before God; Romans
11.6.
no, no, but to exclude all manner of Works, Faith and Obedience whatsoever,
Romans 4.45.
and to rest upon Christ alone, or on his Righteousness exclusive of all the
Creature does, or can do.

(4.) And tho the Soul sees he is already Justified, Ephesians. 1.6.
and accepted in the Beloved, and for ever delivered from Wrath and
Condemnation; yet to live a Holy Life and renounce all Sin and Iniquity from a
Principle of Faith; Romans 8.1.
and because Sin is so hateful unto God, Tit. 2.14.
and so abominable in his Sight, and because Christ is his Lord, therefore to
do all things whatsoever he commands him, Job. 15.15
and all this in Love to Christ, not to seek his Acceptance and Justification
by the Worth of his Faith and Obedience, but in Christ, and to account himself
an Unprofitable Servant, when he has done all that Christ has commanded him.

(5.) Christ never leaves his Elect, until he has brought them to these Terms.

XIII. A Mediator whose Mediation is rejected, after long Patience, The
Mediator leaves all Obstinate sinners at last under the severity of the Law.
leaves the Offended and Obstinate Person to the Severity of that Law he has
broke, and under the Sentence thereof.

So, my Brethren, will the Lord Jesus Christ, after long Patience, and
Forbearance, leave all Obstinate, Rebellious, and Unbelieving Sinners, to the
Severity of the Law of God which they have broken, and to the Wrath and
Vengeance of God; He that believes not, Joh. 3.18.
is Condemned already. All are condemned in the first Adam, and their
Condemnation will be aggravated upon them, because they reject the Offers of
Peace, or the Mediation of Jesus Christ, and believe not in him; and indeed all
Men would do this, was not Infinite Love showed, and Power put forth toward
some according to God's Eternal Purpose in Election.

XIV. A Mediator leaves no liberty of an Appeal after he has passed the
definitive Sentence. Moreover, Christ the Mediator will pass the definative
Sentence, from which there will be no appeal.
it is some times left to him also to pass that Sentence.

So, my Brethren, the Lord Christ at the last Day will leave no room for any
Sinner to appeal to any other Court or Person, there will be no relief; for God
the Father has committed all Judgment to the Son; he will therefore pass the
definitive Sentence against all Mankind in the Day of Judgment; Joh. 5.22.
For the Father Judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son: All
Judgment in the Administration of the Mediatory Kingdom, is given to Jesus
Christ, and in and by the Son will God Judge the World: Act. 17.31.
Because he has appointed a Day in the which he will Judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance to all Men in that he has raised him from the Dead. The Mediator of
this Peace shall Judge all Men, he shall execute Judgment, because he is the
Son of Man; and this God will do, Joh. 5.23.
That all Men may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father: Which shows,
that the same Honor and Divine Worship is due to Christ, that is due to God
the Father, he being the very same Eternal God. So much at present as to
Christ's Work, as Mediator of this Covenant of Peace. And now let me apply
this, before I proceed to the next thing, which is the Suretiship of Christ.

APPLICATION.
1. We infer from hence, that Sin is exceeding sinful: O what Evil is there in
Sin! That nothing can atone for it, nor make our Peace, but the Blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ the Mediator.

It is not his bare Pleading, but it must be done by his bleeding or dying for
us, or in our stead: And O how great was that Breach, which nothing could make
up, but such a Bloody Sacrifice!

2. We also infer from hence, that God's Love to us in Christ is an amazing and
wonderful Love, our Peace shall be made, tho it cost God the Blood of his own
dear and beloved Son; God so loved the World, How was that? Job. 3.16.
Who can conceive of the greatness of it? Even so as he gave his only begotten
Son to die for us, even for his Enemies: Romans 5.8, 9.
God commended his Love toward us in that, while we were yet Sinners Christ
died for us; for when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the Death of
his Son: Not that God was only reconcilable, but by that Sacrifice God was
reconciled; our Faith does not reconcile God to us, but we thereby receive the
Atonement, or the Blessing of Peace and Reconciliation.

3. We infer likewise from hence, that the Love of Jesus Christ was wonderful,
and his Condescension exceeding great: What, did God take our Nature into Union
with himself? What, is the Lord of Heaven and Earth Born of a Woman? The
Ancient of Days became a Child of a Day old? Phil. 2.6, 7.
He that was in the Form of God, found in the Form of a Servant; Shall God
purchase his Church with his own Blood? Act. 20.27, 28.
This is amazing to think upon.

4. We infer from hence also, how wonderfully God has hereby exalted and
magnified Man: Christ is a Man, truly Man, tho God as well as Man; he that is
God, is a Man: Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch as the Children are made Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also
himself took part of the same; and by this means we are nearly related to God,
he is our Kinsman, the nearest of Kin had under the Law the Right of
Redemption, to raise up Seed to the Dead: Christ is our Kinsman, Deuteronomy. 25.5, 6.
our Brother, and by this means the Inheritance (even God) and all he has) is
settled on the whole Heavenly Family, or on all his Seed, or Elect: What can
exalt Man more than this? O what greater Honor could be conferred on our
Nature then, for the Son of God to assume it into Personal Union with the
Godhead!

(1.) Hereby we are made near to God, even nearer than the Holy Angels; Verily
he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham. Angels are
not the Spouse of Christ; they are not Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his
Flesh, but Christ is flesh of our Flesh and Bone of our Bone; and hereby also
we have a nearer Union with God than Adam had in Innocence; nay, as I said,
nearer than the Angels have; for Believers are Christ's Mystical Body, Christ
is the Head of the Church; Col. 1.18.
For both he that Sanctifies, and they who are Sanctified, are all of one;
Heb. 2.11.
for which Cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren.

(2.) Our Nature hereby (as one observes) is the Storehouse or Treasury of all
that good which God intends to dispense to Men and Angels. Moreover, Angels and
Men Worship God in our Nature, that is, Jesus Christ, God-man: And how
astonishing is this?

(3) Moreover, God in our Nature shall be the Judge of Men and Angels; the Man
Christ is God's Equal, God's Fellow. And,

Zech. 13.7.
(4.) What Dignity and Honor is it then to be espoused to such a Prince?

(5.) This speaks great comfort to Believers; Christ who is Mediator, is near
unto God, and as near unto us, the Father has Called, Chosen, Anointed and
Accepted of him in our behalf; he can sympathize with us, he knows our
Infirmities, and he has always God's Ear, and God's Heart, and represents us,
and our Cause to the Father.

Exhortation. Sinners, Will not you accept of Peace?

1. Shall such a Mediator make your Peace; nay, die to make your Peace with
God, and shall any refuse to accept of that Peace which he has made.

2. The Terms are not hard but easy; it is to believe in him, to trust in him,
to believe he has made your Peace, or that God in him is reconciled; it is to
sue out your Pardon through Faith in his Blood.

Take a few Motives to stir you up thus to do.

1. Consider that you cannot have Peace with God any other ways, Act. 4.12.
There is no other Name given under Heaven whereby you can be saved.

2. That whosoever comes to him, receives him, believes in him, rests upon
him, shall not Perish, Joh. 3.14, 15, 16.
but have Everlasting Life.

3. Consider how able he is to save; Heb. 7.25.
He is able to save all that come to God by him, and to save them to the
uttermost, tho they are never such great Sinners, abominable Sinners, profane
Sinners.

4. Consider the Necessity of the Application of his Blood, or of that
Atonement which he has made; Mark 16.16.
He that Believes not, shall be Damned, if ye believe not that I am he; that
is, (that I am the only Messiah, the only Mediator, the only Savior, Joh. 8.24.
and that I am able to save you) Ye shall die in your Sins.

5. Consider the woeful Condition of such that reject Jesus Christ, or lay not
hold on his Strength, or that slight his Mediation, or that think to find Peace
some other way; some think to have Peace by the Law, by the Moral Law, either
as it is written in the two Tables, or as it is written in the Hearts of all
Men, or by the Light of their own Natural Conscience, others by a new Law,
turning the Gospel into a Law, and so bring in (and seek to establish) their
own Righteousness.

Gal. 2.21.
Alas, If there had been a Law (as Paul shows) that could have given Life, then
Christ is dead in vain. These cast great Contempt upon the Mediation of Jesus
Christ; nay, strive to frustrate the grand Design of God, in contriving our
Salvation by his Son Jesus Christ, which was to magnify his own Free Grace
alone, and to abase the Creature, that no Man might boast, or glory in himself,
but that all might be ashamed, and confounded for ever.

Question. What Offices does Jesus Christ exercise as he is Mediator. The
Offices of Christ opened.


1 Answ. I answer: Divines generally assert, That he exercises a threefold
Office, and this every one ought to know, and also the Work of Christ in
respect had unto each Office, or what peculiarly relates to his Priestly
Office, and what to his Kingly Office, and what to his Prophetical Office, etc.
A little to each of these.

1. He is a Priest, Christ a Priest. 1 John 2.2^
and as a Priest he is the Propitiation for our Sins; he has satisfied Justice
by a condign Price, the Price of the Blood of him who is God, he paid our Debts
to the last Farthing; as a Priest he laid down the atoning Sacrifice, and
thereby quenched the Flames of God's Divine Wrath and Vengeance, which
ootherways would have fed on us to an endless Eternity.

2. And as a Priest he interceeds now in Heaven, that all those for whom he
died may be called, and have the Merits of his Blood applied to their Souls;
and that all that are called, and do believe, may have all that Grace which
they need bestowed upon them, to help them to resist Temptations, and to be
supported under all Trials and Afflictions, and be enabled to perform all Holy
Duties, and have all their Sins pardoned. If any Man sin, 1 John 2.2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; he presents
his Righteousness, the Deserts, Merits, and Satisfaction of his Blood, for
Remission of all their Sins, neither can Sin be charged at any time upon any
Believer, as to that Vindicative Wrath which is due to it, because he pleads
the Satisfaction of his own Blood as their full Discharge from the Guilt and
Punishment thereof for ever; for otherwise Justified Persons might again come
under Condemnation, Romans 8.1.
which they cannot; For there is now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, etc. And thus was Christ a Priest; i. e. On Earth he eminently
Sacrificed and Offered up himself to God; Heb. 9.14.
How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit
offered himself without Spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead Works, to
serve the Living God.

And in Heaven also he eminently intercedes for us, Heb. 7.25.
Seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them; and that his Atonement
might be efficacious to us, Heb. 9.^4.
He now appears in the Presence of God for us; therefore it is said, That We
are come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of
sprinkling, that speaks bitter things than the Blood of Abel. Come to Jesus,
etc. that is, to a clearer knowledge of his Work and Office: Sirs, all Christ's
Satisfaction and Priesthood would be ineffectual for our good, if he did not
continue in the exercise of it in Heaven by his Intercession; for it is by
virtue of his Intercession that all his Merits are applied to us; for if when
we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, or God was
reconciled to us, (for it is that, which the Holy Ghost intends; Romans 5.10.
) much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life; the design of this
Office therefore was to make our Peace, or our Reconciliation to God by a Price
paid, and to apply that Atonement that it might be effectual, and continued
unto us for ever: Christ does not reconcile God to us as a King, but as a
Priest, and it is not done by what he works in us, but by what he has done for
us.

II. As Christ is a Priest, so also he is a King: Christ a King. Psalm. 2.6.
He is, I say, invested with Kingly Authority, as he is Mediator; Yet have I
set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion. His Kingdom (as one observes) is not
Regnum natural, which he has as God, co-essential with the Father, but Regnum
Oeconomicum, which he has by Donation and Unction from his Father, it is given
to him as Mediator. Moreover, his Power as King is very great, He is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only Potentate.

1. King over Sin, which as a Tyrant has long Reigned.

2. King over Devils, and all the Powers of Darkness.

3. King over Death, that King of Terrors; the Keys of Hell and Death are given
to him.

4. King of Saints, (he being the Universal Head of the Church) and King of
Nations.

5. Nay, he has Kingly Power and Headship over the Holy Angels; He is the Head
of Principalities and Powers; yea, his Power is over all Creatures, Ephesians. 1.22.
God has put all things under his Feet.

His Kingship and Authority is therefore Universal, Matthew. 28.18.
All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth.

And hence, There is nothing which he (as Mediator God-man) cannot do.

Now the Work of Christ as King.

1. Is to subdue all our Enemies for us, which indeed he has effectually
already done, Sin, the World, Devils, and Death, being all brought under his
Feet.

2. To give us Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances; for as he is Mediator, Isa.
^3.22.
he is our Lawgiver, but he does not give us Laws that by our Obedience to
them our Peace should be made, and we be Justified: In this Sense Christ is no
Lawgiver; no, to make our Peace that appertains partly to his Priestly Office,
(as I have showed you before) and partly to his Suretiship, for so he paid both
our Debt of perfect Obedience, and our Penal Debt also, and merited all Grace
and Glory for us; for tho Christ is a Priest, yet he is more than a Priest,
viz, a Surety also) but he gives us Laws as we are his Freeborn Subjects, whom
he Redeemed by his Blood, that we might know how to Honor, and Live under him
that died for us and rose again.

3. His Work as King is to govern his Church, and every Member thereof;
moreover, his Laws in the New Testament do contain, all those Rules for the
Constitution of a Gospel Church, and also all the Rules of the Government and
Discipline thereof.

4. Christ's Work and Office as King is to subdue all the Elect unto himself; I
mean, to work Grace in them, and to change their Hearts, and vanquish the Power
of Sin, and Satan, for this is, and must be done by that Almighty Power which
he exerts by his Spirit in their Souls, and so takes possession of them as King
and Supreme Ruler, whom as a Priest he purchased by his Blood; and all this as
he is Mediator of this Covenant of Peace, Ephesians. 3.17, 18.
That Christ may dwell in our Hearts by Faith, or sway the Scepter there.

5. Moreover, Christ as King, will exercise his Kingly Office, in taking to him
his great Authority and Regal Power, and Reign over all the Earth: For his
Right is, Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thy Inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession: Ps. 2.699.
Thou shall break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel -- The Kingdoms of this
World, Rev. 11.15
are become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for
ever and ever: Isa. 9.6, 7.
And of the increase of his Government, there shall be no end upon the Throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with Justice
and with Judgment, from henceforth and for ever.

All the Kingdoms under the whole Heavens, shall be given unto him, Don. 7.27.
And he shall possess the Gates of his Enemies -- This will be made good more
fully and visibly upon the going off of the Fourth-Monarchy, and upon the
passing away of the second Woe, or Mahomitan Power, and downfall of the Beast,
and Mystery Babylon, which is now at the very Door, when Christ will save his
Church from all her Enemies.

III. Christ as Mediator is a Prophet; Christ a Prophet. Act 3.22, 23. Act.
7.37.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your Brethren like
unto me: He as Prophet, is the Minister of the New Covenant, or the chief and
great Ambassador of Peace, the chief Shepherd of the Sheep, and Bishop of our
Souls.

His Work as a Prophet.

1. Is to reveal the Will, Purpose, Counsel, and Design of God unto his Chosen;
and this he did in the Days of his Flesh in his own, and in his Apostles
Ministration revealing, That My-Mystery that was hid from Ages and Generations
-- He was indeed a Teacher that came from God, Joh. 3.2.
as Nichodemus says, My Doctrine (says he) is not mine, but the Father's that
sent me; For I have not spoken of my self, Joh. 12.49
but the Father which sent me gave me Commandment what I should say, and what I
should speak; denoting that he received his Mission, his Doctrine, and his
Authority to Preach from the Father as he is Mediator.

As a Prophet he gives the knowledge of Salvation to his People, for without
his Divine Revelation, Mankind could not arrive to the knowledge of it; for the
Light that is in Man naturally reveals nothing of the Mystery of Redemption, of
the Covenant of Peace, and Mediation of Jesus Christ.

2. Nor can any savingly know this, but as Christ reveals it by his Spirit, as
the great Prophet and Teacher of the Church; Matt. 11.25.
No Man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any Man the Father but
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will rev^al him. No Man knows the
Essence of the Father, or has a perfect knowledge of the Godhead; nor do they
know the Councils, Purposes, and Dispensations of the Father of his saving of
Men by Jesus Christ, except Jesus Christ reveals these Mysteries to them; all
true and saving knowledge of God, is in and through Christ as a Prophet.

But as Christ does not Atone for our Sins as a King, but as a Priest, so he
does not give forth Laws, etc. as a Priest, but as a King; nor does he teach,
instruct, or reveal God, and Salvation to us simply as a Priest or King, but as
a Prophet; besides there are some things about the Covenant of Peace, which he
does not simply as a King, Priest, nor Prophet, but as simply considered a
Mediator, Surety, and Testator, etc.

I would therefore desire Mr. Sam. Clark, for all his Confidence, to consider
of his great mistake in his late Treaty, Mr. Clark's Book of Scripture
Justific. p. 106, 107
does it follow (should it be granted) because Christ's Active Obedience does
not properly belong neither to his Kingly, his Priestty, nor to his Prophetical
Office, that therefore his Active Obedience to God's Law, or Active
Righteousness is no part of the matter of our Justification before God, for may
not some things be done by Christ, as Mediator, or as Surety, or Testator, that
does not properly relate to either of his other three Offices; for evident it
is, that the whole of Christ's Work in this Covenant of Peace, does not
strictly belong to these threefold Offices; therefore the Scripture gives an
account of other Offices besides these, which he exercises.

But I will proceed a little further to open the Offices of Christ in the
Covenant of Peace: And,

I. Of the Necessity of his exercising of these Offices as Mediator.

1. Of his Priestly Office, it was absolutely necessary that he should be a
Priest, and that in our Nature, because he was to answer the Types under the
Law, the Priests of the Law that were ceremonially Sanctified, and were to
Sanctify others, were of the same Nature with the People.

And since they offered Sacrifices up to God, it also behoved him to offer up
the Antitypical, Real, and Wrath-appeasing Sacrifice And

2. Forasmuch that we were Slaves and Captives of Sin, and Satan, being in
Chains and Fetters by such Enemies that none could redeem us out of their
Hands, but one clothed with Almighty and Infinite Power.

It behoved Jesus Christ to be a King, who is invested with God-like Power and
Authority, upon this Account.

And since it was the Father's good Pleasure to exalt and magnify him with the
sole Government of the World, and of the Church, it was necessary he should be
Constituted, and Invested with Kingly Authority likewise.

3. And since we were ignorant of God, and under deep alienation from God, Ephesians.
4.18.
Having the Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God,
through the ignorance in them, because of the blindness of their Hearts: It
behoved Jesus Christ to be a Prophet; yea, such a Prophet that can not only
teach the Knowing, and Understanding Heart, but can give Knowledge to the Heart
which is without Understanding; and seeing we were blind and ignorant of the
way of Salvation, it behoved him that was to make our Peace, to bring us to the
knowledge of that Peace and Reconciliation he has made.

Moreover, we were dead, therefore he must quicken us; we were Enemies,
therefore he must reconcile us to God, as well as God to us, we were Impotent,
and could not come to the Father, therefore he, as a Kingly-Prophet, must draw
us; the Father draws us by Jesus Christ to himself; also we were in Debt, and
Divine Justice will be satisfied, and will not abate us one Farthing, Christ a
Surety.
therefore Christ must be our Surety to engage, and also actually pay all our
Debts, in respect of the Preceptory and Penal parts thereof; for we owed
Perfect Obedience unto God, as well as Punishment.

Also he was to confirm the Covenant of Peace by his Blood, Christ a Testator.
and make his Last Will and Testament, and bequeath many Legacies to all the
Legatees; therefore it was necessary that he should be a Testator; yea, the
Testator of the New Testament, or Covenant. Christ a Physician, Shepherd, etc.
-- Furthermore, we were Sick, therefore it behoved him to be appointed our
Physician, we were as Sheep gone astray, therefore he is our Shepherd.

II. As to the End and Excellencies of Christ's Offices, I have lately opened
them in a late Treatise upon Jacob's Ladder, to which I shall direct you; but
know this, the whole design and purport of all his Offices are, that he might
effectually be empowered with all things necessary, in respect had to the Glory
and Honor of God, and for our good, and to give us interest in all the
Blessings of the Covenant of Peace.

Objection. It Is objected, That Christ did not suffer for Sinners as a common
Person, Head, and Representative of all the Elect, or their Surety, but did all
merely as a Mediator, or as one endeavoring to compose the Difference betwixt
God and Sinners.

1 Answ. I answer, One error of the Times detected.
Sad it is to see how in these Perilous Days Men are degenerated from the
Apostolic Doctrine in this most important case, and oppose all our Autho^^
Protestant Writers, and deny Christ to be a Common Person, Head,
Representative, and Surety, etc. but that he, as Mediator, has by his Death
merited a new and mild Law of Grace, i. e. of Faith and Sincere Obedience, and
has made a Compensation to the Justice of God, and Law of Works, and so
removed the Law of perfect Obedience, or abolished it for ever; so that now God
deals with us not according to the strict Law of perfect Obedience, but
according to this New Law, i. e. on easier Conditions, viz. such that believe
and sincerely obey, shall be Justified even so far as they do Obey, and are
Sanctified; not that Christ's Obedience to the Law, or that his Active and
Passive Obedience imputed to us, and our trusting in him according to the Free
Promise of God, is the immediate and sole cause of Pardon, by virtue of
Christ's Satisfaction; but that tho Christ has made God a means for Legal
Righteousness, having satisfied that Law, and took it away; yet our Obedience
to this New Law according to these Men, is our Evangelical Righteousness,
whereby we fulfill the Gospel, and that our Obedience is the Condition of our
Justification before God: Thus Mr. Baxter, Mr. Williams, Mr. Clark of Wickham,
and many others.

And thus is Popery revived amongst us, and Justification by Works asserted by
these Law and Work-mongers, for I cannot call them Gospel-Ministe-s; true, they
affirm that Christ died for our good, but not in our stead; the Doctrine we
maintain, is, that he died for our good; But how for our good? Even so, that he
suffered as our Head and Representative in our stead or room, the Just for the
Unjust, or the Surety for the Principal, or for the Sinner; and this according
to the Terms agreed upon in the Covenant of Peace, (and not simply for our good
any otherwise) God being in his own Nature Just, as well as Gracious, could not
without Wrong, or Injury to his Justice, Holiness, and the Sanction of his Law
Acquit, Justify and Pardon any Sinner, without a full Satisfaction to both
Law, and Justice, and this must either be done by us, or by our Surety for us.

2. We affirm, that the Law of Perfect Obedience results from the Holiness,
Purity, and Rectitude of God's Nature; and therefore it stands as a perpetual
Law, and can never be abolished as a Rule of Life, tho it be taken away as it
required perfect Obedience of us, or as a Law of Works to be fulfilled and
satisfied for in our own Persons in point of Justification. Do we then make
void the Law through Faith? Romans 3.31.
God forbid? Yea, we establish the Law; because by Christ we attain a perfect
Righteousness, being interested in his most complete and perfect Obedience to
the Moral Law, and by his Spirit to live in more exact Conformity thereunto: My
Brethren, Is it not our Duty still, and as much as ever it was, To love the
Lord our God with all our Hearts, with all our Souls, and with all our
Strength, and our Neighbor as our selves; not only sincerely, but perfectly;
nay, Matt. 6.28
to be perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect: Tho we are not able to do
this, yet the Moral Law still remains, and requires us thus to do; true, we
shall not be Damned for want of this perfect Obedienc, because Christ has in
our Nature, and stead, kept the Law perfectly for us; and so he is the end of
the Law in respect of Righteousness to all that believe.

Christ did not come to engage, or undertake as a Mediator, that we should
perfectly in our own Persons, keep the Moral Law, and so be Justified in God's
Sight; nor did he come to undertake that we should sincerely keep any other Law
to that end; much less, leave us to the exercise of our Natural, or Spiritual
Abilities, to keep such a Law, as the Condition of our Justification, and
Acceptance with God; but he came to procure for us such a Righteousness by his
own Obedience and Suffering, that the Holiness, Justice, and Law of God does
require of us if we are Justified with God, for what the Law could not do, Romans
8.2, 3
in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sent forth his Son, etc. It Is a hard
case, my Brethren, that these degenerate Presbyterians, or any pretending to be
Gospel-Preachers, should deny Christ to be a Common Head and Surety for the
Elect; for he that dies in the stead and room of others, is by the consent of
the Lawgiver substituted in their Law place, and so takes upon him the
Capacity of a Surety, Representative, or common Person, undertaking to do, and
suffer what others should, but these Men deny this Relation or Capacity of
Christ as a Surety, in this Sense, and therefore deny he obeyed and died in our
stead. And from hence it follows also that Christ did not do that for us, which
our own Perfect Obedience did do, whilst Man stood, and would have done, had he
not sinned, i. e. Justified him, or have given him a Title to Life.

3. Moreover, if Christ was not put in our Law place, as our Representative and
Surety, Why was he made of a Woman, Gal. 4.
and made under the Law? Was it not that the Law might reach him?

(1.) As to its commanding Power as our Surety, to pay the Debt of Perfect
Obedience thereunto.

(2.) And as a Sinner, in a Law Sense, to die, or be made Sin for us, (that is
by Imputation;) for had not he been under the Law, the Law could not have
reached him in either sense, i. e. either to do or suffer, and had not he took
our Law place upon him, we could not have been the better; for what could his
taking our Nature on him have profited us, had he not been substituted in our
room? But as we were obliged by the Law, Justice, and Holiness of God, to keep
the Law perfectly, so he was made under the Law to keep it for us, and as we
were sinful Men, and liable to the Just Sentence of the Law for our Violation
of it, so he was made under the Law, and as our Representative and Surety, to
die and to satisfy Divine Justice for our Transgressions that were against it.

He was made under the Law, i. e. under the Preceptory part of it, to fulfill
and establish that; he satisfied for that part of the Law.

He was under the Law, as being liable to the Punishment, or Penalty of the
Law, that he might answer and fulfill that, and for ever deliver us from the
Punishment thereof, and all this as our Surety standing in our Law place.

Reproof. This may tend severely to reprehend those new and erroneous Notions
that so prevail amongst us, A Use of Reproof.
concerning Christ's Work and Office as Mediator; we say, and prove that by
Christ's Active and Perfect Obedience to the Law, we are justified and
delivered from Wrath and Condemnation, or that by Christ's Righteousness
imputed, Believers are perfectly Justified, and freed from the Curse of the
Law, and are certainly entitled to Eternal Life.

1. But our new Work-mongers assert, That our Justification or Right to Life,
depends wholly upon our Obedience (to the Gospel as a Law) as the Condition
to which it is promised: Therefore (as one observes) it puts us into a
Condition of Life imperfect, and subject to change, as Obedience it self is,
and that we are not perfectly Justified till our Obedience is perfected: Thus
Mr. Clark of High-Wickham, and others. Clark's Script. Justific. p. 18.
Take Mr. Clark's Words, viz. Our Justification at present, while we are in
this World, is but Partial, Imperfect, and Incomplete.

Ans. Now, say I, this confounds Justification, with Sanctification; and as I
have told him, See Medium betwixt two Extremes.
then it also follows that Believers are partly justified, and partly
condemned, i. e. we are not acquitted from the guilt of all Sin, whilst in this
World, and so Christ's Dove is not Undefiled: Lord, what an Age do we live in!

2. We say, that we are made Partakers of Christ's Righteousness, and the
Benefits of it, by our Union with him through the Spirit, by which means Faith
is wrought in us, by which we apprehend him; and we say, that Faith is an
Instrument whereby we receive him, Faith only Justifying us objectively, i. e.
It is not Faith, but Jesus Christ that Faith takes hold of, that does Justify
us in the Sight of God.

But they say, That Faith in its whole Latitude, is our believing and obeying
the Gospel; that is, Faith and all the Fruits thereof, or Faith and Obedience,
(or, if you please, Faith and Gospel-Works:) For Mr. Clark says, That
Justification by Works, springing from Faith, P. 71.
is Justification by Faith, in this Sense.

Again, they say, That we are made Partakers of the Benefits of Christ, he
having purchased this Grant or Law, i. e. That they that do obey him to the
end, shall be saved; that is, Our Obedience does both Justify us and Save us.

Answ. The Vanity of which, and how erroneous it is, See the Marrow of Justific.
we have showed some time since *.

3. They say, Christ has merited a New Law, or easier Terms and Conditions,
that our Faith, Obedience, and Good Works may Justify, and Save us; but what
says Paul, All boasting is excluded; not legal boasting only, but all
boasting, and cause of boasting, but by their New Law boasting is let in.
Moreover, he says, Romans 11.6.
If it be of Grace, it is not of Works; and if it be of Works, it is not of
Grace; or else Grace is no more Grace, and Works no more Works. Brethren, Works
cannot mix with Free Grace; they are directly contrary to each other in their
Nature; besides, these Men forget that we are Justified alone by the Obedience
and Righteousness of one, Romans 5.18, 19.
(even as we were made Sinners by the Disobedience of one) and that is by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us; for it was by the Disobedience of Adam,
as imputed to us, that we became Sinners.

In a word, Christ has wrought out a Righteousness for us, which is put upon
us, or accounted, or imputed to us, and not that Christ merited a Law, that a
Justifying Righteousness might be wrought out in us, or by us, in conforming to
that New Law; 1 Cor. 1.30
Who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption: Not only that his Righteousness, is the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification, as Mr. Clark affirms, p. 104. but the Material Cause thereof, or
that by which we are Justified, no other Righteousness but his which is
perfect, being pleadable at God's Bar.

4. We say, That Justification of a Sinner, is the acceptance of his Person, or
the pronouncing him Just and Righteous in God's Sight, through the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ, whereby he has a full Right and Title to
Eternal Life.

They say, That Justification is nothing else but the pardon of Sin, See
Lutherus Redivivus, p. 13
i. e. the not executing the Punishment of Sin due by the Law of Works, and an
acceptance of a Man so long as he performs the New Condition of Sincere
Obedience.

For the Lord's sake, and for your Souls sake, beware of those Men, and their
new and strange Doctrine; for it appears, Salvation must be a Debt, and not
wholly of Grace, if what they say were true; because it is granted upon our
fulfilling of the Conditions required, which are indeed not light, but weighty
and difficult Conditions, as Faith, Regeneration, and Perseverance, even Mr.
Dan. William's Baptismal Covenant, which all they who do not fulfill it, he
says, shall be damned; the Violating of that Covenant, being, as he affirms,
the Damning Sin: And this so far as I can see, is that which is their Covenant
of Grace; not that Christ engaged for us to the Father, to do all for us, and
in us in the Covenant of Redemption, even to reconcile God to us, and us to
God; no, but that that was a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace,
which was to make way for us to enter into a Conditional Covenant of Grace, i.
e. of Faith, Good Works, or Gospel-Obedience.

Which Error and Mistake, I purpose, God willing, to refute before I leave my
Text, and prove the Covenant of Peace is but one entire Covenant with that of
Redemption.

Comfort and Consolation, if, my Brethren, it is as you have heard that Jesus
Christ, as a Mediator, is equally interested in both Parties, then what Comfort
is here for Believers.

1. We have no ground to suspect him of partiality; he will not fail us,
because he is so dearly and nearly related to us; and also considering what he
has done and suffered for us: And for their sakes I sanctify my self, Joh.
17.19
that they also might be sanctified through the Truth.

2. Consider his Ability, not only to reconcile us to God, but to continue us
in that reconciled State, we may depend upon his Power; For I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that Day.

3. Considering his Love, and Faithfulness toward us, in the Exercise of his
Work and Office; 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
Faithful is he that calls you, and also he will do it.

4. With what boldness also may we come to God by him? Heb. 4.14.
Seeing we have such a great High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens,
Jesus the Son of God.

Heb. 10.14.
Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of
Jesus.

This, I say, may encourage us to make our humble Supplications to God with
boldness, since we have such a Mediator between God and us, the Man Christ
Jesus.

SERMON IV. Wherein the Suretiship of Christ is opened.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant made, or agreed on, and stands firm in the
behalf of all God's Elect.

I am, my Brethren, a speaking concerning those Transactions betwixt God the
Father, and God the Son, before the World began, about the bringing in, and
establishing of the Covenant of our Peace; in which Transactions I have showed
you the Son of God was chosen Mediator, considered as God-man, and as to that
Office of his, we have spoken distinctly; but as he is Mediator, so you have
heard he is Surety of the Covenant of Peace, and so more than a mere, or simple
Mediator.

And since the Covenant of Peace so much depends upon the Suretiship of
Christ; I shall here,

I. Show what Surety does import, or open this Relation.

II. Show why Christ came under this Relation.

III. Show what Christ was to do, and we were to receive as Christ's our Surety.

IV. Show how his Suretiship differs from Suretiship among Men.

V. Apply it.

What Suretiship does import. Dr. Owen on Heb. c. 72. p. 221. See Metaphors 2d
Book, p. 91.
1. A Surety is one that undertakes for others, wherein they are defective,
really, or in Reputation, in Latin, Sponsor fide jussor; a Surety is one that
engages to make Satisfaction for one, or more, or ingageth for others: Thus
Ruben became Surety to his Father Jacob, Genesis 43.9. to bring Benjamin again;
and Paul for Onesimus, Philem. 18, 19. If he has wronged thee, or owes thee
ought, put that on mine Account; I Paul have written it with my own Hand, I
will pay it: In this Sense we take Christ to be a Surety.

(1.) It signifies likewise to give a Pledge, Isa. 36.8. 2 Kings 18.23.3.

(2.) Also to strike Hands, Prove. 22.26.

Thus Christ is our Surety, i. e. he struck Hands with God for us in this
Covenant.

I say, a Surety is one that undertakes for one or more Persons whose Credit is
gone, or is not good; one not to be Trusted, or whose Faithfulness, or Ability
is suspected.

Now, my Brethren, when Man had broken the Law of the first Covenant, his
Credit was gone or lost for ever; God would not enter into Covenant any more
with him without a Surety, he knowing that Man's Inability and Unfaithfulness
in his Fallen Estate; therefore was graciously pleased to provide for us, or in
our behalf, a Sponsor, or Surety; Heb. 7.22.
By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a better Covenant: As Christ engaged to
God for us, to satisfy for our Sins, and to bring us into a State of Grace,
and Peace with God, and preserve us in that State to the end, and to give
Security to the Covenant of Peace, which he is a Surety of, he is called a
Surety: And as he gives all good things, and Divine Blessings to us, he is
called a Testator; for a Testator denotes one dying, making his Last Will and
Testament firm, and bequeathing Legacies to his Friends; some I know would not
have Christ be a Surety of that Covenant that was made betwixt God the Father
and himself, (which they call the Covenant of Redemption) but of the Covenant
of Grace made with us, but I know no ground for such a distinction (as I shall
hereafter prove;) my Brethren, evident it is, that had not our Mediator engaged
in this Covenant of Peace and Redemption for us, there had been no Covenant nor
Peace for us at all, because all depends on Christ's Suretiship, or on
Christ's Obligation to the Father for us; nor did God ever manifest more rich
Grace to us, than he did in providing of such a Surety for Man. And hence God
says (speaking of the Covenant of Grace; Ps. 89.2^.
) My Mercy will I keep for him for ever, and my Covenant shall stand fast with
him: I have laid help upon one that is mighty, Ps. 8^.8^.
I have exalted one chosen out of the People; one able to perform and do all
his Pleasure, one that he can trust, who neither wants Ability nor Faithfulness.

3. A Surety commonly engages for one Party, even for him whose Credit is
suspected, or who being poor, the Creditor will not, nor cannot Trust him; the
Lord Jesus is only a Surety for us unto God, not for God to us, for God had no
need for any to engage, or be a Surety for him, he never failed any of his
Creatures, See Dr. Owen on Heb. 7, 22. p. 225.
he broke not his Covenant with Man, but Man with him; Because they continued
not in my Covenant, I regarded them not, says the Lord. Therefore God will not
Treat, nor Trade with Man any more without such a Mediator, and Surety as
Christ is; therefore I am not of his Opinion that says, That the Suretish^p of
Christ was, that Sinners might be induced to give God Credit, and that he might
have a Responsal Party to deal with; for this is to cast Contempt upon the
Holy, and Faithful God, as if he is not to be Trusted in, without he gives us
good Security, that he will not fail, nor deceive us.

4. The end of Suretiship among Men, is to give Stability and Security in case
of Bonds or Covenants, etc. that such Bonds or Covenants may be firm and sure;
and to this end did Christ become the Surety of this Covenant of Peace, Grace,
and Redemption. My Brethren, this Covenant depends upon the Suretiship of Jesus
Christ, upon whose Undertakings and Security God Promised and Covenanted with
him, to be our God again, and to give to us all that good which was in his
Heart, to bestow upon his Elect from everlasting.

There being such things requisite to be done in order hereunto, which God well
knew we were not able to perform, i. e. the Satisfaction of his Justice, or
Payment of all our Debts, and Victory over all our Enemies, and that this
Covenant might not be broken, as the first was. My Covenant shall stand fast in
him. Ps. 89.28.


5. Suretiship imports, that the Obligation be free and voluntary, for the Law
forces none to be a Surety, or to engage for others.

My Brethren, tho God chose Jesus Christ to be the Surety of this Covenant for
us, yet Christ as a most free and voluntary act on his part, undertook that
Office, for that Law we had broke, laid no Obligation on him, nor was he under
any necessity of Nature to undertake herein, because he was the Son of God, but
it is ascribed wholly to his Infinite Love and Goodness, and as a Sovereign Act
of his own Free Grace, to undertake for Man, and not for Angels, and also only
for some of the lost Sons of Adam, and not for all: No Man takes my Life from
me, but I lay it down freely; Joh. 10.18
I have power to lay it dnwn, and I have power to take it up again. Lo, Heb.
10.5, 7.
I come in the Volume of the Book, it is written of me to do thy Will, O God.

6. Suretiship imports not only a voluntary Obligation for others, or for
another: but also Union of Parties, or Assumption of the Condition of that
Person or Debtor: In a Law sense it denotes a Foederal, or Law Union, the
Surety and the Debtor are but one Party; yet not so, but that it is the Surety
that pays; it is his Money, and not the Debtors.

My Brethren, Christ, by virtue of his Suretiship, did not only take our Sins
upon him, but our Nature, and put himself in our Law-place, Gal. 4.4.
he took our Condition upon him: He was made of a Woman, made under the Law to
redeem them.

Object. I know it is objected, If Christ and the Elect are but one Party, and
that his Righteousness be ours, i. e. imputed to us, or that he did, and
suffered all in our stead, then we are our own Saviors; we are Mediators, as
having a Mediator's Righteousness.

Clarkson, p. 248.
Ans. This (as one well observes) follows not; for they may as well argue the
Debtor is the Surety, because his Surety's Payment is accepted for him.

Object. Again they object, If Christ our Surety and we are one, and that his
Righteousness is ours, then we are as Righteous as Christ.

Ans. They may as well affirm the Bankrupt is as rich as his Surety, because
his Surety pays his Debts.

7. A Surety does not only engage for Debtors, but also sometimes for Criminals.

Those that Christ became Surety for in the Covenant of Peace, to Reconcile to
God, and to Redeem from Sin and Hell, were Criminals, and not only Debtors; we
all deserved Death, and were under the Sentence thereof.

The Evangelists render the Words, Sins, and Debts promiscuously, as Luke 11.4.
compared with Matthew. 6.12. the Laws of some Countries admit of a Surety for a
Criminal; i. e. that one Man shall die for another: Thus did Christ obey the
Law for us, and die for us: He was made a Curse for us -- Gave himself for us
-- His Life a Ransom for us -- The Just for the Unjust -- Made Sin for us: All
proves he was a Surety for Condemned Criminals, and so died in our stead, to
satisfy the Law, and Justice of God; Romans 8.3.
What the Law could not do -- God sent his own Son; i. e. we could not keep it
perfectly, nor satisfy for the breach of it; therefore Christ died not only
nostro bono, for our good and profit, as the Socinians, and our Work-Mongers
say, See Grotius de satisfact. Roth. Treat. on the Cov. part 2. cap. 2. See
Justis. only upon a satisfaction, p. 124. to p. 146.
but nostra vice, in our room, he died for his Church, for his Elect, as he
died not for the Holy Angels, yet he died for their good, and for the whole
Creation in some sense; he is the Head, and Confirmer of the Angels; (...) is
instead, the Sufferings of the Saints are for the good of the Church, but they
are not substituted to obey and die in the stead of others: A Surety to obey
and die for others, as one has abundantly proved, is to obey and die in their
stead or room.

8. A Surety having paid all, and fully satisfied for Debtors; it follows, that
neither the Creditor, nor the Law can exact Satisfaction of the Debtors, and
also that the Debtors for whom Satisfaction is made, shall be delivered out of
Prison, and be actually discharged and acquitted according to the Time and Terms
agreed on between the Creditor, and the Surety.

God will not, cannot in point of Justice and Righteousness exact Satisfaction
of any Sinners, for whom Christ became a Surety, and has safied; for i. e.
they cannot suffer in Hell, but shall all in due time be actually discharged
and acquitted, and the Law Sentence taken off of them: For no sooner are their
Eyes opened, or are illuminated by the Spirit, but they plead, that their
Surety has paid all for them; he has paid their Debt of perfect Obedience,
and has also born all that Vindictive Wrath and Vengeance that was due to them
for their Sins; Who was delivered for our Offenses, 1 Pet. 2.24.
and was raised again for our Justification: Isa. 53.6, 7, 8.
The Lord laid on him the Iniquities of us all.

Why Christ became our Surety.
II. Why did-Christ become a Surety for us, and put his Hand to the Covenant?

1. Because his Love and Bowels were such to God's Elect, his Love constrained
him thus to do.

2. Because he would readily comply with his Father's Will, Design, and Purpose
herein, which was to exalt his Infinite Grace and Divine Goodness to Mankind.

3. It was to raise the Honor, or cause all the Divine Attributes to shine
forth in their equal Glory, and meet together in his Work and Undertakings as
Mediator and Suretiship, in sweet harmony.

4. Because he would magnify God's Law, and make it honorable: But more of
this hereafter.

5. Because he knew God would not otherwise enter into a Covenant of Peace, to
save lost Sinners, Man being weak, Romans 8.3. Heb. 10.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and unable to answer what both Law and Justice required, in order to our Peace
and Reconciliation with God: Whatsoever the Law exacted on us, he engaged and
condescended to do as our Surety; he promised and struck Hands to satisfy
whatsoever the Law, I say, could demand of God's Elect. See Heb. 9.15. Romans
3.25. Heb. 10.5, 7.

III. What was Christ to do, What Christ as our Surety, engaged to God to do.
and we receive by virtue of his Mediation and Suretiship?

First, Whatsoever Christ as Mediator Covenanted with the Father to do, that he
considered as the Surety of the said Covenant engaged to perform.

1. To vindicate the Honor of God in all the Perfections of his Nature,
particularly to preserve the Justice and Veracity of God, and Sanction of his
Holy Law.

2. He engaged as the Surety of the Covenant, to restore to Man, or to all
God's Elect, that Righteousness which Man lost, that as we were made Sinners by
Adam's Disobedience, so by his Obedience we should all be made Righteous; that
as the Sin of the first Adam was imputed to our Condemnation, so his
Righteousness, as our Covenanting Head, might be imputed to all his Seed, and
all this according to the Contrivance of God's Infinite Wisdom, and to answer
the Design, Purpose, and Proposal of God the Father, in the Council of Peace.

3. And seeing Man was a Rebel, and in Arms against God, and filled with Rage
and Madness, and having Enmity in his Mind against God, Romans 8.7.
Being alienated from the Life of God: Jesus Christ, as our Surety, engaged to
change the Hearts of all he undertook for, and bring them to accept of Terms of
Peace, through the Blood of his Cross; I say, he engaged to God to bring home
all that were given to him. Joh. 10.16
Hence he says, Them I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice: He must bring
them because of the Covenant he had made with God the Father; and upon the
Consideration of that Obligation, he laid himself under, as their Surety. He
must Circumcise our Hearts to love the Lord our God; 1 Pet. 3.18
for Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he
might bring us to God.

From hence it appears, that Christ by virtue of these Articles of Peace, as
our Surety, engaged to open Blind Eyes, and to bring the Prisoners out of the
Prisonhouse, Isa. 61.11.
and to set at liberty those that were bound; or by the Blood of his Covenant,
to send the Prisoners out of the Pit, where there was no water; for this was
agreed should be the Effects of his Undertakings: See Zech. 9.11. Luke 4.18.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has Anointed me to Preach the
Gospel to the Poor; he has sent me to heal the Brokenhearted, to Preach
Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of Sight to the Blind, and to set
at liberty them that were bruised. He engaged to take away the Heart of Stone,
and to give us a Heart of Flesh, to give a new Heart for this the Father
promised in the Covenant, and what he promised Christ engaged to do for us; for
without Almighty Power this cannot be done; He works all our Works in us and
for us: He engaged to subdue Satan, and divest him, that strong Man Armed of
all his Power.

In a word, Christ as the Surety of this Covenant, engaged to Renovate our
Hearts, Regenerate our Souls, or to Create the Image of God again in us; And
that from his Fullness, Joh. 1.16.
we should all receive Grace for Grace: And, indeed, Col. 1.19.
to this end it pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell.

4. Jesus Christ as our Surety, engaged to make good another Article in this
Covenant, which was to preserve all his People in a State of Grace, not only to
bring us into a State of Grace, but to preserve us in the State, or to preserve
Grace as a Vital Principle in our Souls.

That as all the Promises of God are made to us in Christ, so Christ has
engaged that we should persevere in Grace and Holiness, and that we shall never
finally depart from God any more; He that has begun a good Work in you, will
perform it to the Day of Christ. It is not said, he will finish it, but he will
perform it, which denotes his Covenant; as when a Faithful Man has engaged to
do a piece of Work, we say, he will perform it; Phil. 1.6.
He shall bring forth Judgment unto Victory.

1. He will according to his Promise and Covenant, strengthen our Faith, and
increase it.

Mich. 7.19, 20.
2. Subdue our Iniquities; He will subdue our Iniquities, thou will cast all
their Sins into the Depths of the Sea, thou will perform thy Truth to Jacob.

3. To support and succor us under all Temptations, thus he has promised, and
he is Faithful, therefore will do it, 1. Cor. 10.13. No Temptation has
befallen you, but such that is common to Men, and God is Faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, etc.

4. To comfort us in all our Sorrows; I will not leave you Comfortless, etc.

5. To help us under all our Afflictions, Reproaches, Losses, and Persecutions,
all these are Covenant Blessings, and therefore promised to us.

6. To enable us to perform acceptably all Holy Duties; for without him we can
do nothing.

7. To make us Fruitful, and so to abide unto the end; Joh 15, 16
I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you go and bring forth Fruit, and
that your Fruit should remain, the Righteous shall flourish like a Palm Tree:
Psalm. 92.12, 13.
Those that are planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts
o^ our God, they shall still bring forth Fruit in Old Age, they shall be fat
and flourishing. And all this God has promised to us by virtue of Christ's
undertaking as our Surety for us.

For the Grace by which all this is done, was promised first to Christ; he is
filled full of Grace, as our Head of Influence: And he has engaged to God for
us to act, and influence us with that Grace which he so received, which he does
perform in what measure and manner he pleases, through or by virtue of that
Union we have with him, and by the constant communication of fresh Supplies
from himself; Therefore it is added, Verse. 14.
To show that the Lord is Upright, and that there is no Unrighteousness in him.

Brethren, pray consider this well, that all Grace and Spiritual Blessing
whatsoever which we receive, is all promised to us by God the Father, and made
good to us through Christ's Mediation, and Undertakings, as our Surety: For all
the Promises of God in him, are Yea, 2 Cor. 1 20.
and in him, Amen, unto the Glory of God the Father. I say, that that Mutual
Covenant betwixt God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, makes all Covenant
Blessings and Promises sure to us; all Promises are from the Father, through
Christ, by the Holy Spirit

Christ received the Spirit without measure, upon his Covenanting with the
Father, and he engaged to send the Spirit to be the Almighty Agent to do all
things for us; for as he purchased the Spirit for us, so he has asked it of
the Father, and still (as our Surety and Advocate) he intercedes with the
Father for us, that we may receive a Gracious Measure thereof; Joh. 14.16*
I will pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter.

The Father upon Christ's Suretiship promised to him, that his Spirit shall
never depart from him, nor his Seed: As for me, Isa. 60.21.
this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; My Spirit that is upon thee,
and my Words which I have put into thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy
Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds
Seed, from henceforth and for ever.

8. Christ has engaged to confirm us to the end; this he undertook as our
Surety, it was God's Promise to him, He shall see his Seed: This was promised
to him upon what he was to do, and suffer; and Christ, I say, has engaged as
our Surety to confirm us; 1 Cor. 1.9.
Who shall confirm you to the end? God is Faithful, by whom ye were called unto
the Fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Jesus Christ, by virtue of
this Covenant, was to have many Companions, or fellow Heirs of Glory, and God's
calling us, is the first Foundation Act in God, of performance of this Covenant
with Christ, and to us in him: The Father is as much bound and obliged to keep
us, as Christ is; because of that Price he has received for us by Christ,
which he accepted of in this Covenant of Peace.

9. Christ was obliged, as our Surety, not to lose one of them, which the
Father gave him; And this is the Father's Will that sent me, Joh. 6.39.
That of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up at the last Day. This is as if our Lord should have said, The Father's Will
and Covenant made with me is, That I should not lose one of his Elect.

Charneck.
The Father (as one observes) promised three things to the Son in this Covenant,
upon what he was to do and suffer.

1. His Assistance.

2. That he should have a Seed which he should see.

3. He promised Eternal Glory to him, and to all them in him.

I. His Assistance; Isa. 11.2.
The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the Spirit of Wisdom, and
Understanding; the Spirit of Counsel, and Might; the Spirit of Knowledge, and
of the Fear of the Lord.

Behold my Servant that I uphold, Isa. 42.1.
mine Elect in whom my Soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him: Well,
and what has Christ engaged to do? He shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles.

A bruised Reed shall he not break; Verse. 3.
and the smoking Flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth Judgment unto
Truth.

I, the Lord, have called thee in Righteousness, Verse. 6.
and will uphold thine Hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant
of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles: That is, for the Surety of my
Covenant.

To open Blind eyes, etc. Mich. 5.4.
He shall feed in the Strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the
Lord his God: Christ was to plead these Promises; He shall cry unto me, Ps.
89.26.
Thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my Salvation.

II. God promised him a Seed.

1. A Numerous Seed; Ps. 110.3.
As the Dew of the Morning in abundance upon the Flowers and Plants; fear not
for I am with thee, I will bring thy Seed from the East, and gather thee from
the West.

Isa. 43.5, 6
I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back: Bring my
Sons from afar, and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth.

2. A Perpetual Seed, or a Seed that shall endure for ever; His Seed will I
make to endure for ever, Ps. 89, 234
and his Throne as the Days of Heaven -- My Covenant will I not break, etc.

III. The Father promised him great Glory, and an Eternal Kingdom; Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me, I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession; behold my Servant he shall
deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled and made very high -- I will
divide him a Portion with the Great, Isa. 53.13.
and he shall divide the Spoil with the Strong, because he poured out his Soul
unto Death.

Matthew. 28.18.
All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth.

He shall strike through Kings, in the Day of his Wrath. Ps. 110.5, 6.


Heb. 2.9, 10.
But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the Angels for the
suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor -- And he shall bring all his
to Glory too: For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many Sons to Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation
perfect through Sufferings. As this was promised by the Father to him, and to
us in him, so he as our Surety engaged to bring it to pass, or to make it good
unto us

Object. If Jesus Christ entered into Bonds for us, and that by virtue of the
Sanction of the Law of Works, was obliged, as our Surety, to suffer for our
Sins, does it not follow, See Mr. D. W's, and Mr. A's Vindicat. p. 145.
that he was Surety of the Covenant of Works? And how then is it said* He was
Surety of a better Covenant?

1 Answ. Tho Christ was obliged, as our Surety, to fulfill the Covenant of
Works, or of perfect Obedience; yet he was not Surety of the Covenant of Works,
because he did not undertake, that we should perfectly keep the Law in our own
Persons, which he must have done, had he been Surety of the Law of Works, but
that he would keep that Law for us; and therefore it was another and better
Covenant.

2. The Covenant of Works was made betwixt God and Man, without a Surety; the
Covenant of Grace is made betwixt God the Father, and Jesus Christ as our
Surety for us; therefore another and better Covenant.

These Men plead for a Covenant of Grace made betwixt God and us, distinct from
the Covenant of Redemption; in which, Christ, as our Surety, engaged that we
shall keep the New Law of Faith, and sincere Obedience; Christ having abolished
the Law of perfect Obedience, and merited this mild Law, etc.

1 Answ. Tho the Law as a Covenant of Works, Do this and Live, is taken away;
yet as a Law, or Rule of perfect Obedience, it remains for ever: As the
Reverend Mr. Cross, has fully proved.

2. As to their New Law, it brings in Justification by Works; and such Works
too, that are attended with Sin, or Imperfections; and therefore their Doctrine
is to be abhorred. See Mr. Clark's New Book; Scripture justificat.
but more of this hereafter.

IV. I shall show that Christ's Suretiship greatly differs from Suretiship
among Men.

How the Suretiship of Christ differs from that among Men.
1. A Surety among Men, is not of the Creditor's, but of the Debtor's
procurement.

But the Surety of the Covenant of Peace, was of God's procurement, who is
Man's Creditor, or rather offended Creator; God as an Act of Infinite Wisdom,
Love, and Mercy, found him; I have found a Ransom. Moreover, the Father Chose
him, Called him, and Anointed him to be the Mediator and Surety of this
Covenant, as has been fully proved: Therefore it does not follow, that so soon
as our Surety struck Hands, or just when he laid down the Price, all God's
Elect must actually be acquitted.

For should a Creditor find a Surety for the Debtor, all must confess it is in
his choice how and when the Debtor should be actually acquitted. Moreover, it is
evident, that we had no actual Existence when Christ struck Hands for us;
besides, it was for such that he foresaw would fall under Sin, Wrath, and
Condemnation, and Christ did not become a Surety to keep the Elect from falling
under Wrath, and the Sentence of Death, but to recover them out of that State;
Justification presupposes we were once Charged and Condemned.

2. A Surety and Debtor among Men, both enter into the same Bond, and the
Debtor is looked upon the principal Bondsman.

But Christ's single Bond, in this Covenant, is accepted for all; here is a
Change of Persons, God leaves out our Names, and puts in Christ's Name, that
the Debt, Satisfaction, and Curse might fall upon him alone. See Dr. Goodwin: A
Book entitled, Christ set forth, p. 52. Gal. 3.13. Isa. 53.5.
He was made Sin for us -- Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us; he was wounded for our Transgressions -- And now
Jesus Christ here by putting his Name unto this Bond, is become the principal
Debtor, and is wholly obliged to pay, and satisfy for all the Sins of God's
Elect; his Suretiship has swallowed up the offending Debtors Obligation, to
satisfy Law and Justice.

Object. Does it not then follow, we need not be concerned to keep or fulfill
the Law?

Answ. We are not to be concerned to keep the Law to that end Christ kept it,
i. e. not to be Justified by it, for so it is removed; but the Moral Law, as a
perfect Rule of Righteousness, obliges us to perpetual Obedience, it being so
unchangable a Law.

3. Among Men, when the Surety makes a full satisfaction for Debtors, the said
Debtors cannot be said to receive their Release, or Discharge, as an Act of
Grace and Favor, but as an Act of Justice only.

But Jesus Christ, in the Covenant of Peace, makes full Satisfaction for us,
and yet we receive our Release and Discharge as an Act of Grace and Favor
alone.

1. In that God and not we found the Surety, which was an Act of his own
Sovereign Grace, he being wholly at Liberty, whether he would save Man, or not.

So that our Discharge through the Satisfaction of Christ, must needs primarily
and originally flow out of pure Grace, Favor, Love and Pity of God to us.

Had Man found the Surety, it had been otherwise.

2. Because the Surety being the only begotten Son of God, it is a farther
Demonstration of Infinite Love and Favor to us, in that God should substitute
him in our stead, and dispense with the rigorous Action of Satisfaction from
us, and take it from our Surety, as put in our Law-place.

3. Because God, that he might work about our Discharge, in a way of Grace and
Mercy, to the Honor of his Justice, etc. made his own Son a Sacrifice for our
Sins.

4. Because that Interest we have in that Redemption, Pardon, Peace, and
Reconciliation by Christ's Undertakings, is freely bestowed on us, as an Act of
God's Sovereign Grace and Goodness, for as Christ purchased all Grace for us,
so as an Act of God's Favor, and Christ's Purchase and Merits, he gives us the
Spirit and Faith, in order to our actual Interest in all Covenant Blessings; so
that although it all is in a way of Justice as to Christ, yet it is all in a way
of Mercy and Free Grace as to us.

5. In that God accepted of Christ as a Surety for us who deserved no Pity, we
having wilfully forefeited our vast Inheritance, and were become his Vile
Enemies, and rebels against him.

6. Because Christ became our Surety, from whom he could expect no after
Recompense, or Satisfaction for that vast Sum he laid down for us, he never
expected any Recompense from us for the Debt paid.

7. Because we are not only pardoned, and have Peace, but by Christ's
Undertaking, are raised to great Honor: And O what Grace, Love, and Divine
Goodness is here!

USE.
I Admiration. What has God done? Christ done for us? What Love is this?

1. Christ knew before he became our Surety, that the whole Payment would fall
upon him, and yet struck Hands.

2. O! what Exemption and discharge have we hereby from the Law and Justice of
God? The Law, as our Husband, is dead, and we dead to that; that Cruel Husband
has no more Power over us, though as a Law, or Rule of Righteousness, it still
commands us, yet it cannot Kill us, Curse us, nor Condemn us to Eternal Burning.

3. Bless God for Jesus Christ our Surety: What a sweet Covenant is this, that
we are brought into? How sure are all Covenant Mercies? What Riches, Glory and
Power is in Christ the Mediator? Joh. 17.10
As thou have given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life
to as many as thou have given him. Joh. 10.28
We are in Christ's Hand, and none can pluck us out.

4. We shall for ever abide in this Covenant; our Surety has engaged to keep
us, that we shall never break Covenant with God any more, so as to lose our
Inheritance.

5. How easy has God made the Terms of Peace as to us, since Christ is
obliged to work all our Works in us, as well as for us?

Comfort to Sinners.
II. What Good News is here for broken Sinners, who lie Condemned by the
Covenant of Works?

O sue out your Pardon, by taking hold of Christ.

III. Reproof. How does this again tend to reprove such that turn the
Gospel Covenant, or Covenant of Peace, into a Law, with the Sanction of Rewards
for Obedience, and Threatenings for Disobedience; denying that Christ stood in
our Law-place, to do and suffer for us, or to keep the Law of perfect
Righteousness, in point of Justification, and to die in our stead?

Why will Men stand upon their own Legs? -- Proud Man would fain live of
himself, or have whereof to Glory, but not before God, or in Christ Jesus; he
would have God take his Copper, and refuse his own most pure Gold.

Why will they seek Relief other ways than by the Surety and Mediator of the
Covenant?

Can our Imperfect Righteousness, or Sinful Duties Justify us at God's Bar?
Will they dare to plead it at Death.

IV. Trial. Is Grace given to you? Have you Union with Christ? Have you a new
Heart? Do you truly and savingly know the Lord? Then you are brought into the
Bonds of the Covenant of Peace.

V. Consolation. If you are once in Covenant, you are for ever in Covenant, and
all Covenant-Blessing, even all things that are therein promised to Christ, as
your Surety shall be given to you.

But no more at this time.

And with this I conclude the Second Thing, under the Second General Head, viz.
That the Terms proposed in the Covenant of Peace betwixt the Father and the
Son, were agreed to, and of Christ's Work, as Mediator and Surety therein, I
have endeavored to clear to the Weakest Capacity.

SERMON V. Containing the Ratification, or Confirmation of the Covenant of
Peace; showing, how, and by what, and when it was confirmed; also how
proclaimed, and what the Proclamation is.
ISA. Live.x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant made, or agreed on, and stands firm in the
behalf of all God's Elect.

I have showed you First, That in a Covenant of Peace there is a treating
betwixt the Covenanting Parties about the Terms upon which it is made: And
accordingly in order to the making, or bringing in of this Covenant, you have
heard that there was a treating between the Father, and the Son before the
World began.

Secondly, That in such a Covenant, the Terms proposed are agreed unto by both
Parties; so I have showed you it was here; and also that the Mediator of the
Covenant of Peace is Jesus Christ, who was also the Surety thereof; whose Work,
both as he is Mediator and Surety, we have opened.

Thirdly, The Ratification of the Covenant of Peace.
I shall now proceed to the next thing, which is the Ratification, or
Confirmation of the Covenant.

My Brethren, there was a twofold Confirmation of the Covenant.

I. It was confirmed by God in Christ, Gal. 3.17.
and this was, as I conceive, in that Council of Peace that was held in
Eternity betwixt them both: True, among Men this is called, Zach. 6.13.
The Signing of the Articles of Peace; but there was a full Confirmation of
this Covenant, when it was Agreed on, and Signed, and that by both Parties.

1. The Father Confirmed it to Christ, and to all the Elect in him, by his
Oath; Psalm. 89.3.
I have made a Covenant with my Chosen, I have sworn unto David my Servant: By
David is meant Jesus Christ; and I see no reason to doubt, but that this Oath
of God the Father to the Son, as Mediator of our Peace, passed to him before
the World began; Once have I sworn by my Holiness, Verse. 35.
that I will not lie unto David.

My Brethren, when God concluded this Covenant of Peace with Jesus Christ, he
made a Promise to him of performing all things which he agreed unto; and
evident it is, that this was before the World began; Tit. 1.1.
In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie promised, before the World
began. And as it was promised then to Christ, as the Head and Representative of
all the Elect, on their behalf; so there is the same Parity of Reason to
believe, that then the Oath of God passed to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to us
in him also; and now this Promise and Oath of God to Christ, gives not only
Solemnity, but also firm and sure Stability to this Covenant

(1.) He added his Oath to his Promise (says our late Annotator on the Holy
Bible) to make, Pool's Annotations on Psalm. 89.35.
and prove it to be Immutable: Hence Christ, it is said, was made a Priest by
an Oath, not after the Order of Aaron:

Heb. 7.20,
(2.) But after the Order of Melchis^^ck. This Oath is said to be sworn once,
which Word and Phrase (says he) implies the Compleatness, Certainty, and
Irrevocableness of the thing*

(3.) God swore by his Holiness; What is more Sacred? By which God is seldom
known to speak, or to swear; therefore nothing can more fully confirm this
Covenant to Christ, and to us in him.

(4.) Jesus Christ then confirmed also the Covenant on his part; on our behalf,
by his putting his Hand in our stead, and to stand in our Law-place for us, as
you have heard: This, my Brethren, was more than a bare Signing and Sealing the
Covenant of Peace. But --

II. There is yet a farther Ratification, and Confirmation of the Covenant of
Peace, as also there is among Men.

The Covenant ratified by the Death of Christ.
1. It was agreed betwixt God the Father, and the Son as Mediator, that this
Covenant should come under another Acceptance, i. e. as the Last Will and
Testament of Jesus Christ: True, it was not only Christ's Will, or Christ's
Covenant and Testament, but the Father's Will and Covenant also: Hence the
Testament is called, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.1.
which God gave unto him; that is, a Mediator: Yet Christ is the Testator, or
he that is to dispose of all those rich Legacies which the Father by him, as
Mediator, designed to bestow on all his Elect, it is called his Covenant,
Testament, or Last Will.

And now, since the New Covenant was to come under this Character, viz.
Christ's Last Will and Testament; there was a Necessity (for many other
Reasons) that the Covenant should be Confirmed and Ratified by his Death (...):
Key to open Scripture Metaphors, Book 2. p. 119.
The Greek Word is, (...) Diathemenos, (...) Berith. A Testament is the
Sentence, or Declaration of our last Will of what we would have done after our
Death; now this Testament contains all the Blessings, Grants, and Privileges
agreed unto and given to Christ, as Mediator of the Covenant of Peace, and more
properly it denotes Christ's giving them forth as one Dying, to confirm the
Covenant.

1. A Testator signifies a Disposer; Christ the Testator of the New Covenant.
one that makes his Last Will and Testament, who has Goods to bestow, and
Persons to give them unto.

2. It denotes, that a Dying Person, who to confirm his Will and Testament;
there is a Necessity of his Death, and thus Christ as a Testator, died by
virtue of those Covenant Transactions betwixt God the Father and himself on the
behalf of God's Elect; Where a Testament is, Heb. 9.15, 16.
there must also of necessity be the Death of the Testator.

3. It also denotes, that he the Testator has, or is Invested with some
Estate, and has a proper Right to dispose of it; Jesus Christ in this Covenant
had all the Riches of Grace and Glory given to him as Mediator. See John 13.3.
Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his Hands, etc.

4. Moreover it denotes, that whatsoever he gives as a Testator, is of mere
Grace, or of the Good Pleasure of his Will.

5. Also it gives a Just Right to all such (to whom he bequeaths any Legacies)
to what is given, so that such may sue out for them as their own.

Furthermore it imports the Revelation and Declaration of his Will, Love, and
Affections to all his Relations and Friends: So did Jesus Christ, in his Last
Will and Testament, reveal his Will, Love, and rich Bounty to all God'^ Elect.

Now the Design of God and Christ herein, was.

1. To give, or superadd a new Title to al^ Believers (as one well observes) of
all Covenant Blessings, that we might have all manne^ of Security imaginable to
the Inheritance.

2. Also to show the Absolute Freeness of the Conveyance of all Covenant
Grants, and Ble^sings to Believers.

3. And more directly to the purpose i^ hand, Jesus Christ came under this
Relation to ratify and confirm the Covenant of Peace, an^ our sure Right and
Title to all Blessings contained therein; Tho it be but a Man's Testament, Gal.
3.15.
yet if it be confirmed, no Man disanulleth, or adds thereunto: The Covenant
was in force even from the Beginning; and all God's Elect who lived under the
Old Testament Dispensation, received the Grace and Blessings thereof, through
Faith in Christ's Death, who they knew would come in the fullness of time, and
by his Blood confirm this Covenant: The Father, indeed, trusted the Son upon
his Holy Compact or Covenant with him, upon the account of what he was to do,
and suffer in time. Pray, Brethren, observe, That the Death of Christ, is the
great and sure Ratification and Confirmation of the Covenant of Peace. It is a
Confirmation of such Validity, that it is made unalterable, and cannot be
disannulled.

To proceed, there are, Beloved, seven or eight things to be considered in the
Death of Christ.

I. The Death of Christ put an end to, The great Ends of the Death of Christ
opened.
or abrogated the Old Covenant; He took away the first, that he might establish
the second -- Having abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances for to make in himself of twain, Heb.
10.9. Ephesians. 3.15.
one New Man, so making Peace: The first Will, or Covenant is made void by the
second, i. e. by the Last Will and Testament; nor is the Ceremonial Law only
abolished, but the Moral Law as a Covenant of Works, Do this and Live; not as
it is a Law requiring perfect Obedience on Righteousness, but as to the Tenure,
or Terms of it.

Not, my Brethren, but that all Believers, who lived under the Old Testament,
were saved by the Covenant of Grace, Christ was to establish, as I said before:
Yet was not the Old Covenant actually taken away till Christ died, the latter
Covenant is called an Everlasting Covenant; not, I say again, that the first,
as to Righteousness, is ceased, or disannulled; no, but as a Covenant of Works,
requiring perfect Righteousness of us in our own Persons, if ever we are
Justified in God's Sight; but that the perfect Obedience which Law required of
us is transmitted to another Head, i. e. the Christ Jesus, who having answered
all its Demands in point of Obedience and Righteousness, so that He is the end
of the Law, Romans 10.4.
as touching Righteousness, to every one that believes: Insomuch that the Law
cannot Curse, nor any more Condemn them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.


II. Christ's Death (as well as his Active Obedience to the Law) was the
Condition on his part for us, upon which God the Father entered into this
Covenant of Peace, on our behalf; therefore had not Christ died, all that
believed before he came had perished, but neither of these were possible.

III. The Death of Christ, was the Price of our Redemption, by this vast Sum
we were Redeemed: 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Ye are not your own, you are bought with a Price. Not our own observe.

1. We were sold under Sin, and were in bondage to the Law and Justice of God.

2. There was a treating about the Price of our Redemption, and the Terms were
agreed to, which was, That Christ must die; 1 Pet. 1.18
For as much as ye know that ye were not Redeemed with corruptible things, as
Silver and Gold, etc. but with the Precious Blood of Christ -- Who verily was
foreordained before the Foundation of the World; or was delivered up according
to the Compact, or Result in the Covenant of Peace, (to Redeem us from Wrath
and Hell,) held in Eternity between the Father and himself.

3. The Time also when this should be done, was also then agreed on; that is,
when Christ should die; But when the fullness of Time came, Gal. 4.4.
God sent forth his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh -- To Redeem them
that were under the Law, etc.

IV. The Death of Christ was that Price by which all Grace is purchased for us;
for tho we have all Covenant Grants, and Blessings freely given to us, or
merely of God's Free Grace, yet Faith, a New Heart, Regeneration, Repentance,
Pardon, and Peace, and all other Grace, and Blessings here, and Glory hereafter
were all purchased for us by the Death of Christ; for as you heard Christ did
more than pay our Debts.

V. Christ's Death was the Pacifying, or Atoneing Sacrifice, his Precious Blood
quenched the Fire of God's Wrath, and so it is the only way by which we come to
be delivered from Hell: Our Jonah was cast overboard to make a Calm, and
caused the Storm of Divine Vengeance to cease.

VI. And more directly to our present Purpose; I say again, the Death of Christ
was to ratify and confirm the Covenent.

VII. Moreover, the Death of Christ was not only to confirm the Covenant of
Peace it self, but to confirm all Covenant Grants, Covenant Blessings, and
Covenant Promises also; for had not the Testator died, none could sue for any
Legacy therein bequeathed to them.

Furthermore, also the Holy Ghost is appointed to be the Executioner of this
Covenant; or, of the Last Will and Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ: Heb.
9.14, 15.
How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit
offered himself to God; Purge your Consciences from Dead Works, to serve the
true living God. It is the same Spirit of Jesus that offered up his Body, that
applies his Blood, and makes it efficacious to us, and also puts us into the
Possession of the Inheritance purchased for us.

And for this Cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
Death, that they which are called, might receive the Promise of the Eternal
Inheritance; That is, through his Intercession, and the Agency of the Holy
Spirit, the Effects of his Sacrifice might become effectual to all the Elect,
viz. to their Justification, Vocation, Sanctification, and Glorification.

If the Will of Man had been left, or substituted to be the Executioner of
Christ's Last Will and Testament, not one Soul might have been saved, or if
otherwise, yet all the Glory would not have then redown'd to Jesus Christ, but
one great part thereof to the Creature.

But thus it is not left, It Is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs: No, no, it is wholly committed to the Blessed Agency of the Holy
Ghost; who does, and must bow, and bend the Will of Man unto God: But more of
this hereafter.

My Brethren, It is very remarkable what Knowledge some of the Ancient Jews had
of the Messiah.

Rabbi Hadars, Charnock.
(as I find him quoted by a Worthy Divine) speaks thus, viz. God treating with
the Messiah, said, Righteous Messiah, Those who are hid in thee, are such,
whose Sins in time shall bring thee to Grief; thy Ears shall hear Reproaches,
thy Tongue cleave to the Roof of thy Mouth, thou shall be wearied with Sorrows.

The Messiah answered; Lord of the World, I joyfully take them upon me, and
Charge my self with their Torment, but upon this Condition, that thou shall
quicken the Dead; God, says this Rabbi, granted him this, and from that time
the Messiah charged himself with all kinds of Torments.

USE.
I. From hence we may infer what horrid Evil there is in Unbelief, or the
Shamefulness of Unbelief, and O what Ignorance there is in Men, of this
Covenant Agreement; God is pacified and reconciled, but Sinners will not
believe it, and from hence retain frightful Thoughts of God.

2. We infer, That our Salvation stands upon a sure and certain Foundation, and
that the Elect shall be saved.

(1.) They are the Seed of Christ, and are given to him, tho never so unworthy
in themselves.

(2) In regard of the firmness of the Covenant of Peace, you hear how, and by
what it is confirmed.

(3.) In regard Jesus Christ has done his Suffering Work, his Bleeding Work,
his Dying Work, confirming his Covenant, and he is bound to do all the rest in
us and for us, and the Spirit is the Executior, Christ, tho he died, is alive,
and dies no more; and therefore can, and will see his own Will fully executed.

(4.) Because God has linked in this Covenant his own Glory and our Good
together.

II. Contemplate on the Love of your dying Friend; Shall the King Immortal
become a dying Testator?

O search into this Will to find your Names, and see what vast Legacies are
bequeathed therein to you! Moreover, you see that your Right to Grace and Glory
is a Testimentory Right, the Covenant betwixt God and Christ is turned into a
Testament between him and you; My Peace I leave with you: He has paid dear for
it.

III. Sinners, will you by Unbelief make void (if it were possible) this
Covenant, or not sue out by Christ's Blood your Pardon, but think to get it
some other ways, Sirs, all (...) saving Grace is comprehended in this Covenant.

IV. What are all Earthly Legacies to those Christ has left in his Last Will
and Testament --

V. Terror. Let all such tremble that turn Christ's Last Will and Testament
into a Law of Works, or into a Conditional Covenant, or that give the Glory to
their Faith, to their Obedience, or to the Creature, and let all such fear
likewise that venture to alter any thing contained in Christ's Last Will and
Testament.

Lastly, Do not forget your dying Friend; O keep up his Remembrance in those
Holy Signs of his Death and Suffering which he has left in his word, This do
in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.24.


I shall now proceed to the next thing proposed under this General Head.

Fourthly, The proclaiming of this Peace.
After a Covenant of Peace is ratified and confirmed, it is proclaimed, and so
it is here also; this is the next thing, God assisting, I shall speak to. --
And now, as Peace among Men is commonly published by a Proclamation, so has
God graciously ordered this Peace to be published by a Proclamation. Also,

And in speaking to this I shall

1. Show you what is the Proclamation of this Peace.

2. Who they are that God has authorized to Proclaim it.

3. Open the Nature of the Proclamation.

4. Open the Terms upon which it is proclaimed.

The Gospel is the Proclamation of Peace. 2 Cor. 5.19 Ephesians. 6.15.
The Proclamation of this Peace is the Gospel of Jesus Christ: Hence the Gospel
is called, The Word of Reconciliation, and the Gospel of Peace.

I. Because the Gospel only shows us how Reconciliation is made between an
offended God, and offending Creatures; and no otherways is this revealed, or
made known to Men.

II. Because God, my Brethren, is hereby declared to be reconciled or pacified
toward Sinners, 2 Cor. 5.18
even in Jesus Christ; To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. Some would have this extend
to all the World universally, but then all would be saved; for if all were
reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, they shall much more be saved by his
Life; for so Paul argues in respect of all them that God by the Death of his
Son, Romans 5.1^.
was reconciled to; For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the Death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
Life. If God gave us the great Gift, he will much more give the lesser Gift, i.
e. Faith and Perseverance; compare this with Romans 8.32. My Brethren, it is the
same [All,] or World that Christ promised that he would draw to him, and that
he takes away the Sin of. Joh. 3.19.
Moreover, if he had reconciled the whole World to God, Joh. 17.9, 20.
he would have prayed for the whole World, but that he says he did not, yet he
prayed for all he died for.

III. Because the Gospel discovers the Meritorious Cause, or Foundation of our
Reconciliation, viz. the Death of Christ, this was that Sacrifice that turned
away God's Anger, and Vindictive Wrath and Vengeance; He saw the Travel of his
Soul and was satisfied. Isa. 53.11.


IV. Because the Gospel contains mutual Reconciliation, not only an account of
God's Reconciliation to us, but also our Reconciliation to him, which is
through the receiving the Atonement, God is reconciled in Christ, by his
Wrath-appeasing Sacrifice; but the Gospel shows, that Sinners are not actually
reconciled to God, until they are by the Spirit united to Christ, and believe
in him, having that Natural Enmity removed, Romans 8.7.
that is in their Hearts against God.

V. The Gospel is the instrumental means, through the Spirits Operations of the
Sinner's Reconciliation to God; 2 Cor. 5.20
We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. It is called the Power
of God to Salvation, Romans 1.16.
because therein the Righteousness of God is revealed, Verse. 17. It is, my
Brethren, an Instrument of his Power, or a powerful means ordained of God to
this purpose, it having an excellent and efficacious Influence attending it
through the Spirit where it is proclaimed and received. My Brethren, Faith,
Regeneration, Convertion, or Holiness, do not reconcile us to God; no, no,
nothing does that but the Blood of Christ.

And this I might make appear,

1. Because our Reconciliation on God's part is by the Death of Christ; Romans
5.10.
For when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son.
Hence we are said to be Justified by his Blood; that is, Meritoriously, yet
Materially it is by his Active, as well as his Passive Obedience.

2. Because our Reconciliation on God's part, I mean his being Reconciled to
us, is antecedent to Faith, Regeneration, etc. your Faith does not make your
Peace, tho it be an Instrument by which you receive that Atonement that Christ
has made,

3. Faith, etc. is an effect of our Reconciliation, that we may be actually
acquitted, and saved from Sin and Wrath in our own Persons, and have it
evidenced to our own Consciences; it is our receiving that of Christ, which he
received for us upon his Discharge, as our Head, Romans 5.9.
and Surety; Much more being now Justified by his Blood, we shall be saved
through him: Therefore Christ's Blood must be the appeasing Sacrifice that
delivers us from the Wrath we lay under.

4. Nay, my Brethren, Justification is the Effects of Reconciliation; for had
not Christ satisfied Divine Justice for us, we had not been pronounced Just, or
Righteous in him; the Prisoner is acquitted as the Effects of the Payment of his
Debts, his believing his Debts are paid, and the Law and justice satisfied,
does not pay his Debts; tho a Sinner is not in his own Person actually
discharged, until he does believe, or leastwise in his own Conscience.

True, Jesus Christ, as Mediator, does both these; i. e. he pays our Debts, and
knocks off our Chains; he makes the Atonement, and sprinkles the Blood upon our
Consciences by his Spirit; if Reconciliation was the bending of our Hearts to
God, to believe in him, and love him, why should Faith and Sanctification be
laid down as the End and Effect of this Reconciliation: Col. 1.22.
Yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his Flesh, through Death, to present
you Holy and Vnreprovable in his Sight.

VI. A Proclamation discovers, or reveals who they are that shall receive the
Blessings of that Peace which is made, and upon what Terms.

So, my Brethren, the Gospel makes known who they are that are comprehended in
that Peace our Lord Jesus Christ had made, viz. all that God has Elected, or
Chosen in Him, Joh. 6.36.
or all his Seed, or all that the Father has given to him, Act. 13.48
or, if you please, all that do believe in him; Isa. 53.11.
and also it shows upon what Terms, Joh. 3.16.36.
viz. wholly of mere Grace and Favor; Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
Gift of God, not of Works, least any Man should boast, not by any Act of the
Creature, Tit. 3.5.
not by his Faith and sincere Obedience^ nor by Works of Righteousness that we
have done, either in Obedience to Law or Gospel: See Romans 11.6. the Terms are
without Money, Isa. 55.1, 2
and without Price.

VII. Some Proclamations proclaim Peace; so, my Brethren, the Gospel Proclaims
our Peace with God: Isa. 57.19.
Peace, Peace to them that are afar off, and to them that are nigh; It
proclaims Liberty to the Captives, etc. Isa. 61.1.
Hence our Lord says to his Disciples; That which ye have spoken in the Ear,
Luke 12.3.
shall be proclaimed on the House Top -- And came and preached Peace, Ephesians. 2.17.
(or proclaimed Peace) to you which were afar off, and to them that are nigh.
And hence the Gospel also comes so to be called; for what is Gospel, but glad
Tidings, good News, Peace on Earth, good Will to Men! It is called, the Joyful
Sound, Ps. 89.15.
Blessed is the People that know the Joyful Sound, etc. Not they that only hear
it, but that know it, it is that which when known and received, pacifies a
Wounded Conscience.

VIII. A Proclamation of Peace and Pardon, is that which a Self-condemned
Traitor takes hold of, and presently submits himself with Tears, and falls down
at his Sovereign's Feet, being broken to Pieces at the Thoughts of his Prince's
Clemency, and Free Pardon. Also it gives an Assurance to all such of Pardon and
Peace.

So, my Brethren, the Gospel is that which Sin-convicted, and Self-condemned
Sinners, and Stubborn Rebels against God, takes hold of; and it is this that
breaks and melts their hard Hearts, What hear that their Peace is made, and God
reconciled? Nay, and that he has Sacrified his own Son to this very end, this
breaks the Heart of Stone, and brings the Rebel to lay down his Arms, and to
take hold of Pardon. And it gives to each poor Sinner also, an assurance of
Mercy, he brings the Proclamation as it were to God, and pleads his Pardon,
Where the Word of a King is, there is Power: The King's Word and Promise,
(says the Soul) is passed in his Proclamation, that I shall have Free Pardon,
and here it is.

IX. A Proclamation is Written, nay Printed, that it may be read, and known of
all Men; so God, in his Providence, has caused his Gospel to be Printed, that
it may be read and known to all to whom it is sent; it was first Written as
Holy Men speak, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; and since it has been
Printed also.

X. A Proclamation is set up in the Marketplace, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
or in some Public place, so is the Gospel publicly made known; Wisdom cries
without, she utters her Voice in the Streets, Prove. 1.20, 21.
in the chief Place, in the Concourse, in the opening of the Gates, in the City
she utters her Voice, see Prove. 8.1. It is, and shall be made known to all
Nations, to their Joy and Comfort, and for their Obedience of Faith. -- But let
me note here some Disparities.

1. Proclamations are not put into a Book, I say, I think that is not usually
done, to be kept for after Times upon Record, but the Gospel, or good News to
Sinners, or this Proclamation, is put into a Book, for all succeeding Ages, and
Generations to know and understand.

(1.) This Book, Brethren, What a kind of Book the New Testament is.
is wholly by Inspiration given out to remain as a Witness of God's Eternal
Love, and Christ's Eternal Love, and Favor.

(2.) There is a Blessing pronounced to him that reads, and that understands
this Book.

(3.) It is a Book ratified and confirmed by Miracles.

(4.) A Book that all Holy and good Books point to, Moses points to this Book,
the Prophets point to this Book, and all Divine Writers point to this Book.

(5.) It is a Book of all Truth, and no Errors.

(6.) A Book that all Good Books, Holy Books were taken out of.

(7.) A Book kept and preserved by Almighty Power, in spite of Rome, Hell, and
Devils.

But let me add one thing more here, viz. That there were different ways of
proclaiming this News of Peace, by Jesus Christ.

1. It was first proclaimed to Adam, upon his Fall, by the Promise of the Seed
of the Woman.

2. To Abraham it was proclaimed in these Words, i. e. In thy Seed shall all
the Nations of the Earth be Blessed.

Gal. 3.8.
Thus Paul says, God Preached the Gospel to Abraham, to Jacob by the coming of
Shilo.

To Moses, by a Prophet that God would raise up of their Brethren, like unto
him; and by Types and Sacrifices.

To David, by a Promise of a Son to Sit upon his Throne, and by a Covenant made
with him, as a Type of Christ.

To the Prophets many ways very clearly.

But in the New Testament Times more fully and clearer then ever; before it was
hid, as it were, but the Vision is now opened, and hidden things, things long
kept secret, are plainly revealed; We behold with open Face: 2 Cor. 3.18.
Many Prophets, and Kings, desired to see and hear what we see and hear, but
saw, and heard them not.

3. A Proclamation does not usually contain the Sum of all the Articles of
Peace, nor give an Account of all the Gifts, Grants, Blessings, and Privileges
thereof. But this Proclamation, i. e. the Gospel does publish and make known to
all the World, the Sum of all the Articles of this Covenant of Peace; together
with all the great Gifts, Grants, Blessings, and Privileges thereof: In the
Gospel we read of the Council, Compact, and Eternal Purpose of God, concerning
of all those Covenant Transactions that were betwixt the Father and the Son
from Eternity, which were hid, or kept secret until this Proclamation came
forth.

4. A Proclamation of Peace does not particularly give an account of all the
horrid Crimes and Offenders that are by virtue thereof, freely pardoned upon
their coming in; for such a Proclamation is rather put out by a Prince to
reclaim Stubborn Rebbels, in which their Names are inserted; but this
Proclamation, i.e. the Gospel, proclaims Free Pardon for all manner of Sins,
Iniquities, and Transgressions; and to all the vilest Traitors, Enemies and
Rebbels against the Eternal God; as to all Swearers, Liars, Drunkards, Harlots,
1 Cor. 10, 11.
Whoremongers, or Adulterers, Idolaters, Effeminate Persons, Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, Proud Persons, Joh. 3.16.
Covetous Backsliders, Thieves, Extortioners, Malicious Persons, Murderers,
Back-biters, Rev. 22.17
Blasphemers, Sorcerers, ye all manner of Sinners have Free Pardon offered to
them upon their coming in, and laying hold of Jesus Christ; Joh. 6.36.
and none are excepted but such who have sinned against the Holy Ghost.

USE.
1. Bless God for the Gospel, that ever this Proclamation came to your Ears,
Peace is proclaimed to you this Day, to you Sinners! What do you say? Do you
resolve to throw down your Arms and come in? It Is no matter what kind of
Rebbels you have been: Here Is a Pardon for all Sins and Blasphemy (in this
Proclamation) committed against the Father and Son, and but one sort of Sinners
are excluded, and but one Sin, i. e. the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Is not this Good News? Do you believe it? And is it in your Hearts to take
hold of the Promises of the Gospel? What Answer shall I return to him that sent
me.

II. This informs us of the Necessity of Revealed Religion, I mean of the
Gospel; for without this Proclamation had been published, the way of Peace
could not be known, or without such a way of Revelation.

1. For the Moral Law written in the two Tables, reveals nothing of this Peace
made by Jesus Christ.

2. The Law or Light within all Mankind, reveals nothing of it, tho that
convicts of Sin, yet it reveals nothing of a Savior.

The Moral Law and Light, in all, discovers a God, but no Christ, no Mediator:
What does the Pagan World know of this Covenant of Peace? Or of this Mediator,
or of this Proclamation? What will those Arch Heretics say to this, who Talk
of the Light within, and boldly affirm, That they should have known by a Christ
within, as much as they do now, if the Word had never been written; But why
then do not the poor Indians, and Pagans know it, who have the same Light in
them? And why cannot they tell us, What those other things are that Jesus Christ
did, that are not written? Believe them not: Joh. 21.25
These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, and
that believing, Joh. 20.30, 31.
ye might have Life through his Name: These Heretics deny not only the Christ
of God, but the only Rule of our Faith and Practice also.

3. Certainly here is good News to you Sinners who hear me this Day; I am
appointed by the Lord to proclaim Peace to you in this Place; and do assure
you, in the Name of my Great Lord and Master Jesus Christ, that if you come in,
and i. e. believe in him, ye shall have Eternal Life, tho you have been long
Enemies to God, ye Stout-hearted, Isa. 46.1, 13.
and far from Righteousness, or tho never so Vile and Notorious Sinners, Grace,
Pardon, and Peace is offered freely to you this Day, Without Money, and without
Price; Isa. 55.1.
i. e. without any Previous Qualifications, or any thing required of you, it is
all freely tendered, upon your Believing; upon your Espousing of Jesus Christ
all the Blessings of the Covenant of Peace are yours. Rev. 22.17
Whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely.

SERMON VI. Wherein is showed who are the Ambassadors of Peace, or who are
appointed to Proclaim, or Preach the Gospel of Peace.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Jan. 7. School.
I AM upon the Second General Head, first proposed to be opened, viz. to clear
up the main Covenant Transactions, about the bringing in, and Establishment of
the Covenant of Peace.

1. I have passed through those Eight Explanatory Propositions.

2. The Second I have been some time upon, i. e. the Covenant Transactions.

I. I showed you there was a treating about it between the Father and the Son,
as our Head and Representative, before the World began.

II. That the Terms of our Peace were then by them both agreed on, and that
Jesus Christ was chosen Mediator and Surety of the Covenant

III. That this Covenant is confirmed.

IV. And that it is Proclaimed.

Here I told you, that I should do four Things.

1. Show you what the Proclamation is; this we did the last Day.

2. Show you who are the Ambassadors of Peace.

3. Open the Nature of the Proclamation.

4 Show you upon what Terms Peace is offered, or proclaimed.

To proceed.

Secondly, My Business is to show you now who they are that God has appointed,
empowered, or authorized to be the Ambassadors of his Peace.

I. The Great and Chief Ambassador of this Peace, is the Lord Jesus Christ; and
from hence he is called the Messenger of the Covenant; The Lord whom ye seek,
Mal. 3.1.
shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant. All
Expositors agree, that this is meant of Christ; yea, (as one observes) both
Christian and Jewish Interpreters; Ark of the Cov. p. 328
and the same Author also shows from the Hebrew, that a Messenger signifies an
Ambassador, 1 Kings 16.7. and 17.4.
(...) Messengers, i. e. Ambassadors of Peace. My Brethren, I showed you, that
Jesus Christ considered as Mediator, was our great Plenipotentiary,
representing us, and treating with God for us, Zech. 6.13
in that Council of Peace held betwixt them both.

1. He was authorized and approved of by the Father, to Treat about it, and
Conclude the Peace upon such Terms that the Father proposed to him on our
behalf; Joh. 17.2.
As thou have given him power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life
to as many as thou have given him -- I was set up from Everlasting, Prove. 8.23
etc.

2. He only was able to make our Peace, not only capable to treat about it, but
as the Grand Ambassador, to answer all the Just Demands of the Holy and abused
Majesty of Heaven, in order finally to conclude it.

3. He was sent from Heaven to Earth, actually to do this; and from thence, as
I conceive, he bears the Name or Title of Messenger, or Ambassador. My
Brethren, Christ as Mediator, was sent by the Father; Joh. 3.16.
The Father that sent me, is with me: God so loved the World, that he sent his
only Begotten Son.

4. He was the first that Published or Preached the Gospel of Peace, Heb. 2.3.
Which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, etc. First, As to the full and
clear Promulgation of it; some conceive this may refer to his publishing of it
to our first Parents after the Fall; yet I rather conclude, it refers to his
Ministry in his own Person, whose Doctrine was confirmed with Signs and
Wonders; Isa. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has appointed me to
Preach good Tidings unto the Meek.

Moreover he is called, Heb. 8.2.
A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord
pitched, and not Man: This Work refers to his Prophetical Office.

5. He only knows the Counsel of God, or the whole Covenant Transactions
between the Father and himself, and therefore could best reveal them, or make
them known to us; nor can we know or understand the Mysteries of God, the
Mysteries of the Covenant, and Gospel, but by this Interpreter, Job 33.23.
Who is one among a Thousand: Neither knows any Man the Father, Matthew. 11.27.
save the Son, and he, to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. He only is the
Ambassador that can make the People to hear and understand; Joh. 17.8.
I have given them the Words that thou gave me: He has the Tongue of the
Learned, he was God's Great Ambassador whilst he was on Earth, to make known
the Joyful News of Peace and Reconciliation, purchased by his own Blood, and
that gives Success to his Servants whom he employs.

6. Without the Exercise of this his Office, as a Prophet, Minister, or
Ambassador, he could not perfect his Work as Mediator, for it is hereby he
reconciles us to God; by speaking to our Hearts, by enlightening our
Understandings, bowing our Wills, and renovating our Souls. Moreover, all other
Ambassadors labor in vain, if he works not, labors not with them.

7. He has all the excellent Properties of a Messenger, or of an Ambassador of
Peace.

1. A regular Call, or Authority, this he received from the Father.

2. Wisdom, He excels in Wisdom and Knowledge, he is the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor.
1.24.
-- and in him is hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; never
Man-spake like him. Col. 2.3.


3. Faithfulness, He was Faithful to him that appointed him, Heb. 3.2.
as also was Moses; Heb. 7.27.
and as Faithful to us, witness his Death, and also his continual Intercession
now in Heaven.

Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.
4. Lowly, and of a Condescending Spirit; How did he abase himself to become
God's Servant, that is his own Eternal Son; nay, our Servant, he came to serve
us, and was as one that served, while here on Earth.

Joh. 4.6.
5. Active and Diligent, It is my Meat and Drink to do the Will of him that sent
me.

6. Swift and Speedy, How much Work did he do in three Years and a half? For
Swiftness he is compared to an Heart, or young Roe.

But no more as to this.

II. Jesus Christ has substituted, ordained, or appointed others under him,
for him, and in his stead to be his Ambassadors of this Peace:

Quest. Who are they?

1 Answ. Negatively, they are not the Holy Angels, tho it is true, the Angels
brought the Good News of his Arrival, or first coming into the World, and also
proclaimed Glory to God on high, on Earth Peace, Good Will to Men: Yet these he
has not appointed to be his Ambassadors of Peace: No, no, they are Men, or
Gospel Ministers.

2. Yet Negatively, they are not all which are called Gospel Ministers.

1. Some are Legal Ministers, Preachers of a Law, who know not what they say,
nor what they affirm, yet not Preachers only of Moses Law, but of a New Law,
turning the Gospel, or Free Promise of God, and Eternal Life (to such that
believe in Jesus) into a Law of Imperfect Faith, and Sincere Obedience, as the
Matter and Condition of Justification before God; and indeed they seem to
violate the Perfect Law of God, as if that was abolished, and a new Law, or
Rule of Obedience procured by Christ's Merits in its room.

2. Not such that only Preach Good Manners, or Morality, tho Christ's Ministers
Preach this; yet to Preach this, is not to Preach Christ and Peace to lost
Sinners; neither is this the great Doctrine contained in their Mission, 1 Cor.
2.2.
but Christ only, and him Crucified.

3. Not such that are Ministers of Man's making, that come to their Ministry as
Men come to Trades, who perhaps never knew Christ themselves, or were ever
Converted: Can such be Christ's Ministers?

4. Not such that Preach the Moral Law, as it is written in Men's Hearts, or
that call the Light or Law that is in all Men, the true Christ of God; no,
these are Deceivers, and Satan in them has transformed himself into an Angel
of Light.

5. Not such that deny the Godhead of Christ and his atoning Sacrifice, or that
Satisfaction he gave to the Law and Justice of God.

Beware of one Math. Caffin of Sussex, a rank Heretic.
6. Not such that deny his Humanity, or affirm, that he took not Flesh of the
Virgin, being neither true God of his Father's Substance, nor true and real Man
of the Substance of his Mother.

II. Affirmatively, they are such that Christ has Regenerated, and graciously
Qualified, by giving them Grace and Ministeral Gifts, and are also authorized
by him, to proclaim the Covenant of Peace. Let me open this a little.

Every Ambassador must have a Regular Mission, or be Authorized, or Empowered,
before he can be employed in that high Place and Trust: Romans 10.15.
And so it is here, How shall they Preach except they be sent? That is, duly,
or authoritatively, and to the Profit of the People. And,

1. They ought to be Converted Persons; and also to be Members of some true
Church or Churches of Jesus Christ, and Baptized Persons; for Christ himself,
till he was Baptized, did not enter upon the Work of his Ministry.

2. They must pass the Probation of that Church, with whom they are Members,
and receive a Regular Call from them to Preach God's Word.

3. Moreover, they that are regularly called and authorized, and every ways
complete and orderly Ambassadors, Act. 13.3.
must be Ordained by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, 1 Timothy 4.14.
by the Eldership.

III. An Ambassador is a Person of Eminency and Honor in his Prince's Sight,
they represent their Prince's Person; so is Christ's true and faithful
Minister; he is one that Christ confers great Dignity and Honor upon, tho many
of Christ's true Ministers have but little Honor from Men, nor are they
accounted Honorable Ones by the World, but they are notwithstanding, Stars in
Christ's Right Hand, and are called Angels of the Churches. Yet what says
Paul? You see your Calling, Brethren, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.
how that not many Wise Men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble
are called: But God has chosen the Foolish things, etc. and base things of the
World, and things despised: That is, Persons of no Esteem in the Eyes of the
World, yet they represent Christ's Person, which is no small Dignity.

IV. Some Ambassadors are Ambassadors of Peace, to persuade Enemies to accept
of Terms of Peace, and to lay down their Arms, etc. The Ministers of Christ are
Ambassadors of Peace, not to reconcile God to Men, but Men to God; 2 Cor. 5.20.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as tho God did beseech you by us, we
pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Man naturally is in a
State of Enmity against God; and this way, through the Workings of the Holy
Spirit by the Word, they come to be reconciled unto God.

V. An Ambassador of Peace is a Joyful Messenger, so are the true Ministers of
Jesus Christ: How beautiful upon the Mountains, Isa. 52.7.
are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings, that publishes Peace, that
brings good Tidings of Good, that publishes Salvation, etc.

1. An Ambassador is a welcome Messenger, if he comes with Tidings of Peace
from a formidable and powerful Prince, whose Arms are irresistible, or whose
force is unconquerable, and has also been justly incensed, enraged, and
stirred up to Wrath. My Brethren, the Consideration of this renders the
Ambassadors of Christ, most Joyful and Welcome Messengers, where they come and
proclaim Peace, because the great God is an irresistible Enemy, Who is a Match
for him? And he is also justly incensed and stirred up to Wrath, by all Ungodly
Persons: Neh. 1.2.
God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is furious, the
Lord will take Vengeance on his Adversaries, Verse. 5.
and he reserveth Wrath for his Enemies -- The Mountains quake at him, the
Hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his Presence, the World, and all that
dwell therein: Verse. 6.
Who can stand before his Indignation? And who can abide the fierceness of his
Anger? He is an amazing Warrior, he can shake the Heavens by his Voice, Psalm.
24.8.
And cause the Mountains to tremble before him; with God is terrible Majesty,
he is the Lord mighty in Battle: He causes the Earth to fear, and the
Inhabitants thereof to melt away, so that the Men of might cannot find their
Hands: He can make Emperors as Stubble to his Bow, and mighty Kings as Chaff
before the Whirlwind: He makes Beelzebub, with his Black Guards, to quiver and
fly into Darkness to hide themselves: He cuts off the Spirit of Princes, and
Triumphs over the greatest and proudest Monarchs: Alexander, Pompey, Caesar,
and Tamberlain, have all yielded to this Invincible Conqueror; and so shall in
a short time the Proud and Haughty Tyrant Lewis le Grand: If God shows but his
Finger on the Wall, Dan. 5.5.
he makes proud Belshazzar to quake; nay, he can employ Inanimate Creatures to
terrify and destroy Pharaoh and his mighty Hosts. O how joyful then must those
Tidings be, to hear that such a King, such an Enemy is reconciled to us?

2. An Ambassador of Peace, is welcome to a People who lie under heavy Burdens,
or are in fearful Bondage, Slavery, and Misery, and have no power to save, or
relieve themselves; for such, I say, to hear of Liberty, or of a Proclamation
of Peace declaring their Freedom, and that for ever, who had once been a Free
People, but lost it; this renders such an Ambassador welcome indeed!

Now this is the State of all Mankind: What Slaves? What Vassals of Sin and
Satan are all Ungodly Mortals? Their Eyes put out, their Robes rent from them,
their Souls wounded, and nothing but loathsome Sores from the Crown of their
Head, to the Sole of their Feet; and fed with nothing but Ashes, Chaff, Husks,
and Gravel Stones, and laid under the Sentence of Death, being Cursed by God,
or by his Holy Law, and Condemned to be Burnt alive, or to lie in Everlasting
Flames ever dying, and yet can never die. O! How welcome is the News an
Ambassador of Christ brings to such a People, who see this is their State, and
yet are by him delivered!

3. An Ambassador of Peace is welcome, if he comes to offer Peace from a Prince
that is Faithful, and true to his Word and Covenant; and one that can give good
Security as to what he agrees to, or Covenants to perform.

Now the Ministers, or Ambassadors of Christ, come from the Faithful God of
Heaven and Earth, who never did, nor can fail in his Covenant nor Promises, to
any Person, or People; He is Faithful, and cannot deny, i. e. He can as soon
cease to be God, as cease to be True and Faithful: Hence all Covenant-Blessings
come to be so firm and sure; Tit. 1.2.
In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World
began: Besides, he has given good Security, even his own Oath, he has Sworn
to his Covenant by his Holiness, etc.

4. An Ambassador is welcome, if he comes to offer Peace on easy Terms. -- Now

The Terms upon which God offers Peace, you have heard, are very easy; true,
on his part, our Peace was made on hard Terms, it was by the Blood of his own
Son: Had he said you shall have Peace upon a Sacrifice of a Thousand Rams, or
Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil, that might seem hard; or if you would Offer your
Firstborn in Sacrifice, or run your Knife into his Throat, and let out his
Hearts Blood, you would think those hard Terms; but it is not your Firstborn,
but his Firstborn, whose Blood must be let out to make your Peace; you are but
to look to him, Isa. 53.3.
trust in Christ: Hear and your Souls shall live.

What tho Faith will launch the Plague Sore, and let out all the Filth and
Corruptions of your Polluted Hearts; will a Man think that is a Cure on too
hard Terms? Sirs, the Spirit will cause you to vomit up that Poison that you
have taken down; But is that too hard to save the Life of your Immortal Souls?
Is it hard to tell a Man he must give up the Traitor he has harbored in his
House? If he would have the King's Pardon, or possess that Peace purchased by
the Blood of his own Dear Son.

VI. That Love and Respect People show to an Ambassador, a Prince looks upon,
as showed to himself, because the Ambassador represents his Person, and that
Contempt which is showed to his Ambassador, he takes as cast on himself.

So Jesus Christ takes the Honor, Love, and Respect which is showed to his
Faithful Ministers, as if it was showed to him, and the same Dishonor done to
them, as if it was done to himself; He that hears you, hears me; Luke 10.16
and he that despises you despises me.

VII. An Ambassador is to do his uttermost, in order to accomplish his Ambassy,
and to bring the King's Enemies to accept of Peace.

So are Christ's Ministers, they are to pray, to entreat, to beseech Sinners to
be reconciled to God; We pray you in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.20.
etc. Paul besought them with Tears, Faithful Ministers are willing to spend
their Lives to win Souls to Christ, yea, to die upon the spot to save one poor
Sinner; Knowing the Terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.
we persuade Men. Our Great Master thought not his Blood too dear to make our
Peace, and shall Ministers think their Strength, their Lives, their Blood too
much, that so they might see the Travel of Christ's Soul; I mean, Sinners
reconciled unto God, or Christ's Blood by Faith sprinkled on their Hearts: Many
like the Minister's Dignity, but few like their Work and Duty. My Brethren, it
is a great Trust that is committed to them.

Mat. 16.26.
1. The Charge of the Souls of Men that are more worth than all the World, is
committed to them.

2. The wonderful Worth of Gospel Verities, Truth is a rich Treasure; We have
this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, this is committed to them.

3. It Is the Ambassy of that Peace which was made by the Blood of the Son of
God, that is committed to them.

Acts 20.29.
4. The Charge of the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood,
is committed to them.

VIII. An Ambassador is to keep close or exactly to his Instructions, or to the
Words of his Commission, not to add to it, alter it, or diminish from it, on
pain of incurring his Prince's highest Displeasure; so must Christ's
Ambassadors keep close to their Commission; Add thou not to his Word, least he
reprove thee, and thou art found a Liar; they must deliver their whole Message:
There is a Curse pronounced to him that adds or diminishes.

1. They must in all things exalt Jesus Christ, or seek the Honor alone of
their Blessed Sovereign: The whole of their Work is to magnify Christ, exalt
Christ; To Preach Christ the Lord, and themselves but Servants for Jesus sake.

Not magnify the Creature, nor set the Crown on the Head of the Will of Man;
but throw the Creature down at Christ's Feet, and to Teach all Men, to account
all Things done by them, or in them, in comparison of Christ, but Dung, Phil.
3.8, 9, 10.
or Dogs Meat, for thus did Paul.

2. They are to preach nothing to be Christ's Ordinance, but what he has
instituted, or positively appointed in the New Testament, or Word of God, they
must look into their Commission, Matt. 28.18, 19, 20.

IX. An Ambassador, if his Sovereign sees he cannot succed in his Work, or that
Rebels will not have Peace, nor lay down their Arms, whilst the White Flag of
Mercy is put out; he orders him to proclaim War, and puts forth the Bloody
Flag; and nothing but War, Slaughter, and utter Ruin follows: So when Christ
sees that his Ministers cannot prevail with Rebellious Sinners, but that they
remain Obstinate and Obdurant, rejecting Peace upon the Terms of this Covenant,
or will not believe to be saved, but seek their Peace some other way, or
continue in their Sins and Unbelief; he orders them to shake off the Dust of
their Feet as a Witness against them, and so to proclaim War, and such will
fall into the Hands of Divine Wrath and Vengeance, and Christ will at the last
Day say, Bring out those mine Enemies, Luke 19.27.
who would not that I should Reign over them, and slay them before my Face. And
hence Wrath came on the Jews to the uttermost: And says Paul, Lo, we leave
you, and turn to the Gentiles.

X. When an Ambassador is called Home, it is a sign the Patience of his Prince
is worn out, and that he will wait on his Enemies no longer.

What may thou then think, O London! Tremble, tremble! for how many Faithful
Ambassadors in thee, has God called Home very lately? Thy Day of Grace, thou
may fear, draws to an end.

XI. An Ambassador must give an account of his Embassage to his Prince.

So Christ likewise will call all his Ministers to give an account to him, how
they have succeeded in their Work; they must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ; and happy will such be, who have been Faithful in all
things unto him, and have won many Souls to the Lord Jesus Christ, and have
their Accounts to give with Joy.

My Brethren, there are one or two Disparities concerning the Work of other
Ambassadors, and the Ambassadors of Christ.

A Desparity between Christ's Ambassadors, and Ambassadors of Earthly Princes.
1. Other Ambassadors are empowered, to make Peace betwixt States and Kingdoms,
or betwixt one Prince and another that are at variance, they are not employed
only to proclaim Peace, but to make Peace; but this Christ's Ambassadors are
not empowered to do, for no Men, nor Angels could make Peace betwixt God and
Man; all the Wisdom and Power of Men and Angels failed here; should the Angels
have combined together to have given up all their Riches, Treasures, and their
very Beings to God's Justice, they could not have made up that Breach; or
should all the Kings and Emperors of the World have agreed to part with all
their Treasures, Kingdoms, and Crowns, but to have redeemed one Sinner from
Wrath and Divine Vengeance; nay, to pay off the Debts but of the least Sinner
in the World, it would have been contemned by the Holy and Just God.

Or, should all the Saints that ever lived, have offered up all their Graces,
Gifts, Righteousnesses, etc. to have satisfied for the smalest Debt any Sinner
owed to God, it would have signified nothing.

Alas, all that Angels have, Men have, or the Saints have, is none of their
own, they owe all they have, and are, to God; therefore can spare nothing of it
for others to satisfy God's Justice: There was none could make our Peace but
Jesus Christ; and Christ's Ministers are therefore to proclaim that Peace which
is already made, and endeavor to persuade Sinners to accept of it on those
Terms offered to them, that they may be reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20.


2. Princes do not meet together to make Peace in their own Persons, but send
their Ambassadors (who are Men of less Dignity than themselves) to do it,
though they receive their Instructions from their Masters; but God and Jesus
Christ treated about our Peace in their own Persons, and Christ, as Mediator,
made this Peace for us (who as God, is equal with God the Father) as well as he
is he Chief and Grand Ambassador, to declare or proclaim it.

APPLICATION.
1. This informs us what a high value we should have of the Gospel, since it
brings such Blessed News and Tidings to our Ears: O! How do poor People that
have suffered by a long and desolating War, who have been ruined thereby,
rejoice to hear Peace proclaimed; they know not how to express their Joy, and
yet know not how long it may be before War may break out again; but here is
Peace proclaimed, Peace with God, Soul-Peace; Everlasting Peace, Peace that
shall never be broken with such who are actually brought into the Bonds of this
Covenant; The Covenant of my Peace shall not be removed, says the Lord that
has Mercy on thee: Lev. 25.10, 11, 12.44, to the 54.
Therefore here is infinite cause of Joy and Gladness, this is the sounding the
Great Jubilee; all Bondmen now have liberty proclaimed, and they shall all be
set free that take hold of the Covenant; the Great Jubilee was proclaimed and
celebrated with Music, Triumph, and all Expressions of Joy.

Now what was that a Type of, but of the Proclamation of Peace in the Gospel?
Hence the Gospel it is called, Ps. 89.15.
The Joyful Sound: Is not here cause of Joy? Where are your Hearts? Do they not
(as it were) leap in you with ravishing Joy?

2. This informs us also of the great and absolute necessity of Preaching the
Gospel, because this way only is Peace made known to us, and also how it came
to be made.

3. This likewise informs us of that great Dignity God has conferred upon his
Faithful Ministers, they represent the Person of Jesus Christ: O what greater
Honor than this can be conferred on Men?

4. Moreover, this Title should procure an high and honorable esteem of
Ministers, ( Pastors are called Angels of the Churches) especially such whom
they have been Instruments to bring to accept of Peace, should highly value
them. Besides, this is also necessary in respect of the good success of their
Embassage; tho it is true, People are too subject to make Misconstructions what
a Minister may speak upon this account; as if he herein rather sought his own
Honor (than in magnifying his Office to befriend the Gospel, and to advance
the Honor of his Great Master Jesus Christ) and therefore perhaps he is under
a Temptation to forbear. Men, for want of Charity, being so ready to interpret
it as a Fruit of a Minister's Pride, and of that Ambition or Affection they
have of some outward Grandeur, and Worldly Pomp, which they design to gain by
such a magnificent Title: The Apostle himself was sensible of this, but yet
would not desist (tho they might count it his Folly) he does magnify his
Office, 1 Cor. 4.5. Let Men so account of us as Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of God; and that they judge nothing before the time.

5. It also may inform us what need there is, that Churches take care to choose
such to be Pastors, that are Sober, Grave, and Humble Men, and not Novices,
Young and unexperienced Persons, 1 Timothy 3.6.
Least being lifted up with Pride, they fall into the Condemnation of the
Devil; who fell by his Pride, and is ready to tempt others to fall by the same
Sin.

6. And O! with what trembling should this Work be undertaken, it is a mighty
Trust, and Woe to them that seek themselves, and not the Honor of God and
Jesus Christ herein.

Object. But some may perhaps say, If Christ will have Ambassadors to treat
with Sinners, why does he not use the Holy Angels, or choose them to this High
Office.

1 Answ. It is not his Pleasure so to do; the Apostle gives one reason for it;
We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels. 2 Cor. 4.7.
Wherefore? That the Excellency of the Power might be of God, 1 Cor. 2.29.
and not of us. And hence, he has not chosen many Wise and Noble among Men,
That no Flesh should glory in his Presence; i. e. Christ's Ambassadors, or
Ministers, being Men, they have the advantage many Ways above Angels. (1.) They
are concerned themselves in the Message they bring, which the Angels are not:
What greater Argument to press a Man to Care and Faithfulness, than when his
own Interest is concerned in the matter. (2.) Men have a more deep sense
arising in their own Hearts upon the account of the Temptations they themselves
are subject to. (3.) Because the Sufferings and Troubles that Ministers often
meet with for Christ and the Gospel sake, are great Advantages to their
Brethren, and others to whom they Preach; had the Holy Angels been the
Ambassadors of this Peace, they could not have been exposed to those Trials,
and Reproaches, nor have Sealed to the Truth of their Doctrine with their
Blood, they cannot die. (4.) Because the Presence of an Angel might terrify
us, their Glory is so great; or, may be it might create Doubts in us, whether
it be a good Angel, or not.

7. This also shows, that Ministers have received a Special Commission how and
what to Preach, and what Ordinance to Administer; and also that they have a
Regular Call to this Office; How shall they Preach, Romans 10.15.
except they be sent?

2ly. Exhortation. Sinners be ye exhorted, and fully persuaded to hearken to
Christ's Amsadors, and carefully to receive their Message.

1. To accept of Terms of Peace by closing with Christ, by believing in him.

2. To consider the Time allowed you, is this present time; Behold now is the
accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
behold now is the Day of Salvation.

3. To consider the Danger of rejecting, neglecting, or refusing Peace and
Salvation by Jesus Christ: How shall we escape, Heb. 2.3.
if we neglect so great Salvation? Know, O Sinners, that Ministers set Life and
Death before you; Hear, and your Souls shall live; Isa. 55.3.
but he that Believes not, shall be Damned. Mark 16.16.
He that Believes has Everlasting Life, but he that Believes not, shall not
see Life, Joh. 3.36
but the Wrath of God abides on him.

What do you say, Sinners? Will you strive to take hold of Jesus Christ?
Believe in him, cry to him for Faith, resolve to lay down your Arms: What
Answer shall I return to my Great Master? Do not make a Pause, but speedily
come to a Resolution, your Lives are uncertain.

Lastly, This severely reproves all that cast Affronts or Contempt through
Pride, Envy, or Prejudice upon any one of Christ's Ambasdors, or that abase,
deride, or raise up evil Reports on him, Christ takes it all as done to
himself; also it reproves such, who account them as their Brethren, and show
them no more respect than to others, may be not so much, but slight and despise
them, and hardly speak Friendly to them; not considering the Place and Office
they are in. But no more at this time.

SERMON VII. Showing the Nature of the Proclamation of the Gospel, and the
Terms thereof.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant of Peace, made or agreed on, and stands firm in
the behalf of all God's Elect.

We showed you that this Peace is proclaimed.

1. What the Proclamation is?

2. Who the Ambassadors are that Christ has appointed to proclaim it. I shall
now proceed to the next thing under this Head.

3. I shall open the Nature of this Proclamation. And then,

4. Show you the Terms upon which Peace is offered.

Would you know what is contained in this Proclamation?

First, The Nature of the Gospel Proclamation opened
Then know it contains a clear and full Declaration of all those Covenant
Transactions between the Father and the Son, about the Restoration of lost
Sinners before the World began; Col. 1.26.
the Gospel reveals those Mysteries that were hid from Ages and Generations: It
is called, Romans 16.25.
The Revelation of the Mysteries which were kept secret since the World began:
Not only that Mystery that the Gentiles should be Fellow Heirs of the
Inheritance, but the Mystery of the Covenant, Purpose, and Design of God; and
also of the Incarnation, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession
of Jesus Christ. I say, it contains the Revelation of the Mystery of these
things, and not only the History of them.

I. It reveals that Infinite Love, Mercy, Grace, and Goodness of God (...) to
lost and undone Sinners, which astonisheth the very Angels of God to behold;
Ephesians. 3.10, 11.
To make all Men see what is the Fellowship of the Mystery, which from the
beginning of the World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ: To the intent, that now unto the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly
places, might be known by the Church, the manifold Wisdom of God. The Good
Angels are not Teachers of these Mysteries, but Learners and Admirers of them;
the Gospel is to them as a Mirror, or Looking-glass, to behold and contemplate
the Divine Wisdom of God in every appearance of it, but especially in this the
last and great Revelation thereof.

II. It reveals the great Love of God the Father. 1 Job. 4.9.
In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten Son, that we might live through him: That he might die to raise
us to Life; to be Crowned with Thorns, that we might be Crowned with Glory; to
be made a Curse for us, that we might be made the Blessing of God in him; there
could be no higher demonstration of God's Love than this is.

III. It reveals the Love of Christ, which has a Breadth, a Length, a Depth,
Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
and a Height in it, and passes Knowledge; Is it not an amazing Declaration,
or Revelation of the Infinite Love of Jesus Christ our Lord? Who tho he was
God, should condescend to die for such vile Rebels, and wretched Sinners as we
were; Hereby perceive we the Love of God, 1 John 3.16.
because he laid down his Life for us, from that near and intimate Union
between the Divine and Humane Nature in the Person of Christ: Christ's Life is
here called the Life of God, as elsewhere his Blood is called the Blood of God.
God is said to purchase the Church with his own Blood.

IV. This Proclamation is a Declaration, Acts 20.28.
or a Revelation that God in Christ is reconciled to his Elect; that is, the
Price is paid, tho the Blood may not be yet sprinkled: Romans 5.9, 10.
When we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son:
Through the Blood of his Cross, God is satisfied, and his Wrath is appeased,
that the Atonement is madefully, perfectly and for ever; Heb. 10.14.
by one Sacrifice he has perfected for ever them that we Sanctified.

V. It does not only declare, but also proclaim this Peace, and Reconciliation;
Deliverance is proclaimed to the Captives; Isa. 61.1, 2.
The Lord has Anointed me to Preach good Tidings to the Meek, he has sent me
to bind up the Brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the
opening the Prison to them that are bound -- To proclaim the acceptable Year of
the Lord, etc. or the Year of the Great Jubilee: The Sinner is told, his Debts
are paid, requiring him to believe this; nay, Proclamation is made of Free
Pardon, Joh. 3.14, 15, 16.36.
to all that believe, That they shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life;
and that God has received the uttermost Farthing of our vast Debt, and that
Christ has received a Discharge, as our Surety for all the Elect; and that he
has not done what he did in part, or by halfs, but that it is fully, wholly,
and completely done, and that for ever; our Faith adding nothing to that
Satisfaction: The Gospel does not proclaim a Conditional Peace, or
Reconciliation, or that God is only reconcilable; so that if the Sinner
performs his part, God will be fully reconciled; that is, if the Sinner
repents, believes is Regenerated, or answers the Rule of the Promise, as some
speak. I know no such Conditional Gospel, or Proclamation; but those Conditions
which Jesus Christ was to perform, which was not only to reconcile God to us,
but us also to God: Can that be the Condition of Life on our part which Christ
has engaged in the Covenant to do? Joh. 10.16.
viz. to bring us into a State of Peace; Them I must bring -- Nay, Jer. 31.33.
God has promised to give us a new Heart, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and put a new Spirit into us. Act. 5.31.
Moreover, Christ is exalted to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance
to Israel, and Remission of Sins.

My Brethren, observe, that the Salvation (...) by Christ was antecedent to our
Faith, and both were to be performed for us by our Surety; that is, he was as
much obliged to give us Faith, or by his Spirit to apply his Blood, as to pour
it forth upon the Cross for us; tho he has ordained the Preaching of the Gospel
as an Instrument in and by the Spirit, to work it in our Souls.

Secondly, This Proclamation, The Proclamation is Universal.
it is an Universal Proclamation.

1. Peace and glad Tidings is to be preached or proclaimed to all the World; Go
ye therefore into all the World, Peace is to be proclaimed to all Nations.
and Preach the Gospel to every Creature. What is this Gospel? why Peace by
Jesus Christ, or that God is reconciled, his Justice satisfied, and his Wrath
appeased by the Sacrifice and Obedience of his Son, that being the meritorious,
or procuring Cause thereof, and Christ requires them, commands them to
believe this? Believe what? Why that God in Christ, through his Death, was
reconciled to us when we were Ungodly; Romans 5.9, 10.
not that God will be reconciled, and appeased, if we Repent, Believe, are
Regenerated, and Baptized, etc. That which remains to be done, (which he will
also begin and perform for all the Elect) is the Sinners believing what Jesus
Christ has done; it is to receive the Atonement, or to stretch out the Hand of
Faith; to receive the Pardon procured by Christ's Blood; not that any Sinner
can believe, until the Spirit as a Vital Agent, infuses Grace into him; the
Seed must be sown before the Fruit can appear: Christ gives the Sinner Grace
that he may be reconciled unto God, as God in him is reconciled: See Paul's
Word, 2 Cor. 5.18.
And all things are of God, who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, verse. 18. to wit,
that God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself; not imputing their
Trespasses unto them, and has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation,
verse. 19. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as tho God did beseech you by
us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God: God, by the Blood
of his Son, was reconciled to us, (that being the Meritorious Price, or Atoning
Sacrifice) and by the Spirit his Blood is actually applied and made effectual,
or efficacious unto us, to our Reconciliation to God; We pray you be ye
reconciled, etc. that is, we pray you to receive the Atonement Christ has
made, or believe the Record God has given of his Son; i. e. believe there is
Life in him, that God is satisfied in him, and reconciled in him: if this, my
Brethren, be not the Nature of the Gospel, or of this Blessed Proclamation, I
profess, I know not what it is.

II. And as Peace is Universally to be proclaimed to all Nations, or in all
Parts of the World, whither God, by his Providence, is pleased to send the
Gospel.

It is to be proclaimed to all sort of Sinners.
So also, in respect to all sorts of Sins, and Sinners, i. e. Pardon is
proclaimed of all kind of Sins, and free Forgiveness and Peace in Christ, is
offered to all manner of Sinners, Rebels, and Traitors to God, whatsoever they
are, not one Sin excepted, save only, the Sin against the Holy Ghost; in some
Proclamations, or Acts of Indemnity, many Crimes are excepted, as Murder,
High Treason, Felony, and the like, but it is not so here; for whosoever they
are, tho never such horrid Blasphemers, haters of God, Traitors to him, and
Rebels against him, if they come in, and accept of Peace, and lay hold of the
King's Grace, humbly believing in Jesus Christ, or throwing themselves at his
Feet, all their Treasons, Murders, Fellonies, Blasphemy, Adultery,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Idolatry, Heresy, Sodomy, Incest, Buggery,
Covetousness, Lying, Thieving, Backbiting, Cheating, Backsliding, or whatever
else they have done, all shall be forgiven, forgotten, and passed by for ever,
as I told you before; yea, tho they have done all the evil things as they
could, Jer. 3.5.
Will he reserve his Anger for ever, will he keep it to the end; behold thou
have spoken and done evil things as thou could: Tho this People had
committed Adultery, Idolatry, and had rejected the True God, and worshipped
Idols, and dealt most treacherously with the God of Heaven and Earth; yet see
what the Lord says; Verse. 12.
Go and proclaim these Words toward the North, and say, Return thou
Backsliding Israel, says the Lord: That is, Believe, plead your Pardon in and
by the Blood of my Son, and I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you, for I
am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep Anger for ever: God out of
Christ, is a consuming Fire, but in him a reconciled God; only acknowledge
thine Iniquity.

What Proclamation can be more free, or universal than this is?

Object. If Christ is to be offered to all, or Peace proclaimed unto all, is
there then not Universal Redemption purchased by him?

Arminianism detected.
1 Answ. Redemption is a Word that denotes Persons were in Slavery, or Bondage,
for whom a Price is paid, and they therefore are set at Liberty: Suppose Ten
Men were Slaves in Algier, and a Thousand Pound was paid down to Redeem them
all, and yet but four were actually Redeemed, is it true to say all the Ten
were Redeemed?

So here, Is it true to say, That the Redemption by Christ is Universal, when
the greatest part of the World were never Redeemed, but remain under the Power
of Sin and Satan? That Redemption which is by Jesus Christ, is from Sin, from
the Guilt, Power, and Punishment thereof: And are all Men in the World thus
Redeemed? It Is not a Redemption only from the Curse of the Law, and Wrath of
God, but also fom all Iniquity; Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good Works: And are all thus
Redeemed?

2. If Christ laid down his Life to Redeem every Man and Woman in the World,
has he his whole Purchase? A Man would think himself cheated, or strangely
deceived, that laid down a Thousand Pounds to Redeem Ten Men, when he finds
there are not above Three or Four indeed actually Redeemed; this renders
Christ's Blood spilt in vain for the greatest part for whom it was shed, or
whom he intended to Redeem thereby, and so he is deceived, or disappointed.

3. There can be no Universal Redemption, unless Christ were a Universal
Redeemer, but Christ is not a Universal Redeemer, Millions of Souls are left
under the Power of Sin, and dominion of Satan.

4. Will a Man lay down Ten Thousand Pounds, to purchase such or such an
Estate, and will he refuse to part with Ten Pounds to take up that Estate to
make it sure to himself?

Brethren, the Gift of Christ for us, i. e. his laying down his Life is far the
greater Gift; and will he do this, and not give the Gospel to many Nations, nor
Faith to believe and receive him, and yet died for them all? See how Paul
argues, Romans 5.10. Chap. 8.32.

5. Or would Jesus Christ die for the whole World, and yet refuse to pray for
them, that they may all be saved? See Joh. 17.9. The Reprobate World he prayed
not for; yet he prayed for all that should be saved: Joh. 17.20
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their Words; that World, Christ is a Propitiation for their Sins; 1 John 2.2.
or had made their Peace with God, for he died for -- Even that World which he
takes away the Sins of, 1 Job. 1.27
he died for, and that All which he draws to himself by his Spirit, he died for
on the Cross, he takes away the Sin of the World by bearing it himself, or by
satisfying for the Sins thereof; He was made Sin for us, that knew no Sin, 2
Cor. 5.21
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him: He made a Plenary
Satisfaction to the Justice of God, for the Sins of this whole World, and
obtained plenary Remission and Grace by his Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18.
that we might be Redeemed from a vain Conversation: The Elect, before Calling,
are as much the World as any others; yea, and the best part of it too.
Moreover, by A Metonomy [All] is put for a part, frequently in the Scripture.
Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the World, that he gave his only Begotten Son; that is, God so
loved Sinful Mankind, both Jews and Gentiles, That whosoever believes on him
might not perish, but have everlasting Life.

Object. We do not plead for an absolute Universal Redemption, but for a
Conditional one; that is, so that if all Repent, act Faith, are Regenerated,
obey Christ, and are Holy and continue so to the End, they shall be saved.

Answ. Is this Gospel? Does the Proclamation of Peace run thus?

1. I argue then that Christ is but a Conditional Redeemer, and has only made
a Conditional Peace; i. e. he made our Peace, and paid our Debts upon this
Condition, viz. That we Repent, change our own Hearts, or are Regenerated, and
get Faith, and sincere Obedience, and continue Holy and Obedient to the end.

2. Moreover, this Notion of a Conditional Peace, and Redemption, renders our
Salvation not to be of God's Free Grace alone, through that Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ, but that we procure our Peace, or make it with God our selves,
with our own Money, i. e. by our Repentance, Faith, Holiness, and final
Perseverance; and that Christ only merited or purchased this Grant, that our
Money, i. e. our Faith, Obedience, etc. should go for good Coin in Heaven, and
procure our Justification, Peace, and Eternal Life for us -- And thus the Glory
that we are saved would not belong to God and Jesus Christ alone; true, that we
might be saved, we may thank God and Christ; God, by the Death of his Son, is
made reconcilable, but that we are saved, we may thank our selves, Christ doing
no more for us that are saved, than he did for them that perish -- but only we
had more Wit and Care than they had; i. e. for by improving our common Grace,
God was obliged to give us his Special Grace.

3. After this Notion Christ might be, or might not be a Redeemer at all; our
Peace might, or might not be made with God, because it wholly depends upon
the Will of Man, Man's Will determines the Issue of the whole matter, not that
Christ undertook to how our Wills, or reconcile us to God; no, but that we our
selves must Answer the Condition of Repentance, Faith, Obedience, etc. or else
all that Christ has done is lost, and comes to nothing; and why might not all
refuse to do this as well as some, who never will believe, etc.

Christ shall be a Redeemer, and make our Peace if we please; this puts a Bar
to the Purchaser (as one observes) a Man cannot in any good sense be called a
Redeemer of such Persons out of Slavery, till the Persons perform those
Conditions, upon which he laid down the Price: As for Example, (says he) I lay
down an Hundred Pounds for the Redemption of a Person in Slavery, upon this
Condition, that he yield to serve me Seven Years after; I must have his Consent
before I can Redeem him; and therefore upon these Conditions I am certainly
suspended from being a Redeemer; nay, and am no Redeemer of such Persons, if
they refuse the Terms: So that for Christ to be an Universal Redeemer, is a
Contradiction; for it is to be a Redeemer of all, if they please, but can be a
Redeemer of none but of such that consented to the Terms proposed.

4. Besides, this casts horrid Reproach upon the Son of God, as if he had
done some great thing for us, in dying and making our Peace; when indeed,
according to this Notion, he does but deceive poor Creatures; for he has made
their Peace and Redeemed them if they will but get out of Satan's Hands, and
break his Chains and Bonds in pieces, and raise themselves from the Dead, and
change their own Hearts, etc. whereas he knew we were no more able to do this,
than to create a new World. Therefore, Brethren, pray observe; we affirm, that
whatsoever Conditions were agreed upon in the Covenant of Peace, our Lord Jesus
Christ undertook to do and perform them all, both for us, and also in us; I
will give them a new Heart, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
I will take away the Stony Heart, and I will give them a Heart of Flesh, I
will put my Fear into their Hearts, and they shall not depart from me. Jer.
31.33
I will Circumcise their Hearts to love the Lord their God -- He that has
begun a good Work in you, Philip. 1.^
will perform it to the Day of Christ, who were born not of Flesh, Joh. 1.13.
nor of Blood, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. To believe is our Duty, but
it is Christ that gives us Grace and Power so to do; and this Grace was also
purchased for us by his Blood; Acts 5.31.
He is exalted at God's Right Hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
Repentance, etc. And Faith also is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.

5. Moreover, Who can believe that Christ would shed his Blood for such whom he
knew would never answer those Conditions which these Men speak of? besides,
they being Conditions out of their power to perform.

6. Moreover I might argue thus, i. e. If Christ died for all, he intended to
save all, but he never intended to save all, therefore he died not for all: Who
shall frustrate his Purpose, or Intention?

7. That Purchase of Peace and Remission of Sins that leaves many Man under a
certainty to be Damned, Examen. Confessioonis Pacificae.
is not to be esteemed a Redemption at all.

8. Moreover, Christ's Death and Resurrection shall have its full and proper
Effects, for whom, or in whose stead he died: See Joh. 12.23, 24.

9. If there be the same Eternal and Unchangeable Cause of the Price of the
Redemption, as of the Application to the same Persons, Dr. Chancy p. 203, 204
in his Doct. of Godliness.
then whosoever his Blood was shed for, shall have the Virtue thereof applied
to them; whatsoever is not efficient is not sufficient to attain the End
thereof: D. C. p. 203.
See a late Treatise.

Object. If this be so, why is the Proclamation so Universal?

1 Answ. Because no sort of Sins, nor Sinners by Name, are excepted, or
exempted: Who can say, he was not included in this Covenant of Peace to whom
the Gospel comes?

2. Because Ministers know not but that every one to whom they Preach, may be
comprehended in this Covenant, or in the Election of Grace.

3. Because if any sort of Sinners were excepted, unless God should discover
them by Name, who were included, Multitudes might utterly despair.

4. The Proclamation does not run to all otherwise than thus, viz. He that
Believes, he that comes to Christ, etc. or that believes the Record God has
given of his Son, or that receives the Atonement, or believes the Testimony of
the Gospel: See Mark 16.16. Joh. 3.36.

This brings me to the next thing.

Fourthly, What are the Terms upon which Peace is offered and proclaimed?

The Terms on which Peace is proclaimed, run thus, viz.

1. That whosoever it is that believes, shall be saved: The Terms of the
Gospel opened
True, if Faith was not the Gift of God, but the Condition agreed on, as
required of the Creature by his own power to act and exercise, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
it would not only be hard, but impossible, because Faith must be wrought in
our Hearts by the same Power that raised Christ from the Dead; but he that
calls dead Lazarus to rise from the Dead, is able to quicken, and by his
commanding Voice, to raise the Soul, Ephesians. 2.2.
dead in Sins and Trespasses: The Gospel in the Hand of the Spirit is a mighty
Instrument of Christ's Power in the begetting or working of Faith in poor
Sinners.

2. The Proclamation runs to him that thirsts: Oh, every one that thirsts
come to the Waters, Isa. 55.1.
etc. Jesus stood up and cried, If any Man thirst, let him come to me and
drink: This thirsting may refer to thirsting after Happiness, desiring to be
saved; yet others think it is a Thirst begotten in the Soul by the Spirit; from
the sight and sense of the Excellencies that Siners see in Christ, and the
Necessity of him, they desire and thirst after him, Faith draws Virtue from
Christ, but the Branch cannot draw Sap from the Root, until it is grafted into
the Stock; Faith is the Fruit of the Spirit, therefore the Seed must be first
sown in our Hearts: And this originally proceeds from our foederal Union with
Christ, in the Covenant of Peace. And Secondly, by our Mystical Union with him
by the Spirit; for it is hereby Faith is wrought; Can any thing but evil Fruit
grow out of a wild and evil Stock, and Root? all Works before Grace, are Dead
Works, and profit us not.

3. The Terms are to look to Christ; Isa. 45.22.
Look to me and be saved, all ye Ends of the Earth: This is all one with
Believing; the Israelites that were stung with Fiery Serpents, were to look to
the Brazen Serpent; so Christ is lifted up, that whosoever looks to him, Joh.
3.14, 15.
or that believes on him, should not perish, but have Everlasting Life.

4. It Is made to all them that come to Christ; Come to me all ye that labor,
Matt. 11.28. Joh. 6.37.
and are heavy laden, etc. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto
me; and he that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

5. It runs to every one that hears, but it is to such that hear Christ's
Voice; Isa. 55.3. Joh. 25.3.
Hear, and your Souls shall live: The Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of
God. It is also to every one that will, Rev. 22.17
and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life freely. Whosoever God has
inclined their Will, or made willing to accept of Peace by Jesus Christ: If any
Soul believes in Christ, thirsts for Christ, looks to Christ, or comes to
Christ, and yet Christ rejects him, then charge him with Injustice: But where
lives that Man, tho he was never so Vile and Ungodly that did thus, but he
found Mercy? O see how Free and Universal the Proclamation is!

Object. It Is not so Free, but Unbelief puts in a Bar.

Answ. A Sinful State is no Bar to the Power of God; for what tho some believe
not, shall their Unbelief make the Faith of God of none Effect? Romans 3.3.
God forbid.

Object. But Men must be humbled first, before they come, and they must
renounce their Idols, etc.

Answ. Grace only humbles; They shall look to me, whom they pierced, and shall
mourn: But God first pours upon them the Spirit of Grace, before they can thus
look, or mourn: See Zech. 12.10. all previous Qualifications before Grace, are
abominable to God, because the State of the Soul is such; and all such things
that proceed not from Faith, God abhors; it is but a working for Life, and
not from Life; Is the Improvement of Common Grace, the Foederal-Condition of
geting Special? No surely.

APPLICATION.
1 Infer. From hence we may infer, That in the Covenant of Peace, the Promises
of God are Absolute; and that this Absoluteness implies, that all the
Conditions that are required on the Creature's part, Grace is promised to them
to perform them on God's part, Who works in us to will and to do of his own
good Pleasure.

2. This Proclamation is not so Universal, but that it wholly depends upon
God's Sovereign Pleasure, who shall reap the Benefit of it: It Is sent to one
Nation, and not to another; God is not obliged to send it to all Kingdoms and
Nations, nor to all in that Nation whither he is pleased to send it; but if
Christ died for all, I mean in the stead of all. to satisfy Divine Justice for
every individual Person, then he would be Unjust in not sending the Gospel to
them all -- But he must Call all, and be sure he would give all the lesser
Gifts, as well as the greater, viz. the Gospel and Faith, Romans 5.10.
etc. to all, as well as his Son to die for them all, and not let them perish
in their Sins and Unbelief, for whom Christ died; for without Faith all Adult
Persons must perish; Romans 10.
And how shall they believe on him whom they have not heard? And how shall they
hear without a Preacher?

3. This Proclamation offers Free Pardon of all Sins, both past, present, and
to come, to all that believe in Jesus Christ: And therefore a final Deliverance
from the Curse of the Law, and the Wrath of God, Romans 8.1.

4. Free Justification by Christ alone, is therein offered also.

5. With a Supply of all Grace to the End, to all them that are in Jesus
Christ, Phil. 4.19.

6. It proclaims God to be our Father, and we his Sons and Daughters, upon
receiving Jesus Christ.

7. Moreover, where any Elect Sinners are, or dwell, thither the Proclamation
shall, and must go, to bring them all into the Bonds of the Covenant.

8. And also whosoever receive this welcome News, shall be saved from Hell,
and be Crowned with Glory in Heaven for ever and ever.

9. O Bless God for the Gospel! for the News of Peace, and you Sinners see that
you attend upon the Preaching of the Word of Reconciliation, for this way he
has ordained to work Faith in you: O! Cry to him to pour out his Spirit and
help you to believe; never rest till you have got a Heart, a Will to take of
the Water of Life.

10. Terror. But tremble you that reject these Tidings, this Grace, for such
that finally do so, shall never have a share of that Peace Christ has made by
his Blood, Joh. 3.36,
for on such the Wrath of God abides, and will for ever. -- Moreover, he will
also make it appear, that Man's Destruction is of themselves, tho their help is
only in him. Dread, least God gives you up to blindness of Mind, and hardness
of Heart; nay, leave you also to Temporal Plagues and Judgments, as he dealt by
the Jews of old.

11. Comfort. Moreover, here is Comfort to Believers who have heard, and do
know the Joyful Sound.

1. They have Interest in this Peace, and have a Title to Heaven by Christ's
Righteousness alone.

2. It is also a sign they were beloved from Everlasting, because drawn to
Christ, Jer. 31.3.
or were Elected before time, because called in time; therefore let all such
praise the Holy God. To whom be Glory now and for ever, Amen.

SERMON VIII. Showing when the Covenant did Commence; also the Nature of the
Covenant opened.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant of Peace, made or agreed on, and stands firm in
the behalf of all God's Elect.

The next thing under the General Head I am upon, I shall as it were but
mention, which is the Sixth thing proposed, viz.

Quest. When did the Covenant of Peace Commence, and who are included in it,
and what is required in order to their actual Possession of the Peace, and
Blessings thereof?

1. The Covenant was made in Eternity, but the time of its first Commencement,
was after our first Parents had violated the Law of the first Covenant.

2. But it did not so fully commence in the actual dispensation thereof, until
Christ put an end to the Covenant of Works; then it was (as you have heard)
established; He took away the first, that he might establish the second.

II. As to those who were included in it; they were all the Elect, or all the
Seed of Christ, or all that he, as a public Head, represented, and no more.
True, the whole World receives many external Blessings by virtue of it, (for
the Elect sake;) for Jesus Christ is their Great Landlord, and Glorious
Sovereign. The World is upheld by a new Title, i. e. from Christ as Mediator;
for had not he interposed between God and it, the whole visible Fabric
doubtless had been dissolved, and the whole Race of Mankind lost for ever.

III. That which is required, in order to actual Interest in, and Possession of
the Sacred Blessings of this Covenant, and the Peace thereof, is Union with
Christ: Ezekiel. 20.37.
I will cause you to pass under the Rod, and bring you into the Bonds of the
Covenant. Under the Rod, God brings Sinners under Convictions, that wounds like
a Rod, and makes them pass under the Yoke, i.e. he Marries them to his Son, and
so brings them into the Covenant. Sinners, by Faith, take hold of this
Covenant, and Christ being given to them, they also give themselves to him, to
be his, and no more their own, but the Lords; they take God to be their God,
and Christ to be their Savior, and so come to possess the Blessings of the
Covenant, and the Peace thereof.

But no more as to this, I shall proceed to the third General Head.

Thirdly, My Business and Work is now to open the Nature of the Covenant of
Peace.

1. I shall, God assisting, show you what a kind of Covenant it is, or explain
the Properties of it.

2. Apply it.

The Covenant of Peace, is the Covenant of Grace.
I. The Covenant of Peace, is the Covenant of Grace: But pray observe, that the
Covenant of Peace may be considered as twofold, or a mixed Covenant.

1. As it refers to Christ, or to his part, and Work therein; and as thus it
was a Conditional Covenant, Christ receives all for us, wholly upon the account
of his own Desert, or Merits.

2. But whatsoever we receive by virtue of this Covenant, it is wholly in a way
of Free Grace and Favor, through his Merits, or through that Redemption we
have by his Blood: But take it either ways, it is of Grace.

First, As to the Rise, Spring, or Efficient Cause thereof, it was God's
Infinite Love, and Free Grace to his Elect: This moved the Fato send his Son to
be our Mediator, and to accept of him as our Surety, to do, and suffer for us,
and in our stead. I have before showed, God was no more obliged to enter into a
Covenant of Peace with Christ for us, or any of Adam's Offspring, than he was
to reconcile himself to the Fallen Angels, for they were his Creatures, and
more glorious in their first Creation than Mankind were. The Surety of the
Covenant was alone of God's finding, he procured him; Joh 33.24
He has devised means that his Banished might not for ever be expelled from
him; 2 Samuel 14.14. Jer. 31.11.
For the Lord has ransomed Jacob, and he sent Jesus: What could be an Act of
higher, or greater Grace and Favor, than for God to vouchsafe, or provide such
a Mediator and Surety for his Enemies? One so Great, Glorious, Worthy, and
Able, and one so willing to undertake to make our Peace, and bring us again
home to God.

Secondly, And then as to us, this Covenant God entered into with Christ for
us, must needs be of God's Free Grace: For as I have before hinted,

I. It was not of Constraint, I mean, there was no Necessity laid on God, or
Jesus Christ thus to Love, Redeem, and Save us in respect of Motive; there was
nothing in Man I say, that could move the Affections of God thus to do; and
much less was there any thing in us, in respect of Merit; we deserved no such
Love, either absolutely, or comparatively, because we were not only
undeserving, but an ill-deserving; nay, Hell deserving Creatures, being Rebels
to God, Vile, Contemptible, and Base Creatures, even as loathsome as filthy
Worms: What is Man, that thou art mindful of him? Job. 7.
What is his Deformity, his Polution, his Filthiness? And O! What Cursed Enmity
was there in our Carnal Mind? Yea, Romans 8.7.
how much like to the Devil were we by Nature?

II. In that God has manifested his Love and Mercy to so many, this shows his
Infinite Grace to usward.

Object. May be you will say, Why not to more? Nay, Why not to all?

Answ. I answer, Why to so many? Nay, why to any at all? Or, Why to such that
are called? Why to us, and not rather to those that are lost? We being all
naturally as vile and as bad as they; nay, perhaps there are some Sinners in
Hell, that were not so bad as some of us once were, which he has magnified his
Sovereign Grace and Favor unto.

III. The Covenant of Peace is alone of God's Free Grace, because, as our Peace
was made without us, not purchased by our Money, nor by any thing done by us;
so the Promise of our having interest in the Blessings of this Peace, or the
Application of the Blood of Atonement, are not Conditional Promises: I say, not
on Conditional Promises, depending upon the corrupt and depraved Will of Man to
perform, but they are alone free and absolute; Jer, 31.33.
I will put my Law in their inward part, and write it in their Heart; and will
be their God, and they shall be my People; they shall all know me from the
least of them to the greatest; I will forgive their Iniquity, and will remember
their Sins no more -- I will sprinkle clean Water upon them: Ezekiel. 36.25.

Ezekiel. 11.17.

Ezekiel. 36.26.

Ezekiel. 20.37.


I will give them a new Heart; I will take away the Stone out of their Heart,
and will give them a Heart of Flesh -- Are these Promises made upon any
Conditions to be performed by the Creature, or on previous Qualifications to
prepare us for Grace; no, they are all free Promises, I will, and they shall;
God it is that opens our Eyes, that works Faith in us, that makes us willing to
accept of that Peace he has made for us: Zech. 9.11
By the Blood of thy Covenant I have sent out the Prisoners out of the Pit,
wherein there was no Water. My Brethren, the Covenant of Peace from hence
appears to be the Covenant of Grace, it was with Christ for us on hard
Conditions, but to us in him, only by way of Free Promise.

IV. That this Covenant is the Covenant of Grace, appears not only because it
is wholly, or alone of Grace that we are brought into the Covenant, but also
because by God's Free Grace we are kept in this Covenant, or preserved in a
State of Peace with God unto the end: They shall not depart from me; my Sheep
hear my Voice, and they follow me, and I give unto them Eternal Life -- and
they shall never perish. Joh. 10.28


V. But to proceed, It Is the Covenant of Grace in opposition to the Law, the
Inheritance is not of the Law. Romans 1.14.
(1.) For if they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the
Promise made of none effect. Again, says Paul, For if the Inheritance be of
the Law, Gal. 3.18.
it is no more of Promise, but God gave it to Abraham by Promise. What is the
Inheritance but God himself, in the Covenant, etc. and this is not by our
Obedience to the Law, but by Christ's Obedience thereto: It Is not, my Brethren,
by our Obedience to any Law, not to the Gospel as a Law, for that would tend as
much to make the Promise of God void, as the other: Gal. 3.21.
For had there been a Law given that could have given Life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law; -- And then also Christ is dead in
vain, Gal. 2.21. (2.) In opposition to any after-Service which we could do, in
order to make God, or Christ, any Compensation, or Return, by way of Gratitude
for making our Peace, sometimes Men show great Favor to the Poor in Distress,
and pay their Debts upon the Condition that they shall Work it out, or make a
Compensation that way; but so it is not here, for when we have done all we can
do, we are but unprofitable Servants: Can Man profit God? Whoever gave any
thing unto him?

VI. The Covenant of Peace is wholly of Grace to us, because we are Quickened,
Justified, Called, Pardoned, Regenerated, Adopted, have Faith, a new Heart,
Repentance, Sanctification, and all things else whatsoever, by Virtue of this
Covenant, in a way of Free Grace, or all is freely given to us of God.

Let me give you two or three Reasons of this.

Why all is of God's Free Grace
1. Because God will have all the Honor to himself of our Salvation, he alone
will have the Glory, and abase the Creature.

2. Because his Design herein is to Exalt and Magnify his own Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ.

3. That Man might have no cause left him to boast nor Sacrifice to his own
Drag, But that he that glories should glory in the Lord.

4. Because God will have the Covenant of Peace to be sure to all the Seed, i.
e. to all his People; but if it were not of Grace alone, it would not be sure,
but an Uncertain and Mutable Covenant, or on such Conditions that might, or
might not be performed.

Secondly, I shall show you, The great difference betwixt the Covenant of
Works, and the Covenant of Grace opened.
that the Covenant of Peace, is the Covenant of Grace as compared with, or in
opposition to the Covenant of Works: My purpose herein is to show you the vast
difference betwixt the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of Works.

I. The Covenant of Works was made with Man, or betwixt God and the first Adam:
Adam was set up as the common Head, or Representative of all his Seed, and he
was obliged to perform all the Conditions in his own Person in that Covenant.

But the Covenant of Grace primarily was made with our Lord Jesus Christ, or
betwixt God the Father, and God the Son as Mediator, in the Name and behalf of
all God's Elect, he being set up from Everlasting, as their Covenanting Head.

II. The Covenant of Works was made with Man, without a Surety; Adam, in his
own Person, for himself, and for all his Seed, being obliged to perform perfect
Obedience, or live and sin not; yet had he none to engage to God, or to
undertake for him that he should thus do: But the Covenant of Grace and
Reconciliation was made solely upon the Undertaking or Suretiship of our Lord
Jesus Christ; true, he was obliged to perform perfect Obedience to the same
Holy Law of God, which Adam (and we in him) was required to do; yet it is said,
That Christ was made a Surety of a better Covenant; Heb. 7.22.
and that not only in respect of the Promises thereof, which are better
Promises, but also in regard of the Oath of God, which renders this Covenant
firm, together with Christ's Ability, and Faithfulness to perform all the
Conditions thereof, and it being a full and free Covenant, and also ratified by
the Death of Christ.

III. The Covenant of Works was a Conditional Covenant, as made with Adam: It
was made upon mutual Restipulation between God and him; and in the second
Addition of the said Covenant to the whole House of Israel, God promised them,
that upon their keeping this Covenant of perfect Obedience, Exodus 19.5, 6.
he would be their God, and they should be his People, Thou shall have no other
Gods before me; and if thou keep my Laws, and obey my Voice, then thou shall be
a peculiar People unto me. And this also they Undertook, Deuteronomy. 5.27
Promised, and Covenanted to to do; All that the Lord our God speak unto thee,
we will hear it, and do it. But what says the Lord to them? O that there was
such an Heart in them! He knew well their great Inability and Averseness to do
whatsoever he required.

But the Covenant of Grace is an absolute Covenant as to us; as I have, and
shall further show you by and by I repeat this often because I would have it
fastened on the mind of the Reader
.

IV. The Covenant of Works, tho it required perfect Obedience, Personally to be
performed by the Creature; yet it gave no strength to perform what it commanded.

1. But in the Covenant of Peace whatsoever God's Law required of us to our
Justification in his Sight, Christ covenanted and performed it for us, and we
in him. Hence the Apostle says, Romans 8.3.
That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: In us, Christ and
Believers are here represented but as one Person; because what he did, we are
said to do in him; Paul cannot refer in this place to our inherent
Sanctification, for so no Believer can fulfill the Law, because his best Works
and Sanctification are imperfect.

2. Moreover, whatsoever Duties God requires of us as to our actual
Justification, in our own Consciences, and as to our Sanctifica-also, he has
promised to give us his Spirit to perform and work in us.

1. He commands us to Believe -- and he has promised to give us Faith so to
do; Ephesians. 2.8.
For Faith is not of our selves, it is the Gift of God, to you it is given not
only to believe, etc. Phil. 1.29.


2. He has commanded us to make us a new Heart, and he has promised to give
us a new Heart, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and to put a new Spirit into us.

3. He commands us to love him, etc. and he has promised to Circumcise our
Hearts so to do, etc.

V. The Covenant of Works laid all that broke it under God's denounced Wrath
and Curse, and admitted of no Mercy, of no Forgiveness, Heb. 10.28.

In the Covenant of Grace, Christ has born that Wrath and Curse; Gal. 3.13.
He has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us: No
doubt but under the Law he that was Hanged on a Tree, was not made a Curse only
Politically, but also Typically, as signifying that Curse Christ should be made
on the behalf of the Elect.

And by being made a Curse for us, he bore the Punishment due to us for our
Sins, and satisfied Divine Justice; so that all our Sins, who do believe in
Jesus, Heb. 8 12.
are in the Covenant of Grace forgiven for ever.

VI. The Covenant of Works, as to the Tenure of it runs thus, i. e. Do this and
live; but the Covenant of Grace runs thus in the Tenure of it, Act. 16.13. Joh.
3.16.
i. e. Believe and be saved; Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall
be saved.

The One puts Men upon working, or doing for Life; the other puts them upon
believing, and working from Life.

The first promises Rewards for the Creatures Obedience, and threatens Wrath
and Death for the Creatures Disobedience.

The second promises Rewards of Grace to Believers, for what Christ has done,
or through his Merits; and threatens Wrath for not believing, Mark 16.16.
or for non-receiving of Free Justification through Christ's Obedience, or for
refusing the only Remedy, Joh. 3.36. Heb. 2.3.
or for neglecting that great Salvation purchased and merited by the Lord Jesus.

VII. The Covenant of Works represents God an Angry God, an Incensed Judge, or
as a Consuming Fire. Heb. 12. ult.


But the Covenant of Grace represents God in Christ, Matt. 3.17 Isa. 27.4.
a Reconciled Father; This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; Fury
is not in me: There is no Fury in God, no Wrath, no Condemnation to any that
believe, Romans 18.1.
or that are in Jesus Christ.

VIII. The Covenant of Works consisted all in Precepts, in Commands which were
partly Moral, and partly Ceremonial; the latter being numerous, some speak of
more than three Hundred Precepts that were enjoined on the People; for tho the
Ceremonial Law shadowed the Gospel, yet Paul counts it part of the first
Covenant: See Heb. 9.1. Yet I deny not, but that there was much Grace held
forth in it.

But the Covenant of Grace, as to us, consists only of Free Promises. Hence
the Elect are called, Romans 9.8: Gal. 3.16.
The Children of the Promise -- Unto Abraham, and his Seed, were the Promises
made: Now we Brethren, as Isaac was, Gal. 4.28.
are Children of the Promise. And hence the Covenant of Grace is called, The
Covenants of Promise. Ephesians. 2.12.


Note, It Is called Covenants, in respect of the diverse Revelations, or
Declarations of it, as to Adam, Abraham, David, etc. and as revealed in the
Gospel, tho it is but one and the same Covenant: True, it may differ in some
Accidents, but in Substance it was the same, viz. Jesus Christ promised, and
Free Justification through him, Gal. 3.21.
Is the Law against the Promises? That is, Is the Law, as given in Mount Sinai
against the Covenant of Grace? No, but given in Subserviency thereunto; or as
leading to it by discovering the Evil of Sin, and the absolute Necessity of
Christ's perfect Obedience thereunto in our stead.

IX. The first Covenant required perfect Obedience to the Law in every Man's
own Person, in respect to their Justification at God's Bar, by which means,
through Man's Weakness, and Inability to perform it, it is called, The Killing
Letter; 2 Cor. 3.6.
The Letter kills -- for Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me,
and by it slew me -- Sin revived, Romans 7.11.
and I dyed: That is, as to any hope of Life by the Law.

But the Covenant of Grace admits of a Substitute, or of a Surety, to keep the
Law for us; and God accepts of his Obedience and Suffering as imputed to us,
to our free Discharge and Justification in his Sight: And hence the Gospel is
called, The Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.
and Life.

Thus the Covenant of Peace, is the Covenant of Grace.

(1.) As considered in it self. (2.) Comparatively, or in opposition to the
first Covenant, or Covenant of Works.

Thirdly, The Covenant of Peace, is the Covenant of Grace, appears in that it is
an absolute Covenant.

It Is the Covenant of Grace, because it is an absolute Covenant.
I. It is not made on Conditions to be performed by us, i. e. which being
performed, gives us a Right unto the Reward promised thereupon; because our
Right and Title to Heaven, is only by the Righteousness of Christ through his
perfect Obedience to the Law, etc. Dr. C.
The Nature of the Covenant of Grace (says a Worthy Divine) is Absolute, or a
Covenant of Promise, notwithstanding all the Conditionalty contained therein.
(1.) In respect of the Original Proposer of this Covenant, it came from the
Free and Absolute Will, Grace, and Purpose of the Father, 1 Timothy 1.9. The
Covenant of Peace was not purchased by Christ; I mean, the Covenant it self,
tho the Blessings in it were Christ's Purchase. (2.) The Covenant is Free and
Absolute as to the Elect Personally considered; because the whole of the
Foederal Conditions lay upon their Head, as undertaking for them.

II If we consider the Covenant (says he) in respect to its Application, or
its being actually applied to the Elect in time; this is done absolutely in
God's bestowing Grace, and the Gifts of the Promise to dead Creatures (or to
Sinners, as Sinners.) In whom (as says our Worthy Author) there is an absolute
Impossibility of performing the least entitling Act to the Promise. Dr. C.
There can be nothing freer than Life to a dead Creature; neither does Life
give a Title to Action, but it is the Principle of Action.

III. All the Promises of the Covenant in the Promulgation of it, in its
Original Nature, and as respecting us, expresses the Tenor of it as most Free
and Absolute: Thus it was to Adam, to Abraham, to David; and to us; I will be
your God, and you shall be my People: It is not you shall have Peace upon the
Condition that you do this or that, ye shall be Pardoned, or then be Justified;
No, but quite otherwise; But he that works not, Romans 4.5.
but believes on him that Justifies the Ungodly: It Is not by our Obedience,
or Duties, but by the Promises that we partake of the Divine Nature. 2 Pet.
1.4. etc. All is given absolutely of Free Grace. True, there are in the
Covenant, Conditions of Connection; if a Man believes, he shall be saved; But
who gives that Faith? Is it not God? Pray observe that Jesus Christ has made
our Peace, and Faith to receive the Atonement is given as an absolute Promise:
Is not the Spirit so given? And pray, does not God give the Spirit, before
Faith can be exerted by us? Is not Faith the Fruit of the Spirit? And does not
the Fruit proceed from the Seed, Gal 5.22.
and the Act flow from the Habit?

Brethren, beware of them that Preach Peace to you, upon a Conditional
Covenant; the Condition they speak of, Reader, be not offended I repeat it is so
often in so great a case.
is your Repentance, Faith, Regeneration and Obedience.

And alas, who is able to perform these hard Conditions? Besides, this is to
turn the Covenant of Grace, into a Covenant of Works; you must work for
Justification and Peace, if you will have it; nay, and you shall be no further
Justified, nor have Peace, than you are Sanctified, if you believe these Men's
Gospel.

But we say that Peace is made, and God has promised that he will give the
Spirit, even pour it out upon Sinners; he first pours out the Spirit of Grace,
and then the Sinners believe or look to him whom they pierced, and receive the
Blessing of Peace, Zec. 10.12
or have the Minifestation of it to their Consciences. There is no Condition
(says Reverend Cotton) before Faith, but a Condition of Misery, a lost
Condition: These Men render God like Pharaoh's Taskmasters, who would have
their Tale of Brick, but find the Israelites no straw.

They will not have Sinners to have Peace, without doing that for it, which
indeed no Man is able to do; But O! let poor lost Souls look up to Christ, wait
on him, attend on his Word, cry to him who has received Gifts for the
Rebellious also, i. e. the Gift of the Spirit, the Gift, (or rather) the Grace
of Faith, the Gift of Righteousness.

Will you have a Righteousness wrought out of your own Bowels, or by doing, or
have none at all? Will you be saved by Works, and not by Grace? But to proceed.

5. The Absoluteness of the Covenant (says this Author) appears as to us, Dr.
C.
in that all the Foederal, Intitling Conditions contained in it, are found in
another, i. e. in Christ, and not in us, neither wrought in us, nor by us; for,
Romans 9.16.
whatsoever is wrought in us, is of Free Grace.

My Brethren,

Does a Child contribute any thing to its own Formation in the Womb? Alas, What
is in us before we are Born again? Jam. 1.18.
And of his own Will begat he us, etc.

Object. But does not the Gospel require Faith and Repentance, as the Condition
of Justification, and Eternal Life?

1 Answ. I told you but even now, there are Conditions of Connection by way of
order and dependence of things one upon another: As in Logic (says the same
Reverend Divine) if a Creature be a Man, he is a Rational Creature; or if God
be the first Cause, he is the Creator of all things: And in this sense (says
he) Creation is a Condition of Salvation; if a Man be Saved, he must be
Created: So if a Man believe he shall be Saved, believing is a Condition of
Connection, a State of Grace is thus a Condition to a State of Glory, by way of
Connection in the Promise; but one is not the Foederal Condition of another, but
both come in as the Gift of Grace; in this sense the Covenant contains all the
Conditions of Order and Dependence in the Exhibition and Performance; the
hearing the Word is the Condition of Faith, but hearing is not a Foederal
Condition; so the giving the Spirit is the Condition of Union to Christ and
Faith, and Faith the Condition of receiving of Pardon, and living in Holiness
and the giving of Pardon the Condition of receiving it, and Holiness the
Condition of seeing God, and of having Eternal Happiness; but these kind of
Conditions are not Foederal Intitling Conditions to the Promise, but are
contained in the Promise, and denote the Connection and Dependence of one
promised Benefit upon another.

2. God requires Faith and Repentance of them that shall be saved; but (1.) Not
that the Creature can do either of these of himself, but to show he will work
Faith and Repentance in all whom he will save, or as he has ordained the End,
so he has also ordained the Means.

(2.) But not that either of these are procuring, or Foederal Conditions of the
Covenant blessings, or of Salvation, because all the Graces of the Spirit are
contained in the Covenant as part of it; therefore neither Faith, Repentance,
Regeneration, as the Creatures Part or Work, can be Conditions of it: These Men
call Faith, etc. such a Condition, that the Mercies granted are suspended till
we perform the Condition. It is therefore, says he, no more than an Act of
ours. True, we have a good Bargain, as a Man that gives but Twenay Guineas of
his own, Purchases an Hundred Pounds per Annum.

Brethren, (as our Author observes) We must distinguish of the Ministry of
Reconciliation, in respect of the Letter of it, and the Spirit of it, 1 Cor.
3.6. in the Letter of it, or mere external Dispensation it kills, because the
Sinner looks upon all these Conditions of dependence, Foederal Conditions, but
the Spirit in its Ministry is absolute, according to the Original Contract, and
the fullest Discovery in its highest freedom; therefore the Apostle says, The
Spirit gives Life. The believing Corinthians, are said to be the Epistle of
Christ, written and transcribed from the Original-Covenant Contract; Not with
Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God. Therefore

From hence we must distinguish between the Covenant in its Absolute Tenure,
and the Ministry thereof, which is Conditionally dispensed, according to the
Connection, Order, and Dependence of good Things contained in the Promise to a
mixed People: The Effects of the Ministry will either soften or harden, it will
either work effectually by the Ministry of the Spirit, according to the Nature
of an Absolute Promise, and unto such it becomes a Savor of Life, unto Life,
or else it works only in the Letter, and unto such it Kills, or is a Savor of
Death unto Death, or an Aggravation of Death and Condemnation: But all its
Divine Efficacy is according to the Purpose, Will, and Good Pleasure of God.
But having occasionally spoken much before of the Absoluteness of the Covenant,
I shall say no more, but Conclude at this Time.

SERMON IX. Further opening the Nature of the Covenant of Peace; that it is a
well-ordered Covenant, a Glorious Covenant, a Full Covenant, a Seasonable
Covenant. etc.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant of Peace, Febr. 6. School.
made or agreed on, and stands firm in the behalf of all God's Elect.

I am, my Brethren, upon the Third General Head of Discourse, which is to open
the Nature of the Covenant of Peace.

1. I showed you it is the Covenant of Grace. And that as considered in it self.

3. (...) It is an Absolute Covenant.

Fourthly, To proceed: It is a well-ordered Covenant; See 2 Samuel 23.5. Yet he
has made with me, an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, etc.

The Covenant of Grace a well ordered Covenant.
I. This Covenant is well-ordered in all things in respect of the Revelation,
and Manifestation of all the Perfections, and Glory of the Three Divine Persons
in the Godhead.

1. The Perfections, Work, and Glory of God the Father shines forth, and is
displayed in this Covenant.

2. The Perfections, Work, and Glory of God the Son, shines forth, and is
displayed herein also.

3. The Perfections, Work, and Glory of God the Holy Ghost shines forth, and is
displayed in it likewise, as has been showed.

II. This Covenant is well ordered in all Things respecting the Manifestation,
or Revelation of the Perfections, and Glory of all the Divine Attributes of
God, and as they also in this Covenant appear to meet together in Sweet Harmony.

III. This Covenant is well ordered in all things, to the utter Overthrowing,
Defeating, and Destroying for ever the Design, Devices, Works, and Kingdom of
the Devil; For to this End was the Son of God manifested. 1 John 3.8.


IV. This Covenant is well ordered in all things to magnify the Sanction and
Honor of the Holy Law of God, in that rather then the Law shall fall to the
Ground, or be violated, or rendered contemptible in God's Saving lost Sinners,
the Son of God comes and takes our Nature on him, and yields Perfect Obedience
to it; and to greaten its Glory, he died the Cursed Death of the Cross, to
answer the Just Punishment it does denounce upon Mankind, for the Breach
thereof. Moreover,

V. This Covenant is well ordered in all things for our Good, both in respect
of Grace here, and Glory hereafter; or in respect of what by it we are
delivered from, and of those high Privileges, Dignities, and of that
Unchangeable and Eternal Honor we are raised up unto hereby: But because I
have lately upon another Text spoken unto these Things largely in two Sermons
on the Covenant, I shall not add any thing further on this Account See a book
Entitled, The everlasting covenant, a sweet cordial for a drooping Soul, -
being Two Sermons Preached upon the Account of Mr. Henry Forty's Funeral,
Minister of the Gospel, and at his Request, from 2 Samuel 23.5.
.

Fifthly, It is a Glorious Covenant.

I. It must needs be a Glorious Covenant in respect had to the Time when it was
made, or entered into, between the Father and the Son; and this was, as you
have heard, before the World began, even in Eternity, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2.

Hence Jesus Christ it is said was a Lamb slain before the Foundation of the
World, Rev. 13.8. and what Pilate, and the People of Israel, and the Gentiles,
did to him, was whatsoever God's Hand and his Counsel determined before to be
done, Act. 4.28.

The Covenant of Grace is a Glorious Covenant.
Certainly that Covenant that was so early, even from Everlasting, contrived by
the Sublime Wisdom of God, and entered into between such Glorious Persons as
the Father and the Son, must be a most Glorious Covenant; and this, I say, in
respect to the Time when, and to the Persons who entered into it, certainly it
must be some great Thing that is contained in this Covenant that was so early,
and by the Eternal God concluded upon.

II. It must needs be a Glorious Covenant, in regard that there was also a
Council held about it in Eternity, for it was made as the Result of a Great and
Glorious Council; Act. 2.23.
Him, being delivered by the Determinate Council and Foreknowledge of God, ye
have taken, and by Wicked Hands ye have Crucified and Slain. The Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit then agreed, That the Second Person should assume the Nature of
Man, and die to make our Peace; tho it is true elsewhere it is said. Zech. 6.13.
The Counsel of Peace was between them both, viz. the Father and the Son; yet
since it is ascribed to God without distinction of Persons, and also seeing the
Holy Ghost has his part in this Covenant to act and do, in order to the actual
and complete Accomplishment of the whole Transactions agreed on in that
Glorious Council, I see no reason to exclude the Holy Ghost from being
concerned therein.

Moreover let us consider the great Things Consulted about in that Glorious
Council.

1. It was how God might be Just, or Magnify his Justice, and yet be Gracious,
and Magnify his Mercy, and Infinite Love and Goodness; or how God might
preserve his own Honor, and yet become our Redeemer.

2. How Sin might be punished, and the Odious Nature, and Infinite Evil that is
in it, be exposed, and yet the guilty Sinner be acquitted.

III. It is a Glorious Covenant, because in it there is a display of God's
Highest, and most Glorious Wisdom; the Gospel contains the Manifestation of
God's Hidden Wisdom, and the Wisdom of God in a Mystery; nay, Paul calls it a
Glorious Mystery, Col. 1.27.
To whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this Mystery.
There is much of the Wisdom of God seen in his Works of Creation and
Providence; yea, and there is also great Mysteries hid in those Works of God,
but the Chiefest and most Glorious Wisdom of God is manifested in the Work and
Covenant of Man's Redemption; Without Controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16.
great is the Mystery of Godliness; God manifested in the Flesh, the Word was
made Flesh. This is the Wonderment of the Holy Angels, and it is mervelous
indeed, how an Infinite Nature should be Personally united to a Finite Nature,
so as to make but one Person: What Wisdom of God is here displayed? O who can
search out the depth of this Mystery?

IV. It must needs be a Glorious Covenant in respect of that display of God's
Glorious Love therein; God so loved the World, that no Created Beings can
conceive of it, neither Men nor Angels.

And so I might speak of the Glory of his Justice, Power, Holiness, etc. which
amazingly shine forth herein.

V. Also in that this Covenant sets forth the Glory, Beauty, and Personal
Excellencies of Jesus Christ.

1. In respect of his Person, as God-Man.

2. In respect of his Offices, of which I have already spoken.

VI. It is a Glorious Covenant in respect of those Things which we are hereby
delivered from, and are also invested with, and raised up to possess -- Is not
that a Glorious Covenant, by the Blessings of which, Sinners are delivered from
Sin, which is the greatest Evil; and that brings them out of a State of Death,
Wrath, the Curse, and Condemnation? And that which also gives them, through the
Application thereof, an Interest in God, the chiefest Good; or which restores
God to them to be their God forever? Consider what Glorious Gifts and
Privileges are given and granted in this Covenant? Is not that a Glorious
Covenant in which God is given, Christ is given to the Soul? (But this I shall
open more largely under the next Head.) But O! what Glorious Privileges are
contained herein, as granted to all true Believers? Moreover, What Glorious
Grace is by this Covenant procured for all the Elect? The Covenant of Peace, a
full Covenant.
And what a Crown and Kingdom do they hereby obtain a true Title unto.

Sixthly, The Covenant of Peace is a full Covenant; there is nothing wanting in
it, either respecting the Glory of God, or our Good and Eternal Happiness.

I. It is a full Covenant in respect of Satisfaction, Merit and Righteousness;
my Brethren, neither Divine Justice, nor the Law of God can require any more
than what Christ has by his Active, and Passive Obedience paid: God says,
Mat. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Christ is called the Sun of
Righteousness, Mat. 4.2.
denoting that fullness of Righteousness which is in him as Mediator; What is
fuller of light than the Sun? And who is fuller of Righteousness than Jesus
Christ? And as the Sun communicates its Light to all the Earth, even so Christ
communicates his Righteousness to all the Elect; i. e. His Righteousness is
imputed to all that Believe: (not the Effects of his Righteousness) but his
Active and Passive Obedience, is the Material cause of our Justification, and
the Imputation of it, is the formal cause thereof, and from him by the Spirit
an Inherent Righteousness is also infused into the whole Body (to whom he is a
Head of Influence) to their Sanctification.

II. This Covenant is a full Covenant; because, in it, or in Christ (who is the
Sum of the Covenant) there is a fullness of Sufficiency: and in the application
of it by the Spirit, There is a fullness of Efficacy to all the Elect, He is
the Head of the Body, the Church, Ephesians. 1.23.
the Fullness of him that fills all in all.

Christ makes the Covenant Effectual or Efficatious to all his Members, filling
all who believe, with all grace by the Spirit, leaving not one believing Soul
empty of what is truly good. Does the Soul want light? Christ will give it; He
is the Light of the Gentiles: The Light of the World. Does he want Liberty?
Christ releases the Captives. Does he need Rest? Christ gives the weary and
heavyladen rest: Mat. 11.28.
In a word, Christ in the Covenant is Food to the Hungry, Clothes to the Naked,
Strength to the Weak, Health to the Sick, Courage to the Faint-hearted, Succor
to the Tempted, Beauty to the Deformed, Riches to the Poor, Peace to the
Troubled, Life to the Dead Christ is all in this Covenant.

III. It is a Full Covenant; because it answers not only all the wants of the
Soul, but of the Body also: Psalm. 111.5
He will give meat to them that fear him, he is ever mindful of his Covenant:
Meat to the Soul, and Meat to the Body. Also, Psalm. 37.3.
Trust in the Lord and do good, and so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily
thou shall be fed. All things both for the Body and Soul, which God sees is
good for us we shall have; he will give Grace and Glory, Pal. 84.11.
and no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly: But yet, we
must not be the Judges of what is good, but leave it to God. We may think that
is good for us which he may see to be hurtful.

IV. It is a Full Covenant; because in it there is the Mediators Fullness
Communicated to all such that are united to him as the effects thereof, it is
not a Creature-Fulness that is in Christ; no, but the Fullness of God: For it
pleased the Father that in him all Fullness should dwell; Col. 1.19. Chap. 2.9.
-- in him dwells the Fullness of the Godhead Bodily: The Fullness of the
Godhead dwells as truly in the Son, as in the Father; and of his Fullness do
all Believers partake, Of his Fullness all we receive, Joh. 1.16.
and Grace for Grace.

1. Therefore in this Covenant, we do not only receive Light, but the Fullness
of Light.

2. Not only Life, but the Fullness of Life, because Christ is our Life whom we
receive in this Covenant.

3. Not only Strength, but the Fullness of Strength; The Lord is the Strength of
my heart, Psa. 73.26
and my Portion for ever.

4. Not only Pardon of Sin, but a Fullness of Pardon; or, the Fullest Pardon,
complete Pardon.

5. Not only Righteousness, but the Fullness of Righteousness; perfect and
complete Righteousness, and you are complete in him. Col. 2.10.


6 Not only Peace, but the Fullness of Peace; Phil. 4.7.
Peace that passes all understanding.

7. Not only Beauty, but the Fullness of Beauty; For it was perfect, Ezekiel. 16.14.
through my Comeliness which I put upon thee, says the Lord God.

8. Not only knowledge, but the Fullness of knowledge; And ye also are Full of
all goodness, filled with all knowledge, Romans 15.14.
etc.

The parts may be weak, yet where Christ dwells or has taken possession of the
heart, there the Soul has a Fullness of Spiritual knowledge: Our Vessels may be
full though but small. And

9. Not only Joy, but the Fullness of Joy; These things have I spoken unto you,
Joh. 15.11.

Joh. 16.24.

1. Pet. 1.6.


that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. Again, he
says, Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full; it is called,
unspeakable joy, and full of Glory.

10. Lastly, And not only Glory, but the Fullness of Glory; for the Fullness of
the Glory of Heaven is contained in this Covenant, or the perfect and full
enjoyment of God, even the Beatificial - Vision.

Seventhly. It is a seasonable Covenant.

I. In respect of God's early contrivance and making of it for us with Christ;
it was provided (my Brethren) before Man sinned, or ready against the very time
of need: Poor Adam when he had sinned knew nothing of it. But God provided the
Plaster before we received the Wound; he provided us a Physician, before we
were Sick; or a Savior in this Covenant, before we had sinned; had not this
Covenant been made before with Christ for us, we had been lost no doubt for
ever that very moment Man fell, every thing being Beautiful in its time, or
proper season. It Is

II. A seasonable Covenant, in respect of the Revelation or Manifestation of
it; even just as Adam had sinned, and when Divine Justice was ready to lift up
his direful Ax of Divine Vengeance: How seasonable is it for a poor condemned
Criminal to hear of a Pardon, just when he is brought to the place of
Execution; and the Halter is put about his Neck, or the Ax lifted up to Cut off
his Head?

III. It is a seasonable Covenant, in respect to the application of the
blessings thereof to a poor Sinner.

1. It Is by the Spirit applied, when the sinner sees he is Condemned, being
under the sense of Sin, Wrath and Condemnation, beholding himself just dropping
into Hell; then this Covenant is opened, and the blessing of free
Justification, and Pardon is applied.

2. When the Soul and Conscience of a sinner is wounded, and his wounds bleed;
then is the Balm of the Covenant applied to heal him.

3. When the Sinner sees he is pursued by the Avenger of Blood, and sees no way
to escape, then his Eyes are opened and he is directed to fly to the City of
refuge; the way being made plain and easy, and the Holy Spirit directs the
Soul to Christ, and cries Refuge, Refuge. Heb. 6.19.


4. When the Sinner sees he is so sick that he cannot live, even then the
Physician provided in the Covenant comes immediately and pours in his Oil and
Wine, Ezekiel. 16.6.
When I passed by and saw thee polluted in thy Blood, I said unto thee live --
Ye I swear unto thee, ver. 8.
and entered into Covenant with thee says the Lord, and thou becamest mine.

Eighthly. It is a Sure Covenant: 2 Samuel 23.5.
Ordered in all things and sure. -- Incline your ear and come unto me, hear and
your Souls shall live, Isa. 55.3.
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you even the sure mercies of
David.

I. It is a sure Covenant, because it is made with such a Surety as Jesus
Christ is, it is not made primarily with us, but with Christ for us, and with
us in him; the sure mercies of David: That is our Lord Jesus Christ, he is the
true Antitipical David. Sure, because they are Mercies granted to us through
Christ's suretiship; and when a Sinner is brought into the bands of the
Covenant, God is said to make this Covenant with him, i. e. he actually
entering then through Christ into Covenant with God; but our standing then in it,
is upon the account of Christ's Covenant with the Father for us.

II. It is a Sure Covenant, because it stands upon the absolute purpose and
unchangeable Decree and Council of God. Psalm. 89.28.
My Mercy will I keep with him, and my Covenant shall stand fast with him. ver.
54.
-- My Covenant will I not break nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
mouth. Hence the absolute Decrees of God, are compared to mountains of Brass,
Zach. 6.1. Denoting how unmovable, stedy and unchangable his Councels are; nay,
Though the Mountains should depart, Isa. 54.10.
and the Hills be removed, yet says the Lord, my loving kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, etc. All
Covenant-Mercys are according to God's Eternal purpose, which be purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord: Ephesians. 3.11.
The Covenant stands not only as the act of God's Eternal Wisdom, but as his
Eternal Decree and Purpose before all Worlds.

III. The Covenant of Peace is sure, because it is confirmed by the witness of
the Holy Ghost.

1. The Spirit of God was a witness to the Covenant when it was made.

2. Moreover it was confirmed in the promulgation of it by the Holy Ghost, by
wonderful Miracles; for what served all those Miracles more clearly for, than
to confirm the Authority of the Mediator, and the verity and stability of the
Gospel Covenant?

IV. Furthermore, The Covenant was (as you heard) confirmed by the Blood of
Jesus Christ, therefore it is a sure Covenant.

V. The Covenant is sure; because it is confirmed by the Promise and Oath of
God: Psalm. 89.35, 36.
Once have I sworn by my Holiness that I will not lie to David, -- his Seed
shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me. Isa. 54.9.
This is as the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of
Noah shall no more go over the Earth, so have I sworn that I will not be wrath
with thee, nor rebuke thee; compared with Heb. 6.13, 16, 17, 18.

VI. It is a Sure Covenant to all Gods Elect; because the Execution of it is
put into Christ's own hands, he is the Executioner of his own Will and
Testament, for tho Christ was dead yet he is alive; Rev. 1.18.
I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive forevermore. Christ
sees his last Will and Testament fully executed by his Spirit.

Ninethly, It is a Covenant of Peace, this is the Name that is given to it in
my Text, which also shows it is of an excellent and precious nature.

I. It Is a Covenant of Peace with God, God is hereby reconciled to us, and we
to him, and that for ever.

II. Hereby we come also to have peace in our own Souls, or peace of
Conscience; nor indeed can we ever have true peace any other ways: For, can
your repentance give you peace of Conscience? Can Tears of Blood apease Divine
Wrath, or satisfy Divine Justice? Can Reformation of life give you Peace, or
your inherent Sanctification, or pious and religious duties? Do you fetch your
peace from thence? If you do, your peace will be turned into trouble and
anguish of Spirit; or can your lively and spiritual Frame give you true and
lasting peace? I affirm it is a false peace that is simply grounded on a lively
and Spiritual Frame or disposition of Heart, for there can be no true peace of
Conscience but by Jesus Christ; Heb. 13.20.

Psalm. 85.8.

Joh. 14.27.


through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. He is our peace, etc. He will
speak peace to his People. -- Not as the World gives, give I unto you. Dare a
Man plead his Faith or good Duties to Justify him, and so from thence fetch
his peace and comfort; alas! What unrighteousness cleaves to our righteousness,
what doubtings attend our Faith, and what wanderings of heart attend us in our
best Duties; nay, may we not find some Hypocrisy in us also, tho in the main
we are sincere; our peace is only had in Christ.

III. It Is only by the peace made by Christ, as is revealed in this Covenant,
that a poor wounded disparing and distressed Soul comes to have peace. I once
cited a passage out of Dr. Owen, being pious Anselem's directions to a poor
tempted Soul on a Deathbed, let me repeat it here once again.

Minister, Do thou believe, thou can not be saved but by the Death of
Christ.

' Sick-man, Yes, I do so believe.

Minister, Then let it be said unto thee, go, and whilst thy Soul abides in
thee, and put all thy confidence in Christ's death alone, place thy trust in no
other thing; commit thy self wholly to Christ's death, cover thy self wholly
with his death, wrap thy self wholly in his death: and if God would judge thee,
say, Lord I place the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy
Judgment, and no other ways will I contend with thee: And if he shall say unto
thee, thou art a sinner, say I place the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between
me and my sins; and if he shall say unto thee, that thou deservest Damnation;
say, Lord I put the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between thee and all my
sins, and I offer his Merits for my own, which I should have, and have not: If
he shall say, that he is Angry with thee; say, Lord I place the death of Christ
between me and thine Anger. Dr. Owen on Justifica. p. 13, 14.


O Sinner, here is thy relief, it is in the Blood of the Covenant, it is
Christ's death under all Fears, Temptations, Despair and Anguish of Soul, here
is peace even under the accusations of thy own Conscience and Satan's
temptations, even in Life and at the hour of Death: O Blessed Covenant of
Peace! Who is it that is just a going to God's Tribunal, that dares to plead
what he has done, or is wrought in him? alas, all hands will be weak all
hearts faint, and all felf-confidence will fa^ them: This Covenant is therefore
all o^^ Hope, our Peace, and all our Salvation, and in it there is indeed a
Salve for every Sore.

USE.
1. Sinner take hold of this Covenant and tho thou art an Eunuch, i. e. a poor
d^^ barren and fruitless Soul, yet if thou tak^ hold of God's Covenant, Isa.
56.4, 5.
or can but ge^ Faith to take hold of Christ, God will giv^ thee a Name in
his House better than that o^ Sons and Daughters.

2. Saints do you fix your eyes also upon this Covenant, to plead the Blood and
Merits of Christ in this Covenant? Rest alon^ upon the Lord Jesus and on the
Faithfulnes^ of God, in his promises in this Covenant, for tho thou know
nothing of thy self, yet th^^ art not thereby Justified; nor can thy s^^
condemn thee if thou art in Christ, for tho^ art perfect in him, touching thy
Justification before the Throne of God.

3. With what comfort then may thou (...) Believer take the Sacrament as a
Token (...) the Covenant-blessings: Yea, thou take i^ as a pledge from God,
that all his wrath (...) over in Christ, and that Divine Justice is satisfied
toward thee in Christ, and that all the Sins are for ever pardoned, that God
is the Father, Jesus Christ is thy Savior, and Heaven is thy Inheritance, but
here I shall Conclude at this time.

SERMON X. Showing the Covenant of Peace, is a tried Covenant; that it is but
one Entire Covenant, viz. That the Covenant of Grace and Rededemtion, are not
Two distinct Covenants as some lately affirm, but only one and the same
Covenant: That it is a Covenant full of the Strongest consolation, and lastly an
Everlasting Covenant.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


I AM upon the opening the nature of the Covenant of Peace, Feb. 10.169
or to show you what kind of Covenant it is, I have passed through an Induction of
Nine Particulars already; shall proceed.

Tenthly, It is a Tried Covenant.

I. All the faithful Children of God ventur^ their Souls and their Salvation
upon it, and never failed any one of them; Adam no dou^^ ventured his Soul and
Salvation thereon, (...) did Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
all the Holy Patriarchs, and all the Holy Prophets, and the Apostles of Jesus
Christ together with all the Saints both in the times of the Old and New
Testament, an^ they all found it, having tried it, a Sure Covenant.

II. Multitudes of Souls departed this Li^ are already made Perfect in Heaven,
by the Grace and Blessings thereof, they find it t^ their own unspeakable Joy
and Comfort a sum and happy Covenant: For it was by the Merits and
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, or bloo^ of the Everlasting Covenant, they are
all go^^ to Heaven.

III. Never did any person venture (...) Soul upon Jesus Christ, by virtue of
this Covenant, by Believing truly on him; but (...) found it a Firm and saving
Covenant: (...) how many have tried and found it so t^ be.

IV. Satan that great enemy of Believers and of the Souls of Men, has often
tried (...) and endeavored to shake the hopes of Believers, and break this
Covenant; but h^ to his shame and confusion sees that he cannon break the bonds
thereof.

Eleventhly, It is one entire Covenant, The Covenant of Redemption and the
Covenant of Grace, not Two distinct Covenants, but one and the same Covenant.
i. e. the Covenant that was made with Christ from Eternity, is the Covenant of
Peace and ^econciliation, or the Covenant of Grace; ^s well as of Redemption.
For,

1. Was it not made with him as our Co^enanting Head, and so in him with all
Gods ^lect and for them? Some of late times would ^ave this Covenant to be a
Covenant of Re^emption, and not the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation; but a
distinct Covenant, and so plead for Two Covenants, besides the ^ovenant of
Works, which we read no where ^f in the Holy Scriptures

2. Was it not wholly of the Free Grace ^f God; yea, and the highest Act and
De^onstration thereof, that he was pleased to ^nter into that Covenant with his
own Son, ^s our Surety and Mediator?

3. Was not all the good which we receive ^n time promised to us in Christ
before the World began? See Tit. 1.2. Nay, was not all ^race given Foederaly to
us in Christ in that Covenant? See 2. Tim. 1.9. Who has sav^d us and called
us, not according to our works ^ut according to his own purpose, and Grace
which ^as given to us in Christ before the World be^an.

4. Was it not that Covenant that was made ^etwixt the Father and the Son, that
Christ was made the Mediator and Surety of, and Confirmed by his death? and did
not he un^ertake to Die for all Gods Elect when the Fullness of time was come?
Or was not God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18.19.
in and by virtue of that Covenant from everlasting a reconciling the World to
himself? And if so, Was not the Covenant made with Christ of Redemption, a
Covenant of Peace and Reconciliation also? Was it not representitively made
then for us in Christ, and actually made with us by Application; and that it
might be thus Applied to us in time, did not Christ engage to see it done for
us before time in that Holy Covenant then agreed on?

5. Is there any one Promise, one Blessing, or one Privilege which we received
which was not Primarily granted to Christ for us in that Covenant, viz. That
our Acceptance should be in Christ, that our Justification should be in him,
and our Sanctification should be in and by him, etc?

6. Was not the Covenant of Redemption made with Christ as a Public Person, a
Second Adam: And if so, was it not made in him with all his Seed?

Take here what a Reverend Author has Asserted in this case.

Dr. C. p. 126, 127.
That Scripture, Isa 53.10, 11, 12. Is (says he) a place wherein this Covenant
is clearly described between the Father and the Son, and it holds forth the
Covenant of Grace fully and clearly, yea the promise of all Grace and Benefits
that are contained in the said Covenant of Grace. And the Apostle tells us
expressly, that this Covenant agreement was the Will, by which Will we are
Sanctified, through the Offering the Body of Jesus once for all. -- He further
argues,

2. That Covenant that contains in it the whole matter and form in Conditions
and Promises of the Covenant of Grace, does not Essentially differ from it; but
the Covenant of Redemption does contain in it the Conditions and Promises of
Grace, yea, all things that pertain to Life and Godliness: And it contains in
it all conditions upon which we may be partakers of any Promimises, i. e.
Christ's Person, Offices, Sacrifice, Righteousness active and passive; there is
no Covenant condition of Atonement, Propitiation or Satisfaction unto the
Justice of God: But it is here, Christ is the great fulfiller of the Law and
satisfier of it; Romans 10.4.
and he is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.

3. From the veiled dispensation of the Covenant of Grace (says he) before the
coming of Christ, their Sacrifices and Ceremonial Administration held forth in
a Figure, that it was made with Christ and confirmed in him as the great
Offering and Atonement; Christ is there exemplified and set forth as the
fullness of the Covenant of Grace, both in respect of Promises and Conditions.

4. When we plead (says he) for any thing of the Covenant of Grace, it is the
Promises of Life made to us in Christ, as Yea, and Amen; and to us in him, in
respect of obtaining and performing to us.

5. Our Justifying acts of Faith is fixed on Christ as the Sum of the Covenant
of Grace, as satisfying for our Sins; and as to whom the Promises were made,
and the great things promised, as the Fountain and Meritorious cause of all
Blessings: He is given to us as the Covenant.

6 There is (says he) all Grace to be had in this Covenant, Frustra sit per
plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. There is no Grace but is given forth and
received by us, by the Covenant between the Father and the Son, the gift of the
Spirit, the Grace of Faith, Justification by his Blood; by him came all Grace,
yea, all other supposed Grace that came not from the Father, and through Christ
is no Grace, and will not profit us.

7. Where the Covenanters Conditions and Promises are all from Free Grace and
Love to us, there is a Covenant of Grace; but in that Covenant they call a
distinct Covenant of Redemption, the Covenanters, the Conditions and Promises
are all of Free grace and Love to us; God the Father from his Free grace and
Love to us called his Son to this Undertaking and Covenanting with him; God the
Son in our Persons (or in our behalf) from his Love and Free grace Covenanted
with the Father, he came and freely offered himself to perform the Covenant
Conditions; the condition of this Covenant, in all mediatorial perfections and
performances, is freely promised and bestowed upon us; the promise of Eternal
life. All Grace and Glory are promised, and given in this Covenant: that is a
Covenant of Grace, wherein God is to us a God of all Grace.

8. If the Covenant of Redemption be not the Covenant of Grace, then there is
more Covenants than the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace for Life
and Salvation; but there is no more Covenants for Life and Salvation, but that
of Works, and that of Grace, the Minor I think hardly any will deny -- If
Church Covenants be alleged they add nothing to this Grand Covenant, but are
the accomplishments of the promises thereof to whom it does belong, it being
promised that they shall be Gods People; in this Covenant Christ stipulates and
we in him as we did in the first Adam, then; And when we stipulate being moved
thereunto from the grace of the Promise, and enter personally into this
Covenant, embracing that Covenant which was made for us in Christ, it is called
a laying hold of it: it is solemnly also owned, professed and restipulated to,
when we enter into Church Fellowship: the repeating and restipulating, and
renewings of the same Covenant may be without changing the Covenant: For we
find God often repeating this Covenant, and renewing it with his people in
Revelation and Establishment, as with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
etc. yet it was was the same Covenant: Doctor Chauncy.
So are Gods Children excited and encouraged thereunto from the Free Grace of
the said Covenant. Thus this Author.

1. Now let me add one or two arguments more to what this worthy Author has
said, viz. If the Covenant of Redemption, be not the Covenant of Grace, or
Covenant of Peace and Reconciliation, which God calls his Covenant; The
Covenant of my Peace shall not be removed says the Lord: Then it will follow,
that our Peace is made with God, or God is reconciled to us by a Covenant of
Grace, which we enter into with him, which Covenant Christ Merited for us in
his performing the Covenant of Redemption; and if it be so, how is it Paul
says God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself? Indeed as far as I
can see, this notion of two distinct Covenants of Redemption and of Grace,
seems to be defended of late, on purpose to favor the grand Errors of our new
Methodists viz. In the Covenant of Redemption, say they, Christ made God amends
for our breach of the Law of perfect obedience, by himself alone, and for
himself only, that so he might be a fit Mediator, and Merit a new Law of Faith
and sincere Obedience; (for their Covenant of Grace is a Law of Obedience)
which Law or Covenant he Confirmed by his Death. So that now God, say they,
enters into a Covenant with mankind, and if they perform the Conditions of it,
or so far as they do, so far they shall be justified, and shall have Eternal
life provided they continue unto the end; and thus (as before I have hinted)
Christ is our legal righteousness in the Covenant of Redemption, he fulfiled
the Law of Works, or the strict Law of perfect Obedience: by giving God a
satisfying recompense, And so he has abolished the Law of perfect obedience;
but our Faith, Inherent-righteousness, Gospel-holiness and Sincere obedience,
is our Evangelical Righteousness; or that which justifies us at Gods Bar or in
his sight: Now this dangerous Error, I say, seems to follow the allowing of two
distinct Covenants.

2. There is no distinction between the Covenant of Redemption and the Covenant
of Grace; because Redemption presupposes Peace and Reconciliation, and not
only Gods Reconciliation to us, but our reconciliation to him; for Redemption
is not from the Curse of the Law and Wrath of God only, but also from Sin, or a
vain Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
and out of the Power and Kingdom of Satan, which Christ (by his Blood as
poured forth, Tit. 2.14.
and in applying it) undertook to do in the Covenant of Peace; which is called
Christ's Covenant. As for thee by the blood of thy Covenant, Zech. 9.11.
I have sent forth the Prison^rs out of the Pit, wherein there was no water.

Reverend Charnock says, Christ is the surety of the Covenant of Grace, but the
Covenant of Redemption had no surety, the Father and the Son trusted one
another; the Covenant of Redemption was not Confirmed by Blood, etc.

Answ. Had God only entered into Covenant with Christ, as a single Person and
for himself, there had been no need of a surety; but since he entered into that
Covenant as a public person, and that for broken and fallen mankind, whom God
regarded not, their Credit being for ever gone; there was a necessity of
Christ's suretyship in that said Covenant, in respect had to those things,
which Christ was to do for us, and also work in us; which he then engaged to
the Father to perform, and if the Covenant of Redemption from Sin and Wrath was
not confirmed by the Blood of that Covenant, one grand part of our safety and
security is gone for ever.

My Brethren, Our Lord Jesus Christ when he first entered into the Covenant with
the Father, See the Everlasting Covenant a sweet Cordial, p. 12, 13, 14, 15.
agreed to be the Mediator and Surety thereof; also evident it is, that there
are some Transactions where suretiship is required, which a Surety must
undertake to do, and readily agree unto; even all such things which the
Creditor requires and the nature of the Covenant calls for: So that there are
some things that peculiarly belong to him as surety, even so and in like manner
it was here about the complete accomplishment of the Covenant of Grace entered
into between the Father and the Son in behalf of the Elect. Yet all the good we
receive through the applicatory part of the said Covenant, are but the effects,
fruits or product of the same Covenant as it was made with Christ for us, as
our Surety -- Also among Men those things and Covenant Transactions betwixt the
Creditor and the Surety which peculiarly appertain to him to perform and answer
(though the poor debtor nevertheless is mainly concerned therein) they being
such things that must be performed by the Surety for him, or the Debtor can
have no benefit by it; yet the free grants to the Debtor in the said Covenant
upon the Suretys engagement is never called a distinct Covenant in it self, but
(as I said before) it is one and the same Covenant, our Covenant therefore is
but a branch of Christ's Covenant with God the Father, in which he engaged to
Spouse and Marry us to himself for ever: Therefore I know not what these Men's
nice distinctions signifies, unless it be to amuse the world, or except it be
for the worser purpose just now hinted.

Brethren, The distinction lies not in two distinct Covenants Essentially
differing from each other, but in the distinct parts of the said one entire
Covenant.

I. One part as it refers to Christ, viz. he is the Surety and we the Debtors
whom he engaged for; his money and not ours pays all, and makes satisfaction to
God. Christ is the Redeemer in this Covenant, and we the Redeemed. Christ is
the Savior, and we the Saved.

II. That part that appertains to Christ was upon conditions of what he was to
do and suffer, he has obtained all for us wholly by Desert and Merit, and we
have all, every way of mere grace and favor particularly in the applicatory
part thereof: Moreover, let it be noted that there is a difference in respect
of the time of the making of the Covenant, and of the Revelation, Execution and
Application thereof.

Christ in the Covenant first Articl'd with the Father to be Mediator and
Surety, etc. and in the execution of the Covenant actually discharges those
Offices, and all things that appertains to them, one thing being his bringing
of us home to God, or into the bonds of his Covenant.

Moreover, Take here what the Reverend Assembly of Divines have said about the
Covenant of Grace, Larger Cathechism.
viz. Q. 30. Does God leave mankind to perish in a state of Sin and Misery?

Answ. God does not leave all mankind to perish in a state of Sin and Misery,
into which they fell by the Breach of the first Covenant, called the Covenant
of works; but of his mere love and Mercy delivers his Elect out of it, and
brings them into a state of Salvation, by the second Covenant, commonly
called the Covenant of Grace.

Q. 31. With whom was the Covenant of Grace made?

Answ. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ as the second Adam, and in
him with all the Elect as his Seed: Thus that Learned Assembly.

From hence it does appear, that this opinion of two distinct Covenants was not
received by that Assembly; they own but two Covenants i. e. that of Works and
that of Grace, and I am sure the Scriptures bear witness of no other Covenant
of Redemption, but that of Grace and Reconciliation, which includes Redemption
and all Covenant-Blessings. My Brethren, That very Covenant made between the
Father and the Son, was hidden or kept secret as to the clear manifestation of
it till Christ came, and then it was manifested, and the clear revelation of it
is in the Gospel, which shows how God manifests the grace of this Covenant by
offering Pardon and Peace to sinners, by revealing of Christ who is called the
Covenant, and offering him to them for Life and Salvation; so that this
Covenant contains all Grace, Mercy and Redemption.

Moreover, Remarkable it is to see how that Learned Person that wrote the Book
called The Ark of the Covenant, (who too boldly asserts the Covenant of
Redemption a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace) does in diverse
places contradict himself herein, take some of his words, Ark of the Covenant,
p. 3.
viz. So that I take(says he) the meaning of these words, This is my Covenant
with them, my Spirit that is upon thee, etc. to be, This is my Covenant that I
have made with thee upon their account, and for their behoof; or the Covenant
that I have made with them: to wit, virtully when I Covenanted with thee, and
made promises to thee for their behoof. He confesses that the Covenant of
(...) was made with Christ primarily, and representatively, and with the Elect
in him; and all promises of Grace was made to us in Christ in that Covenant:
And what do we say more? but this is to overthrow his own Notion of two
distinct Covenants.

Nay, the same Author confesses, that the grand thing he argues for, is to
prove, that there is nothing spoken of Christ's Seed, Page 5
as parties with whom God deals in this Covenant, and upon whom he lays any
Commands.

Answ. We say so too, Christ is only the Covenanting party for us, and on our
behalf; and all the doing and suffering work is laid upon him, he is
substituted Mediator, Surety, Savior and Redeemer; it is enough we were to be
the Saved, and Accepted and Justified in and by his Obedience and Merits:
Moreover, all Commands concerning us are given to us from God in Christ as
Mediator, but not to bring us into the Covenant, but as being his Redeemed
People, as he is our King, we ought to obey and serve him.

Page 21.
Again, he says, In this Covenant Christ received his Offices, Employment,
Trust, Powers and Authority. A great truth! (and in the next place he says)
Christ is Lord Mediator of the new Covenant, etc.

Answ. Is not the New Covenant the Covenant of Grace, this they Confess; and he
affirms Christ was chosen Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, let me infer upon
him viz.

If Jesus Christ in that Covenant he entered in with the Father, was constituted
Mediator of the New Covenant, and he is Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, How
can that Covenant be distinct, or Essentially differ from the Covenant of Grace?

Moreover, it is observable how this great Author, and Reverend Charnock differ
one with the other, yet both assert the Covenants are distinct

This Man says, P. 26.
that Christ was surety of the Covenant of Redemption; the other denies it, and
says, Charnock on Reconcil. p. 273.
The Covenant of Redemption had no surety, but the Father and the Son took each
others words. True, we say none was a surety for Christ to God in this
Covenant, nor for God to us; but Christ in this Covenant was our surety to God,
he undertook on our behalf; Art. of the Cov. p. 423
one says Christ is Mediator (King, Priest and Prophet) of the Covenant of
Redemption:

The other says Christ is Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, Charnock's
Reconcil. p. 273.
but not the Mediator of the Covenant of Redemption.

The mistake, I humbly conceive, lies in this, viz. They distinguish not
between Christ's part and work in the Covenant as our Covenanting head, and the
Blessings we receive as the effects of his Mediation.

But again, our Scottish Author says, Art. of the Cov. p. 457
Christ is the Covenant of Grace comprehensively, he is the very compound, or
there is an abridgment of the Covenant; in the Mediators Person, there is the
little sum, or the whole Covenant -- Consider this, how the Parties Articles,
Mutual Stipulations, Promises, Proportion, and Blessings of the Covenant, are
all some way abridged in Christ, and summed up in his Person.

1. Christ is all the Parties of the Covenant of Grace, or rather both the
Parties are comprehended in the Mediator's Person; he is both the Parties in
three respects. (1.) Because of the Union of the two Natures in his Blessed
Person, he is God-Man, God made manifest in the Flesh. (2.) Because the Person
who is Mediator, is upon both sides of the Covenant, as being one with the
Father and Holy Ghost, he is on God's part, Joh. 5.7. 2 Cor. 9.13. And as he is
one with us, he is on our side, Heb. 2.11.13. For both he that Sanctifies, and
they that are Sanctified, are all of one -- (3.) He is not only upon both sides
of the Covenant, but he contracts for both the Parties.

2. Christ obtains the Consent of both Parties, p. 459.

3. The everlastingness of the Covenant is comprised in Christ, he is God
everlasting, yea, an everlasting Mediator, he was set up from everlasting, p.
462.

Now these things being granted by our Author, what cause he has to affirm,
That the Covenant of Redemption, and that of Grace, are two distinct Covenants,
I will leave to all Men's Considerations.

Mr. Sam. Petto on the Covenant, p. 18.23.
But further, to confute this Notion, take what another Reverend Writer has
written on this Subject. The Covenant of Grace was made and established not
only with us, but jointly with Jesus Christ, and with us in him; so that both
are but one and the same Covenant: For the great Transactions with Jesus, yea,
even the giving and sending of him, and his accepting the Office of a Redeemer,
and undertaking for us, are all of Grace, as well as what is promised to us
through him; therefore the Covenant of Grace must take in all that conduced
(otherwise than a mere Decree) to our Restoration, and eternal Salvation.

1. There is (says he) no Scripture Evidence for making these to be two
Covenants, (one of Redemption with Christ, and another of Grace and
Reconciliation made with us) that distinction which some use, is improper, for
the Parts are coincident, seeing that which was made with him, was of mere
Grace also, Joh. 3.16. and it is promised, that he should be given for a
Covenant, Isa. 42.6. therefore it is of Grace we are Redeemed by him, 2 Timothy
1.9. There was Grace before the World was, and that must needs be in the
Covenant as with Jesus Christ, which was for reconciling the World to the
Father, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Col. 1.20, 21. It is true Christ only is our Redeemer
and Surety, not we in our own Persons; and Christ has some peculiar Precepts
and Promises appropriated to him, which are not afforded to us in the same
manner and degree; yet this hinders not the Oneness of the Covenant with him
and us.

2. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ as a public Person, a second
Adam, and therefore with all his Seed in him.

3. All in the Covenant as with us, is undertaken for, and promised in the
Covenant between the Father and the Son, and so together make but one Covenant.

4. All Covenant Blessings are primarily granted to Christ: Thus this Great and
Worthy Person. See also the Everlasting Covenant: A Sweet Cordial for Drooping
Souls, p. 10. to 18.

But because in my two Sermons Preached and Published on the Everlasting
Covenant, I have answered the Reverend Mr. S. C's Eight Arguments, to prove the
Covenant of Redemption a distinct Covenant, I shall refer the Reader to that
small Tract, and say no more to this at this time.

Twelfthly, The Covenant of Grace, is a Covenant of Consolation, of strong
Consolation.

1. Considering what is contained in it, and also the Nature of it.

2. In that it is all our Hope and Salvation, all the Water of Life flows down
to us through this Covenant.

3. In that also it affords us Comfort in all Times, States and Conditions,
both in Life, and at the Hour of Death; and this was that which was David's
Dying, 2 Samuel 23.5.
or Sickbed Cordial. For Consider,

Art thou afflicted, or tempted? Look into this Covenant; His Seed will I make
to endure for ever: If his Children forsake my Law -- then will I visit their
Transgressions with the Rod, Ps. 89.29, 30, 31.
etc. but my loving Kindness I will not take away, (...) from him nor suffer my
Faithfulness to fail. See 1 Cor. 10.13. Or,

Art thou Backsliden from God? See what God says; Hos. 14.4.
I will heal their Backslidings, and love them freely.

Do thy Sins grieve thee? (...) thy Soul? Look into the Covenant; Jer. 31.31
32, 33.
I will be merciful to their Transgressions, and their Sins and Iniquities I
will remember no more. Or,

Art thou deserted? God is faithful, he remembers his Covenant, he will return
again.

Do fear thou shall some time or another depart from God? Read the Covenant
Promises; I will put my fear in their Hearts, Jer. 32.40.
and they shall not depart from me.

Do thou fear thou shall suffer want, yea, want Bread? See the Covenant; Ps.
84.11.
He will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them
that walk uprightly. -- If therefore there be any Consolation in Christ, if any
Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies,
it is all in this Covenant.

Lastly, It is an everlasting Covenant; He has made with me an everlasting
Covenant: As it was made from everlasting, so it will abide to everlasting;
it is compared to God's Covenant of the Day and Night, Jer. 33: 20. Thus says
the Lord, If my Covenant of the Day and Night, and that there should not be Day
and Night, then may also my Covenant be broken with David my Servant. Covenant
Love is everlasting Love, Christ's Covenanting Obligation was an everlasting
Obligation, Covenant Espousals are everlasting Espousals; Hos. 2.19, 20.
I will betroath thee to me for ever: Covenant Redemption is eternal
Redemption, and Covenant Salvation is an everlasting Salvation; Israel shall be
saved in the Lord, Isa. 45.17.
with an everlasting Salvation -- But my Salvation shall be for ever. Isa.
51.68.


SERMON XI. Showing what is contained in the Covenant of Grace, or what the
Gifts, Grants, and Privileges which are Vouchsafed to all Comprehended therein.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant of Peace, made or agreed on, and stands firm in
the behalf of all God's Elect.

Showing what great Gifts, Grants, and Blessings are contained in the Covenant
of Peace.
My Brethren, I shall now proceed to the next thing.

Fourthly, The Fourth General Head proposed, was to show you what is contained
in the Covenant of Grace; I mean the Gifts, Grants, and Glorious Privileges
vouchsafed to all those Persons that are comprehended therein.

The First and chief Gift which is given in this Covenant, is God himself; and
in speaking to this,

1. I shall, God assisting, show you how God comes to be our God in this
Covenant.

2. Show you what this of having God to be our God does import.

3. I shall show you what a wonderful Gift, Grant, and Privilege this is.

I. My Brethren, How we come to have God to be our God.
how Man had God to be his God at first in the Covenant of Works, I shall not
speak of here; it is evident that by breaking the first Covenant, he lost God,
or that Blessed Covenant Relation he stood in to him; but now we have a new
Title, God is ours again, and on better and more sure Basis, viz. upon the
account of Christ's Mediation and Satisfaction -- I will be your God, Ezekiel.
36.27.
compared with Jer. 32.38. Cap. 24.7. and 30.31.33. Now that these Promises
refer to the Covenant of Grace, See Heb. 8.8, 9, 10. And finding fault with
them, he says, Behold the Days come, says the Lo^d, when I will make a New
Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of Judeth, ver. 8. Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the Day when I
took them by the Hand to lead them out of the Land of Egypt: Because they
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, v. 9. For this is the
Covenant, etc. -- I will put my Laws in their Mind, and write them in their
Hearts, and I will be to them a God, etc. This being (as I said) the great and
chiefest Gift, and Grant in the Covenant, I shall proceed to show how God comes
in this Covenant to be our God.

1. Originally and Primarily by virtue of that Covenant made with Christ, as
our Head and Representative, thus he became our God; I ascend to my Father, and
to your Father, to my God, and to your God.

2. By his own free Donation; through that Atonement Christ has made, God
gives himself to us to be our God.

3. Nay, by what ways Soever we become God's People, by the same ways he
becomes our God; as I shall have occasion to show you afterward.

Secondly, What does this import for God to be our God?

What it does import to have God to be our God.
1. Negatively, not merely our God by Creation, for so he is the God of the
Fallen-Angels, and the God of all Ungodly Reprobates in the World, they are his
Creatures, or were made by him.

2. It does not imply his being our God as he was the God of the whole House of
Israel, which was by virtue of a Legal, and Typical Covenant; for tho in that
Covenant he was their God, and an Husband to them, yet for all that, for their
Disobedience he cast them off, and utterly rejected them, and now they are so
no more his People, that Covenant and Covenant Relation, being quite dissolved
and removed for ever: Therefore it follows, that was not the Covenant of Grace,
into which all the Natural Seed of Abraham, as such, were taken; the Covenant
of Grace can never be removed.

3. Neither is he our God simply by an external or visible Profession, or by
virtue of our own external Personal Covenanting with him, for many of these God
will disown and be ashamed to be called their God; it is one thing to have the
Christian Name, and profess the Christian Religion, and another thing to have a
saving interest in God; Men may in this sense be in Christ, Joh. 15.6.
and yet as withered Branches be cut off and cast into the Fire.

But in the Affirmative.

I. God is our God in this Covenant by way of special interest, it denotes our
peculiar Relation to God. (1.) As a Father is related to his Children, whom he
either has begotten, or adopted, even so God in this Covenant is our God and
Father. (2.) Or, as a Husband is related to that Woman whom he has in his most
indeared Affections Espoused, and Married to himself. (3.) Or as an Heir is
related to an Estate, or an Inheritance which was purchased for him, and made
sure to him for ever. (4.) Or as a Redeemer, has an interest in such Persons
whom he has redeemed for himself, and bought and purchased for his own
Service, and to be for him and not for another.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to show you what an amazing Blessing this Grant, or
Gift in the Covenant of Peace is, i. e. for God to be our God.

What it is for God to give himself to us.
I. It is a choice and precious Blessing for God to give himself to us according
to that Grant to Christ in the Covenant, because it is a clear Demonstration of
his Special, Peculiar, and Eternal Love and Election: No Man can say he was
beloved from everlasting, till he is effectually called; it is not a Man's
having great Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Sweet Relations, Wealth, Health, and
Prosperity; no, but it is his having Saving Grace: To kiss the King's Hand is a
great Favor, but it is a far greater Token of Special Love to be made his
Queen, and Royal Consort, and to lie in his Bosom: O! what can be a greater
evidence of Divine Love and Goodness, than for God to give himself to us to be
our God in the nearest Relation that a Creature is capable of, or can be
brought into with his Glorious Creator, and Blessed Redeemer; For this God to
be our God, our Portion, the Lot of our Inheritance, our Shield, and our
exceeding great Reward, who were once his Enemies and mere Vassals of Sin and
Satan: What Tongue is able to express this Love, or Heart to conceive how great
it is?

II. It is an amazing Privilege, Grant, and Blessing, because God cannot give
a greater Gift than this is: My Brethren, Is there any thing in Heaven, or
Earth greater or better than God himself? What has God to bestow that excels
himself? God (as I may speak with Reverence) looked round about on all things
he had in Heaven and Earth, and saw nothing good enough to impart to his Elect
and Beloved ones; and therefore gave himself to them, who comprehends and
infinitely excels all Excellencies in both Worlds: Now is the Fountain of the
great Depths broken up, and Mercy and Divine Goodness flows down like a mighty
River: O! what Thoughts of Love and Bounty was in the Heart of God to us, when
he entered into this Covenant of Peace, with Jesus Christ for us? What make a
Deed of Gift of himself to us? And on such a sure Foundation too? Be amazed O
ye Heavens! One Smile of God's Face, is better than all the World; which made
David say, Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none on Earth that I desire
besides thee.

III. Because when God gives himself to a poor Sinner, he gives all he is, and
all he has, so far as it is communicable to Creatures; Genesis 15.1.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great Reward. My
Brethren, all that Good that is contained in the communicable Attributes of
God, are in this Covenant made over by a Deed of Gift to every Believer, as I
briefly shall show you.

I. Divine Goodness, Divine Goodness given in this Covenant.
this is let out to all true Believers, the Goodness of God is given to them,
not only laid up for them that fear his Name, but also it is imparted to them;
and this of all the Attributes of God, seems to be the sweetest, it is one of
the choice perfection of his Nature, and that which renders God to be the
Object of our Love, Joy, and Delight: As he is a great and just God, he is the
Object of our Fear, and as he is a Faithful God, he is the Object of our Trust,
but as he is a Good God he is the Object of our Affections; God is good; Matt.
29.17.
There is none good but one, and that is God; nothing that is good, truly good,
but what is derived from God, the loss of God only made Man miserable; and the
Damned being for ever deprived of God, is that which makes them eternally
miserable; And Sinners having interest in God, in the Goodness of God, this
only tends to make them happy.

Quest. What a Good is God?

Answ. Goodness in God may be considered under a twofold Consideration.

What a good God is, opened.
I. The Perfection and Excellency of the Being of God, I mean his Essential
Goodness, this cannot be imparted to Creatures.

II. His Communicative Goodness, or that which God has wrought out, laid up,
and which he lets forth to Believers; Ps. 31.19.
O how great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?
Which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the Children of Men
-- The Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord: Psalm. 35.5.
I will make all my Goodness pass before thee, Exodus 33.19.
etc. My Excellency, or my Glory. This is that which we call the declarative
Goodness of God.

1. God is Absolutely Good in the Perfection of his Being, he is independently
Good, there is nothing wanting in him, no defection, he subsisteth in and of
himself, he needs not us, and there can be no addition made to his Goodness
to make it more than it is.

2. God is originally and essentially Good, God originally good.
not only good, but Goodness it self; Goodness in Creatures is an accessory
Quality, or a Created, or Superadded Gift, but Goodness in God, is not a
Quality, but it is his Essence; he can as soon cease to be God, as cease to be
Good; as a Vessel of pure Gold, the Matter is pure Gold, it self gives luster
to it; but Brass gilt with Gold is another thing: So my Brethren, a Saint is
one thing, and his Grace, his Righteousness is another thing. The Fallen Angels
are God's Creatures still, they retain their Beings, but their Holiness they
retain not, that is gone: God is the First Good, the Original Good, and
Essentially Good.

3. God is infinitely Good, God infinitely good
Goodness in Creatures is small, and but little, but in God there is an Ocean
of Goodness; it is bankless, boundless, bottomless, our Goodness is like a drop
of Water out of the Ocean; -- nay, there is a greater disproportion between
that Goodness which is in God, and that which is in Saints, than there is
between the Main Ocean and one small drop of Water, or between a Beam of Light
let into a Room, and the Sun it self.

4. God is Immutably and Vnchangably Good, God Immutably good.
as Goodness in God cannot be augmented, so it cannot be diminished, he cannot
change or loose his Goodness, no not the least degree thereof; Mal. 3.6. Heb.
13.8.
I am God I change not -- He is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever: God
made Man good and upright, but he long abode not so; all things in the first
Creation are subject to change, but so is not the Blessed God and Creator.

God universally good.
5. God is Universally Good, we may have Health and no Beauty, Learning but no
Grace, Wisdom but no Power; Men may be Great and not Good, Rich but not
Virtuous, etc. but all Perfections and Excellencies meet in the Blessed God; he
is a Sun, a Shield, Wisdom, Love, Mercy, Power, Holiness,. Faithfulness, Grace,
Mercy, Glory, etc.

God an unmixt good.
6. God is an unmixt Good, there is no Condition of poor Mortals, but has in
this Life its Mixtures; Honey yet some Gall, Grace yet some Sin, Strength yet
some Weakness, Light yet some Darkness, Wisdom yet some Folly; but in God there
is infinite and unmixt Goodness, whatsoever is good, all good, and that without
any mixture.

God a Soul enriching good.
7. God is a Soul-inriching Good, a Soul-suitable, a Soul-satisfying Good, and a
Soul-fatening Good; Isa. 55.1, 2
Eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in Fatness: Why
will you spend your Money for that which is not Bread, and your Labor for that
which satisfies not? There is enough in God to satisfy the Holy Angels, much
more smaller Vessels; this Good Satisfies and not Surfeits; it satisfies the
Soul, the Precious and Immortal Soul; neither can any Thing, or Person do this
but God himself alone; Ps. 36.8, 9.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fate things of thy House, and thou
shall make them drink of Rivers of thy Pleasure; for with thee is the Fountain
of Life: God made the Soul for himself, it is fitted for him; therefore
Creatures cannot satisfy it, God alone is the Adequate Object to it; it is
Spiritual, and its Constitution is such, if it enjoy not God, it is restless,
disquieted, and like Noah's Dove, it finds no resting place till it returns to
the true Ark; Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, (says David) take up thy dwelling
in God, trust in him.

8. God is a Delicious Good, God a delicious good.
a Soul-ravishing Good, he is an eternal Spring of Joy and Delight, and in this
Covenant he displays his transcendent Glory and Perfections to his Creatures,
who by the Spirit discern the Heavenly Beauty, and are made Partakers of the
Divine Nature, which so indears them to the Divine Being, that they are at
times transported with Joy, his Glory shining in them; there is nothing
requisite to entire Blessedness, but it is in God, which Goodness powerfully
alures and engage the Affections of every true Believer, who is in the exercise
of Faith and Love; so that they at some Seasons are filled with unspeakable
Comfort.

9. God, it appears from hence, God Superlatively good.
is a Superlative Good, he is far better than any thing we can conceive of, he
is Man's only summum bonum; Who would weigh a Feather against a Mountain.

10. God is a Communicative Good, God a communicable good.
this Crowns all; Why did he enter into a Covenant of Peace, and provide such a
Mediator, but to let out, as through a Conduit Pipe, his Infinite Goodness to
us? Herein we see how his Heart wrought from Eternity; it is an opening and an
unfolding of his Bowels, which lay secretly yearning in him; this brings Life
and Immortality to light, in the Revelation thereof, here is an immense Flood
of Bounty and rich Goodness flowing down to Mankind, which shows the Excellency
and Amiableness of his Nature most honorable to himself, and a perfect Pattern
of Goodness unto Men, that so we may Adore and Worship him with Love and
Delight.

God an Eternal good.
Lastly, God is an Eternal Good, all Earthly Good will fail, it lasts but for
a moment, but God and his Goodness indures for ever; Why boasts thou thy self
in mischief, Ps. 52.1.
O mighty Man? The Goodness of God endures continually. His Love, Mercy, and
Goodness to his People is not fading and inconstant, but everlasting and
unchangable; the Love of God will eternally be running and flowing forth, so
that our Joy, Peace and Satisfaction will never end, our Portion wastes not,
it will never be spent, God is an Eternal Reward.

II. As Divine Goodness is that Man's who has God to be his God, so is Divine
Strength his also to support, uphold, and strengthen all that are his People;
Ps. 73.26.
My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the Strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever: When God becomes our God, he is our Shield, and our exceeding
great Reward, our Rest, our Fortress, our High Tower, etc. when God made that
Promise to Abraham, it is as if he should say, I and all my Attributes are
thine, for thy Use and Benefit; my Power is thine, my Arm is thine; Fear not
Abraham, I am God All-sufficient; and I will from thence communicate all things
to thee that thou need; thou shall have Me, my Goodness, my Power, and my
Love for thy Portion; Isa. 12.2.
Jehovah is my Strength and my Song, he also is become my Salvation.

III. Gods Mercies is theirs also, he is not only a God of Mercy, but a
Believer (that has God to be his God) may say with David of God's Mercy, my
Mercy, Ps. 59.10.
The God of my Mercy shall prevent me; the Mercy of God is ours, to spare and
pity us; that is, we have interest in the Mercy of God, however great, or good
and lasting it is, it is ours, his Mercy shall be let out to us, flow down to
us: And O! what a Sweet Blessing is this?

IV. Moreover, Divine Wisdom is ours, Ps. 73.24.
if God be our God, to conduct, lead, counsel, and guide us, Ps. 25.9.
and to order and dispose of all things for our good.

V. Pro. 8.18.
Also the Riches and glorious Bounty of God is our Wealth, if we have the
Person, Ephesians. 1.7. and 18.
or are Married to the Person, we have the Portion, Col. 1.27.
a Believer has interest in all the Riches of God's Grace and Glory.

VI. Ps. 119.90 and 143.1.
The Care and Faithfulness of God is ours to preserve and keep us; to whom
should Faithfulness be manifested, Lam. 3.23.
but to such that are in Covenant, and to whom all Promises are made; if God be
our God, his Faithfulness will preserve us; Who should a Father care for, but
for his own dear Children, as well as love and pity them? 1 Pet. 5.7.
Casting all your Care upon him, for he Cares for you.

VII. His Love is ours, (who is the God of Love) if he is our God, that is, we
are the Objects of his most choice Affections, his Love is ours to delight and
comfort us. Hence he is said to delight in his People, and to rejoice over
them, Isa. 61.10.
as a young Man rejoices over his Bride.

VIII. His Justice is ours to acquit us, to discharge us, and to plead for us
as well as his Mercy: and to pronounce us Righteous in his Son, and for ever
pardoned; He is Just and Righteous to forgive. 1 John 1.9.


Mal. 3.6.
IX. And his Vnchangableness also will prevent us from being consumed, that is
our Security: O see what a Blessing and high Privilege it is to have God to be
our God in Covenant? When Jehoshaphat had made a Covenant with Ahab, see how he
expresses himself; i. e. There is a League between us, 1 Kings 22.4, 5.
therefore my Horses are thy Horses, and my People are thy People: 2 Kings 3.7.
And so it is between God and us, his Strength is our Strength, and his Armies
our Armies, we have interest in all God has, there is an offensive and
defensive Leauge between God and us; his Angels are all ready to engage in our
just Cause, and fight for us, and against our Enemies: If we implore God's Aid,
will he, think you, break his Covenant? God forbid. Moreover, his Special
Providence is ours, if he be our God; I will guide thee by mine Eye -- Have
thou not made an Hedge about him, and about all he has? Job 1.10.

Thirdly, There is one thing more that ought to be minded (that is) in this
Covenant, all the Holy Attributes are united together, as a mighty Army on our
side, in Christ they all sweetly harmonize, Ps. 85.10.
Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each
other. But having spoken to this already, I shall add no more to it now. See
Dr. Bates' s Harmony of the Divine Attributes.

Fourthly, He that has God to be his God in this Covenant, has him to be his
God for ever, he shall never lose God any more, every Believer has an
everlasting Interest in, and a Title to the ever Blessed God; Ps. 48.14.
This God is our God for ever and ever, and he will be our Guide even unto
Death: This Grant will never be revoked by the Giver, nor can it be forfeited
by the Receiver; you have heard how sure and firm the Covenant is, by which we
hold the Inheritance; he is our Father, our Friend, our Portion, our Strength,
our Help, our Riches, our Honor, and our God for ever.

Secondly, Christ is given.
Jesus Christ is given to all Believers in this Covenant, this is a glorious
Gift, or Grant: O! how great and how comprehensive is this Gift? God is not our
God till Christ is ours: O! consider; every Saint may say with Thomas, My Lord
and my God: Christ is not only a Savior, but a Believer may say, my Savior;
he is not only a Redeemer, but my Redeemer; not only the Life of the World, but
my Life: When Christ, Col. 3.4.
who is our Life, shall appear, etc. Christ is not only Light, but our Light;
and not only a Peacemaker, Ephesians. 2.14.
but our Peace; He is our Peace that has made both one: He is not only a
Bridegroom, but our Bridegroom; my Beloved is mine, not only a Physician, but
our Physician; and not only a Shepherd, Ps. 23.1.
but our Shepherd; The Lord is my Shepherd, yea, and our King, our Priest, our
Prophet; he is our Righteousness, our Strength, 1 Cor. 1.30.
our Food, our Clothes, our Foundation; who of God is made to us Wisdom and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. In a word, Christ in this
Covenant is all in all; Col. 3.11.
Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all and in all.

The Holy Spirit is given.
Thirdly, The next great Gift that is given in this Covenant, is the Holy
Ghost, Isa. 59.21. the Holy Spirit is given to unite us to Christ, to quicken
us, to illuminate our Minds, and to renovate our Soul, to be our Guide, our
Comforter, and to dwell in us for ever, and to seal all Covenant Blessings to
us.

All Grace is given in the Covenant.
Fourthly, All Grace is given in this Covenant, Faith, Repentance, a pure
Heart, Love, Hope, Humility, Patience, Charity, Temperance, Ephesians. 4.8.
Meekness, etc. But to every one of us is given Grace according to the measure
of the Gift of Christ; and not only Grace, but all Spiritual Gifts also, yea,
Sanctified Gifts; thus many great Gifts are given.

Fifthly, Consider what other Grand Blessings and Privileges, are also given
and granted, by virtue of this Covenant, viz. (1.) Adoption, to as many as
received him to them gave he power to become the Sons of God. (2.)
Righteousness and Justification from all things. (3.) Sanctification. (4.)
Pardon of all Sins, and that for ever, and not only forgiven for ever, but they
also are forgotten for ever. (5.) Peace. (6.) Communion with the Father and the
Son (7.) Godly Zeal. (8.) Spiritual Strength and Courage. (9.) All Ordinances
are given, yea, Fat and Green Pastures, Bread and Water of Life. Ministers
given in the Covenant.
(10.) The Ministers of Christ are given; Whether Paul, or Apostles, or Cephas,
or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all is
yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's: They have a Right and Title to all
things that are good. All the Prromises given.
(11.) All the Promises of God, are given in the Covenant; 2 Pet. 1.4.
Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious Promises: Promises that
suit every State and Condition that we are, or may be in; great as to their
Quantity, and precious as to their Quality; 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the Promises of God are in him, yea, and in him, Amen, unto the Glory of
God the Father. Moreover, all Gospel Ordinances are given. (12.) Yea, Eternal
Life is given.
a Right to Eternal Life also is given and granted to all in this Covenant,
even a Crown of Glory that fades not away; a Kingdom, a Crown, and a Throne is
given; Rev. 3.21.
To him will I grant to sit with me in my Throne. (13.) Final Perseverance is
given by this Covenant. Lastly, Free access to God granted in the Covenant.
A Free Trade to Heaven is granted, or free access to the Father: But to this I
shall more largely and distinctly speak at another time.

O stand and Wonder! O what Gifts, Grants, Blessings and Privileges are
procured in the Covenant of Peace? Happy are they that are taken into it: But I
shall go no farther at this time.

SERMON XII. Showing that as God in the Covenant of Peace is our God, so we
also are his People, opening what this denotes; i. e. our being God's People.
(2.) How this appears to be a Covenant Privilege. And (3.) Also what a
Wonderful Blessing it is.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


THE last Day I showed you what wonderful Gifts, Grants, Blessings, and
Privileges are contained in the Covenant of Peace; particularly, that God
gives himself, and his Son Jesus Christ to all that are brought into it; he has
promised to be our God, etc. But to proceed.

There is yet one great Blessing, which is included in the former, viz. That as
God gives himself to be our God, so he has promised we shall be his People;
Believers are God's People by Virtue of the Covenant of Peace. Jer. 31.33. Five
things premised.
this Grant and Privilege is in the Covenant; And I will be their God, and
they shall be my People, compared with Heb. 8.10. And I will be a God to them,
and they shall be a People unto me.

First, Let me by way of premise Note here four or five Things.

1. That this is a most gracious, high, and sublime Privilege, ( viz.) God to
be our God is the first; and this is comprehended in it also as the second, and
next in order to be esteemed by us, i. e. we shall be his People.

2. That this is granted only as an Act of God's Free Grace and Sovereign
Goodness, through Jesus Christ: Brethren, it is not upon Condition of our doing
this or that, that we procure this Blessing it is not, as the Promise run to the
People of Israel under the first Covenant: But it is an absolute Promise if
there is any such in all the Word of God; I will be your God, and you shall be
my People. Men nor Devils, Ungodly Relations, our own evil Hearts, nor our
great Unworthiness shall ever hinder us from being God's People.

3. That God's giving himself to us, is the Spring, the Cause and Reason why we
become his People; we have not God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit, because we are
Believers, or Penitent Persons, but he first gives himself his Spirit, Cotton
on the Cov. p. 55.
etc. God first gives himself in working of Faith (says Reverend Cotton)
before Faith can be there. Therefore Faith is called, Gal. 5.22.
The Fruit of the Spirit; Man is passive in Regeneration, or in God's infusing
the first Principle, Root, or Habit of Faith, and of all Grace in him.

4. This implies, that we were once not actually God's People (notwithstanding
the Design and Purpose of Grace that was in his Heart concerning us; Romans 9.25.
) I will call them my People, which were not my People; and her Beloved, that
was not Beloved; Hos. 2.33.
that is, that were not actually his People, nor owned and acknowledged so to
be, we lost this Relation to God by the Fall: when God ceased to be our God, by
way of Special interest, we ceased to be his People.

5. They shall be my People; this denotes the certainty of their Special
Vocation, and of our being his People for ever; He shall see his Seed, all that
the Father has given to me shall come unto me; that is, they shall believe in
me, etc. Now in speaking unto this Promise, Grant, and Privilege.

1. I shall first show you in what Respect, or Consideration we may be said to
be God's People.

2. Show you what kind of People God's Covenant People are; I mean such that
are actually owned to be his People.

3. Show you what a great Blessing this is.

4. Apply both these great Privileges together.

I shall wave several Acceptations, by which a People may be called God's
People, that I may directly come to the Business in Hand.

1. We may be said to be God's People, How we may be said to be the People of
God. Joh. 10.16.
and he our God decretively, or by virtue of God's Eternal Election; God chose
Christ as our Head, and all the Elect in him: See our Lord's Words; Other Sheep
have I that are not of this Fold, them I must bring: He calls them his Sheep,
and yet then they were ungodly and unbelieving ones: So he said to Paul, Act.
28.10.
I have much People in this City; they were his People decretively, tho not
actually his at that time.

2. The Elect were God's People Foederally, or by virtue of that Holy Covenant
made betwixt the Father and the Son (as I hinted before) and now that this
Relation also arises from those Covenant Transactions, is most evident; for
Jesus Christ struck Hands with the Father, in behalf of all God's Elect, to
procure this Privilege: But a little further to open this, pray consider that
there is a Foederal Union and Relation, as when the Father of a Young Man, and
the Father, or Guardian of a Young Damsel shall mutually agree and Covenant,
that they two shall be Man and Wife; even thus God the Father and God the Son
Agreed and Covenanted in behalf of all the Elect: Christ was, as I may say,
their Guardian, yea, and also he Covenanted to Espouse and Marry them to
himself for ever, and God the Father gave the Elect to Christ in this Covenant.
Moreover, herein he had the advantage of others; for may be such a Young Man,
as before mentioned, might not Love the Person his Father Covenanted with her
Guardian to be his Wife, or he might not be able to obtain her Affections, but
Christ's Love was set upon his intended Spouse from everlasting, and also he
knew how to gain our Love, and unite our Hearts to himself, and that by sheding
his Love abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. The Love of Christ,
has in it a Physical Operation.

And thus, my Brethren, by Covenant, and the free donation of the Father, we
become God's People, or in a remote sense, were thus brought into this Blessed
Relation to him; Thine they were (that is, Joh. 17.6.
by Election) and thou gave them me.

Verse. 9.
Again he says, I pray not for the World, but for them that thou have given me,
for they are thine.

4. The Elect are God's People by virtue of Christ's Purchase, he bought them
with his own Blood; 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
Ye are not your own, for you are bought with a price, etc. and it was that
they might be a peculiar People unto God: Hence the Apostle says, Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of Good Works; or a famous or
principal People, as the Greek Word renders it. Without this Price had been
laid down, we had never been brought into this Relation unto God.

5. They are God's People by Renovation, or Regeneration, Of his own Will begat
he us by the Word of Truth.

6. By Conquest also Believers are brought into this Relation, Cant. 6.5.
God has subdued them unto himself, Rev. 17.14
he has by his Victorious Grace overcome them, and this way they are made his
Liege People, and he becomes their God and Sovereign, as having rescued them
out of the Hands of Sin and Satan, those cruel Tyrants, whose Slaves, Subjects,
Joh. 8.34.
and Servants they were before: Christ has set them free, Romans 6.16.
or made them a free People indeed, Joh. 8.36.
to and for himself.

7. The Elect are actually the Lord's People, by the in-dwelling of the Holy
Spirit, or by virtue of their Mystical Union with Christ by the Spirit, which
is the Bond of this Union on Christ's part; and by this means we come to chose
Jesus Christ as the only Object of our Affection, and Blessed Bridegroom of our
Souls; and also hereby we take God to be our God, and thus we are actually and
personally brought into this Relation to him, in which sense, and in respect of
these and the two last things mentioned, we were not his People before; for
notwithstanding the Covenant Agreement of Parents, or a Marriage by Proxy,
betwixt great Persons, yet they must after that actually and personally be
Married together, before they can enjoy each other, or properly be said to be
Man and Wife: And so, my Brethren, it is here, for notwithstanding the Decree
and Purpose of God, and his eternal Compact and Donation; and also
notwithstanding the Purchase of Christ, yet till by the Spirit we are united to
Christ, and do believe in him, close in and embrace him, and enter into an
actual Covenant with God in and by Jesus Christ, we cannot be said to be
properly God's People; for before this we were the Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
and the Slaves of Sin and Satan: But so much to the first thing proposed.

What a kind of People the People of God are.
Secondly, I shall endeavor to show you what a kind of People these are that
are thus brought into Covenant with God.

I. They that are God's peculiar People, have renounced all other Lords from
having any claim to them, or interest in them.

1. They have broke that Covenant which they had made with Sin, that Union is
dissolved, their Love to Sin is gone for ever; I do not say the Being of Sin in
them is gone; no, Sin will be in their Hearts, and in their Conversations too,
but it is not in their Affections; they approve not of it, they regard it not;
Romans 7 15.
The Evil which I hate, that do I, says Paul; Psalm. 119.113.
I have vain Thoughts, says David; to love Sin is worse than to commit it, and
to hate Sin is better than to leave it; a Good Man may commit Sin, and yet
loath it, and a wicked Man may leave Sin and yet love it; Ye that love the Lord
hate Evil: Ye do so, or else you are none of God's People, i. e. it is your
Character, and also your Duty.

2. They have renounced the Love of this World, they are dead, nay, Crucified
to the World, they that are God's peculiar People have not only Crucified the
Flesh, or are become dead to Sin, but have Crucified the World also; Gal. 6.14.
But God forbid that I should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is Crucified unto me, and I unto the World. The World
cares not for them, and they care not for the World, they are dead to the
Honors, Pleasures, and Riches of the World; Moses contemned all the Glory of
Pharaoh's Court, yea, all the Pleasures of Sin and Riches of Egypt; and so do
all God's sincere People contemn this World: If any Man love the World, 1 John
2.15.
the love of the Father is not in him.

3. They that are God's peculiar People, are become dead to the Law, to that
cruel Husband, and to all their own Righteousness, Phil. 3.8.9
accounting it but Dung, or a dead Carkase, or Dogs-meat in comparison of
Christ; Romans 7.4.
Ye also are become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ, etc. The Union with
that Husband is dissolved, they seek not Life and Justification by the Law, or
are not in love with Self-Righteousness, but dead to it, whilst others make an
Idol of it, and trust in it.

4. They have renounced themselves also, and confess they are not their own,
but that their Souls, their Bodies, their Substance, their Graces, their Gifts,
their Time, their Strength, their Lips, and their Lives are all the Lord's, and
for him; for as all that God has which is communicable is theirs, or freely
imparted to them, and for them; so all they are and have, they account it is
the Lord's, they being but only Stewards of all they have and do possess: Shall
such think that they are the Lord's who live to themselves, seek themselves, or
only bring forth Fruit (like empty Vines) to themselves? No, they that are the
Lord's People, esteem all they have to be his, and for his Service, and are
willing to render it up to him when he calls for it. Nay, they have given God
their Hearts, not their Lips only, or their Tongues, nor their Ears, nor their
Substance, but their Hearts also; My Son give me thy Heart. Prove. 23.26.
God complains of some that drew near to him with their Lips, and sat before
him as his People sat, and with their Tongues showed much kindness, Ezekiel.
33.31.
but (says he) their Hearts went after their Covetousness, after the World,
these God's Soul abhors, and he will not own them to be his People: Some give
their Hearts to Pleasures, to strange Women, and to Vanity, and to mere Folly,
and others give their Hearts to Riches, but God's Vovenant People give their
Hearts to him, not a part of the Heart, but their whole Heart; they love the
Lord their God with all their Hearts, with all their Souls, and with all their
Strength: Others have their Hearts divided between God and the World, between
God and their Lusts; but such that love not God with their whole Heart, hate
him, for the lesser Love is accounted Hatred in Scripture.

II. They that are God's peculiar Vovenant People, are Begotten and Born of
God, for they this way (as you heard) become his Children; there are none, my
Brethren, that are the Lord's People by Adoption, but they are his also by
Regeneration; they have his Image formed in them, they are like to their Father
in Holiness, Heavenliness, in Humility, Mercy, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Meekness, Love, Goodness, Charity, etc. they partake of the Divine Nature,
every one resembles the Son or Daughter of a King; Then said he unto Zeba and
Zalmunna, Judge. 8.18.
What manner of Men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou
art, so were they, each one resembled the Children of a King: They are nobly
descended, they have sublime Spirits, Holy Hearts, Desires, Aims and Ends in
all they do; they are not mere Dunghil-Rakers, like the Men of the World, but
far excel all others; Prove* 12.26.
The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, he has an excellent
Spirit, Life, and Principles in him.

III. They that are God's Vovenant People, Trust in him as their God, as well
as Love him as their God; all People trust in their God, tho it be a God of
Gold, or Silver; a Worldly Man's strong Confidence is his Wealth, he makes Gold
his Hope: So they that have God to be their God, trust in him, depend upon him;
They that know thy Name, Psalm. 9.10.
will put their Trust in thee: They trust in the True and Living God, God is
their Hope their Confidence, they rely upon his Power, his Mercy, his Love, his
Faithfulness, his Covenant, and on his Blessed Promises, and this at all times,
in Afflictions, Desertion, Temptations, etc. and when called to any hard
Service: in Prosperity, and in Adversity, in times of Want and Necessities, and
in Times of Fullness; in Life, and also at the Hour of Death: This tends, my
Brethren, to the Glory of God, and by this they show what a value and esteem
they put upon God. How often does David say, he trusted in the Lord, and
because God was his God, Psalm. 25.2.
O my God, I trust in thee. Job says, Job 13.15.
Tho he slay me, yet will I trust in him: Tho they see not, feel not, or have
no sensible Comfort, or Relief, yet can and will trust in God, Isa. 40.10.
tho God hides his Face, or they walk in Darkness, and have no Light.

IV. God's peculiar People highly love, value, and prize the Lord Jesus Christ:
They can say with David, Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? Neither is there any on Earth that I desire
besides thee. Psalm. 34.8.
They have tasted how good the Lord is, and beholding his Beauty can say, Cant.
5.10
He is the chiefest among Ten Thousand; they live upon Christ, fetch all their
Comfort, and Hope of Salvation from him, and rejoice in him alone; Serving God
in Spirit, Phil. 3.3.
and have no Confidence in the Flesh. Moreover, when they have done all things
that Christ has commanded, they look upon themselves Unprofitable Servants,
they live in him, to him, and by him; their living in him shows Christ is their
Life, their living to him shows Christ is their ultimate End, their living by
him shows Christ is their Strength; they receive the Spirit, and so live in the
Spirit, and walk in the Spirit; they bring up the bottom of their Lives to the
top of their Light, they do not only know what is to be done, but do what they
know; the Darkness of Carnal Professors will be the blackest, because their
Light seemed to be the clearest, but these are better inwardly in substance,
than outwardly in appearance; in a word, they are as much in love with the
Employment of Holiness, as with the Enjoyment of Happiness, or to be Holy here,
as well as Happy hereafter, or to live to God on Earth, as well as with him in
Heaven.

V. God's Vovenant People ascribe all the Glory to him, and take all the Shame
to themselves; Both Riches and Honor come of thee; 1 Chronicles. 29.11. 13. 16.
the Power, the Glory, and the Victory is thine, and of thine own have I given
thee. Luther was contented to be counted a Devil, so that Christ might be
exalted; others make their End their God, but these make their God their End:
The Glory of God (says one) should be the Golden-Butt at which all our Arrows
of Duties are shot; the only way to be Crowned in Heaven, is to cast our Crowns
at Christ's Feet on Earth.

VI. God's Vovenant People can say, there is nothing which they enjoy, that is
of any worth, without God be enjoyed with it: Therefore they know to want God
is the greatest Evil, and to enjoy God is the greatest Good; if God be
withdrawn, Psalm. 30.5*
all their Comfort is gone; it is Day when we have him, but it is Night when we
want him: What is Health and no God? Riches and no God? Pleasures and no God,
Honors and no God? Relations, Wives, Children, Friends, and no God? A little
will do with God; nay, Hab. 3.17.
if we have nothing besides him, we have enough, nay all; but if we have all
other things and no interest in God, we have nothing.

VII. They that are God's peculiar People, are a Holy People, Isa. 66.2.
a Heavenly People, a Humble People; To this Man will I look that is Poor and
of a Contrite Heart, and that trembles at my Word. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 1.16
God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble -- Be ye Holy for I am
Holy. My People shall be willing in the Day of my Power, Ps. 110.3.
in the Beauty of Holiness, etc.

VII. They are an Obedient People, they walk in God's Ways and keep his
Precepts; Mich. 4.5.
For all People will walk every one of them in the Name of his God, and we will
walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. Joh. 15.14.
They yield Universal Obedience to God, Ps. 119.6.
or do whatsoever Christ says, and that too because they love him; and also
they are constant in their Obedience, they keep God's Precepts always even to
the end.

IX. They are an Upright People, a Sincere People, Isa. 63.8.
Sincere in their Obedience; Surely they are my People, Children that will not
lie; not Children of Deceit, or Falsehood, but Faithful, and Upright in Heart:
They are called, Ps. 111.1.
The Assembly of the Upright; that is, Sincere Worshipers of God, Israelites
indeed, in whom is no Guile, no Falsehood, or no reigning Hypocrisy. Moreover,
they are called, The Generation of the Upright, Ps. 112.2.
Men of clean Hearts, and Undefiled in the way, or Perfect ones, Ps. 119 1.
i. e. they want no Essential thing of True Christians.

X. God's Gospel Vovenant People are an United People, Acts 2 41.47.
being constituted or incorporated into a Church State, according to the
Institution of Christ in the New Testament, Joh. 15.19.
being separated from the World in Worship, 2 Cor. 6.17
and all Evil Traditions, Customs, Rev. 18.4.
etc. Worshipping God in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 12.2. Joh. 4.24.
giving themselves up one to another; 2 Cor. 8.5.
keeping all the Ordinances of Christ as they were once delivered to the
Saints, 1 Cor. 11.2 Joh. 20.31.
owning the Holy Scriptures to be the only Rule of their Faith and Practice,
Joh. 5.39. 2 Timothy 3.16
having regular and ordained Officers, viz. both Pastors and Deacons, and
walking in Love, 1 Timothy 3.2.8.
and watching over one another as becomes Saints. Ephesians. 4.3. cap. 5.1, 2.


XI. Lastly, The peculiar People of God, love all the Children of God, even
such that differ from them in some things that are Circumstantials, they love
as Christ loves; 1 John 5.1.
As they love him that begat, so they love them also (and all them) that are
begotten of him: Joh. 8.42.
If God was your Father, you would love me, for I proceeded forth, and came
from God (says our Savior) he that loves the Father, will love the Child so
far as he resembles the Father: Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all Men know ye are my Disciples if you love one another -- He
that loves not his Brother, abides in Death: And this is a sign that they are
passed from Death to Life. Joh. 3.14.
Brethren, this Love is not in Word and in Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth
also: How does it appear you love your Wife, your Children? Even so let it
appear you love all the People of God, i. e. let nothing be too dear to part
with for their sakes, speak well of them, and do much for them, and bear them
always upon your Hearts, when you are at the Throne of Grace: If you would
approve your selves to be God's People, this being so, what shall we think then
of him that hates any one of the Children of God, or bears Malice in his Heart
against him, and reproaches him.

What a great Blessing it is to be God's People.
Thirdly, I shall show you what a great Blessing and Privilege this is.

1. Can there be a greater Privilege than to be made God's own peculiar
People? For hereby God is their Father, 1 Job. 3.1.
and they his Children. (1.) He loves them as his Children. (2.) He Feeds them
as his Children. (3.) He Clothes them as his Children. (4.) He Teaches them as
his Children. (5.) He Pities them as his Children, Isa. 63.9, 10. (6.) He
Guides, Leads, and Protecteth them as his Children. (7.) He Chastens them in
Love as his Children, Heb. 12 5, 6, 7. (8.) And lays up for them also as his
own Children; If Children then Heirs, Romans 8.17.
Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ --

O! what an Honor is it to be the Sons and Daughters of God? 2 Cor. 6.16. Of
the Great God, the King of Heaven and Earth? Nay, to be Begotten and Born of
him, Joh. 1.12, 13.

2. They have the Privilege to dwell in his House; nay, to dwell with God, and
to walk with God, and to have Communion with him, 1 John 3. Moreover,

3. Their Enemies are God's Enemies, and their Friends are God's Friends, the
Angels that are God's Servants, are their Servants, and are sent to Minister
unto them, Heb. 1.14.
etc.

4. They are Espoused by Jesus Christ; they are the Jewels of his Heart, Mal.
3.17. or his chiefest Treasure.

5. God will never leave them, nor forsake them. And,

6. All things shall work together for their good. Romans 8.28.


7. And he will Crown them at last with Glory and Immortality.

Question. What Assurance has God given that they shall be his People for ever?

1 Answ. Because his Love is Eternal, or Unchangable, Jer. 31.3.
his Love is their Security; nothing can separate them from the Love of God
which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. The Decree and eternal Election of God, Romans 8.39.
is their Security.

3. Because the Mercy of God, Psalm. 52.1.
which is in Jesus Christ our Lord, endures for ever.

Psalm. 52.1.
4. Because the Goodness of God indureth also for ever.

Isa. 54.9.10.
5. Because his Covenant and Faithfulness can never fail, in which they are made
his People.

Jer. 32.40.
6. Because he has put his fear into their Hearts, that they shall not depart
from him.

7. The Promise and Oath of God, Heb. 6.18, 19.
is their Security.

8. They are Justified and Pardoned for ever. Romans 8.30, 31.


9. Christ's Suretiship is their Security, Joh. 10.28.
they are put into his Hand, and none can pluck them out: (These Things have
been fully opened already as you have heard.)

10. The Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Romans 8.34.
and Intercession of Jesus Christ, is their Security.

Joh. 17.20, 21, 22.
11. Their Union with Christ, which is an undissolvable Union, is their Security.

12. The Inhabitation of the Holy Ghost is their Security, Joh. 14.17.23.
it remains, and shall remain in all true Believers for ever; they have it as a
Principle of eternal Life; and as an Earnest, Witness, Pledge, and Seal of
Glory to come unto them.

APPLICATION.
Infer. O the Wonder of Divine Goodness! How amazingly does it flow forth in
this Covenant to sinful Mankind? (As one Notes) Herein we may see the Scheme
and Model of his Thoughts, Charnock.
the Method of his Councils, and Treaties of Man's Recovery: Behold the Motions
of his Goodness in its descent to Earth, and ascent to Heaven, carrying at last
the Creature with it, to the wearing a Crown upon its Head: Here is a Medicine
provided before the Disease, a Pardon for Traitors before the Rebellion broke
out.

2. We infer from hence, That the Christian Religion, Revealed Religion, excels
all Religions, in that it shows the way of Peace with God.

3. What greater Demonstrations of Love, of Infinite Love could God give? What
give himself to us? What has he more, all Happiness is comprehended in God?

4. Behold the Excellency of Faith, as it applies Christ, and takes hold of
him, and gives Peace to a Poor, Troubled, and Wounded Spirit; and also see what
sure footing, and firm foundation there is for Faith in this Covenant.

5. Moreover, from hence you may see the strength and sufficiency of Christ in
all the Concerns of his Mediation, together with his Excellencies; How precious
is he who is made all in all things to us?

6. Reproof. But how does this reprehend their Folly and Ignorance, who affirm
that Believers, yea, Justified Persons, may finally and totally fall away and
perish? How are such here detected?

Terror. It may also be for Terror to such, who think they are God's People,
and yet are Unbelieving, and Profane Persons, they glory they are Christians,
born of Christian Parents; nay, Protestants, and know the Articles of their
Religion (and were Baptized, as they call Sprinkling) but are Swearers,
Drunkards, Unclean Persons, Proud, and Covetous ones, etc. Alas, what will
their Religion signify? You hear who are God's People, and what kind of People
they are.

7. It also shows you the Necessity of Regeneration and Union with Christ, and
that you must renounce all for his sake, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
that was once gain to you, or you must perish for ever.

8. Lastly, What Comfort is here for all drooping Believers, weak in Faith?
What in Covenant with God, and yet fear? What are you put into Christ's Hand,
and yet doubt? Has God given you such Security that your Persons are accepted,
your Sins pardoned for ever, and yet hang down your Heads? All is yours,
whether you know it or not; God is yours, Christ is yours, Pardon is yours,
Peace is yours, Strength in Weakness is yours, Succor in Temptation, etc. Life
is yours, Death is yours, i. e. for your good, Death that is so great an Evil,
and so dreaded by the Wicked, is yours -- that is your great Gain, yea, a
mighty Blessing to you: Bread is yours, Bread for your Souls, and Bread for
your Bodies, even all that God sees good for you, is yours.

SERMON XIII. Showing what a Glorious Trade is opened to Heaven for poor
Sinners by the Covenant of Peace.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


Doct. THAT there is a Covenant of Peace, made or agreed on, and stands firm in
the behalf of all God's Elect.

I Am upon the Fourth General Head of Discourse; Namely, to show you what is
given, granted, or vouchsafed to all those that are brought into Covenant with
God.

I have passed through an Induction of twelve Particulars, upon this account.

Thirteenthly, The last Privilege, or Blessing that is hereby procured and
granted, which I shall speak to now, A Free Trade is opened by the Covenant of
Peace.
is that of a Free Trade to Heaven: This, you know, is one of the great and
chiefest Blessings that follows a Peace made between Princes and States on
Earth.

I. War stops up, or interrupteth all Trade and Commerce betwixt those Kingdoms
and States that are at War one with another, (the sad and bitter Effects of
this we in this Nation have lately felt, by means of the late War, which now is
happily ended;) even so, my Brethren, all Spiritual Trade and Commerce betwixt
God and Man, was stopped, and utterly interrupted by that fearful War, which was
occasioned by our Sin and Rebellion against God in the first Adam; The Flaming
Sword that turned every way, was a Token of this: Poor Man could not now make
any approach to God, no Trading to Heaven any more for Mankind, until his Peace
is made, or procured.

What is meant by the interruption of our Trading with God.
1. God will not admit Sinners to receive any of his Special, Spiritual, Saving,
and Soul-inriching Commodities, tho through his great Bounty and Goodness he
does give forth common Gifts, or Earthly good things to his Enemies.

2. Nor will God receive of Man any thing that he has, or can do, or offer to
him, until his Peace is made, and his Person accepted in his sight, for Sinners
Hearts being departed from God, their very Prayers, and all their Services are
Abomination unto him, and hateful in his Sight: So that all ways of Blessed
Intercourse betwixt God and Man, were stoped up, Rev 22.1.
and the Streams of that River, by which all Spiritual Blessings must come to
them, are stayed, viz. the Holy Spirit: besides Thieves, Pirates, and Robbers
were let out upon them, I mean Satan, and all the Powers of Darkness; and thus
was Mankind brought to utter Beggary, for all their original Riches, or
Righteousness, and Blessed Treasure was utterly consumed by means of that first
Act of Rebellion; nor was there any ways left to Mankind to get one Penny to
help or relieve themselves in their Necessity.

But no sooner was there News brought of this Covenant of Peace, or it was
published to our first Parents in that Promise; The Seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpent's Head.

But there was a Free Trade opened again for all Believers, tho it was then but
darkly discovered. Now in speaking unto this great Grant, Blessing, and
Privilege, I shall endeavor to do four things.

1. Show you what I mean by this Free and Open Trade to Heaven.

2. Prove that this Privilege is granted as the Effects of the Covenant of
Peace.

3. Show you that this is the best Trade or Traffic in all the Earth, viz. our
Spiritual Trading to Heaven by Jesus Christ.

4. Apply it.

1. By this Trade or Traffic to Heaven, What is meant by our Trade and
Traffic to Heaven.
I mean, our free Intercourse or Access to the Father.

2. God's free and kind distribution, or giving forth the best of Heaven unto
us, when we come or approach unto him by Jesus Christ, or in this new and
living way, and that to the enriching of our Souls; not only, my Brethren,
barely to supply our Wants, and pinching Necessities, but also to the making of
us very Rich and Great.

3. I mean by it, God's Gracious Acceptance of our Persons, Duties, and all our
Holy and Spiritual Performances, or Services, which is no small Favor and
Blessing, but one of the greatest we can partake of; for this must always be
premised, that God will never accept of any Man's Duties, till he first
accepts of his Person; for thus he first accepts of Abel; that is, of his
Person, Genesis 4.4.
The Lord had a Respect unto Abel, and to his Offering; Heb. 11.4
he offered his Offering in Faith, he was a Believer, and God accepted of his
Person in Christ, and so he does of the Persons of all True Believers, Ephesians. 1.6.
Wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved -- in whom we are united and
made Members of his Body, and it is in him that God looks upon us.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to prove, This Trade the effects of our Peace.
that this Trade, or Blessing of free Access unto God, is the Effects of the
Peace made by Jesus Christ.

1. The Navigable River, by which we Trade to Heaven, by virtue of this Peace,
is opened, viz. the Holy Spirit is poured forth; This is that River that makes
glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. The Saints Trade is in and by the River, i.
e. the Holy Spirit so called.
etc. and this it does not only, in that it supplies God's People, or his Holy
City with Water to drink, (which is indeed Water of Life) but also in that it
is by it we Trade to Heaven, all our Spiritual Trade and Traffic, is in and
through this River: Our Trade, my Brethren, is a Trade of Merchandise -- For
the Merchandise of it, Pro. 3.14.
is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold.
Rev. 22.1.
Now this River proceeds from the Throne of God, and the Lamb, and that this
River is opened by the Sacrifice of Christ, or by that Peace he has made: See
Acts 2.31. This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all Witnesses --
Therefore being by the Right Hand of God exalted, and having received of the
Father, the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this, which ye now
see and hear, Verse. 32.

Moreover, Jesus Christ promised the Spirit to his Disciples upon his
Ascension, and this Promise he graciously made good; Romans 5.12
Therefore (says the Apostle) being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access by Faith into this
Grace, Ephesians. 2.18.
etc. Again he says, And came and Preached Peace to you that were a far off,
etc. For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father; that
is, through the Mediator and Peacemaker, who has reconciled us to God: We are
now admitted or introduced into the presence of the Father, and this with
boldness; Ephesians. 3.12.
In whom we have Boldness and Access with Confidence, by the Faith of him: And
this not only in Prayer, but also in all Holy Fellowship, Commerce, and
Heavenly Communion; Having therefore, Brethren, Boldness to enter into the
Holiest by the Blood of Jesus: It was the Blood of Christ that opened this
Trade, or procured this Access to Heaven for us, By a new and living way, Heb.
10.19, 20.
which he has consecrated for us through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh.
Hence our Blessed Lord says, Joh. 14 6.
I am the Way, no Man comes to the Father but by me. Except this River had
been opened, we could never have Traded to Heaven, and that this is done by
Jesus Christ, or by the Peace which he has made, I have thus fully proved.

Thirdly, I shall show you that this is the best Trade, or there is no Trade
like unto it in all the World.

1. Because the Word of God declares it so to be; What a Rich and Glorious
Trade this Spiritual Trade is.
The Merchandise hereof is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain
thereof than fine Gold. Now what Merchandise of this World, do Men account to
excel that of Silver and fine Gold? But Spiritual Merchandise the great God
declares, is better than these, or whatsoever else you can think, or speak of.
Now this I shall further endeavor to make appear in this Method following.

1. In respect of the Subject, these Merchandises enrich.

2. In respect of the Nature of the Things Traded in, or for.

3. In respect of that Blessed Correspondent, who manages all our Affairs in
Heaven, and that makes us Returns of all we venture.

4. In respect of the Terms upon which we Trade.

5. I shall apply the whole -- I shall speak briefly to each of these.

First, The Spiritual Trade inriches the Soul.
The Subject that these Merchandises enrich is the Soul, the Precious and
Immortal Soul of Man, which all other Trades and Merchandise cannot in the
least degree relieve the Wants of, much less enrich; but these Heavenly
Merchandises does this.

1. It is hereby the Soul of a Believer, or a Spiritual Merchant, comes to have
God again; God to be his God, yea, a God in Covenant with him, and to be his
Portion for ever (as you have heard.) It Is through Jesus Christ, or by the
Peace he has made, that this Blessing is obtained; God is hereby our Father,
and Christ is our Savior, and the Spirit is our Sanctifier; whosoever will
venture out by Faith, and Trade in these Seas, or on this Voyage, shall obtain
a sure Interest in Christ, and in God through Jesus Christ for ever.

2. Because this Trade answers all the Necessities of the Soul, Phil. 4.19.
or all its Wants; My God shall supply all your need, according to his Riches
in Glory by Christ Jesus: Graciously, nay, Gloriously, or according to his own
Fullness, or rich Mercy, or Riches in Glory. Nay,

3. Not only supply the Needs of our Souls, but these Merchandises tend to
enrich the Soul with Grace; yea, with all Grace. This Trade, or this
Merchandise, puts a Crown better than that of Gold on its Head, and Chains
about its Neck; Prove. 1.19
They shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about thy Neck.
This, my Brethren, makes the Soul amiable and honorable in the sight of God,
and all good Men; A meek and quiet Spirit is in the sight of God of great
price. No other Ornaments are of any worth in the esteem of God, but are
hateful to him when the Creature is lifted up with Pride thereby. What are the
Curled Locks, and Chains of Gold, and Glis^^^ing Robes in the sight of God?
Poor Lazarus was far more lovely before his Eyes.

4. Because these Merchandises enrich the Soul with Choice and Blessed
Experiences. This Trade inriches the Soul with choice Experiences.
Hence David says, The Law of thy Mouth, is better to me than Thousands of
Gold and Silver. And again he says (speaking of his Experiences) Thou have put
Gladness into my Heart, Ps. 119.72
more than in the time when their Corn and Wine increased. Psalm. 4.7.
One Day in thy Courts, Ps. 84.10.
is better than a Thousand -- And from hence it is that he cries out, Whom have
I in Heaven but thee? Ps. 73.25:
Neith^r is there any on Earth I desire besides thee. Again, says he, Psalm.
34.8*
O taste and see how good the Lord is: He is so Good, yea, so Precious, so
Sweet in his Love and Favor, that I am not able to express it, (as if he
should say) Therefore pray taste your selves, and then by experience you will
find it to be as I say: Solomon also found by experience, this was the best
Trade; Wisdom is better than Gold, Pro. 31.29
and to get Understanding, rather to be chosen than Silver -- Yea, better than
Rubies; Prove. 8.11
all things that may be desired, are not to be compared to it. Solomon had the
experience of all other Things, he had Riches in abundance, Honors beyond all
Men on Earth, and Pleasures of all sorts, and such Wisdom also, which no mere
Man ever attained to, Eccles. 1.1
yet he cries out, Vanity of Vanity, all things are Vanity: Doubtless God might
let him try the Nature of all Worldly good, or whatsoever the Heart of Man
could desire, that by him all Men might know, even by his Experience, the
emptiness and vanity of them; no Man ever decry'd the Vanity of all things
under the Sun, more than he did -- And in the close of all, by that experience
he had, how does he commend Spiritual Things, or the Merchandise of Wisdom, i
e. the Love and Favor of God in Christ, or our Lord Jesus Christ himself, whom
he sets forth under the Name of Wisdom. Moreover, Moses chose rather to Trade
in these rich and rare Commodities than in all the Treasures and Glories of
Egypt, or of Pharaoh's Court; nay, he esteemed the Reproaches of Christ greater
Riches, Heb. 11.25, 26.
or much better than all the Riches and Treasures of Egypt, or all the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season. Also you may take Paul's Experiences on this
account: What says he? But what things were Gain to me, those things I counted
Loss for Christ; Phi. 3.7, 8.
yea, doubtless I account all things but loss for the excellency of the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but Dung, that I may win Christ. In his Judgment all
things in comparison of Christ were but as Dung, or Dogs-meat. O! that every
Soul that hears me this Day, would but endeavor to play such a Game as Paul
did, or get such Experiences as he had.

5. By this Trade also, This Trade inriches the Soul with Gods Promises.
the Soul is enriched with all the Promises of God, precious Promises,
exceeding great and precious Promises; Whereby are given unto us, exceeding
great and precious Promises: Whereby, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that is through the Knowledge of God in Christ; That by these ye may be
Partakers of the Divine Nature. Those Promises by which we partake of the
Nature, or Image of God, must needs greatly enrich the Soul, it is by and
through them we attain to an Impress of the Divine Nature, or Divine Qualities
and Dispositions, as Knowledge, Righteousness, Mercy, Goodness, Holiness, etc.
They are full Promises, suitable Promises, suited to every Condition, and
seasonable Promises, and also sure and certain Promises.

6. Because this Trade inriches both the Soul and Body too, they that drive
this Trade in a right manner shall have their vile Body changed and made in
likeness to Christ's Glorious Body, Phi. 3.21.
and be Crowned with Glory for evermore.

7. This Trade, through Faith in Jesus Christ, With Satisfying and
Soul-fatening Riches.
gives the Soul full Satisfaction, it fills it with Joy and Comfort; for as
hereby we come to have a likeness to God, so also to have Communion with God
and Jesus Christ, it is therefore a most sweet and honorable Calling; it makes
us happy while we live, and happy at Death also: Thus, in respect of the
Subject, these Merchandises do enrich, it appears it is the best Trade in all
the Earth.

Secondly, This will further appear, by considering of the Nature of the things
about which the Soul Spiritually Trades.

I. They are Things of great Worth, Riches, or of an Inestimable Value. The
Nature of Spiritual Things opended.
This appears,

1. In respect of the great Price by which they were bought, which was the
Blood of Jesus Christ, they cost an Infinite Sum of rich Treasure, 1 Pet. 1.18,
19. Who would not highly account of Things bought with such a Price, and part
with all things for them, as Paul did? The Merchant-Man sold all he had, and
bought the Pearl of great Price; Ps. 49.8, 9.
The Redemption of the Soul is precious, etc. That which is most costly, is
commonly most preferred. My Brethren, Jesus Christ did not over-buy them, he
never repented that he laid down so great a Price to purchase them for us. O
costly Ware! (says one) O dear bought Goods! For which the Pearl of great
Price went. Will you not value those things highly which the Son of God bought
with his own Heart's Blood?

2. They are Heavenly Things, Heavenly Riches: What are the Nature of all
Earthly Things to Heavenly Things? Alas, God gives the Things of this World to
his Enemies, to such that hate him: What said Luther of all the Turkish Empire,
It was but a Crust that God casts to a Dog. Brethren, we shall never fully know
the Worth and Nature of Heavenly Things till we come to Heaven.

3. They are Incorruptible Things, (and Things that Thieves cannot steal) and
Things that corrupt not, perish not, they are not the worse for keeping, their
Nature changes not, all other things perish in the using; and as our Lord
shows, Moth and Rust corrupts them: But God is unchangable, and Christ is the
same Yesterday to Day, and for ever: 1 Pet. 1.23
The Word of God is incorruptible, which lives and abides for ever.

4. They are Unsearchable Riches, no finding out perfectly either the Quality,
or Quantity of this vast Mine of rich Treasure, Ephesians. 3.8.
To me who am less than the least of all Saints, is this Grace given: That I
should Preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable Riches of Christ: What are
the Spanish Gold Mines, or the Riches of Mexico or Potosi, to Christ's Riches.
Mines of Gold may be exhausted, or such that have those Mines may be poor, as
the Spaniard is. Brethren, Millions of Millions live upon Christ, yet his
Treasure is full, the Riches of Christ are permanent, abiding Riches, Pro. 8.18.
With me are durable Riches and Righteousness.

5. The Riches procured by this Covenant in this Trade, are not only
Soul-satisfying, but also Soul-fatening Riches; Isa. 55.2.
Eat that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness: These
were those Riches that satisfied Divine Justice, and appeased Divine Wrath, and
that quiets a guilty and wounded Conscience; they fill the Soul, faten the
Soul; Psa. 36.8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy House, and thou
shall make them drink of the Rivers of thy Pleasures -- They shall be fat and
flourishing, Ps. 92.14.
etc.

6. They are certain Riches, the Riches of this World are called Uncertain
Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17.
they make themselves Wings and fly away: Besides, they will not avail in the
Day of Wrath, they will stand in no stead then, nor any ways profit the
Wretched Sinner at Death, nor in the Judgment Day -- But Godliness is
profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4.8.
it is great gain, every ways profitable, at all times, in all States, and
profitable to the Soul and Body too.

7. The Things that Believers Trade in, are the best Things of Heaven, the best
Things of God, he has no better Things to bestow, as you have heard, all good
is comprehended in these Riches; and hence these Things are only given to his
own People, to his Beloved ones, as a Pledge of his Eternal and Special Favor
in Christ. What exceeds himself? His Son, his Spirit, his Love, his Grace, his
Peace, Peace with God, Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and
Eternal Happiness in Heaven?

2 Cor. 4.18
8. They are Eternal Things; The Things that are seen are Temporal, but the
Things that are not seen, they are Eternal. These are Everlasting Wares, you
shall carry them out of the World with you; Joh. 15.11.
These things have I spoken, that my Joy might remain in you, and that your Joy
might be full. O! what a Trade by this Peace is opened to Believers?

Who Believers Trade with, or is their Correspondent.
Thirdly, This is the best Trade in respect of our Blessed Correspondent whom
we Trade with, or who manages all our Affairs at the Court of Heaven; namely,
Jesus Christ.

I. Consider that the Father has put the Management of all our Affairs into
Christ's Hands as our great Trustee: Moreover every true Believer has committed
himself and all his Concerns to Jesus Christ; Ps. 10.14.
The Poor commits himself unto thee.

II. Consider his Power, he is the King of Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18.
All Power is given to me in Heaven and Earth, he is the Mighty God, this made
Paul say, 1 Timothy 1.12.
For I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him against that Day. I have committed my self
to him, my Soul to him, my Life and all I have, and hope to receive, to him;
and I doubt not of his Power and Ability to keep it.

III. Consider of his Faithfulness, other Correspondents oftentimes deceive and
prove unfaithful Stewards, but Jesus Christ is Faithful, he never failed any
one poor Soul that truly trusted in him; God is Faithful, Heb. 3.1, 2
and Christ is called, A Faithful High Priest, etc.

IV. Consider of that great Price he gave for all those Things which we Trade
with him for: Moreover, and that he bought them for us, and has opened a
Blessed and sure way of Conveyance of them; and besides, he has obliged
himself by Covenant to give them down to us as we need them.

V. Consider of that Relation Believers stand in to him, and of his Infinite
Love and Affections to them; he Trades, or Intercedes for his Friends, (for
such he ransomed with his own Blood) for his Spouse whom he has betroathed to
himself for ever.

What Returns Christ makes Believers.
VI. Consider what Returns he makes, some venture much, and that which is great
in worth, but hardly sometimes have returns of the full intrinsical value
again, but thus does not Jesus Christ deal with us.

First, Christ makes great and vast Returns. Christ makes great Returns.


1. To appoint them that mourn in Sion, to give them Beauty for Ashes: Beauty,
especially Spiritual Beauty is a precious Thing, Isa. 61.3.
but what are Ashes worth? What are our Duties? Our Fastings and Prayer and
Humiliations? Why, of no more worth then a little Ashes? Yet here is Beauty
returned for Ashes; yea, Beauty on the Soul, Glorious Beauty!

2. And the Oil of Joy for Mourning; we mourn and weep for our Sins; well, and
pray what are a few Tears good for? Are these of any worth in themselves? No
certainly: Yet Christ makes returns of the Oil of Joy for this Mourning, or in
lieu of these Tears, even the Holy Spirit which fills the Soul with Joy and
Comfort.

3. And the Garment of praise, for the Spirit of Heaviness: Christ approves of
Sadness of Heart that rises from that Sense we have of that Unworthiness that
is in us, and of that Dishonor which is done to him; But how little Worth is
there in this Heaviness, as in it self? But he returns the Garment of praise;
i. e. he clothes the Soul in Beautiful Garments; all these Expressions show,
that whatsoever we receive is in a way of Free Grace, and that there is no
Worth in our Duties; and also that Christ in a way of Grace, will make Blessed
Returns: My Brethren, Rewards of mere Grace are far greater than those of Debt,
as I have often told you. But further.

4. He that gives, Matthew. 10.42.
or ventures a Cup of cold Water to a Disciple, in the Name of a Disciple,
shall not lose his Reward. This is a small thing indeed, yet here is a great
Return for this, when given to a right Object, and to a right End; and if he
that gives, or ventures a Cup of cold Water, has such Returns, what shall he
have that ventures his All, yea, his very Life?

5. And every one that has forsaken Houses, Mark 10, 29, 30.
or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father and Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands
for my Name sake, shall receive an hundred fold, now at this time -- and in the
World to come Eternal Life. Matthew. 19.29.
An hundred fold is a wonderful Return, as when a Man that ventures one Pound
to Sea, to India, or to any other place, and receives a Hundred Pounds in lieu
of it, it is a mighty Return; but this is more in Quantity, and better in
Quality, and that in this Life; an Hundred fold here, and a Crown of Glory in
the Life to come: Who would not Trade with such a Correspondent, or not enter
into such a Calling? Will you not this Day become Spiritual Merchants? What do
you say?

II. He will fill our Treasures, and that with Riches and Honors, yea, Prove.
8.18, 19.
with durable Riches and Righteousness: That I may cause them that love me to
inherit Substance, and I will fill their Treasures.

III. He has promised to return Glory in Heaven, Romans 8.18.
for Sufferings on Earth; For I reckon the Sufferings of this present time not
worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us: Let us weigh
one against the other, and see what a vast difference there is: 2 Cor. 4.17.
For our light Afflictions that are but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

But did I say these Returns are for what we venture? No, no; not for, but in
venturing, in keeping Christ's Precepts, there is an exceeding great Reward:
For all Returns are in a way of Free Grace, it is a Free Trade.

1. Without Money, and without Price, without Money or Moneys worth. We Trade
for nothing, receive nothing for what we had, or give for it as you have heard.

What buying denotes
It Is true, Buying denotes our parting with something that is our own, that we
may have that we want: But what is ours which we must part with? Is it of any
worth? We must (1.) Part with all our Sins, Evil Courses, Evil Habits, and old
Companions. (2.) With our old Hopes of Heaven. (3.) Our own Righteousness in
respect of Trust and Dependence: And what is that but filthy Rags? We have
nothing to part with but cursed Filth and Pollution.

2. Sirs, whatsoever you have which is good, it is his own; Of thine own have
we given thee, says David. It Is true, we must give him the Glory of our
External and Internal Riches; Gifts, Grace, Righteousness, but this is but to
give him what is his own; Job 35 7.
If thou art Righteous, what give thou him? Or what receives he at thine
Hand?

3. He gave us Grace from whence our Tears of Sorrow proceeded: Christ Reaps
nothing but what he first Sowed; it was his Grace, his Spirit that broke our
Hearts; it was his Spirit that created Faith, Love, Hope, Humility, etc. in us;
we only Trade with Christ's Money.

Secondly, Christ makes sure Returns, Christ makes sure Returns.
certain Returns.

1. They that Sow in Tears, shall Reap in Joy. Ps. 126.5.
Again he says, Gal. 6.6.
Your Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

2. Christ is our great Insurer, he keeps an Insuring Office in Heaven, and
has engaged his Faithfulness and Holiness to make us sure and certain Returns;
you shall not go forth Weeping, Ps. 126.6.
but he assures you that you shall return Rejoicing, and bring your Sheaves
with you.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ makes quick Returns. Christ makes quick Returns.


1. Nay, we sometimes meet with Returns (when it is in our Hearts to Trade with
him) before we venture out in Trading; Isa. 65.24.
Before they call, I will answer; and whilst they are yet speaking, I will hear.

Object. But sometimes we do not presently receive what we ask of God in
Christ's Name.

1 Ans. God answers us sometimes, tho not in that manner, or in that thing we
request of him, yet he gives us that which he sees is better for us.

2. He gives us always quickly, or right early, that is, when he sees the Fruit
is ripe and good for us, or in the proper Season; Unripe Fruit is not good,
it is hurtful you know.

3. When we are fit to receive the Mercy desired, and know how to improve it to
his Glory and our Profit, then we shall have it; and would you have it sooner?

4. He may forbear sometimes to give us what we ask, Jam. 4.2.
because we ask amiss, or to try our Faith, Love, Patience, etc. but God must
be Judge, and not we, of what is best for us, and of the time when given to us
also.

APPLICATION.
1. Bless Christ for the Covenant of Peace, upon the account it opens such a
happy Trade, or procures for us such free access to God.

2. We infer that Sinners are woefully blind, that so few will study this Trade,
they will not Trade to Heaven, nor deal in Spiritual Things. (1.) Satan has
blinded their Minds. And (2.) The World is got into their Hearts; they are for
present Things, for sensual Things, sensual Pleasures, Profits, Honors. (3.)
They know not the way how to Trade, Christ is the Way, but they know him not;
they will Trade in forbidden Goods, even with their own Money, etc. They think
by their Tears, by their Repentance, by their own Faith, Righteousness and
Obedience, to procure all things they want, even both Justification, and
Eternal Life.

3. Train up your Children in this Trade, labor to instruct them into the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ, bring them up in the Way that they should go.

4. This also reproves such that grow weary of this Holy Calling, or that
decay, or waste their Stock, and grow poorer and poorer every Day. (1.) The
Price of Heavenly Commodities are fallen in their Esteem, Prayer, Reading,
Meditation, Christian Converse, Church Communion, Peace with God, and Peace of
Conscience too is but of little worth now with them. (2.) Their Faith is low,
their Love to Christ, his Truth and People is decayed, their heat of Zeal is
gone. (3.) They are but little at Home, do not watch their own Hearts, or are
more abroad to find faults in others, and spying the Moat that is in their
Brother's Eye.

Quest. Cannot Men Break, that follow this Trade?

Answ. False Traders, false Professors may; There are some false Traders, and
these will be undone, or Break, and come to nothing, but others cannot Break
nay, will Break, and come to nothing. (1.) They Set up without a Stock; I
mean, without true Saving Grace. (2.) They Trade with their own Money, or have
Confidence in the Flesh, and trust in their own Strength, which had almost
undone Peter. (3.) They are far in Debt, and see not the way of coming out;
they do not see that all their Debts are paid by Jesus Christ. (4.) They Trade
not alone in Christ's Name, nor are they strong in the Grace that is in Christ
Jesus. (5.) They look one way and Row another, look Heavenward, but their
Hearts are Earthly. (6.) They prize Earthly Riches above Heavenly Things; so
that it is no wonder if these Break, but no true Christian, I have proved, can
ever Break, or be Undone.

5. Be exhorted to Trade for Heaven, and to buy of Christ; Rev. 3.18.
Buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, Pro. 23.23
etc. -- Buy the Truth and Sell it not: Do not only Cheapen his Wares, but
resolve to buy: Do you not love Gold? O! Buy presently, you hear how, without
Money: What, are all Things here free? And yet do you not like the Terms? Alas,
Proud Man would fain pay for all he has, this Plague reigns amongst those of
this Generation.

Directions to Trade to Heaven.
Directions to Trade to Heaven.
(1.) Trade with God by Christ, make use of this Blessed Correspondent, come to
God by him, or you will get nothing, obtain nothing; Hitherto you have asked
nothing in my Name; and therefore received no more. (2.) Know and be assured,
that by the Peace Christ has made, you may freely Trade and come to God, but be
sure see, that it is in Faith you come to him, or you will never speed; plead
the absolute Promises. (3.) Observe the Motions of the Spirit, Mariners set out
with the Wind and Tide, Joh. 3.8.
so must you, The Wind blows where it lists: God's Spirit will not always
strive with Men. (4.) Mind the Exchange-time, Merchants will not fail here: O!
see you do not neglect God's Public Worship; no, lose not one Opportunity, if
it be possible; one Neglect in this case had almost ruined Thomas: When
Ministers Preach, you ought to hear; nay, you must hear. (5.) Be sure you keep
up Closet Prayer, much of this Spiritual Trade lies in this Duty; also you must
labor to pray in Faith, and also fervently, cold Prayers will never prevail
with God. (6.) Keep up your Acquaintance with Jesus Christ, you that are
Believers see to this; and you that are Sinners see that you get Union with
him, Acquaint thy self with him, and be at Peace, Job 22.21
thereby good shall come to thee; without Union there can be no Communion with
Christ: Brethren, here is great Complaint of Badness of Trade, may be it is a
Judgment, because this Trade is slighted, or so much neglected: O! remember
this is your general Calling, and it must have the perferance, whatever
business is neglected, this must not: How did God blast the Jews in Trading,
Hag. 1.4.6
because his House lay waste? They minded not this Trade. Also know the more
you venture the greater Returns you will have, the more you do or suffer for
Christ, the greater your Reward of Grace will be; They that turn many to
Righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the Stars for evermore: There are no doubt degrees of Glory in
Heaven.

Quest. Who are Rich Traders, Rich Christians?

Answ. All Believers are rich, yet some are richer than others, richer in
Faith, Love, and Holiness than others. (1.) They that can Trust most, are rich
Dealers, the Poor you know cannot Trust, they live upon their Labor, so some
too much fetch their Comforts from their liveliness in Duties, and lively
Frames, or from their own Labor, but this is not to live by Faith, but such
are rich that can Trust, or Believe, tho they with Thomas see and feel not.
(2.) Such that are rich live high, they keep a Noble Table; I mean, eat the fat
and drink the sweet of the Ordinances and of the Promises; and also they dwell
above, they dwell on high, or enjoy Blessed Communion with the Father and the
Son. (3.) They that are Spiritually poor, poor in their own Eyes, are rich;
Rev. 2.9.
I know thy Poverty, but thou art Rich. (4.) Such that are more Heavenly than
others, are the richest Saints. (5.) Such that are most rich in good Works.
(6.) Such that can best bear Burdens, when Taxes or Burdens are laid on poor
Men, they cannot bear them, but the Rich can. (7.) Commonly the Rich are envied;
so Satan and wicked Men envy such Christians that are most rich, Thieves seldom
beset a poor Man's House; the more thou art tempted, O Soul! the greater sign
it is that thou art rich. (8.) Rich Men feed others, they feed the Poor; so
such that are rich in Grace, and Experiences, feed other Christians; The Lips
of the Righteous feed many. (9.) The Rich are better clothed and adorned than
others; so rich Believers are more Holy, more Humble, Meek and Lowly than
others are: But I cannot enlarge on these Things, but must leave what I have
said to the Blessing of God.

SERMON XIV. Opening the Nature of the Peace made by virtue of this Covenant.
ISA. Live. x. Neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord
that has mercy on thee.


I AM this Day to conclude with this great Subject: The last Thing I told you,
April 3. School.
that I should do, was to open the Nature of that Peace, which is made by
virtue of this Covenant: The Method I shall take in speaking unto this, shall
be,

First, To give you a short Summary Account of what we have said, as to what is
requisite to this Peace with God, etc.

Secondly, Show you the Nature of this Peace.

Thirdly, Apply the whole we have said on this Subject.

First, I have showed you that Jesus Christ alone, A Summary Account of what
has been said as being requisite to Peace with God, etc.
is the great Peacemaker between God and Man.

I. You have heard that we can have no Peace with God, until he is Reconciled,
and this Christ has done; God in Christ is Reconciled, his Justice is
satisfied, and his Wrath by Christ's Obedience and Sacrifice is appeased.

II. Sinners must also (we have showed you) be Reconciled to God; 2 Cor. 5.20
We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God.

Tho Sinners Peace may be made with God, by Jesus Christ, yet that Peace may
not be accepted of by them, or they may not be reconciled to him; true, we have
proved that Jesus Christ undertook to do both these for all God's Elect; (as
has again and again been hinted.)

1. You have heard that Christ died on the Cross, so making Peace by satisfying
Divine Justice.

2. He also, as our Blessed High Priest, sprinkles that Blood upon our
Consciences, I mean, applies the virtue of it to our Souls: By the first Act he
removes all Obstacles out of God's way, and by the second he removes all
Obstacles out of the Sinner's way; so that the Reconciliation becomes Mutual.

Now that which is requisite on the Sinner's part, in order to Peace and
Reconciliation to God.

What is requisite to the Creatures being Reconciled to God.
1. Is that his Eyes be opened to see his wretched State and Condition by
Nature, i. e. that he is a Sinner, an Enemy to God, a Rebel; yea, a Cursed and
Condemned Creature in the first Adam -- Yet,

2. That God in Christ is well pleased (or as I have shown) is reconciled by
his Wrath-appeasing Sacrifice, as the Way, Means, or Meritorious Cause thereof;
and that that Enmity which is naturally in the Sinner's Heart, must be removed
also.

3. He must believe, or come to Christ, resting alone upon him for
Justification, Pardon, Peace, and Eternal Life; being convinced there is no
other way to obtain these Blessings but by him only.

4. And the Grace of God being thus poured forth upon the Soul by the Spirit,
Faith is wrought in him to look to Jesus Christ; and so seeing and admiring the
rich Bounty, Pardon, and Unwordable Clemency of his offended and provoked
Sovereign, this works Repentance, or Godly Sorrow for Sin in every such Person;
by which means he mourns, Repentance how and when it is wrought in the Soul.
and is more or less in great bitterness of Spirit, in beholding how hateful
Sin is to God, and also what Sorrows his Sins brought upon his Blessed Savior.
Hence it is called, A mourning for him, Zech. 12.10. For says the Soul, now I
see that my Sins Crucified my dear Lord, and let out his Hearts Blood; and thus
was my Peace made.

5. Upon this the Believing and Sin-loathing Sinner resolves to lay down his
Arms, and never any more to fight against God. Shall I (says he) thus receive
a Free Pardon of all my bypast Treasons, Sins, and Rebellion against my most
Gracious Sovereign, refuse to lay down my Arms? -- Shall I continue in Sin,
Romans 6.1.
because Grace has abounded, God forbid? Brethren, if Grace be infused into the
Sinner's Heart, it will Teach him to deny all Ungodliness, Tit. 2.12.
and Worldly Lusts: And not only to deny it, to leave it, but also to loath it;
it changes the Mind: yet Repentance is not the Condition of Peace with God, but
an effect of it, or of Christ's Merit, a Broken Heart being one Promise in the
Covenant.

6. A Sinner has not, cannot, have actual interest in the Blessings of this
Covenant, or have Peace in his own Soul, without Union with Christ, which is
accomplished by the Holy Spirit, and Faith of the Operation of God first of
all, whereby it is, that the Soul is transplanted out of the first Adam, that
dead stock into the second Adam that quickening Spirit. Moreover know that the
Real and Relative Change is at one and the same time; and certainly all that
deny that there is a Change of State, as well as a Change of Heart, err
exceedingly. (1.) Because the Word of God positively declares, That by Nature
the Elect are Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
as well as others; therefore more than under Wrath in their own Conscience;
for in their own Consciences they may not apprehend they are the Children of
Wrath before they believe;) Faith also must be somewhat more than an Evidence,
the Soul having that in its actual possession, which it had not before. (2.)
Because they that believe, God says, Are passed from Death to Life; that is,
from a State of Death and Condemnation, into a State of Life and Justification:
See Joh. 5.24. 1 John 3.14. (3.) Because the Holy Spirit in Convictions,
represents the state of an Elect Sinner to himself, to be before Grace wretched
and miserable, who is a true and faithful Witness, and cannot lie. Brethren, as
the first Adam, and all in him were Condemned by the pronunciation of the
Sentence of the Holy God in Paradise; so the second Adam, or all his, or all in
him, are for ever Justified: And as whilst we remain in the first Adam, his
first Sin is imputed to us, so not till we are in Christ is his Righteousness
to our actual and personal Justification imputed to us, tho I grant Foederally
and Representatively in Christ it was imputed before to all the Elect; yet it is
through the reception of Grace, or the infusion of the Spirit, whereby Faith is
wrought, that the Soul receives the Atonement, and comes actually possessed
with the Blessing of Peace; Romans 15.13.
The God of Hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing -- There is no
Peace to the Wicked, says my God: And this because they have not an actual
Interest in Christ -- Where the Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty, and
therefore Peace, 2 Cor. 3.17
and in none else. --

7. And thus the Sinner is brought to God, (and comes to be taken into the
Covenant of Grace) the which the Spirit does renew and confirm in his Baptism,
Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and which is further renewed and confirmed to him in the
Holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, which is a Sign or Pledge of the New
Covenant, in or by Christ's Blood. Hence called, The New Covenant in his Blood.

8. Moreover let it be noted, A Person may Believe and not know it.
That a Man may be in a State of Grace and Peace, and yet not know it; all that
have Faith, or do believe, do not know they have Faith, or believe, but have
Doubts about it, 1 John 5.13. all enjoy not what they have in possession; Faith
is more than a bare Evidence.
therefore true Faith, as to the Essence thereof, cannot be a simple Evidence
to the Soul of what it has, nor a full Persuasion that Christ is mine and I am
his; for if so, then he that has not this Evidence, or Assurance, is no true
Believer, or if he lose it, he loses the very Essence of Faith, and so ceases
to be a Believer. Moreover, it would then follow, that there are no weak
Believers, or Babes in Christ, for every Babe must be a Strong Man, were it
thus: For is not he a strong Christian that has a clear Evidence of his
Justification, and a full assurance of Eternal Life?

9. There is no steady and full Enjoyment of this Spiritual Peace, without
keeping up and maintaining a War against Sin; also this War is maintained by
every Faculty; the whole Soul being united in carrying it on, and also against
every Sin. Joh. 6.14.
Moreover it is a War in which the Soul by the Spirit prevails; Sin shall not
have Dominion over you, Romans 6.14.
etc. It Is a resolute War, or carried on with uttermost Revenge against Sin,
and likewise always, even to the end of our Days; Heb. 12.4.
and if called to it, to resist unto Blood, striving against Sin. All, my
Brethren, that have Peace with God, or are Reconciled to him, are at War with
Sin, Satan, and the World, resolving never to be Reconciled to these Enemies,
or be at Peace with one Sin whilst they live.

Peace is according to the degree of Faith.
10. Our Peace, as to the degree of it, as in our selves is, and will be
according to that degree or measure of our Faith we have, a weak and doubting
Believer, has but little Peace in his own Conscience, he being too subject to
ground his Peace on his good and lively Frame, or to judge of his Justification
by the degrees of his Sanctification, or inherent Holiness, tho the State of
the weakest Christian, is as safe as the strongest, yet he has not that Peace
and Comfort others have. But no more as to this,

Secondly, I shall open the Nature of this Peace.

1. It is Peace with God, the Mighty God, The Excellent Nature of Peace with
God opened, by virtue of the Covenant.
God is hereby become our Friend, all Enmity or Wrath in God against the Soul
is gone for ever, and all Enmity that was in the Soul against God, is removed
or taken away also, there being a Mutual Peace and Reconciliation; I do not say
God can no more be offended with the Soul, but if he be, yet he will not be
provoked to Wrath, or to let out his against such a Person any more for ever.

2. All the actings of God toward his People, are in Love, tho the poor
Believer, perhaps, cannot see it thus, but fears the contrary: My Brethren, God
receives us into his entire Affections, and lets out his Love and Bowels
toward us, and acts always toward us as a tender Father to his Children.

3 We hereby enter actually into a League with God, God takes the Soul into an
everlasting Covenant of Peace, and the Soul also takes God to be his God in the
same Everlasting Covenant, as you have heard, which Covenant all the Powers of
Hell and Darkness can never break or violate, the Peace and Union with Christ
in this Covenant, is indissolvable; The Covenant of my Peace shall not be
removed, says the Lord: Tho we may sin, yet God will blot them all out, Sin,
nor Satan, nor the World, nor Life, Romans 8. ult.
nor Death, neither any thing else can separate us from the Love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord; Heb. 10.17.
their Sins and Iniquities I will remember no more: All the Attributes of God
are for us, and no Accusation of Satan, can provoke God against us, so as to
become our Enemy: True, Sin or Satan may spoil the sensible Peace and Comfort
of our Souls, but they cannot spoil our Peace with God, or break our Union.

4. It is Soul-Peace, Spiritual Peace: O! how great, how sweet and precious is
that Peace? Earthly Peace, National Peace, Congregational Peace, and Family
Peace is good and to be prized: But what is any kind of Peace to true Spiritual
Soul Peace? As no Trouble, no Sorrow is like Soul-Trouble, so no Peace is to be
compared to Soul-Peace; Psalm. 119.165.
Great Peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.

5. Such have Peace also with the Holy Angels; the Angels of God are at Peace
with them that God is at Peace with, they are hereby become our Friends, and
take our part, and fight for us, and against the Devil our grand Enemy; they
War against the Evil Angels, who hate and envy us; Heb. 1.14.
And they Minister unto them that shall be Heirs of Salvation; Ps. 34.7.
nay, the Angels of God encamp round about them that fear him. They also War
against our external Enemies: yea, against all Gods Enemies, and our Enemies,
and fight for our Friends.

6. It Is such a Peace that reconciles a Man to himself: Before a Man's Heart
was divided, one Faculty was set against another, the Understanding, perhaps,
was enlightened, and the Will opposed the Understanding, also Conscience
perhaps terrified the Man, because he sinned against the Light and Dictates
thereof; a Man's Judgment, (like Balaam's may declare for God, and cry out; How
goodly are thy Tents, Numb. 24.5.
O Jacob? And thy Tabernacles, O Israel?) But his Love and Affections may run
out after the Wages of Unrighteousness, as Balaam's did: A Man before Grace
Wars against himself, but Grace unites all the Faculties of the Soul, and sets
them all against Sin, and on God's side; all inward Tumults now cease, nothing
is a greater sign of true Conversion, my Brethren, than this; i. e. when the
whole Heart is united to God and Godliness.

7. It is a wonderful, or inconceivable Peace; it passes all Understanding;
Phil. 4.7.
The Peace of God that passes all Understanding, shall keep your Hearts and
Minds through Christ Jesus. This may not simply refer to Peace of Conscience,
but to that Peace made with God by Jesus Christ, we cannot conceive of the
Excellent Nature thereof; nay, that which is received and inwardly enjoyed, is
unexpressible at some times; 1 Pet. 1.8.
Nothing shall offend such who possess it -- It is called Joy, unspeakable, and
full of Glory.

Isa. 26.3.
8. It is perfect Peace; Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is
stayed upon thee, because he trusts in thee. It is the same as to its Nature,
with that Peace the Saints possess in Heaven, it is Heavenly Peace.

Romans 14.17.
9. It is Peace joined with Joy in the Holy Ghost: It is thus when this Peace
rules in the Heart, or a Believer possesses it in the highest Decree.

10. It is a Peace that opens a Blessed Trade to Heaven: Hereby as you have
heard we have free access to the Father, Heaven is opened, by this Peace, and
Christ's Treasures of Grace and Glory are free to all Believers, to all
Spiritual Merchants, and Holy Traders; but you must set out with full Sails of
Faith, and with a sweet Gale of the Spirit, and then you will return well
freighted, your Ship shall be laden with the rich Merchandise of Heaven, being
filled with Peace, Joy, and Consolation.

11. It is a Peace that opens the way to Communion with God: Hereby we come to
have the Honor to walk with God, as Enoch did Three Hundred Years; Amos. 3.3.
Can two walk together except they are agreed? Can they friendly converse, and
have Communion together till then? No, surely: Hereby we also come to dwell
with God and Jesus Christ; Ephesians. 1.3.
nay, and to sit with Christ in Heavenly Places; Christ and Believers daily
visit one another, yea, and God opens hereby his Secrets to us, Cant. 1.1.
and we have also the Sweet Kisses of Christ's Mouth, and are Embraced by him,
and lie as it were in his Bosom. Moreover, God is hereby become our Refuge, our
Defense, our Protector, our Guard, and only Safety in the Day of Trouble.

12. It is that great Legacy Christ bequeathed to all his Disciple; My Peace I
leave with you, Joh. 14.27.
my Peace I give to you, etc. It Is Peace the World knows not of, can neither
give it, nor take it away.

13. It Is Everlasting Peace, Peace like a River, and it will abide to Eternal
Ages; nay, and it will increase and be much greater, but never cease, read my
Text.

14. To Sum up all: All sorts of Peace are comprehended in this Peace. (1.)
Peace with God. (2.) Peace of Conscience. (3.) Peace with Angels. (4.) Peace
with your selves. (5.) Peace with Saints, ( Jews and Gentiles by this Peace
were made both one) that is, all the Elect among them. (6.) Congregational
Peace, Christ purchased this Peace, and requires us to possess it: Have Salt in
your selves, Mark 9.50
and be at Peace one with another: And O how lovely a thing is this. (7.)
Family Peace, relative Peace; before Grace, may be the Husband and Wife lived
in War with each other; and the Parents and Children, and Masters and Servants,
might quarrel with one another, but Grace reconciles all together in Love. True,
Christ says, He came not to bring Peace, but a Sword; that is, he foresaw this
would be the effect of his coming, and where he is received and one is
Converted, and the other not, the Unconverted raises oftentimes War, but when
that Person is changed, and has Peace with God, that War ceases also. (8.)
National and External Peace is comprehended in this Peace likewise; The Happy
and Universal Peace of Christ Kingdom.
all Nations shall have Peace, as the Effect of the Covenant of Peace; yea, and
all the Saints shall be united together in Love, and sweet Concord, and tho
this is not yet fulfilled yet, Christ's Kingdom is at the Door, and it will be
a Peacable Kingdom, the Church shall then have outward and inward Peace like a
River; He will also make Wars to cease, to the Ends of the Earth -- Of his
Government and Peace there shall be no end -- And they shall beat their Swords
into Plow-shares, Isa. 9.7.
and their Spears into Pruning Hooks: Isa. 2.4.
Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War
any more. O be ready! Look out, for those happy Days are very nigh. Read the
Words after my Text, Verse. 13, 14, 15. And all thy Children shall be taught of
the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children, verse. 13. In
Righteousness shall thou be established, and thou shall be far from Oppression;
thou shall not fear, and from Terror, for it shall not come near thee, verse. 14
Compare this with Isa. 66.10, 11, 12, 13. I will extend Peace to her like a
River, and the Glory of the Gentiles like a flowing Stream. Brethren, Babylon
must fall before these Prophsies are fulfilled: O cry therefore to God to
hasten his Judgments upon that Bloody Whore, that Sion's Glory and Peace may be
manifested, and all Sighings and Sorrow fly away: And then these Words shall be
fulfilled, viz. And the Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effects
of Righteousness, Quietness, and Assurance for ever; and my People shall dwell
in a Peaceable Habitation, and in sure Dwellings, and in quiet resting Places,
Isa. 32.17, 18.

The General Application.
I. From hence we may infer, that there is a great Mystery in Reconciliation,
yea, and we may well stand and admire the Wisdom and Goodness of God, in
respect of that Peace we receive in and by Jesus Christ.

II. We may infer also from hence, that God the Father is the principal Author
and Spring of this Reconciliation, or way of our Peace; he was the Contriver,
and first Mover in those Acts, whereby the first Foundation-Stone was laid; 2
Cor. 5.18
God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself -- All things are of God,
etc. that is, of God the Father, and through Jesus Christ, etc. It is to raise
his Glory, as well as the Glory of Christ, and of the Holy Spirit; therefore
let him primarily have the Honor of our Peace and Salvation. O how did Love
and Bowels move toward us in the Heart of God the Father from everlasting?

III. Exhort. Also be exhorted to prize and highly esteem of the Lord Jesus
Christ, from what you have heard concerning the Covenant; Christ the Sum of the
Covenant. Isa. 42.6. Ark of the Cov. p. 454
because Christ is the Sum of the Covenant; I will give thee for a Covenant to
the People.

1. Christ is originally and fundamentally the Covenant, says a Worthy Writer,
he is the Original Root, out of which this Covenant sprang, and he is the
Foundation upon which it is grounded; Isa. 28.16.
Behold, I say, in Zion, for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious
corner Stone, a sure Foundation, etc. God fixed his Eye on Christ, and entered
into Covenant with him, he is the Foundation Stone of this Covenant; had there
not been a Mediator found, there had been no Covenant of Peace ever made, nor
any Redemption for poor Sinners.

2. When it was first revealed, it was expressed by his Person, Genesis 3.15.
viz. The Seed of the Woman, nothing else is mentioned there, yet this contains
the first Revelation of this Covenant to Fallen Man: And what was the Covenant
of Grace as revealed to Abraham, but Jesus Christ; Genesis 12.3.
In thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be Blessed. Thus Christ is
represented as the Sum of the Covenant.

3. Christ is the Covenant primarily (as the same Author notes) and by
Propriety; As Fire is hot for it self, and all things hot for it, and by
participation: With Christ the Covenant was made as the chief Party; with
Believers it was made in Subordination to him; with him it was made at first
Hand, with us at second Hand. Now, Brethren, this certainly is true, therefore
all Promises were made first to Christ, and first fulfilled to him, and all
Acts of God's Love terminate first upon him, and come to us through him, Who
has made us accepted in the Beloved: Ephesians. 1.6.
Had not God's Love been fixed first on him as Mediator, it had never run out to
us; all Covenant-Blessings are in him; Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with
all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. Christ, as our
Head, is the Repository, or Seat of all Divine Blessings. Christ is the Jewel,
the Riches, or the Sum of all things in the Covenant, as Life, Righteousness,
Pardon, Peace, etc. And he that receives this Jewel, receives all things with
him. From hence he is compared to a Cluster of Camphire. Cant. 1.14


4. Jesus Christ (says the same Author) is the Covenant eminently, because he
is the chief Blessing of the Covenant; there is not such another Promise in all
the Bundle of Promises contained in the Covenant; Joh. 4.14.
If thou know the Gift of God, etc. Christ is the Gift of God; yet certainly
our Author forgot that God the Father, and the Holy Ghost are given as well as
Christ in the Covenant; but when Christ is given, God the Father and the Holy
Spirit is given; He that has the Son, has the Father also: All other things in
the Covenant are (says he) but as the Garnish of this Jewel.

5. Christ is the Covenant virtually, he is the just value of all the Bargain;
he is of as much worth, as all that is promised: If you would know the worth of
the Covenant, consider the worth of Jesus Christ. Moreover, my Brethren, they
that have Christ, have all that is promised in the Covenant.

6. Jesus Christ purchased all that good which is in the Covenant; when we say,
God is our God, we must say, he is our God in Christ, or by Christ, or through
his Redemption and Procurement.

7. Christ is the Covenant comprehensively, or summarily; he is the very
Compound or Abridgment of the Covenant; he is the whole Covenant by way of
Stipulation on our part, etc.

8. Jesus Christ is the only way of Conveyance of all Covenant Blessings,
through whom we receive all we need, or that is Communicaed unto us. Moreover,
the Tender of the Covenant, and Interest in it, is contained in the free Tender
of Christ, and Interest in him: Get Christ, be but in Christ, and thou art in
the Covenant. Sirs, when God gives Christ to a Sinner, the whole Covenant is
performed to that Person, and he that receives not Jesus Christ, shall never
have one saving Benefit or Blessing thereof. And thus may Christ be called the
Covenant -- But

IV. From hence also we may infer the wonderful worth that there is in the
Blood of Christ -- It is not only precious Blood in respect had unto his Person
whose Blood it is, viz. the Eternal Son of God; but also in respect of that
Atonement it has made, and that Wrath it has appeased, and that Peace it has
procured, and in regard of those Infinite Blessings and Priviiedges it has
merited for us, and that precious Soul it Sanctifies. O prize this Blood! What
will become of them that contemn and slight this Blood -- and the Virtue and
Efficacy that is in it? Or account it as the Blood of another Man, or as an
unholy and unprofitable thing, it had been better for such if they had never
been Born.

V. We may moreover from hence see the absolute necessity there is of the Work
and Office of the Holy Spirit, in order to the Application of the Blood of the
Covenant, and all Covenant Blessings unto us: The Holy Ghost deserves (my
Brethren) equal Glory with the Father and the Son. The Holy Spirit must plant
Grace in our Hearts, or be a Vital Principle in the Soul; it is he which
infuses sacred Habits, from whence all Vital Acts proceed; by the Spirit we
come to have the root of the matter in us, from whence all Spiritual Fruit
flows; it is the Spirit that draws us to Christ, that unites our Souls to him,
without it the Death of Christ profits no Man, it is he which sprinkles his
Blood on our Consciences. O let our Mediations swim in the unlimited Ocean of
Love and Divine Goodness, and magnify all the three Persons of the Blessed
Trinity.

VI. We may furthermore learn from hence to see what absolute necessity there
is of the Revelation of this Mystery through the Word or Holy Gospel, what
signifies all Natural Religion, does naturally light in Man, discover any thing
of our Redemption and Reconciliation by Jesus Christ: And from hence let us be
moved to abhor those New and Cursed Notions, which at this Day so much prevail,
which tend to raze the very Foundation of the true Christian Religion; for such
that contemn all revealed Religion, contemn the Christian Religion. From hence
also

VII. We may perceive the Necessity of True and Saving Faith, and likewise the
Excellency thereof; no Man is possessed of this Peace that has not the Faith of
God's Elect; He that believes not, Joh. 3.18.
is Condemned already -- and shall be Damned, Mark 16.16.
unless he believes in Jesus Christ: Also you may hereby see what a strong
ground here is for our Faith and Comfort. From hence also we may see the Cause
why the Holy Angels pry into this Mystery; this Love and Grace of God to
Mankind, they bow down to look into these things, 1 Pet. 2.8.
yea, look with admiration; And shall not we admire it, who are more especially
concerned herein?

IX. Sinners be exhorted (from the Considerations of the whole) to labor and
strive to receive Jesus Christ -- (And let such of you who think and hope you
have received him, try your selves by what you have heard;) O, be exhorted to
know in this your Day the things which belong to your Peace, before they are
hid from your Eyes, Luke 19.42.

X. Believers, see that you labor after a strong Faith in Christ, and in the
Covenant; for the measure of your Peace, will be according to the measure and
degree of your Faith. O get a great Faith, and then your Peace will not be
little, but like a River, yea, wonderfully abound in you.

XI. Trial. Let all that hear me this Day, try themselves, examine themselves,
whether they have Peace with God, or not? Take a few Rules to try your selves.

1. Are you at War with Sin? How to know whether we are in Covenant with God,
or not.
Is Sin cast out of your Love and Affections? Is there an unreconcilable
opposition made in you against all Sin? And as it is Sin, do you loath and hate
it, because it is hateful to God, and has exposed your Blessed Savior to so
much Pain, Shame, Sorrow and Suffering, even to let out his most Precious Blood?

2. Do you mourn for Sin, because it caused such Cursed Enmity in your Hearts
against God, causing your Souls to rebel against him, yea, to hate and despise
him in your Hearts?

3. Are you reconciled to the Ways of God, even to the strictest Acts and
Duties of Holiness? Do you love the Word of God because of its Purity?

4. Do you love all the People of God, and are you Reconciled to those, (who
may in many things differ from you?) Do you pray for them, and hate all
Bitterness; and forbear all Reproachful Language and Sensorious Reflections?
Dare any reproach and speak against their Father's Children? Ps. 50.20.
Thou sitest and speak against thy Brother, and slandrest thine own Mothers
Son. It is thy deliberate Practice and Business (as if God should say) thus to
do: It Is to be feared, that such are not at Peace with God, that are not at
Peace with all the Children of God: 1 John 2.9.
He that says he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness until
now -- We know that we are passed from Death unto Life, 1 John 3.14.
because we love the Brethren; he that loves not his Brother abides in Death.
Therefore let such tremble that are not at Peace with all those who have Peace
with God.

5. Do you mourn for such whom you love, even for your Brethren, your Kinsfolk,
your Neighbors that are not yet Reconciled unto him? See Romans 9.1, 2.

Romans 10.15.
6. Do you Love, Esteem, and highly Respect and Honor the Ambassadors of Peace,
and cannot endure to hear them reviled and unjustly slandered and spoken
against?

7. Have you Peace in your own Consciences, and Peace in your Families? And do
you live peaceably in the Church of God? And also strive as much as in you is,
to be at Peace with all Men?

8. Do you long for the Peace of Jerusalem, and pray for her Peace, for that
Peace which is promised to her in the last Days?

Christ has purchased Universal Peace for his Church; not only internal Peace,
but external Peace also, not only Peace within, but Peace without; not only
Peace with God, but Peace with Men also, and the Day is near he will give his
People Entire and Universal Peace.

A Needful Caution.
Caution. Let none mistake me in any thing I have delivered in any of these
Sermons about God's being Reconciled in Christ, etc. so as to think he is at
Peace, Reconciled, and well pleased with the Elect, whilst they remain in a
State of Enmity against him, being vile and notorious Sinners: God cannot but
hate Sin wherever it is, and loath the unrenewed. Sinner, when he looks upon
them as in the first Adam, or as in their Filthiness, for as such he hates and
loathes them, but as he looks upon any Persons in Christ, so he loves them, and
is at Peace, and well pleased with them; God sees not as Man sees, for he sees
a Man Condemned and Justified at one and the same time; nay, as being in this
World, and yet as being in the World to come, but whatever sight of Things, or
of Persons God has, or how we are looked upon and Justified in his sight in
Christ, is one thing, and what the State of Persons are (or what Things and
Persons may be said to be) as they actually are, or when they actually exist,
(or in a proper Sense and Acceptance) is another thing; for it is ridiculous
to say, That a Man in a proper Sense is actually or personally Condemned and
Justified, Dead and yet Alive at one and the same time, or is in the first
Adam, and yet in the second, or in a State of Wrath, and yet in a State of
Grace, at one and the same moment: Nay, and dangerous it is for any to say,
that a wicked Man whilst he is so, is an Object of God's Delight, or that such
a Person is actually Justified, and that God is at Peace, and well pleased with
him, it being so directly contrary to the Testimony of God's Word, and the
Witness of the Divine Spirit. The Sum therefore of what I say and mean is this:
When I say God in Christ is Reconciled to Sinners, viz. God having chosen his
Elect in Christ from Eternity, was Reconciled to them in him as the Way and
Means of the Procurement of their Peace, or of their Recovery out of the Fall,
or out of their lapsed State foreseen by him; but to say he was actually
reconciled to them, personally considered from Eternity Tho you have heard that
I own a Foederal Union from Eternity.
, or from the Death of Christ, seems absurd and improper: For how could he be
said to be Reconciled to this or that Person, before that Person had any
personal Existencies, or Being; or if they had a Being, yet were Enemies to
him, and loathsome Wretches, and under his denounced Wrath, and Curse, and in
which State they remain before they are actually united to Christ, or are
effectually called -- Yet take notice that that which actually reconciles the
Holy God to us is Christ's Satisfaction alone, to which there can be no
Addition made by any Collateral Work wrought in us, and done by us. We should
therefore distinguish between a Foederal, a Virtual, and a Representative
Union, and Justification, and an Actual Union, and Personal Justification. For
from hence, perhaps, the Mistake may arise: The Scripture every where
declares, that God is an Enemy, or an Adversary to all Unconverted Persons;
nay, and that he hates all the Workers of Iniquity, and Ministers declare and
preach the same thing, and the Holy Ghost in Convictions represents the State
of the Soul to be deplorable before effectual Calling: See my Medium betwixt
two Extremes.
There is it is evident a Relative Change, passing on the Soul by the Spirit,
as well as a Real Change.

Consolation. In the last place (and to close with all I shall say) What ground
of Comfort and Consolation to Believers is here?

1. Your Sins are fully and for ever expiated, When he had by himself purged
our Sins, Heb. 1.3.
sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on high; that is, he has removed
the Guilt, Stain, and Punishment of Sin by his Satisfaction and Merits, so as
God may be Just as well as Gracious in Pardoning and Justifying of us that
believe in Jesus.

2. All Accusations of Sin, the Law, Satan, and our own Consciences, shall be
silenced and answered by the Intercession of Christ: He does and will out-plead
them all.

3. All your Wants shall be richly supplied, all your Graces strengthened, and
all your Enemies are and shall be Overcome, Conquered, and Vanquished for ever.

4. You are brought to God, and Reconciled to him in his own way, in a sure
way; Comfort ye my People, says your God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,
Isa. 40.1, 2
And cry unto her that her Warfare is accomplished, and her Iniquity is
pardoned; for she has received of the Lord's Hands double for all her Sins.
War is for ever ceased betwixt God and you, and as God has received by Christ
double Satisfaction (as it were, For where Sin abounded, Grace has much more
abounded:) So you have and shall receive hereby double at his Hands, viz. not
only a Discharge from Sin and Wrath in Hell, but also Eternal Life and Glory in
Heaven.

5. All your Afflictions (and whatsoever else) shall work together for your
good.

6. You stand firmer, and more sure in ^his Covenant, than Adam stood in
Paradise ^^^ore he fell.

Prove. 4.18
1. Your Peace is increasing, The Path of the Just is as a shining Light that
shines more and more to the perfect Day: And not only your Personal Peace, or
Peace of your Souls, but the Peace of all God's Israel also. O how great will
that Peace be in the latter Days, when God delivers his People from all their
external Enemies, and Troubles, and also unites them altogether to serve him
with one consent.

2. You shall have Peace not only while you live, Psa. 37.37.
but also when you die; Mark the Perfect Man, behold the Upright, the latter
End of that Man is Peace -- He shall enter into Peace, Isa. 57.2.
they shall rest in their Beds, etc.

3. You shall be found in Peace at the Great Day, 2 Pet. 3.14.
when the Lord Jesus shall appear; Be diligent, that ye may he found of him in
Peace, without spot and blameless: That is, give diligence to make it evident
to your own Consciences, that you are in Christ, or are sincere Christians,
that so the Peace of God may rule in your Hearts by the Holy Ghost.

4. Lastly, None can deprive you of this Peace and Joy, or take it away from
you; Peace I leave with you, Joh. 14.27
my Peace I give unto you, not as the World gives give I unto you: Let not
your Hearts be troubled, neither let it be afraid -- Your Hearts shall rejoice,
Chapter 16.22.
and your Joy no Man takes from you.

Therefore be of good cheer, for tho you have many things that trouble you, and
Satan may greatly disquiet your Minds, yet lift up your Heads and Hearts -- My
Brethren, I shall conclude all with the words of the Apostle; The God of Peace
shall bruise Satan under your Feet shortly: The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
be with you. Amen.

FINIS.

