POEMS OF Mr. COVVLEY AND OTHERS. COMPOSED into SONGS and AIRS with a Thorough
BASSE to the Theorbo, Harpsecon, or Base-violl;

BY WILLIAM KING Organist of New-Colledge In the University of OXON:

OXFORD, Imprinted By William Hall, For the Author 1668.

TO ALL LOVERS OF MUSIC.
THE only Reason that caused me to Print these Songs, was to serve the desires
of my Friends; And since they are public, I must content my self with what
Fortune they meet with, or what Acceptance they shall have. I intended many
more Songs, which might have made this Book far larger; But considering that
they were not so fit company for the Great COWLEY, I have given them leave to
find out more suitable Acquaintance.

Farewell.
SOme few faults have escaped the Press by the Authors absence; and where any
Cliffe or Notes are misplaced, you shall find the letters put under or over
them, which will plainly be understood.

The CONCEALMENT.
^ NO; to what purpose should I speak?
^ No, wretched Heart, Swell till you break!
^ she cannot love me if she Would;
^ and to say truth, 'twere pity that she Should.
^ as No, to the Grave thy sorrows bear,
^ Silent, as they will be there*
^ since that loved Hand this mortal wound does give,
^ so Handsomely the thing contrive,
^ that she may Guiltless of it live.
^ So perish, that her killing Thee
^ may a Chance-Medley, and no Murder Be.
2
It Is nobler much for me, that I
By'her Beauty, not her Anger die;
This will look justly, and become
An Execution; that a Martyrdom.
The censuring world will never refrain
From judging men by Thunder slain.
She must be angry sure, if I should be
So bold to ask her to make me
By being hers, happi'er then she.
I will not; it is a milder fate
To fall by her not Loving then her Hate.
3.
And yet this death of mine, I fear,
Will ominous to her appear:
When, sound in every other part,
Her Sacrifice is found without an Heart.
For the last Tempest of my death
Shall sigh out that too, with my breath.
Then shall the world my noble ruin see,
Some pity, and some envy Me,
Then She herself, the mighty She
Shall grace my fun'rals with this truth
It Was only Love destroyed the gentle Youth.
DAVID'S Song to MICHAL.
^ Awake, awake my Lyre,
^ and tell thy silent Masters humble tale,
^ in sounds that may prevail;
^ such Sounds that gentle thoughts inspire,
^ Though so Exalted she and I so Lowly be,
^ Tell her such diffe'rent Notes make all thy Harmony.
2.
Hark, how the Strings awake,
And though the Moving Hand approach not near,
Themselves with awful fear,
A kind of num'erous Trembling make.
Now all thy forces try,
Now all thy charms apply,
Revenge upon her Ear the Conquests of her Eye.
3.
Weak Lyre! thy virtue sure
Is useless here, since thou art only found
To Cure, but not to Wound,
And she to Wound, but not to Cure.
Too weak too will thou prove
My Passion to remove,
Physic to other Ills, you are Nourishment to Love.
4.
Sleep, sleep again, my Lyre;
For thou can never tell my humble tale,
In sounds that will prevail,
Nor gentle thoughts in her inspire;
All thy vain mirth lay by,
Bid thy strings silent ly,
Sleep; sleep again, my Liar, and let thy Master die.
The ENJOYMENT.
^ THen like some wealthy Island thou shall ly;
^ and Like the Sea about it I.
^ Thou like fair Albi'on To the Sailers sight,
^ sprea -- ding her beauteous Bosom all in White,
^ like the kind Oce'an I will Be
^ with loving Arms for ever clasping Thee.
But I Will embrace Thee gentli'er far then so;
As their fresh Banks soft Rivers do,
Nor shall the proudest Planet boast a power
Of making my full Love to ebb one hour;
It never dry or low can prove,
Whilst thy unwasted Fountain feeds my Love.
3.
Such Heat and Vigor shall our Kisses bear,
As if like Doves we'engendred there.
No bound nor rule my pleasures shall endure,
In Love there is none too much an Epicure.
Naught shall my hands or Lips control;
I Will kiss Thee through, I Will kiss thy very Soul.
4.
Yet nothing, but the Night our sports shall know;
Night that is both blind and silent too.
Alpheus found not a more secret trace,
His loved Sicanian Fountain to embrace,
Creeping so far beneath the Sea,
Then I will do to enjoy, and feast on Thee.
5.
Men, out of Wisdom; Women, out of Pride,
The pleasant Thefts of Love do hide.
That may secure thee; but thou have yet from Me
A more infallible Security.
For there is no danger I should tell
The Joys, which are to Me unspeakable.
Her NAME.
^ WIth more then Jewish Reverence, as yet,
^ do I the Sacred Name con -- ceale;
^ When ye kind Stars, ah! When will it be fit,
^ This gentle Mistr'y to reveal,
^ When will our Love be named, and we posses,
^ that Christning As a Badge of Happiness.
2.
So bold as yet no verse of mine has been,
To wear that Gem on any Line;
Nor, til the happy Nuptial Muse be seen,
Shall any Stanza with it shine.
Rest, mighty Name, till then; for thou must be
Laid down by Her, e're taken up by Me.
Then all the fields and woods shall with it ring;
Then Echoes burden it shall be;
Then all the Birds in sev'eral notes shall sing,
And all the Rivers murmur Thee;
Then ever'y wind the Sound shall upwards bear,
And softly whisper't to some Angels Ear.
4.
Then shall thy Name through all my Verse be spread
Thick as the flowers in Meadows lie,
And, when in future times they shall be read,
(As sure, I think, they will not dye)
If any Critic doubt that They be mine,
Men by that Stamp shall quickly know the Coin.
5
Mean while I will not dare to make a Name
So good to represent thee by;
Adam (Gods Nomenclator) could not frame
One that enough should signify.
Astraea' or Caelia as unfit would prove
For Thee, as it is to call the Deity, Jove.
A Comparison between ART and NATURE.
^ ARt lives on Nature's Alms is weak and poor
^ Nature her self has inexhausted store
^ Wallows in Wealth and runns a hidden Maze
^ that no vulgar eye can trace Art's
^ like th'ig -- noble Crow rapin and noize does Love
^ whilst Nature's like the sacred Bird of Jove
^ now bears Loud Tho -- un -- ders,
^ and anon with silent Joy the beaut'uos Phrig'ian Boy,
^ defeats the strong ore-takes the fly -- ing Prey,
^ and sometimes bask's in the open flames of Day,
^ and some times too he shrouds his soaring Wings
^ a -- mong the Clouds.
CUPID'S Complaint.
^ Cupid once when weary grown with Women's Arrants
^ Laid him down on a refreshing rosy Bed, the same sweet
^ Covert harbored a Be and as she always had a quarrel
^ to Love's Idle Trade stings the soft Boy: Pain
^ and strong fears straight melts him into Cries and
^ Tears. As wings and feet would let each other
^ Home he hastens to his Mother, There on her knees he
^ Hangs his Head, and Cries, O Mother, I am dead
^ An ugly Snake they call a Be (O see I swell!)
^ has murdered me* Venus with smiles replied, O
^ Sir, does a Bee's sting make all this stir, Think what
^ pains attend those Darts wherewith thou still art
^ wounding Hearts. Even let it smart may chance that
^ then Thou'l't learn more pity toward Men.
MY FATE.
^ Go bid the Needle his dear North forsake, to
^ which with trembling Reve'rence it does bend. Go
^ bidd the Stones a Journey upwards make: Go
^ bid th'ambiti'ous Flames no more t'ascend
^ And when these false to their own Moti'ons prove,
^ Then shall I cease, Thee Thee alone to Love.
2.
The fast-link'd Chain of everlasting Fate
Does nothing tie more strong, then Me to You;
My fixed Love hangs not on your Love or Hate;
But will be still the same, what e're you do.
You cannot kill my Love with your disdain,
Wound it you may, and make it live in pain:
3.
Me, mine example let the Stoics use,
Their sad and cruel doctrine to maintain,
Let all Praedestinators me produce,
Who struggle with aeternal bonds in vain.
This Fire I Am born to, but'tis she must tell,
Whether't be Beams of Heav'en, or Flames of Hell.
4.
You, who men's fortunes in their faces read,
To find out mine, look not, alas, on Me;
But mark her Face, and all the features heed;
For only there is writ my Destiny.
Or if stars show it, gaze not on the skies;
But study the Astrol'ogy of her Eyes.
5.
If thou find there kind and propitious rays,
What Mars or Saturn threaten I Will not fear;
I well believe the Fate of mortal days
Is writ in Heav'en; but, oh my heav'en is there.
What can men learn from stars they scarce can see?
Two great Lights rule the world and her two, Me.
LOVES FIELD.
^ MEn of War, march bravely on, The Field is easy
^ to be wonn; There Is no danger in that War, where
^ Lips both Swords and Bucklers are, Here Is no
^ Cold to Chill you, A Bed of Doune's your
^ Field Here Is no Sword to kill you unless you
^ please to yield. Here is nothing to in -- cumber,
^ Here will be no Scars to number.
Composed by Mr George King the Authors Father.
ALEXIS Singing.
^ Yes yes, It is Alexis sings to his Theorboe,
^ whilst the strings tremble to hear his lusty
^ voice, out-shake their Well-tuned mellow
^ noize. And eve'ry Songster in the Fields, to
^ his sweet strains the better yields, when He sings
^ high, The Nightingall baffled does hush her pretty
^ Tale. when lower the Melodi'ous Be would
^ Hum and imitate, but She finding it is in vain to
^ strive, for grief does creep in-to her Hive, Thus with Ap -- Plauding
^ silence All admire each slide, each rise, each
^ fall. If they perceave that He draws nigh This Cadence
^ ends his Harmony. Then voice they thus a second strain, sweet Alexis sing
again.
All-over LOVE.
^ It Is well, it is well with them (say I,) whose short lived
^ Passi'ons with themselves can dye: For none can be unhappie
^ who midst all his Ills a time does know, Though never so
^ long when he shall not be so.
2.
What ever parts of Me remain,
Those parts will still the Love of thee retain;
For 'twas not only in my Heart,
But like a God by powerful Art,
'Twas all in all, and all in every part.
3.
My Affection no more perish can
Then the First Matter that compounds a Man.
Hereafter if one Dust of Me
Mixed with another substance be,
'Twill Leaven that whole Lump with Love of Thee.
4.
Let Nature if she please disperse
My Atoms over all the Universe,
At the last they easi'ly shall
Themselves know, and together call;
For thy Love, like a Mark; is stamped on all.
LOVES VISIBILITY.
^ With much of pain, and all the Art I knew, have
^ I endev'ourd hither-to; To hide my Love, and yet
^ all will not do.
2.
The world perceives it, and it may be, she;
Though so discreet and good she be,
By hiding it, to teach that skill to Me.
3.
Men without Love have often so cunning grown,
That something like it they have shown,
But none who had it ever seemed to have none.
4.
Love's of a strangely open, simple kind,
Can no arts or disguises find,
But thinks none sees it cause it self is blind.
5.
The very Eye betrays our inward smart;
Love of himself left there a part,
When through it he past into the Heart.
6.
Or if by chance the Face betray not it,
But keep the secret wisely, yet,
Like Drunkenness, into the Tongue it will get.
LOVE Undiscovered.
^ I; others may with safety tell, the mode'rate flames which
^ in them dwell, and either find some medicine there, or
^ cure themselves ev'en by despair: My Love's so
^ great that it may prove, dange'rous to tell her that I
^ Love; So tender is my wound, it must not bear
^ any Sa-lute though of the kindest air.
2.
I would not have her know the pain,
The Torments for her I sustain.
Lest too much goodness make her throw
Her Love upon a Fate too low.
Forbid it Heaven my Life should be
Weighed with her least Conveniencie:
No; let me perish rather with my grief,
Then to her disadvantage find relief.
3.
Yet when I dye, my last breath shall
Grow bold, and plainly tell her all.
Like covetous Men who never descry,
Their dear hid Treasures till they die.
Ah fairest Maid, how will it cheer
My Ghost, to get from Thee a tear!
But take heed; for if me thou Pitiest then,
Twenty to one but I shall live again.
The given LOVE.
^ I Will on for what should hinder me, from Loving
^ and enjoy -- ing Thee, Thou can not those excepti'ons make
^ which thin Soul'd under-Mortalls take, That my Fate's too mean and
^ low, 'twere pity I should love thee so, If that dull cause could
^ hinder me in Loving and en -- joying Thee.
2.
It does not me a (...) please
Since that the rich (...) seize;
That you all Titles (...) our own,
Are Valiant, (...) alone.
But if you claim over Women too
The power which ove* Men ye do;
If you alone must Lovers be,
For that, Sirs, you must pardon me.
3.
Rather then lose what does so near
Concern my Life and Being here,
I Will some such crooked ways invent,
As you, or your Forefathers went,
I Will flatter or oppose the King,
Turn Puritan, or Any Thing;
I Will force my Mind to arts so new:
Grow Rich, and Love as well as You.
4.
But rather thus let me remain,
As Man in Paradise did reign;
When perfect Love did so agree
With Innocence and Poverty.
Adam did no Jointure give,
Himself was Jointure to his Eve:
Untoucht with Av'arice yet or Pride,
The Rib came freely back to 'his side,
5.
A curse upon the man who taught
Women, that Love was to be bought;
Rather dote only on your Gold?
And that with greedy av'arice hold;
For if Woman too submit
To that, and sell her self for it,
Fond Lover, you a Mistress have
Of her, that is but your Fellow-slave.
vide Cowley fol. 6. Mist.

COUNCIL.
^ Ah! what advice can I receave, No, satisfy me
^ first; For who would Physic pot'ions give, to one that
^ dies with thirst. A little puff of breath we find small
^ fires can quench and kill, But when they are great the
^ adverse wird, does make them greater still, now whilst you
^ speak, it moves me much, but straight I Am just the
^ same: Alas! th'ef -- fect must needs be such of cutting
^ through a flame.
Upon the graveing a Name on a Tree.
^ A -- las! how barbarous are we, thus to re -- ward the curte'ous
^ Tree, who it is broad shade affording us, deserves not to be
^ wounded thus. See, see how the yiedling bark com -- plies with our un --
grateful
^ injuries; And seeing this say how much then, Trees
^ are more generous then Men, Who by a Nobleness so
^ Pure, Can first obleige and then en -- dure.
LOVES CURE.
^ GO soft de-sires Loves gentle Progeny, And on the
^ Heart of charming Silv'ia seize, Then quickly back again re -- turn
^ to Me, since that is the on -- ly Cure of my disease
^ But if you miss her Breast whom I a -- door
^ Then take your flight and vi -- sit mine no more.
The Given HEART.
^ I won -- der what those Lovers mean who
^ say, they have give'n their Hearts away,
^ Some good kind Lovers, tell me how, for mine is
^ but a tor -- meant to me now.
2.
If so it be, one place both hearts contain,
For what do they complain?
What courtesy can Love do more,
Then join Hearts, that parted were before?
3.
Woe to her stubborn Heart, if once mine com
Into the self same room;
'Twill tear and blow up all within,
Granado-like into a Magazin.
4.
Then shall Love keep the ashes, and torn parts,
Of both our broken Hearts:
Shall out of both one new one make,
From hers, the Allay; from mine, the Metal take.
5.
For of her heart, he from the flames will find
But little left behind:
Mine only will remain entire;
No dross was there, to perish in the Fire.
Clad in WHITE.
^ FAirest Thing that shines below, why in this
^ Robe do thou ap -- pear, would thou a white most
^ perfect show, Thou must at all no garment wear
^ For Thou will seem much whiter so, Then winter
^ when it is clad in Snow.
2.
It Is not the Linen shows so fair:
Her skin shines through, and makes it bright;
So clouds themselves like Suns appear,
When the Sun pierces them with Light:
So Lillies in a glass enclose,
The Glass will seem as white as those.
3.
Thou now one heap of beauty art;
Naught outward, or within is foul:
Condensed beams make every part:
Thy Body's Clothed like the Soul.
Thy soul, which does it self display,
Like a star placed in the Milky way.
4.
Such robes the Saints departed wear,
Wooven all with Light divine;
Such their exalted Bodies are,
And with such full glory shine.
But they regard not mortals pain;
Men pray, I fear, to both in vain.
5.
Yet seeing thee so gently pure,
My hopes will needs continue still;
Thou would not take this garment sure,
When thou had an intent to kill.
Of Peace and yielding who would doubt,
When the white Flag he sees hung out.
The DISTANCE.
^ I* have followed Thee a year at least, and
^ ne -- ver stopped my self to rest, but yet can
^ Thee or'etake no more, then this day can the
^ Day that went be -- fore.
2.
In this our fortunes aequal prove
To Stars, which govern them above;
Our Stars that move for ever round,
With the same distance still betwixt them found.
3.
In vain, alas, in vain I strive
The wheel of Eat faster to drive;
Since if a round it swiftlier fly
She in it mends her pace as much as I.
4.
Hearts by Love strangely shuffled are,
That there can never meet a Pare!
Tamelier then Worms are Lovers slain;
The wounded Heart never turns to wound again.
LOVES FUEL.
^ SInce Love has in thine and mine Eyes, Kindled an
^ holy flame, what pi -- tie 'twere to let it dye, what
^ Sin to quench the same; The Stars that seem ex -- tinct
^ by day, dis -- close their beams at night
^ and in a subtle sense con -- vey, Their Loves in flames of Light.
2.
What though our Bodies do not meet,
Love's fuell's more Divine;
The fixt-stars by their twinkling greet,
Although they never join.
Falce Meteors that do change their place,
Though they seem fair and bright;
Yet when they covet to embrace,
Fall down, and loose their light.
3.
If thou percev'st thy Love decay,
Come light thine Eyes at mine:
And if I find mine wast away,
I Will fetch fresh fire from thine;
Thus while we shall preserve from wast,
The flame of our desires;
No Vestall shall maintain more chaste,
Nor more Immortal fires.
AGE.
^ Often am I by the Women told, Poor A -- nacreon
^ thou grow'st old; See how thy hairs
^ are fall -- ing all, Poor A -- na -- cre -- on how they
^ fall; Whether I grow old or not? By the of -- fects
^ I do not know, This I know with -- out being
^ told, It Is time to Live if I grow Old,
^ It Is time short plea -- sures then to
^ take, Of little Life the best to make,
^ And manage wise -- ly the last stake.
Turn over for the Second Part.
The Second Part.
^ Fill the bowl with to -- sie wine, round our
^ Temples to -- ses twine; And let us cheer -- fully
^ a while like the Wine and To -- ses smile
^ Crowned thus we will con -- temn Gyges wealthy
^ Diadem: To day is ours what need we fear
^ To day is ours we have it here, Lets gently
^ treat it, that it may, VVish at Least with us to
^ stay. Lets bannish busi'ness, ban -- nish sor -- row
^ to the Gods be -- longs to mor -- row.
Compos*d by E. Y. a Friend and Lover of Music.
The Heartbreaking.
^ IT gave a pit'eous groan, and so it broke
^ In vain some -- thing it would have spoke
^ The Love with -- in too strong for it was, Like Poison
^ put into a Venice Glass.
2.
I thought that this some Remedy might prove,
But, oh, the mighty Serpent Love
Cut by this chance in pieces small,
In all still lived, and still it stung in all.
3
And now (alas) each little broken part
Feels the whole pain of all my Heart:
And every smallest corner still
Livs with that torment which the whole did kill.
4
Even so rude Armies when the field they quit,
And into several Quarters get;
Each Troop does spoil and ruin more,
Then all joined in one Body did before.
5.
How many Loves reign in my bosom now?
How many Loves, yet all of you?
Thus have I changed with evil fate
My Monarch-Love into a Tyrant State.
The MONOPOLY.
^ What Mines of Sulphur in my Breast do lie,
^ That feed th'ae -- ternall burnings of my Heart;
^ Not AEtna flames more fierce or con -- stant -- ly, the
^ sounding shopp of Vulcans smoaky Art; Vulcan his
^ shop has placed there, And Cu -- pids forge is set up here.
2.
Here all those Arrows mortal Heads are made,
That fly so thick unseen through yielding air;
The Cyclops here, which labor at the trade
Are Jealousy, Fear, Sadness and Despair.
Ah cruel God! and why to me
Gave you this cursed Monopoly?
3
I have the trouble, not the gains of it;
Give me but the disposal of one Dart;
And then (I Will ask no other benefit]
Heat as you please your furnace in my Heart.
So sweet's Revenge to me, that I
Upon my foe would gladly die.
4
Deep into'her bosom would I strike the dart;
Deeper then Woman e're was struck by Thee;
Thou giv'st them small wounds, and so far from the Heart,
They flutter still about inconstantly.
Curse on thy Goodness, whom we find
Civil to none but Womankind!
5
Vain God! who woman do thy self adore!
Their wounded hearts do still retain the powers
To travel, and to wander as before;
Thy broken Arrows 'twixt that sex and ours
So'unjustly are distributed;
They take the Feathers, we the Head
The 133 Psalm. Mr Sands's Translation Two voices to the Organ.
^ O blessed e-state, blessed from a -- bove blessed from above O blessed e -- state
blessed from above when brethren join in mutu'all blessed from a -- bove when
Brethren join in mut'uall Love in mu -- tu'all Love, It Is like the pret'ious
Odors Love in mu -- tuall Love. ^ shed on consecrated Aa -- ron's It Is like the
precious odours shed on consecrated Aaron's Head which trick -- led trick --
led from his Head which trickled trickled from his and breast down down to the
borders of his vest to the Head and breast down to the borders of his vest to
the ^ bor -- ders of his Vest. It Is like the Pearls of Dew that drop drop bor --
ders of his Vest. It Is like the pearls of Dew* that Drop on Syons e -- ver fra
-- grant Top, Or which the smy -- ling Heav'ens didrop, on Syons e -- ver fra
-- grant Top, Or which the smyling-still on happy Syons sacred Hill, for there
the Lord his* Heavens distill on happy Syons sacred Hill, for there the Lord
his ^ favors placed and life which shall and life which favors placed and
life which shall shall for ever Last and life which shall and life which shall
for e -- ver last and life which shall For e -- ver Last Allelui'ah Al -- le --
luiah Al -- le -- luiah For e -- ver last ^ Al * Al * Alleluiah Al * Al * Al *
Al * Al * All -- lui -- ah Al * Al * Al * *All -- lui -- ah

Bassus. Gloria Patri etc. 3 Voc:
^ Glo -- ri -- a Pa -- tri and Filio and Spiritui Sancto and Spiri -- tui
Sancto and Spiritui Sancto Sancto and Spi -- ri -- tu -- i Sancto Sicut erat in
principio est nunc and semper est nunc * Semper and in Saecula and in Secula
Saeculorum and in Secula Saeculorum A -- men.

Contra-Tenor.
^ Gloria Pa -- tri and Fi -- li -- o and Spi -- ri -- tu -- i Spi -- ri -- tu
-- i Sancto and Spiritui San -- cto and Spiritui San -- cto and Spiritui San --
cto sicut erat in prin -- cipio est nunc and semper est nunc and semper and in
sae -- cu -- la and in se -- cu -- la and in sae -- cu -- la sae -- cu -- lo --
rum and in saecula saeculorum A -- men.

Treble.
^ Gloria Pa -- tri and Fi -- li -- o and Spiritui San -- cto and Spiritui San
-- cto and Spiritui San -- cto Sicut erat in prin -- ci -- pi -- o est nunc and
semper est nunc and semper and in saecula saeculorum and in saecula secula secu
-- lorum and in sae -- cu -- la sae -- cu -- lo -- rum A -- men.

FINIS.

