depiction of Father Christmas Behold the Majesty and grace --!
Of loueing, cheerful, Christmas face.
Whom many thousands, with one breath:
Cry out, let him be put to death.
Who indeed can never die:
So long as man has memory.


THE EXAMINATION AND TRIAL of Old Father CHRISTMAS.

At the Assizes held at the Town of Difference, in the County of Discontent.

Written according to Legal proceeding, By Josiah King.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Johnson, at the sign of the golden Key in Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

To the Worshipful John Hodge, Doctor of Physic at Modbury in Devon.
Sir:
PArdon I beseech you my presumption, in presenting you this ensuing Allegory:
I must confess, it is too trivial for your grave perusal, yet the reading
perhaps may serve to the same end the writing did, which was only Recreation;
Fancy is a Daughter of Salomons good Houswife; she will be spinning before it
be light: Sir, I hope you will Heartily construe his intention, who is weak in
his endeavors, though strong in his desires, and if he could he would not; or
if he would, he could not, be otherwise than

Your Servant in the bonds of affection. Josiah King.

To Captain Thomas Prinne, of Wembury.
Sir:
IN discharge of my promise, I here tender you the service of an old man, let
him not be served, like the Serving-man, turned away because old; I hope he
will not speak any thing that may offend a chaste ear: yet I question not, but
there will be evil reports raised on him, and indeed, Woe were to him, if all
should speak well of him.

I know you are ingenious, and besides
I have been told, a lover of good Tides:
O let them flow! if they content do bring;
But never ebb, thus prays your servant King.
To Momus, or the Critic.
Self-conceited Sir,
I Know thou will brag, thy very breath is enough to poison the Muses: how many
pots of ointment have thou spoiled, I know thou will be chopping upon my broken
style, but tell me, can thou expect flowers from him, that never walked in
Apollo's garden? If thou say, here is something stolen, I say thou lie; it
is but borrowed, and that is the Method: The Author of the Isle of man, and I
had it from the Assizes; now be advised by me, put thy ears in under thy cap,
and shut thy black mouth, and then no body will know thee; thus says

I. K.

To the honest Reader.
Friend:
MY intent in writing this Allegorical Trial of Christmas, was not to vent mine
opinion upon the observation of the time, he that observes a day as he should,
may keep Christmas every day: only herein is expressed some part of those
arguments which are used in pleading for, or against the keeping of it: It will
be I hope no cause of controversy, there is too much division already, for
which there is as much grief of heart: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let
them prosper that love it.

Blessed are those that all dissension hate,
And strive to quiet a disturbed state.
Vale.
The TRIAL of Christmas.
THe day appointed for the Assizes being come; the Judge and the Sherriffe with
the Justices of the Peace, came to the place where they were to sit: and first
I think it would not be amiss to tell you the Names of them; the Judge was
called Judge Hate-bate, the Sherriffs name was Sir Leonard Love-peace; the
Justices are called as follows; the first is Justice Hate-bribe, the second
is Justice Wise, the third Justice Upright, the fourth Justice Doe-good, the
fifth Justice Fearnone; these with the Judge and Sheriff, being settled on the
Bench, the Judge read his Commission; after which, the chief of the Prisoners,
being one Old Christmas, was commanded to be brought to the Bar; then was a
Jury for Life and Death to be impanneld, who are for the Commonwealth, and
are to give in their Verdict according to their Evidence, and as they were to
be called, there stepped up one Sir Hica Busy* and delivered a list to the
Sheriff, informing him, that the Country desired those men whose names were set
down, might be the Jury to pass upon old Christmas at the Bar; which the
Sheriff for quietness sake, delivered to the Clerk of the Arraignment, to have
them called, a company of brave Gentlemen, you shall hear them named by and by.

The Clerk having received the Paper, bid the Crier call, as follows.

Cler. Crier, call Mr. Starve-mouse. Cr. O yes, Mr. Starve-mouse.


Crier, call Mr. All-pride.


Cr. O yes, Mr. All-pride.


Crier, call Mr. Keep-all.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Keep-all.


Crier, call Mr. Love-none.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Love-none.


Crier, call Mr. Eat-alone.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Eat-alone.


Crier, call Mr. Give-little.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Give-little.


Crier, call Mr. Hoord-corn.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Hoord-corn.


Crier, call Mr. Grutch-meat.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Grutch-meat.


Crier, call Mr. Knit-gut.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Knit-gut.


Crier, call Mr. Serve-time.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Serve-time.


Crier, call Mr. Hate-good.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Hate-good.


Crier, call Mr. Cold-kitc^in.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Cold-kitchin.


Then says the Clerk to the Crier, count them, Starve-mouse one, All-pride
two, Keep-all three, Love-none four, Eat-alone five, Give-little six,
Hoord-corn seven, Grutchmeat eight, Knit-gut nine, Serve-time ten, Hate-good
eleven, Cold-kitchin twelve.

Then says the Crier, all you bountiful Gentlemen of the Jury answer to your
names, and stand together, and hear your Charge.

With that there was such a lamentable groan heard, enough to turn ice into
ashes, which caused the Judge, and the rest of the Bench, to demand what the
matter was; it was replied, that the grave old Gentleman Christmas, did sound
at the naming of the Jury; then it was Commanded that they should give him air,
and comfort him up, so that he might plead for himself: and here I cannot
pass by in silence the love that was expressed by the Country people, some
shreeking and crying for the old man; others striving to hold him up, others
hugging him, till they had almost broke the back of him, others running for
Cordials and strong waters, insomuch that at last they had called back his
wandering spirits, which were ready to take their last farewell.

Then said the Judge, old man, what is the matter?

Christm. Ah good my Lord! I have been grossly abused, and had been trodden
under foot, had not these good Country people helped me.


Judge. But me thought I heard some say, it was at the naming of the Jury; If
thou have ought justly to except against them, I will hear thee.


Christm. I heartily thank your Honor, and this favor which your Lordship
has granted me, has encouraged me to crave another, and that is, That you be
pleased to grant me the benefit of a Council, in regard of mine Age, and
defect of memory and expression. Besides, the Jury are all strangers to me, as
well as enemies: and therefore I desire my Council may be one of this County,
that so he may describe the Gentlemen of the Jury.


Judge. Well Christmas, in regard that thou were a merry old man when I was but
a Boy, and did often at thy coming make me sport, I have granted thy request,
choose thy Councellor.


Christm. I humbly thank your goodness my Lord.


Then the old man whispered to a Friend, to deliver a Fee to Councellor Crab,
and desire him to decypher the Jury, and as occasion did offer it self, to
Plead his Cause.

The Fee being delivered, and accepted, the Councellor after this manner spoke
to the Bench.

Council. My Lord, may it please your Honor, this Jury which is now impanneld,
and to pass their Verdict upon old Christmas, is illegally chosen, there is not
one of them a Freeman, and all mortal enemies to this old Gentleman.

And first of all here is Mr. Starve-mouse, I wonder how he dare show his face
in Court, the very Cats cannot abide him.

Secondly, Here is Mr. All-pride, I must confess he has an estate.

But at his housekeeping you may admire,
Where silken gowns do quench the kitchen fire;
And of his Cup, there is none that ever ^^ste,
And break their necks may, sooner than their fast.
And when at any time a feast he will keep,
He in Bravado will kill half a sheep.
Here Is another my Lord called Eat-alone, a Malefactor my Lord, and ought to be
condemned by Magna Charta; where it is to be found, that one of the Lord chief
Justices own Clerks being accused, was forced to free himself, and get it
recorded, that he eat not his morsel alone.

To be short my Lord,

To eat his breakfast he a corner sought,
And in his pocket has his dinner brought.
There Is another of them called Givelittle, he may well be called give nothing,
yet the Fool will sometimes brag of his Charity; if he kills but an Egg, and
give the offall to the needy: he is, my Lord, a great benefactor to the poor,
but will bestow nothing upon the Beggars; and as for Master Cold-kitchin, here
is his man Sam Servant, is ready to give Oath, that he has almost sterved him
to death.

And for Mr. Hoord-corn, the people in general all curse him, it is he that
makes the Epha small, and the shekel great; good my Lord, let Justice be done
upon him, unless he will save Gregory the labor, and follow the steps of his
father, who the last cheap year hanged himself.

There Is another of them called Mr. Grutchmeat, he may be termed grutch clothes
too, for his clothes were never young in my memory, they may be set down in
the Almanac with the dear year, and the great frost: he is one that never gave
Alms in his life, the house of his own body he will not keep Tenantable, but
it had been irrecoverably decayed; had it not been for the reparations of other
men's Tables, where he hoords up meat enough for a month; in a word, my Lord,
he is a base fellow, and so I leave him.

There Is another of them called Mr. Servetime, he dwells at the sign of the
Weathercock; he has a glove for every hand, he holds it most safe to do as
most do, right or wrong, he will be on the harder side.

And when a hunting goes, I have been told,
He with the Hare will run, and Hound will bold.
So my Lord not sit for a Juror, because he makes conscience of nothing.


Judge. Were there ever such a brood of Vipers as these, Mr. Sheriff, how came
this to pass?


Sheriff. Surely my Lord it was Sir Hica Busy that gave me the List, and told
me, it was the Countries desire that these men should be the Jury; and I was
induced to believe it, in regard I know him to be a popular man.

With this the Jury began to murmr, and told the Judge that the Councellor
had abused them to please his Client, as most of his fraternity will do; and
therefore would appeal, or stand to justification.


Council. My Lord, here are some witnesses to prove the truth of what I have
spoken.


Judge. Let them come in.


Coun. Crier, call Humility.

O yes, Humility.


Judge. Come friend, can you testify any thing against any of the Jury?


Hum. My Lord, I am convinced, that all that has been spoken by the
Worshipful Councellor is true, but especially I can speak something more
against Mr. All-pride than has been yet declared: for may it please your
Honor, he has endeavored to murder me, and my Neighbor Patience: all his
practice is in brave clothes, big looks, swearing and swaggering, and
insulting over his poor Neighbors, there was one Mr. Good-work lived in the
house before this fellow threw him out of the doors; he spent more in Mustard
every year, than this gaudy Gentleman does in Beef, he keeps two wicked men to
his Servants; the one is called Stony-heart, the other Bribe, and these help to
keep him up in his wicked courses.

My Lord, here are many more witnesses if your Lordship please to examine them.


Judge. No, no, this is no Joshad's day; Mr. Sheriff, let another Jury be
impanneld immediately, a pack like the former, if they be to be gotten,


Council. Before he find their Fellows, he must rake
Tophet throughout, and the infernal Lake.

The Jury being chosen, were called as follows.

Mr. Love-friend one. Mr. Hate-strife two. Mr. Freeman three. Mr. Cloath-back
four. Mr. Warm-gut five. Mr. Good-work six. Mr. Neighborhood seven. Mr.
Ope-house eight. Mr. Scorn-use nine. Mr. Soft-heart ten. Mr. Merry-man eleven.
Mr. True-love twelve.
No man taking any exception against this Jury, the Clerk read the Indictment
against old Christmas, as follows.

Cler. Christmas hearken to they Indictment.


Christmas, thou art here Indicted by the name of Christmas, of the Town of
Superstition in the County of Idolatry, and that thou have from time to time
abused the people of this Commonwealth, drawing and enticing them to
Drunkenness, Gluttony, and unlawful Gaming, Wantonness, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Cursing, Swearing, abuse of the Creatures, some to one Vice,
and some to another, all to Idleness: what say thou to thy Indictment,
guilty, or not guilty? he answered not guilty, and so put himself to the Trial.

After this, the Parties that can give Evidence against him are called.


Council. His innocence appears; I lay a Crown,
Whiter than untrod Snow, or Culver down.

Cler. Crier call in Gregory Grutchmeat.

O yes Gregory Grutchmeat.


Judge. Come you thin belly, what can you say against the Prisoner at the bar,
do thou know him?


Greg. Know him, yes my Lord, his name is Christmas, a great waster and
spendthrift, he has been all his days nothing like Sampsons Lion, out of that
eater came forth meat, but this old fellow devours all, and produces nothing,
he passes the great eater of Kent, his mind is wholly set upon his belly, for
satisfaction of which, he murders the poor innocent Creatures: My Lord, let
the Records be searched; and before the flood, we cannot find, that man ever eat
any thing but fruit or herbs, but this Cormorant is all for flesh flesh, and
eats it with the blood thereof, which is the cause that he is so beastly
minded, a mere Esau, he will sell, his birthright to satisfy his belly, he is a
Bastard, begotten of the horseleaches Daughter continually crying, give, give;
Some people of this Nation are so besotted by this old fool, that they make a
world of provision against his coming, and invite him to be Gossip to all their
Pyes, and call them after his name, Christmas-Pyes.

My Lord, here is an honest Neighbor of mine called Pinch-gut, can testify as
much as my self.


Council. Hear me a word my Lord, and if you please,
Pharoahs ill-favored Kine were fed by these.

Clerk, Crier call Pinch-gut.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Pinch-gut.


Judge. Come fellow, what can you say against the Prisoner?


Pinch. I perceive my Lord the Councellor is purposed to abuse us, to please
his Clyent, as all the fraternity will do, but I would have him know, that I
was well descended, my Father was called Saving, and my Mothers name was Spare,
a very good hous-wife; and of great repute amongst the Farmers.


Judge. Fellow, I am not come here to examine pedigrees, were they as Authentic
as a Welch-mans. But come let me hear what thou can say in the behalf of the
Commonwealth, against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Pinch-gut, My Lord, I can say that this Old man is an Epicure, all his delight
is to please his Pallat, his throat is an open Sepulcher, he is the Canker of
the Commonwealth; worse than the Locust; or the Palmer-worm, and this is the
sum of what I can testify.


Council. This is a liberal fellow it is confessed,
He will keep all, and give away the rest.

Judge. What witnesses are there more?


Clerk. call Mr. Allwork.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Allwork Allwork Allwork.


Judge. Friend, what is the matter you must have so much calling, and so long
coming?


Counc. It must be so my Lord, even snails keep state,
When with slow pace, their horns peep forth the gate.

Allwork. I was very busy my Lord, in my shop.


Judge. Can you evidence any thing against the Prisoner?


Allw. I can witness that he is a very idle fellow: I saw a warrant the other
day under the Lord chief Justices own hand; Commanding us to work six days, and
this old villain would persuade us to play twelve: he teaches also revelling
and rebellion, we cannot bear any rule with our servants when he come, for if
we command them to follow their work, they will murmur and deny it, saying is
it not Christmas time?

Thus my Lord, and several other ways, he is the Author of Rebellion and
sedition, in fine my Lord, he brings with him, both fire, fuel, and bellows of
contention, thus being extreme hasty, about my labor, I desire your honor to
excuse me.


Counc. Go too industrious fool, labor for those,
Which never will thank thee; nay, perhaps thy foes.

Judge. Are there any more?


Clerk. Call Mr. Meanwell.


Cr. O yes, Mr. Meanwell.


Judge. Come fellow, what can you say?


Moan. My Lord, I can say that this Old man is a spend-thrift, a riotous
spoil-good, he is the chief cause that the good Creatures are abused, he is a
superstitious and an Idolatrous fellow, an observer of times, he makes his
belly his God, a mere Dives, he faresdeliciously every day, but his feasting is
the cause of poor Eazarus his fasting.

He provokes only to wanton fulness, and lustful love, he makes those that
love him, and his company, unfit for any good dutys; but on the contrary, he
makes them ready for all evil, as uncleanness, scurrility, vain talking, and
the like, he is like the Idolatrous Israelites, they eat and drank, no mention
of grace before meat; and rose up to play; there is no mention of grace after
meat, just so does he, he teaches that which the people of the old World
practiced; only eating and drinking, and such other delights* This was he my
Lord that invited Jobs sons to dinner.

He overcomes men with surfeiting, and Drunkonn^sse, and makes them that they
cannot pronounce Shiboleth: he has twelve sons, all follow the steps of their
Father, and they keep company with one Mr. Prodigul, Mr. Wast-full,
Belly-chear, and Idle, with Mr. Gamester, and such others like them, all the
accursed Brats of base men, here is a friend of mine, called Mris. Prudence,
she can inform your honor of some thing else.


Council. Thy name is Mean-well friend, I know it is so
That thou art called, yet so thou never did do.
Thy Father he was called Curious, he would know,
Whither the Rainbow had a string or no
What wood, the man that is in the Moon does carry,
Or whither he intend or no, to marry.
Such monsters, yea such Salyres, and mad strains,
Danced in the wilderness of his wild brains.

Cler. Call Mris. Prudence.


Cr. O yes, Mris. Prudence.


Judge. Make room for that Gentlewoman to come in, Come good woman, are not you
a stranger-hereabouts.


Prud. My Lord, wheresoever your honor is, I desire to be your handmaid, as
for my residence, it is most in the University, and here and there, sometimes
in the Country, I am found as soon in a lowly Cottage, as under a lofty Crown.

I have a Sister called Wisdom, we always travel and dwell together.


Judge. Jury take a special notice of this woman's testimony, and get as much
acquaintance with her and her sister as you can, Come virtuous woman, let me
hear what thou can say, in the behalf of the Commonwealth against the
Prisoner.


Prud. My Lord, much has been already spoken, and much more I can say, this
Old man has been one chief instrument that I and my Children have been abused.
I have three Daughters, My Lord, the first is called Patience, the second
Temperance, and the third Chastity, and one so named Sobriety, all these by
this Christmasses means, are injuriously dealt withal, and violently handled:
which before his coming, were in good estimation in Gentlemen's houses; my
daughter Patience is an admirable good servant, she uses to look to the
Children, and servants, and would keep them in love, peace, and quiet, if at
any time she were reviled, she would not revile again.

Joseph's words were often in her mouth, see that ye fall not out by the way:
she is an excellent Labourer* and in the winter time of adversity, no Christian
able to live without her, yet this naughty fellow, has much wronged this my
Daughter, and caused her to be thrown out of doors: for wheresoever he is
entertained he carries a very base fellow called Gamester with him, and he has
two companions, the one called Spendall, and the other Careless; these will
ride abroad night times, vizarded to glean money, to maintain their play, and
make men stand, that would fain be going, and leave the stranger with a heavy
heart, and light purse: This Gamester has also one chief man called Anger, and
also two Pages, the one called Swearing, the other Cursing, and when there is
any difference about their Masters play, these two presently call in two others
as good as themselves, one named Quarrelling, the other named Fighting; and
these murder my daughter Patience.

For my second Daughter Temperance, she is a very abstemious maid, and uses
always to wait upon the Table, before this wicked wretch comes, and then she
is banished, or choked, at the best thrown out of the doors: and then perhaps,
must lie without in the street, no entertainment can get, if he be in the Town,
unless it be at some honest Tradesmans house, it may be at the Ministers, if he
be one of the last edition.

My third Daughter Chastity is as beautiful as the Sun, and she is a
Chambermaid, and this fellow is the cause that she is abused also, for
Gluttony has two Associates, Chambering and Wantonness, and these kick my
poor Daughter diverse times down the stairs; Thus my Lord, my Children whom I
have so educated, as they are fit Companions for Princes, are by this vile
Varlet abused: my Lord in few words, he is the cause that many men make their
Tables and Alter to their belly, and a snare to their souls.


Judge. Prudence many women have don't virtuously, but thou have excelled them
all.


Pru. Good my Lord pity me?


Judge. I do, and will pity thee.


Coun. Good my Lord, your pity a while hold,
One Tale is good, until the others told then.
Hear but old Christmas what he says, and
You will reserve some pity for old men.

Judge. Old Christmas hold up thy head and speak for thy self, thou have heard
thy indictment, and also what all these Witnesses have evidenced against thee:
what say thou now for thy self, that sentence of condemnation should not be
pronounced against thee?


Christm. Good my Lord be favorable to an old man, I am above one thousand six
hundred years old, and never was questioned at Sizes or Sessions before: my
Lord, look on these white hairs, are they not a Crown of glory?


Judge. Yea, if they be found in a good way.


Christm. I hope you shall not find these in a bad way.

And first my Lord, I am wronged in being indicted by a wrong name. I am
corruptly called Christmas, my name is Christtide, or time.

And though I generally come at a set time, yet I am with him every day that
knows how to use me.

My Lord, let the Records be searched, and you shall find, that the Angels
rejoiced at my coming, and sung gloria in excelsis: The Patriarcks, and
Prophets; longed to see me.

The fathers have sweetly embraced me, our modern Divines all comfortably
cherisht me, O let me not be despised now I am old. Is there not an injunction
in Magna Charta, that commands men to inquire for the old way, which is the
good way: many good deeds do I do, O why do the people hate me? we are
commanded to be given to Hospitality, and this has been my practice from my
youth upward: I come to put men in mind of their redemption: to have them love
one the other, to impart with something here below, that they may receive more
and better things above: the wiseman says, there is a time for all things, and
why not for thankfulness? I have been the cause, that at my coming Ministers
have instructed the people every day in the Public: telling the people how
they should use me, and other delights, not to effeminate or corrupt the mind*
and bid them abhor those pleasures from which they should not use bettered, and
that they should by no means turn pass-time into Trade: And if that at any time
they have stepped an inch into excess, to punish themselves for it, and be ever
after the more careful to keep within compass.

And did also advise them, to manage their sports without Passion: They would
also tell the people, that their feasts should not be much more than nature
requires, and grace mederates: not pinching, nor pampering: And whereas they
say that I am the cause they sit down to meat, and rise up again graceless,
they abundantly wrong me: I have told them, that before any one should put his
hand in the dish, he should look up to the owner; and hate to put one morsel
in his mouth unblessed: I tell them they ought to give thanks for that which is
paid for already, knowing that neither the meat, nor the mouth, nor the man,
are of his own making: I bid them fill their bellies, not their eyes, and rise
from the board, not glutted but only satisfied: and charge them to have a care,
that their guts be no hindrances to their brains, or hands: and that they
should not loose themselves in their feasts; but bid hem be soberly merry, and
wisely free. I also advise them to get friendly thrift to be their Caterer, and
Temperance to Carve at the board, and be very watchful that Obscenity,
detraction, and scurrility, be banished the Table: But let their discourse be as
savoury as the meat: and so feed as though they did eat to live, not live to
eat: and at last, rise as full of thankfulness, as of food: This has, this
is, and this shall be my continual practice: now concerning the particulars
that these folks charge me with, I cannot answer them, because I do not
remember them; my memory is but weak, as old men's use to be: but me thinks they
seem to be the seed of the dragon, they send forth of their mouths, whole
floods of impious inventions against me, and lay to my charge things that I am
not guilty of: which has caused some of my friends to forsake me, and look
upon me as a stranger: My Brother Good-works broke his heart, when he hear
don't: my sister Charity was taken with the NumPalsy, so that she cannot
stretch forth an hand: O tell it not in the City, nor publish it in the
Country: my Lord, I am but a bad Orator, therefore I humbly desire your honor,
to hearken to my Council and witnesses.

In the mean space, I Will weep I cannot hold,
Good works is dead, and Charitie's half cold.

Judge. Councellor, what can you say.


Coun. Me thinks my Lord, the very Clouds blush, to see this old Gentleman thus
egregiously abused* if at any time any have abused themselves by immoderate
eating, and drinking or otherwise spoil the creatures, it is none of this old
man's fault; neither ought he to suffer for it; for example the Sun and the Moon
are by the heathe is worship'^ are they therefore bad because idolized? so if
any abuse this old man, they are bad for abusing him, not he bad, for being
abused: These Bastards of Amon, have abused him, and therefore now would banish
him: far beit from my Lord, to casheir a good thing, with the base use annexed
thereunto: They term his charity wasting and spoiling, the making of Idlers,
and increasing of Beggars: But where too much charity has slain her thousands,
too little has slain her ten thousands some of these witnesses did hint at
Religion, but I believe they are maidens for that, the first that wooes them
may win them they tax him of Rebellion, and sedition, but how can love and
peace be the Author of that: for that is his Motto:

As for Mris. Prudence, because your honor is pleased to give more credence to
her testimony, than to any of the rest; I shall answer her in particulars: and
first for her children, I must confess as she said, they are fit Companions
for Princes, but she standers Old Father Christmas, to say that he ever wronged
any of them: no, he ever had a good esteem of them, it was one Anger, a fiery
fellow, with Wrath and Rage his Sons; that threw her daughter Patience out of
doors, and not he and for her daughter Temperance it was Gluttony, and
unsatiable appetite, that abused her and not this old man.

And for her daughter Chastity, it was a scurvy scabby fellow, called Carnal
Concupiscence: that forced her, therefore I beseech your honor; give not any
ear to these false reports: then said the Judge, Mr. Sheriff give order for
the apprehending of these fellows, and presently after apprehending of them,
execute them.

Then aragg them to the ditch, where let them lie,
So long as one man has a memory.

Coun. My Lord here are some honest men, desire to give in their evidence in
the old mansbehalf.


Judge. Who are they, let them be called.


Clerk. Crier, call Simon Servant.


Cr. O yes, Simon Servant.

Call Peter Poor.


Cr. Peter Poor.

Call, Nicholas Neighborhood.


Cr. Nich. Neighborhood.


Judge. Come Simon Servant, what can you say in behalf of the Old man here.


Serve. My Lord, I live at the Town of Bond, in the County of little Rest; my
Master is called Mr. Hard-heart, a great enemy to his old father at the bar:
but for mine own part, I will speak upon my oath; that I had suffered more than
an Egyptian bondage had it not been for him.

I had had a Sabbathlesse pursuit of my masters Labor, had it not been for
him: the very beasts that groan under the burden are beholden to him for ease,
for when the Ox and the Asses neck, seemed married to the yoke, he divorc't
them, the very Jews had their Jubilees, times of rest, therefore good my Lord,
if you give us nothing, keep not our brick and straw from us.


Judge. Peter Poor, what can you say.


Poor. My Lord, I dwell at the Town of Want, in the County of Needs, Poor in
name, and poor in estate: and had it not been for old Christmas I had been
poorer, if poorer I could have been; had it not been for him, my best friend
God-free Giving, had lost his life: all that have spoke against him, are all
Gadarens, and of the Lineage of Naball, (Mris. Prudence only excepted) if you
take away this merry old Gentleman from us, you take away all our Joy, and
comfort that we have on earth.

Hear us good Judge, we for thy favor call;
Save him alive, or else destroy us all.

Clerk. Call Mr. Neighborhood.


Cr. O yes, Neighborhood.


Judge. Come friend what can you say?


Neighbor. May it please you my Lord, I dwell at the Town of Amity, in the
County of Unity, my Father was the good Samaritan, and my Mother was called
Dorcas, and all that I can say for this Old man is, that he is a very kind and
loving man; inoffensive to all: a hater of strise, a lover of harmless mirth:
our whole Town and County are much beholding to him when he comes, for he uses
all means to bring us together, and to renew friendship: he is a great
Peacemaker, if there have been any difference betwixt party, and party, he will
endeavor to end it in an amicable way: he always uses to tell me (next God) I
must love my name sake, to gloify the first, and tenderly affect the second: in


(...)
