THE Counterfeit Christian; OR, The Danger of Hypocrisy: Opened in TWO SERMONS.
Containing an EXPOSITION of that Parabolical Speech of our Blessed Savior,
Matthew. xii. 43, 44, 45. When the Unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, etc.

By BENJAMIN KEACH, Author of (...), Pastor of the Church of Christ meeting on
Horsly-down in Southwark.

Ezekiel. 33. 31.And they come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before
thee as my People, and they hear thy Words, but they will not do them: for with
their Mouth they show much Love, but their Heart goes after their
Covetousness. Mat. 23. 25.Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites. 2 Pet.
2. 21.For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
Righteousness, etc. London printed, and are sold by John Pike at the upper end
of Bread-street, just by Cheap Side; and by the Author at his House near
Horslydown in Southwark, 1691. Price stitched 6d.

To the Reader.
IT is more than a Year since, I began a Morning-Exercise on the Lord's Day at
seven a Clock, when I entered upon an Exposition of all the Parables and express
Similitudes contained in the four Evangelists, according to the measure of
Light and Knowledge received; though by reason of a Journey into the Country it
has not been continued. The whole will contain 100 or 120 Sheets in Folio.
The Explication of this Parabolical Speech of our Savior, I have been
prevailed with to make public. And if this meets with Acceptance, I may in a
short time publish Proposals for printing the whole; which in regard of the
greatness of the Charge, cannot be done but by Subscriptions. And though I must
confess my Ability to perform so great a Work to be much inferior to many
others; yet by God's Assistance I shall do what I can.

And the Consideration of the kind Acceptance my other Labors have had amongst
God's People, has caused me to take the more pains: God having blessed the
Writings of diverse of his Servants to the Conversion of many Souls, and Comfort
of others; yet if I have not sufficient encouragement from Christian Friends, I
must desist this great Essay.

Reader; The second Sermon I have much enlarged, scarcely half of it was
delivered when preached, thinking to have preached a third time upon the Text,
but was prevented by laying down that Lecture, for the Reason aforementioned:
Neither have I been so large on other Parables already opened, nor intend to be
on those I purpose to explain; so that the first Sermon is rather a proper
Specimen of the whole Work than the second.

As touching some part of this dark Parabolical Saying of our Savior, I may
differ in my Conceptions, it is probable, from diverse Men; (...) inclined, it is
like, to believe that the Man, or Men here mentioned, are such only that Satan
overcomes, after they have made a profession of Religion, with the same
scandalous Sins, and so they turn with the Dog to their old Vomit. I grant this
may be true in respect of some of them; yet I do not believe the Lord Jesus
intends to show hereby they do all after manner fall from their (...) Religion
and Profession: It Is evident to me, he applies it to the Pharisees, and other
People of that Generation; but many of them never became openly Profane, yet
was their State worse by many degrees, (than whilst they abode under the Power
of gross and scandalous Sins) and died in their Unbelief and Hypocrisy, which
it is to be feared many now do. If the Scope of the (...), be considered, That
our blessed Savior designed by this Parable to see (...) the State of the
Pharisees, is evident, as may be seen if you begin at the 24th Verse of the
Chapter, where they charged him with casting out Devils by B^^lzebub the Prince
of the Devils. From whence his (...) an occasion to set forth the sadness of
their Conditions, (...) Zeal and outward Sanctity, showing(...) Verse. 33, 34,
35. that their Hearts were not made good, but like an Evil and corrupt Tree.
Then soon after follows these words, When the Unclean Spirit is gone out of a
Man, etc. Reader, I shall not trouble thee further: what Weakness thou find
in these Sermons, I hope Chairty will (...) it: If any Profit thou shall
receive thereby, bless God, and be (...) of resting in a Form of Religion,
being not brought into (...) Union with Jesus Christ, nor under the Power of
true (...) let me have a part in thy Prayers, who is (...) them, being attended
with many Troubles and (...), but doubt not but God will make them all work
together for good, and will at last, I hope, through his infinite Grace, bring
to his quiet, peaceable, and everlasting Rest,

His poor Servant, thy unworthy Friend and Brother in the Gospel, BENJ. KEACH.
From my House near Horslydown, this 27th of the 3d Month, called May, 1691.
ERRATA.
PAge 33. line 28. for Pride, read Proud, etc. l. 34. for regulate, r. regular.
l. 35. blot out by.

P. 35. l. last, f. they, r. we, and f. thereby, r. there^^

The Counterfeit Christian; OR The Danger of Hypocrisy. CONTAINING An
Exposition of that Parabolical Speech of our Savior, Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45.
SERMON. I.
When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walks through dry places,
seeking Rest, and finding none, Ver. 43. Then he says, I will return into my
House from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept,
and garnished, Ver. 44. Then goes he and takes with him seven other Spirits
more wicked than himself, and enter in and dwell there; and the last State of
that Man is worse than the first, Ver. 45.
THIS place of Holy Scripture is generally acknowledged to be hard to be
understood; Preached August 10. 1690.
most Expositers and Annotators (I have met with) say but little to it.

Some call it a Parable, and others a parabolical Speech or a Similitude.

By the Scope and Coherence of the place it is evident our Savior sets
forth by it the direful State and Condition of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
other People of the Jews, who boasted of their external Holiness, or seeming
Sanctity, they being not profane or notorious Sinners; or as they themselves
foolishly said, Not Extortioners, unjust, or Adulterers, like as the Publicans
were, Luke 18. 11. Yet the Lord Jesus shows by this Parable how they were
deceived: for though they were delivered from that profane and debauched
unclean Spirit, yet was their State worse than the State of gross and wicked
Sinners, which is signified by the entering into them seven other unclean
Spirits worse or more wicked than the first that were gone out of them.

That the Words may be applied to them and other People of that Generation, is
evident from the sequel of ver. 45. Matthew. 12. 45.
Even so shall it be with the People of this froward Generation. Yet no doubt
our blessed Savior in this place may have Reference to a Man in the like
State; or as Beza, Caeterum quum Spiritus impurus exierit a quopiam, etc. as
well as unto that People who were carried away with cursed Hypocrisy.

When the unclean Spirit, etc.

By the unclean Spirit, (...), is certainly meant the Devil, called, Mark 5. 8.
an unclean Spirit.

1. Because he has lost his own original Purity, or clean and Holy Nature, he
being at first created an Angel of Light, having like Holiness before he fell,
which the blessed and elect Angels of Heaven have.

2. Because he is so universally filthy and abominable vile in himself, and so
remains and will abide for ever, there being no Possibility for him to become
better, he being left and forsaken of God, without any means afforded of being
purged from his unclean and filthy Nature.

3. Because he is not only unclean in himself, but also defiles the Hearts and
Spirits of all such Persons who receive and entertain him; nay, all the
Pollution of our Nature, yea, the whole Nature of humane Race, was originally
from that Compliance and yiedling to him by our first Parents; it is this
unclean Spirit that has poisoned and notoriously defiled the whole Man both
Body and Soul in all its Powers and Faculties, and not the whole Man only, but
the whole World also. And as this is naturally the filthy and miserable
Condition of all Creatures, so those who yield to his Temptations, come to have
farther Polution and Defilement cleave to their Hearts and Lives. Sin is an
unclean thing, and it makes all such loathsome and abominable in the Sight of
God, who are overcome by it. Though all naturally are vile and filthy, yet
there are Degrees of Uncleanness, some are worse than others, more wicked, and
so more like to the Devil, in whom his very Image or Likeness clearly may be
seen.

4. He may also be called an unclean Spirit, because he continually inticeth
and strives to draw Men to Filthiness, and to all manner of Uncleanness, being
an utter Enemy to all Purity and true Holiness, envying all those who love it,
and strive to promote it.

Is gone out of a Man.] Not that the Man was actually possessed with the Devil
(as some may think) though it is very like the Lord Jesus may borrow this
Parabolical Speech from a Person actually possessed; but he shows hereby that
all wicked Men are in a mystical and spiritual sense possessed with the Devil;
all graceless Sinners have an unclean Spirit in them. Where Sin predominates
and rules in the Heart, there the Devil has Possession; that Heart is Satan's
Throne where he reigns and sways the Scepter: Satan was said to enter into
Judas Luke 22. 3.
; and to fill the Heart of Ananias Acts 5. 3.
: both these had this unclean Spirit in them; the one was plagued or possessed
with a treacherous Devil, and the other with a lying Devil. Hence it is also
said, that Satan, who is the Prince of the Power of the Air, both works and
rules in the Children of Disobedience Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
.

Gone out] Either by the Power and Force of the Grace of God in its common
Operations he was thrown out; or else, through Policy, he voluntarily leaves
his House for a time, with an Intention to return again with a stronger force:
Some adhere to the first sense, and others to the last.

Gone out, i.e. as a carnal, profane, or black Devil, for so he may be said to
be in all debauched Persons: and in this respect he may be said to be gone out,
or thrown out of the Pharisees, and other false and counterfeit Professors; he
may not be able to keep them any longer under the Power of open and gross
Profaneness. And from hence the Pharisee proudly breaks forth, God, I thank
thee, I am not as other Men are, Luke 18. 11.
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. Why may not Satan
be expelled or forced out of his House in some degree, by the common Influences
of the Spirit? All generally grant that legal Convictions, and the Operation of
common Grace through the Workings of natural Conscience, have some considerable
Power in them to reform the Life of a wicked Person. Nor can I think Satan
would yield to any Soul voluntarily so far as to let him become so much as
civilized if he could help it; therefore I rather think he was forced to give
place, as not being able to hold his own (in some respect) as formerly,
although whilst the Creature abides in his natural State, not having a changed
Heart, Satan has possession of that Soul still in a great measure; and
therefore he leaves, no doubt, a strong Guard behind him, when he is said to go
out, though they may be said to hide themselves, or retire into some
lurking-holes and Corners of the House, or rather of the Heart. Satan cannot
doubtless keep Possession always, so far as to hold Men under the Power of
gross and scandalous Sins, or cause them to continue openly profane; such
Power and Virtue is there in the common Operation of the Spirit, or in legal
Convictions and workings of natural Conscience, together with the help of the
external Ministration of God's Word, and by the means of Afflictions, and those
severe Providence and Dispensations, under which wicked Men may be exercised,
that it may tend to make them become other Men: though it cannot change their
Hearts, yet it may make a great change in their Lives, by which means they may
look like Saints, and talk like Saints and sanctified Persons, and be taken for
such too by the truly Godly; nay, and that which is worse, may conclude within
themselves they are converted, since their former Enemy, that debauched gross
and unclean Spirit is gone out of them. I am so far of the mind of James
Arminius, that Man by the means of that common Help and Power God affords to
all in general, may leave the gross Acts of Wickedness, let Satan do what he
can; which has been often evinced by that Terror severe humane Laws have had on
the Consciences of wicked and ungodly Persons. I am persuaded were there a Law
that he that swore an Oath, or was Drunk, or committed Adultery, should have
his right Hand cut off, or be made a Slave all the days of his Life, we should
see Men would get Power over those Temptations of Satan, and neither be Drunk
nor commit Adultery.

He walks through dry Places.]

1. Satan is said in that of Job Job. 1. 7.
, To go to and fro in the Earth, and to walk up and down in it. Satan here
speaks, says Mr. Caryl like a Prince; therefore says he; Some conceive this
was the Prince of Devils that is mentioned in this Text, or Beelzebub the chief
of Devils. He walks about to view his Provinces and Territories, from one
place to another, but he does not walk to and fro as an idle Peripatetick, but
to enquire, to observe, and consider, as a Spy, to search all things and
Persons as he passes along. Therefore;

2. This notes that Satan is a diligent Enemy; if he has lost a little
ground, or is worsted in one Soul, he will try what Power and Success he can
find in another.

3. It shows that he is an unquiet and restless Spirit, being cast out of
Heaven, he can rest no where; and if he be forced out of some Men at one time,
he will tempt others; nay, if the Servant has a little worsted him, he, to
revenge himself, will fall perhaps in the next place upon the Son; if he lose
some place in his own House, he will see if he cannot get into the Temple of
the Holy Ghost; or, if he is forced to leave wet and filthy places in which he
delights, he will walk through dry places, and see what he can meet with there.

4. Satan's great Work which he imploys himself in and about, is no doubt to
get into the Heart of Men to dwell, nay rule there, and so subject them to
himself, and defile and polute them one way or other.

Dry places, seeking Rest, and finding none] i. e. where there is no Water or
Moisture, or not enough to refresh him; he has a cruel Thirst upon him, and
unless he can meet with that he seeks, which is to make a Prey of the Souls
of Men, he is in a restless state, like a thirsty Person who walking through
dry Places can find no Water. There are some sorts of Men that aford Satan no
Content nor Satisfaction; he seeks for that oft-times which he finds not; he
is not pleased to be as a Travellor, to pass through a place and stay (as it
were but for a Night) but would fain find Rest, i.e. have a Place or Heart to
dwell in, and take sole Possession of. I find one of the Ancients, who writing
on this dark Expression, speaks thus: So long as he dwells not in me, he is
said to seek Rest he is grieved and vexed, etc.

1. Dry Places are commonly clean Places, or Places where there is no Dirt or
Mire: and Satan, that unclean Spirit, is like a Swine, i. e. he delights in
filthy and mirery Places, which may signify his assaulting the Saints, or
seeking to get into sanctified Hearts, or Hearts renewed by the special Grace
of God, and thoroughly purged by the Blood of Christ, in whom that filthy sink
of Sin and Polution is not only dried up, but the Heart is changed and made
new, and so no more a House or Habitation for this unclean Spirit, but is
become the Temple of the Holy Ghost, or a Habitation for God through the
Spirit. And these Men's Hearts are unto Satan, like dry Places to a thirsty and
restless Person: for as the Holy Spirit cannot rest, nor take up his abode in
filthy and poluted Hearts; so the Devil, that wicked Spirit, can find no Rest
nor Place of abode in renewed and sanctified Hearts. And as it is no suitable
House or Habitation for him; so likewise Believers have one dwelling in them,
strong enough to keep Satan out: for stronger (says the Apostle 1 John 2. 14.
) is he that is in us, than he which is in the World: and again he says 1 John
5. 18.
, Ye are strong, and the Word of God abides in you; and ye have overcome the
Wicked one: He that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and the wicked one
touches him not: shall not so touch him as to enter into his Heart, and take
up his Dwelling, or get Possession of him any more; and therefore these Men's
Hearts, i. e. the Hearts of true sanctified Christians, I conclude are meant
here by our Savior, which are to Satan as dry places, where there is no
dwelling or abiding for him.

2. As dry Places are clean Places; so likewise they are commonly barren
Places, Places where little or nothing will grow; Satan is for such Hearts that
will receive his evil Seed, i. e. suited and fit to close in with his cursed
Temptations, which are like to moist or mirery places; such as all corrupt and
unregenerate Hearts are, in others that bitter and evil Seed which this unclean
Spirit sows, will not take root: Or if it should so fall out, that through the
Carelessness and Negligence of Believers, and Strength of Temptations, Satan
should drop some of his cursed Seed in them, and it should meet with a little
of the old corrupt Nature (there being in the best of Men an unregenerate part)
yet it would soon wither and come to nothing; for their Hearts are, (as I said
before) no proper Soil for the Seed of the wicked one, therefore if he gets in
a little, he is soon turned out again; so that in a Word, according to the
Import of this Saying of Christ, (as I conceive) these Men's Hearts are to the
Devil, like dry places, where he can find no Rest.

3. Dry Places are for the most part places least inhabited for want of Water;
the Hearts of Saints are like uninhabitable Places to Satan, in them he cannot
find those proper Accommodations which he needs and must have where he dwells.
But since he can find no Dwelling here, no Diabolical Comfort nor Refreshment,
i. e. no abode in Godly Hearts; he says, I will return into my House from
whence I came out, ver. 44.

I will return: Not that he was quite routed and vanquished before, it is called
still his House, he lays claim and pleads Propriety in him and Interest still*
Therefore this Man's Heart was not become the Temple of the Holy Spirit, he was
gone out, or forced out before, as a Swearing, Cheating, Whoring, or drunken
Devil, etc. and this might inrage him, and move him to attempt some greater
Enterprise, which we have already spoken to. Satan does not love to loose or
let go any strong hold he has of carnal and profane Persons; but seeing he
had received some small Defeat, he sets upon the truly Godly Christian; like as
when he was cast out of Heaven unto the Earth, he presently persecuted the
Woman which brought forth the Man-child, Rev. 12. 13. When he saw he could not
uphold his Kingdom by Paganism, nor farther execute his Malice by Pagan
Emperors, but was routed and overcome as to that Power he had, (as our late
Annotators observe) to let us know that he retains his Malice, though he has
lost his former strength, he goes on in pursuing the Church of God. Even so, I
say, he having been forced to give way before (as was hinted) he walks about to
seek Revenge upon the Saints; but they being to him like dry Places to a
thirsty Man, or as an Inn to a Traveller, viz. no resting Place, he resolves to
return to his own House, that is, the Hearts of hypocritical Professors, such
as the Pharisees were: And this returning of his into his old House, imports
(as I conceive) his coming again in another form or shape, and with a
Resolution to get better and more firmer and surer Possession than he had
before.

Now he appears as an Angel of Light. Nor can we suppose he had no Party left
in the said House when he went out. Parables must not he strained too far; We
ought not to scrue or make too severe a Scrutiny upon every Phrase: therefore
we cannot think when he is said to return to his former House, or attempt
afresh the false and counterfeit Christian, that he has quite given over his
Designs in assaulting sanctified Persons, but he cannot endure to be an
Underling, he is for kinging it in the Souls of Men, would fain reign and sway
the Scepter there; and where he cannot rule and domineer, he harh no Rest, nor
can be satisfied. And therefore he may be said to return as an exiled Prince,
and lest he should be discovered, he puts on a new Garb, and is now contented
his Captive should become religious, that so the deluded Sinner might not
discern him, but take him for his lawful Sovereign; as if he should say, I will
yield to you now; if you will be a Professor and become religious, ye shall,
but I will dwell with you notwithstanding; here is room enough for me as a
white Devil, tho not as a black one

And when he is come, he finds it empty, swept and garnished.]

Empty; That is, the Spirit of God was not there, true Grace was not there,
Christ dwells not there; that House may well be said to be empty, where God
and Jesus Christ are not; nor is it a hard and difficult thing for the unclean
Spirit to enter into such a Soul, since there was no Enemy strong enough to
keep him out; but contrariwise, the place seems to be rather prepared and made
fit for him, to take up his abode in this new religious and spiritual
Appearance; nay here is not only room for himself, but the House is so empty,
that many other unclean Spirits more wicked than himself, may have their abode
and dwelling there also. Satan says, I will return to my House, etc. He speaks
as if he was sure enough that this sinner was his own, and therefore should
without any difficulty enter in, in that new Disguise in which he now appears;
and accordingly it is said, he finds it empty, and also swept: but doubtless
some Dirt and Filth was yet in some Hole or Corner: For like as a lazy and
slothful House-wife uses to sweep a little of the loose Dust and Filth in the
open and middle of the Room, and lets many secret Corners lie foul as before,
and may be leaves the Dirt behind the Door out of the public view of People:
So the false and counterfeit Christian reforms his Life in the sight of Men;
or, like the Pharisees, makes clean the outside of the Cup and Platter; but
their Hearts are still polluted, and as vile as ever.

Swept; but not with a proper and fit Broom; it is said to be swept, but alas
'twas only with the Beesom of legal Reformation; and how far that will cleanse
the unclean and wicked Person, is known to all understanding Men; it only takes
away the Filth of gross and scandalous Sins: therefore said by St. Peter, 2
Pet. 2.
To escape the Corruption that is in the World; that is, the profane World, i.
e. vile and notorious Sins and Pollutions.

And garnished, or painted; which may signify that seeming Sanctity, moral
Virtue, and the common Graces of the Spirit. Our Savior elsewhere compares
Pharisaical Holiness, Mat. 23. 27, 29.
to painting or garnishing of a Sepulcher; Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, for ye are like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but within are full of dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness:
Ye build (says he) the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of
the Righteous. And thus Pharisaical and Hypocritical Professors may be said to
be garnished, i. e. they seem glorious to Men, who only judge by the outward
Appearance, and know not the Heart; there may be a great change of Life, a
beautiful outside, and yet the evil and vicious Habits and Pollutions of the
Heart may be still the same, and not changed. And remarkable is this Phrase of
our Savior [ garnished,] which we know is commonly a curious piece of Art: Men
by their Ingenuity strive to imitate Nature; they will draw the Face of a Man,
etc. with curious Painting, very exact, so that it much resembles the Person's
natural Face, yet it is not the same, it is but a piece of Paint, an artificial
Invention: Even so in like manner by the Improvement of a Man's natural Parts,
common Grace, Light and Knowledge, he may appear in the view and sight of Men,
as a true Child of God, and may talk and discourse like a Saint, read and hear
God's Word, nay, and pray also with much seeming Devotion and Piety, and may
likewise bridle many unruly Lusts, and gross Enormities of Life, and give Alms
to the Poor, insomuch that he may very exactly resemble a true and sincere
Christian, and be taken by all Godly People to be indeed such an one: but
notwithstanding all, it is but an artificial Piece, it is but like a curious
Paint, or vainglorious Garnish; it is not the Image of God, it is not the new
Creature; though it looks like it, much resembles it, yet it is not the same:
for the Man is a mere Hypocrite, a counterfeit Christian, the work upon him
being only the Product of natural Improvements, and not the Effects of the
saving Operations of the Holy Spirit. Nay, and Satan, though an unclean Spirit,
likes to dwell in such a House, I mean such a Heart, thus swept and garnished,
as well as in the Heart of a vile and debauched Person: And evident it is, that
this sweeping or external cleansing with the Broom of outward Reformation, or
the Garnish of moral Righteousness, common Gifts and Graces of the Spirit,
Prayer, hearing the Word, partaking of the Sacraments, and doing many good
Works, cannot secure the Soul against Satan's Attempts, in order to his taking
up his Habitation in such Persons Hearts.

After I had preached these two Sermons, a Godly Friend who heard them, told me
he had met with a Treatise of Mr. Richard Allen's, Author of Vindiciae
Pietatis, who gives the same sense on this mysterious place of Scripture: He
helped me to the Book which I was ignorant of, and Mr. Allen being a very
worthy Person, I shall give you some brief Hints of what he has said.

When the unclean Spirit goes out of a Man, etc. That Sinners are vile and
abominable, says he, it is from that wicked Spirit, Satan, that dwells in
them: Every Sinner is a Person possessed of a Devil; when a little reformed,
they seem for a time to be dispossessed, etc. He walks through dry Places;
what these dry Places may be, is not easy to determine: Some by these loca
arida, understand loca vacua, void empty Places, the Deserts and Wastes of the
Earth, where he finds no body to attempt or molest.

But could Satan, says he, think to find Rest there where was no House for him
to lay his Head in? Would the Tempter waste his time in seeking whom to devour
in those waste Places, where he knew well enough there were none to be found?
He knows too well where Sinners dwell, to go to seek them where they are not;
more like to find the Devil at a Market, than in a Wilderness. Thus therefore
seems not to be the sense --.

Why may not, says he, these dry Places be the Saints on Earth, the Fountain
of whose Blood is dried up? in whom the Sun has dried up their Dirt and Mire,
in which this Swine loves to wallow, etc. [ He seeks Rest] this notes two
things.

1. When the Devil is gone out of any Person, he is never at Rest till he is
gotten in again, either thither whence he went out, or into some other
Habitation, where he may do more Mischief: Like Children, like Father, it is
said of them, so it is much more true of him, He rests not but in doing Mischief.

2. The Devil loves to dwell where he may be at Rest; that is, not from Work
(his Rest is his Work) but from Resistance or Opposition, i. e. in carnal and
unclean Hearts, etc.

[ Seeking Rest and finding none.] He goes, says he, through these dry Places,
from Saint to Saint, from Heart to Heart, in hope to find Entertainment, but is
still disappointed; here is little Rest for me to be had, these dry Places I see
are no Places for me, here is watching and wrestling and warring against me; so
much praying, complaining against me, that there is no stay for me here: -- I Will
go back to my old Habitation: And when he comes, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished, a little cleaner and handsomer than when he left it. The Devil can
allow Sinners a little Reformation; but though it be a little cleansed and
garnished, yet it lies empty still, there is no Tenant has taken it up, though
the Devil went out, Christ was not let in, but there it lies void for the next
that comes.

Then he goes and takes seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and
they enter in, and dwell there; and the last state of that Man is worse than
the first. Beware of a returning Devil; the Devil at his return often makes
sevenfold worse Work than before he did. Allen's Godly Fear, p. 213, 214, 215,
216.

He modestly offers this as his Thoughts on the Place, and I find others
confirming by some brief Hints the same things. I thought it not amiss to
recite this Passage of his, as a farther Confirmation of the Exposition I have
briefly given you of this dark Place of Scripture, not doubting but it is the
sense and meaning of our Savior.

But now to draw toward a Close, take two or three Points of Doctrine. Doct. I.
Observe,

1. Satan is an unclean Spirit. As God is the Author and Original of all true
Holiness, so is Satan of all Sin and Wickedness: And as God's Nature is pure,
so the Devil in his Nature is impure; all Purity proceeds from God, and all Sin
proceeds from Satan; God strives to promote the one, and the Devil labors to
promote the other: As God's Kingdom is set up in the World, and maintained by
Holiness and spiritual Sanctity; so the Devil's Kingdom is set up and upheld by
Sin and Filthiness. As God by his Spirit dwells in sanctified Hearts, so the
Devil dwells in polluted and sinful Hearts: And as Christ makes that Man or
Woman holy and clean where he makes his abode; so Satan makes those Souls where
he takes up his Dwelling, unclean and abominably wicked. Moreover, as he who is
truly sanctified and made Holy, is said to be of God; so they that are wicked
and ungodly, 1 John 3. 8, 12.
are said to be of the Devil John 8.
. All those who are spiritual and truly gracious are like to God, or bear some
Resemblance of him; and all unclean and wicked Persons are like to the Devil.
These things considered, no marvel Satan is called an unclean Spirit. Doct. II.


2. All profane notorious and ungodly Sinners are in a woeful state, the
unclean Spirit is in them, their Hearts are Satan's Habitation.

The Heart of Man was not originally Satan's House, nor has he any just Right
or Propriety in it; it is his by Usurpation and Conquest, as Men yield up
themselves to him, and entertain his Temptations. Man both Body and Soul is the
Lord's, he is his Creature; nor ought he to suffer any to dwell in him, much
less to rule and sway the Scepter over him, but the Holy God. But as all Men as
they come into the World, have wretched and cursed Natures, through original
Depravity; so ungodly Men actually have cast off God, their lawful and only
Sovereign, and have embraced the wicked one, they have received, and do subject
themselves to Satan that unclean and filthy Spirit, he is King and Lord over
them. The Devil has got Possession by Craft, he enticed our first Parents to
open the Door to him, they gave him the first Entertainment, 'twas then he took
Possession, and thereby at once corrupted all that are in the House; I mean,
all the Faculties of the Soul, to such a Degree, that they all naturally side
with Satan, and are for him, and are filled with Enmity against God, Romans 8. 7.
and oppose and resist his Spirit, and rebel against the Light. Wicked Men had
rather be under the tyrannical Government of the Devil, than to be ruled and
governed by Jesus Christ: And from hence it is no wonder they rather choose to
have wicked earthly Rulers and tyrannical Kings to be over them, than to be
subject to a Prince who is an Enemy to Wickedness, Tyranny and Oppression. This
shows the Blindness and miserable State and Condition of all wicked and ungodly
Men. We may further note also,

3. That Satan may lose some ground in Sinners Hearts, Doct. III.
he may seem to be gone out of them, and they may become sober and civilized,
and yet may be in the Gall of Bitterness, and their Hearts notwithstanding may
be still Satan's Habitation.

Let these Men change their Lives, and become other Men in the View of the
World, alter their course of Life, yet they are miserable; Satan has spiritual
Power and Dominion over them; he has a strong party in their Hearts, when he
seems to be gone out, and knows they are his still, and owns them as his
dwelling place. When he cannot meet with Entertainment in other places, when
Saints afford him no Encouragement, but displease and defy him, and their
Hearts are as dry places, he can nevertheless return at pleasure to his old
Habitation, and there he enters and dwells. Let them change their Religion, yet
they are Satan's Slaves still, he matters not if they leave Popery and cleave
to Prelacy, and so become Protestants in general; nay, embrace a more refined
sort of People, and take upon them a more strict Profession of Religion, yet
still they belong to him, if they are not truly regenerated and renewed in
their Souls; let them be Presbyterians, Independents, or Baptists, it signifies
nothing, they are still the same, and under Satan's Power and Dominion. O how
miserably are some Men deceived, thinking if they are reformed and become
zealous for external Ordinances, and have taken up this or that form of
Religion, and are taken for Saints by Men, that all is well, and they shall be
saved! How did the Pharisees glory in their seeming Zeal and Piety, and flatter
themselves, and yet woefully blinded, and in a damnable State and Condition?
Note also, that,

4. Morality, Doct. IV.
external Gifts and common Grace, are but like a vain Paint, a mere empty and
artificial Garnish.

They make a fair show in the Flesh, they pride it in themselves, and Men
praise and admire them, but what does all this signify? they are still under a
diabolical Power and Influence, and twofold more the Children of the Devil than
they were before: Nay, as I shall hereafter show, rather seven times worse than
when they were openly wicked and profane.

APPLICATION.
1. A Terror to Sinners. Tremble you that live wicked Lives, remember the
unclean Spirit dwells in you, and has Power over you, your Hearts are his
Habitation, he rules in you, and takes you Captive at his Will. If in this
State you die, you are undone for ever.

2. See to it, you that are Professors, lest you are also deceived. What is a
reformed Life without a changed Heart? To cast off the gross Acts of Sin, will
not avail you any thing, without the evil Habits are broke, and you renewed in
the Spirit of your Mind. Though you seem to be godly to Men, yet God knows your
Hearts, and how they stand affected to him, and to true real Godliness. A form
of Religion will never save you; and though you may have got some ground
against Satan, and he seems to have left you, or is gone out, yet take heed he
does not return again with greater strength, and get you into stronger Bonds
now, than he had before. But because this will be more fully opened in the next
place, I shall at present say no more to it now.

3. This also affords much Comfort to God's People. Satan sets upon you, and
fain he would subject your Souls to himself, and take Possession of your
Hearts, but he cannot prevail, you have got one in you who is stronger than
Satan, who will preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom. But no more at this time:
I shall leave what I have said to the Blessing of God.

THE unclean Spirit that goes out, This Hymn was sung at the close of the first
Sermon.

Of Men that vicious are,
Does oft-times seek and search about,
For rest both here and there:
And fain would he make his abode,
In places dry and clean;
And ruin all the Saints of God,
Which has been often seen.
But thou, O Lord, do them preserve,
And in them thou do dwell,
So that from thee they cannot swerve,
To be o're-come by Hell.
Which Satan seeing, strait-way goes,
To his own Dwelling place,
And with him brings more dismal Woes,
On such who want thy Grace.
Who of it being empty quite,
Tho swept and garnished,
He enters in, and with strong might
They captive all are led,
And overcome by him again,
Through cursed Hypocrisy,
And in them he does rule and reign,
Which few are brought to see.
What cause have such thy Praise to sing,
Who are renewed by thee?
Whose Heart thy Habitation is,
They always happy be.
SERMON II.
On MATTHEW. 12. 43, 44, 45. -- When the Unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man,
etc.
THE last Day I opened the several Parts of this place of Holy Scripture,
Morning-Exercise on Horsely-Down, August 17* 1690.
in the usual Method I have all along taken in my Exposition of other Parables,
which I have already spoken to, according to that small measure of Light and
Knowledge the Lord has been pleased to bestow upon me. There remains one thing
further to be done, and that is indeed the chief and most material of all,
which is to show you the sad State of the false and counterfeit Professor, out
of whom the Unclean Spirit is said to be gone, but yet is returned again with
seven other Spirits more wicked than himself. Our Blessed Lord says, Mat. 12.
45
The last State of that Man is worse than the first. Now in what respect a
painted Hypocrite, or one garnished only with common Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit, may be said to be in a worse State than the open Profane, I shall
endeavor, God assisting, to demonstrate.

It Is said, Satan returned with seven other Spirits, etc.] Seven is a number of
Perfection. I judge our Savior designed hereby to show that the Devil has now
got stronger hold and possession of such a Person by many degrees; many unclean
Spirits, or worse and more dangerous Sins cleave to him than before, so that he
is like to be perfectly miserable. But to proceed;

First; That which renders false Professors, or counterfeit Christians, to be
in such a deplorable Condition, (which also evidently appeared in the Pharisees
and other People in that Generation, to whom primarily our Savior refers, as
the close of the 45th Verse shows) is, that great Ignorance that cleaves to
them notwithstanding their common Illuminations; which usually does consist in
these Respects following.

1. They know not their own miserable State, looking upon themselves to be rich
and increased with Goods, Rev. 3. 17.
and to have need of nothing: as appears by that Charge of the Lord Christ
against the Church of Laodicea, who were fallen into the like Condition; they
think none knows more than themselves, insomuch that they secretly contemn him
who tells them how it is with them; and this rises from the consideration of
that great Knowledge they conceit they have above others; Joh. 9. 41.
But now ye say, Ye see, therefore your Sin remains. If your Ignorance were
simple, (as if Christ should say) and not affected, or were you sensible of
your blindness, then your Disease would not be so incurable: But now you say
you see, and you doubt not but you are in a state of Happiness, and are the
only People of God, and yet presumptuously refuse the way of your Relief and
Salvation, and do not conclude you are under Guilt and Wrath, as indeed you
are. Profane Persons, though their State is bad, and very miserable, yet are
not generally so blind as once to imagine their Condition to be good, but act
and do those abominable Deeds of Darkness, against the Light and Dictates of
their own Consciences: And though Satan has got power over them, and their
Lusts predominate in them, yet are they commonly possessed at certain times
with fear about their eternal State, (unless wholly given up to a reprobate
Mind, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
having their Conscience seared with an hot Iron); and that which seems to bear
up their Spirits, is the hopes they have of future Repentance; for the thoughts
of dying in the present Condition they are in, is grievous to them: Nay, and
the false Professor, whilst he abode under the Power of the Unclean Spirit,
being openly profane, might tremble, as seeing himself posting headlong to
Hell; but now, through the blindness of his Mind, for want of a true
illumination of the Spirit, he thinks he is in the direct way to Heaven, his
Conscience being misled, (and his intellectual part darkened) never reproves
him, but rather gives in its testimony for him. And thus it was with Paul
before his Conversion; whilst he abode a Pharisee, his Conscience never accused
him for those great Evils in persecuting the Church of God; for he himself
says, he did it ignorantly in unbelief. What can render the State of a Person
worse, i. e. to be an Enemy to God, and Jesus Christ, and to the Power of
Godliness, and yet think he is Holy, and a good Christian; nay, and his
Conscience being blinded in the Matter, acquits him of Hypocrisy for want of
Saving-light, whilst he keeps up in a zealous performance of the external Acts
of Duty and Religion, by which means he is deprived of that help which some
openly-prophane meet with from the Rebukes and Lashes of their own Consciences,
which oft-times proves a means of their Conversion. But the hypocritical
Professor, not knowing the want of a changed Heart, nor the defect of those
Sacred Principles from whence should flow all he acts and does, but
contrariwise is stirred up by false Principles, and acts only by the power of
natural Conscience and Affections, having no clear judgment to discern his own
Danger, nor what a State is he still in; His Condition is deplorable, and this
Unclean Spirit is worse and more direful than that which he was in before.

2. Their Blindness and Ignorance consists, in that they cannot discern nor
distinguish between a changed Heart and a changed Life, or between legal
Reformation and true Regeneration. They think, because their State seems so
much better than it was before, in their own apprehension, and in the
apprehension of others also, their Condition is good enough, they comparing
themselves with themselves, 2 Cor. 10. 12.
beholding what a vast difference there is, or seems to be in respect of what
they once were, when Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, etc. cannot but commend
themselves to themselves: once they saw themselves Sinners, and called
themselves so, and were ashamed of their own sinful and wicked Lives; but now
they are Righteous in their own conceit, and so have no need of any further
work, being arrived to that State of Holiness, (as they think) to that degree
of Piety, to that Change, to that Conversion, that they conclude they need not
seek for any other, and yet are deceived, and in the Gall of Bitterness. And
hereby they seem to put themselves out of the Call of Jesus Christ, Mat. 18. 11.
who came to seek and to save that which was lost: not to call the Righteous,
but Sinners to Repentance. Let Men think what they please, certainly there is
no Devil like this Devil: If he can persuade a Man that he is whole, and not
sick at all, and so needs no Physician; and that when the Gospel is preached to
Sinners, and the danger of Unbelief is opened, yet it does not affect him, nor
concern him, he being become a righteous Person; what hopes can there be of
such a one? Alas, the Ministers of Christ have received no Commission to offer
Christ to any but to Sinners. Now these are not the Persons a precious Savior
is tendered unto, they see no want nor need of him, and therefore these are
passed by as such who need no Repentance.

3. Their Blindness consists in their ignorance of God's Righteousness, not
knowing what Righteousness it is that will render them accepted and justified
in the sight of God; and so, like the poor Jews, Romans 10. 3.
go about to establish their own Righteousness, their own personal
Righteousness, a homespun Righteousness; they see no need to go to another, to
be beholden to another, for that which they suppose they have in themselves.
And this ignorance of the Righteousness of God, partly rises from their
ignorance of the Nature of the Law, and pure Nature of God, concluding, there
is no need of a spotless or perfect Righteousness in point of Justification,
(as either being inherent in us, which cannot be, since all have sinned) or else
by Imputation, as wrought out for us in the Person of the Mediator; and
therefore think (as Paul once did) he is a justified Person who breaks not the
Letter of the Law, or is not guilty of the gross Acts of Sin.

Secondly; Their Danger appears also from a proud Devil that now is entered into
them. Pride commonly accompanies Ignorance, and this abounds in the Heart of
Man by Nature, and there it will predominate, till the Soul passes through an
effectual Change; but it appears in none so fully, or to such a Degree, as in a
Pharisaical Person; he cannot endure to think he is so poor as profane and
notorious Sinners are; what, go to his Neighbor's Door for every Morsel of
Bread he eats, and for every draught of Drink! no, it is below him to beg, he
thinks it is enough for Publicans and Sinners to do so. And indeed what need he
go to be fed and clothed by another, that is full, and sees his Goods
increased, and has need of nothing? Faith empties the Soul, makes it poor,
before it fills and inriches it. But this Man knows not what Faith is, nor the
Life of it. Pride springs from an inordinate Self-love: Self-love, and
Self-flattery, are the Glasses in which a self-deceived Hypocrite looks daily
in, in which he appears indeed that which he is not. Self-love is a
Multiplying, yea a Magnifying-Glass. These never had a true sight of
themselves, never saw their own Poverty, and horrid pollution of their Nature;
it is with them, as it was with the Apostle, before the Commandment came, they
are alive, Romans 7. 9.
and beautiful in their own Eyes. Behold, thou art called a Jew, Romans 2. 17, 18.
and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and know his will, and
approvest the things that are excellent. Thou art, as if he should say, called
a Saint, looked upon by all to be a Holy Person, a Religious Man, one of great
Parts, and Knowledge, and Abilities, exceeding many; make thy boast of God, as
if none knew him so well as thou do: but this was their Pride, their Hearts
were lifted up, by reason of that knowledge they had of the Letter of the Law;
though neither their Hearts nor Lives were conformable to the Spiritualness of
it, never saw that the least Sin and Lusts lays them open to the dreadful Wrath
of God, and to the Curse of his holy Law. They boasted in that they had escaped
the Corruption that is in the World, Romans 2. 22.
i. e. all scandalous and gross Sins, and so were puffed up in Pride and
Vainglory. These Self-righteous Persons will not be made sensible that they
are in a sinful State, because of those commendable Qualities possessed within,
as they seem in their own Eyes; and do not perceive how they are degenerated,
and have lost the Image of God which we had in Creation, and how now they bear
the Image of the Devil by Corruption; they understand not the Nature and Extent
of Original Sin, the pravity of their natural Faculties, the lameness and
impotency of their own natural Powers, nor the sinfulness of the first motions
of their Hearts; boasting (as one observes) of self-Ability in the midst of
utter Weakness, Charnock.
and an affection to God under prevailing and horrid Enmity. Pride commonly
arises from a conceit of some excelling Quality, whether Beauty, Parts, or
Knowledge, or affected Piety; and these Men never being convinced of their own
natural Deformity, Filthiness, and Pollution of Sin, that contagion of the
Soul, the universal stain of Nature, nothing but Pollution succeeding in the
place of original Purity, are swelled up in spiritual Pride and
self-conceitedness. The Pharisees were the proudest of all People, and they
were the most ignorant of Gospel Truths; they would have their Opinion a Rule
to all the People, and that must be a Truth which they so esteem to be, and
that an Error, which they conceit so to be. Pride being the Devil's Sin, is
hateful to God. He that looks upon himself too much, looks upon God too little.
If God hides the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven from any, Mat. 11. 25.
it is from the Wise and Prudent. The Design of God in the glorious contrivance
of the way of Salvation by Christ, is to confound and destroy the Pride of Man;
and because Man's corrupt Reason cannot comprehend the Sacred Mysteries of the
Doctrine of Faith, they contemn and disbelieve the revelation of it.

No Religion nor Ordinance of God is valued by some Men but what suits with
their own affected Principles and Notions; from hence the Greeks counted the
Gospel Foolishness: 1 Cor. 1.
and the Jews were so wedded to their own legal Righteousness, that unto them
Jesus Christ was a stumbling block; the pride of their Knowledge and Seize
was the Mother and Nurse of their incredulity: Joh. 7. 48.
Have any of the Pharisees believed on him? These Men sin (as I have often told
some of you) against the Remedy, and fence against the Edge of that Sword by
which their Souls should be wounded, and they die, if ever they come to live
indeed; therefore what hopes is there of them? Alas, Men swelled up with an
Opinion of their own good Estate and Condition without Christ, are unfit for
Faith. This is one of the strong Holds, exalting it self against the Knowledge
of God: How loath is a proud Man to become a Fool, that he may be wise? or to
captivate his Reason to the obedience of Faith, to be justified by another's
Righteousness? and that our own Righteousness, which is so pleasant and
acceptable in our sight, and in the sight of Men, should be as filthy Rags, or
a loathsome thing in the sight of God, is to these sort of People a strange
Paradox.

Lucifer, as some pretend, is one of the chief of Devils, who is called also
the King of Pride: If so, certainly he is one of those wicked Spirits that
entered into this Person. Now what but infinite Power can throw out this Devil,
this Pride, and bring this Soul to the foot of the cross, and make it strike
its swelling Sails to Jesus Christ, and become nothing in it self, and to hate
and loath its own Righteousness, by reason of that impurity and pollution that
cleaves to every best Duty they do or can perform? Thus this unclean Spirit
raises up strong Fortifications against the way of Salvation, the way of Faith,
or going to Jesus Christ for all as poor and undone Sinners. These Enemies, in
Hypocritical and Self-righteous Persons, stand armed in the Breaches of Nature
(as one observes) to beat off all Assaults of the Gospel, Charnock.
and therefore the latter State of these Persons is worse than the first.

Thirdly; Self-confidence may be another evil Spirit that is entered into these
Persons, and which renders their State so bad. It Is impossible to persuade them
that their Condition is naught and damnable: you may (as I hinted before)
quickly bring a vile and debauched Person to acknowledge his State is dangerous,
tho there is no turning him from his evil course; yet he stands not upon
self-justification, but rather readily yields to you: if you deal with him at a
seasonable time with Wisdom, and tell him he is a very wretched Creature I
know: I am so, says he, the Lord have Mercy upon me. But the Man out of whom
the debauched Devil is gone, is in his own Eyes become another Person, a
seeming Saint, one that hears Sermons, Prays, and gives Alms, and yet not
renewed, nor his evil Habits changed. O it is no easy thing to bring him once to
doubt or question the Goodness of his Condition, he blesses God for that help
he has had to change his former course of Life; God, I thank thee, I am not as
other Men, nor as this Publican; I was as bad as other, but I am become
religious; now I am no Swearer, Whoremonger, Drunkard, Extortioner, etc. To
this purpose you have the Pharisee boasting and praising of God: this renders
his state lamentable with a witness. What made the foolish Virgins so bold as
to go forth to meet the Bridegroom? Was it not that confidence they had that
their condition was good? Prove. 14. 16.
A wise Man, says Solomon, fears, and departs from iniquity; but a Fool
rages, and is confident.

Confidence is opposed to Fearing; so that this sort of Men are secure and
unsensible of their Danger till it is too late. As in the Case of the Foolish
Virgins, they saw not their fearful State till the Midnight Cry was heard. And
hence our Savior told the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 21. 32, 33.
that Publicans and Harlots went into the Kingdom of Heaven before them: Which
fully confirms what we say from this dark Scripture, viz. That openly profane
Persons, and notorious Sinners, are not in so dangerous a condition, as a false
Professor or counterfeit Christian, who having passed under a seeming change of
Life, and left the gross Acts of Sin, though never thoroughly wrought upon by
regenerating Grace; and I conclude this of Self-confidence is one of those more
wicked Spirits that are now entered into him. Behold, thou art called a Jew,
Romans 2. 17, 18, 19.
and rests in the Law, and makes thy boast of God, etc. And art confident that
thou thy self art a Guide of the Blind, a Light to them that sit in Darkness,
etc. Thus these Persons proudly, with great Self-confidence, arrogate all
Wisdom and Knowledge to themselves; and are like the Sluggard Solomon speaks of,
Prove. 26. 16.
i.e. wiser in their own conceit than seven Men that can render a Reason.
Tremble ye who fear nothing, who conclude all Wisdom and Knowledge is with you,
and that you need not be taught more than you already know. Some Men, tho
openly profane, glory and boast of their Church and Christianity, and doubt
not but in that Faith to be saved: But if those who are of a good moral Life,
and zealous for the external Parts of true Religion, for want of a saving Work
of Grace on their Hearts, are in such a deplorable State, what vain pride and
folly possesses that foolish and debauched Crew we have amongst us?

Fourthly; Vainglory also certainly may be another Sin this Person is become
guilty of. The Design of God in the Gospel, is to discover how vile, helpless,
and wretched all Men naturally are in themselves, and so to show us that we
have nothing to glory in, 1 Cor. 1. ult.
but that he that glories might glory in the Lord. But these Persons glory in
their seeming Gifts, Parts, Learning, Knowledge, and external Privileges: they
are like those of old who cried out, the Temple of the Lord, or the Church of
God are we. Poor Sinners have nothing to glory in unless it be their Shame. The
Publican cries out, Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner. But the false and
self-righteous Professor, like as a rich Man glories in his Riches, and a
strong Man glories in his Strength, so he glories in his own Righteousness, in
his spiritual Seize and seeming Sanctity. And doubtless this is another
strong Chain with which the Devil binds these deluded Creatures.
Self-confidence, Pride, and Vainglory, are all of near Kin, and proceed from
that horrid Ignorance I first mentioned; they are all the spurious Offspring
of that cursed Parent. But why should we glory in the Lord, or rejoice only in
Christ? Why it is, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
because ye are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: Ye are in him by Faith, by
Regeneration, and his Spirit dwells in you. Our Righteousness is so imperfect,
and so filthy, that it is compared to a menstruous Cloth; instead of glorying
in it, we have cause to be ashamed of it, and to loath our selves, and with
Paul, Phil. 3. 8, 9.
to account it but Dung; our best Actions, Works and Duties we perform, cannot
commend us to God, nor in any respect procure the least Good from his Hands,
forasmuch as Sin cleaves to them, and nothing but a perfect and complete
Righteousness can render the Soul justified and accepted in his sight.

This vainglorious Person little considers what horrid Pollution abides
still in his Heart, for which he is accursed by the Law of God, and so remains
till he has real Union with Christ, and is brought under a Divine Change. What
though he has escaped some abominable Evils and Corruptions of his Life, since
his vicious Habits, and filthy Nature is not changed, nor he sees not the
Purity of the Law of God? Alas, he beholds it, as only forbidding all outward
Acts of Sin, but the Spirituality of it was never opened to him, for if it had,
he would see no cause of glorying in himself, but contrariwise would soon be
convinced of his Error and sad Mistake, and behold himself an undone Man, and
cry out of the deceitful Nature, turnings and windings of his own base Heart,
Thoughts and Affections, and what a disproportion or disagreement to the
perfect Rule; or how far he is from that Holiness, and Purity, and Rectitude
described in the Book of God. It amazed Paul, when he once came fully to
understand the Law, when he looked on all the parts of it, not only on the
grosser Sins forbidden by it, but on the Rectitude, the Holiness which is
required therein: When he saw the Law discovered Lust to be Sin, and that the
least Lust of the Heart is as palpable a breach of it, as Murder, Theft, or the
outward Act of Adultery, and exposed equally to the Curse of it, and so to the
Wrath of God: Then (says he) Sin revived, Romans 7. 9.
and I died; that is, as to any hopes of Life and Salvation by that
Righteousness which before he gloried in, and made his boast of. The same
Apostle afterward came to see that in him, Romans 7.
that is to say, in his Flesh dwelt no good thing; nay, and the Holy Ghost
says, Romans 3. 10.
All are gone out of the way, all are become filthy, and there is none that
does good, no not one. What cause is there then for this Man to glory in his
Parts, Knowledge, and seeming Righteousness, since these things for which Men
value and esteem themselves above others, God says there is no good in,
nothing excellent, but it is contrariwise abhorred and hateful to him? But O how
hard a thing is it to bring this and that self-righteous Person to believe
this, or receive it as a Truth? What, says he, can ye make me think I am still
a vile Sinner, and God does not accept me, who do so much good, that pray as I
do, and hear Sermons, and am thus much reformed? O this is a worse Devil than
the former, and he hereby is in a worse state than at first. Before he was
easily brought to confess his State bad: when openly profane, his gross and
scandalous Sins appeared odious to him, being so indeed in the Eyes of all
sober and civilized People; gross Wickedness seemed to him as filthy Rags, or
as a menstruous Cloth: But to tell him his Righteousness is alike abominable,
filthy, and hateful to God; this he cannot believe, but concludes, it is a
glorious Cover, a rich Garment, a precious Ornament, and so prides himself in
it, and makes his boast of it, pretending now to so much Sanctity, that like
those of old he is ready in his Heart to say to others, Isa. 65. 5.
Stand by your selves, come not near me, for I am holier than you. Thus the
Pharisees of old sequestered themselves from all sorts of Men, must not be so
much as touched by any; for so it seems by that passage, when the poor Woman
came to Christ, Mat. 9. 20.
and touched the Hem of his Garment, they wondered that our Savior would
suffer himself to be touched by her, she being a Sinner; they could not endure
to have any legal pollution upon them, would not eat a bit of Meat until they
had washed their Hands, and often washed their whole Bodies, especially after
they had been at a Feast, for fear any pollution had fallen upon them: and so
also when they came from the Market, lest peradventure they should have touched
some Heathen, or some Person who was legally unclean. And now in this
Righteousness they gloried, trusted to it, and sought hereby for Justification
and Acceptance in the Sight of God, which rendered their State worse than
before. And that which seems to feed and heighten this Pride, Self-confidence,
and Vainglory, in some of these blind and self-deceived People, is that
strange Conceit and Apprehension they have of their own Power and Abilities to
do and perform those things God requires, in order to their Acceptance with
him, together with their false Notions of God's Mercy in pardoning them wherein
they come short. In this very respect the Jews erred to their eternal
Overthrow; they thought they had Power, and were able to keep the Law to such a
Degree, that they were accepted as righteous Persons in God's Sight by it; and
though they might not be puffed up with Pride (as some of late amongst us are
and have been) as to think they were without Sin, yet did not doubt but wherein
they came short or were guilty, God, as a pure Act of his Mercy, would forgive
them, not seeing a Necessity of Christ and of his Righteousness. Which Notion
tends at once utterly to make void the Doctrine of Faith, and Covenant of
Grace, and so consequently the whole Design of God in sending Jesus Christ into
the World: for if Salvation may be obtained this way, Christ is dead in vain.
And whilst I am hinting these things to you, I cannot but bewail another sort
of Men, who though not so grossly blind and mistaken as some others are, yet
doubtless greatly miss it, and run upon almost as bad a Rock, whilst they
apprehend and think all Men are put into such a Capacity that they may be saved
if they will, i. e. by improving the means of Light and Knowledge, they have by
their own inherent Power and Abilities, without the special Operation of the
spirit, not considering the woeful pravity of Man's Nature, by original and
actual Transgression, they being dead in Sin, and stand in as much need to be
quickened by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.
or to have a Principle of Divine Life infused into them, if ever they
spiritually live, as Lazarus had to be quickened and raised again, after he had
lain four days in the Grave. Nay and it is evident, God does work in us, who are
spiritually quickened and brought to believe, after the same manner which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20.
One ground or cause of these Men's Mistake may arise from the Consideration of
that Power Men in general have by the help of natural Conscience, and the
external means of Grace, to leave the gross Acts of Sin, and so reform their
Lives, and cleave to God in all Acts of Obedience, in the external Ordinances
of the Gospel, which is I fear all the Conversion some Professors ever attained
unto, and is also indeed the Substance of that which Man by the Power of his
own Will, is able to arrive unto, to affirm that Man by his own natural and
internal Abilities (as influenced by common Grace) has Power to renew himself,
change his own Heart, or form Jesus Christ in his Soul, is in effect to
attribute to him Omnipotency, and make a God of him, even no less than a
creating Power: For the Image of God, which is wrought in all true regenerated
Persons, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
is called the new Creature; and a glorious Creature it is as ever the Almighty
formed, being the top-Glory of all his creating Power. And besides, this
necessarily makes way for Men to boast and glory in themselves, for it makes
Man a Competitor, a Co-partner, and a Co-worker with God in Redemption; for the
Work of Redemption does not only consist in a price paid, or an Atonement made
by Jesus Christ, (whereby he appeased Divine Wrath, and satisfied God's
offended Justice) but also by Power and blessed Conquest the one was done
without us in the Person of Christ, the other is done in us by the Spirit of
Christ, whereby those evil and vicious Habits that are in us, naturally are
removed, and the Power of Satan broke into Pieces, or that strong Man armed
overcome, 1 John 3. 8.
and the Soul set at Liberty. To this purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. No Man can be said to be redeemed
by Christ, until he is redeemed from his Sins, or delivered from that Enmity
that naturally is in his Heart against God, or that sacred Image of God be
again restored in him, Romans 8. 7.
not until he is quickened or raised from the dead. 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18.
Hence St. Peter, speaking of Redemption, says, We were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from a vain Conversation, etc. but with
the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish and without
Spot. The Redemption is from a vain Conversation, it is not from Wrath only, but
from Sin the cause of that Wrath also. And all Men know this is not universal,
seeing but a very few are indeed thus redeemed; and they may as well perceive
that this is as absolutely the Work of Christ, as he is our Redeemer, viz. thus
to work in us, to redeem us as it was his Work to die for us. How good is it
therefore for us to consider the Danger that arises from mistaken and unsound
Principles, if we would not be found guilty of this Sin of Vainglory? The
truth is, some good Men are so misled, that they make the new Covenant a mere
conditional Covenant, and if after all Christ has done, their Interest in it
and eternal Life wholly depends upon the weak and wavering Principles of the
depraved Creature, and his stubborn and rebellious Will has its negative Voice:
and if the Creature works not, complies not to those Conditions required, the
whole of Redemption-Work may be lost, and not one Soul redeemed. And were it
thus, there is more reason to believe Christ would have lost all his Labor and
infinite Kindness, than otherwise. Since Man is naturally so depraved and
averse to that which is truly good, having such Enmity in his Heart against
God, and is wholly under the Power and Government of the Devil, and this also
would render the new Covenant not better, nay, not so good as the first; for
then Man was a perfect Creature, having not then such a captivating Power of
Sin nor Satan in him, but had a Power of Will to stand, if he had exercised it,
and resisted the Tempter from without. There is one thing more I shall note,
before I leave this Point: It Is easy to perceive from hence, what Grace it is
that Man may fall from, I mean finally and totally fall, i. e. whatsoever Men
may act or do from those common Operations of the Spirit, or by the Power of
natural Conscience, under the external Preaching of the Word, or means of the
Rod or Afflictions, by the Assistance or Help of which I doubt not he may
become another Man, a great Professor, pray, hear the Word, have a sort of
Faith, viz. that of Credence, be baptized, and so become a Churchmember, yea,
a Preacher, and may be in the Sight of Men of a blameless Life and
Conversation, and yet never changed in Heart, or regenerated by the effectual
and special Operations of Christ's Spirit, nor have Union with Christ: From
this Grace, or such a reformed Life and Profession of Religion, a Person may
fall away, and indeed rise no more. And such I conclude the stony and
thorny-ground-Professors were. Mat. 13.
Moreover, it is as evident that the goodground, viz. the honest-hearted Person,
brought forth Fruit to Life eternal, and fell not finally and totally away from
the Grace of God.

If any ask, Quest.
how it came to pass any of the ground is said to be good?

I answer. Answ.
Naturally all the Hearts of Men and Women are evil, the Defection was
universal. But these Hearts of Men who are said to be good ground, were
prepared for the Word; by which means, through the Spirit, they came to be
regenerated, their Hearts were plowed up or broken in pieces by the Word and
Spirit in effectual Convictions. Plow up the fallow Ground, Jer. 4. 3.
(says the Lord by the Prophet) and sow not amongst Thorns. Not that Man is
able to do this, any more than he is to make himself a new Heart, which he is
likewise required to do, Ezekiel. 18. 11. but the former is the Work of the Spirit
by Convictions; the latter the Work of the Spirit in Regeneration. Till the
Heart is pierced by the Holy Ghost, and broken to pieces and made soft, which
naturally is hard, the Word can find no saving or effectual rooting there, but
it is like a Rock, or so stony or thorny, that no Fruit of the Word will abide
to everlasting Life. Therefore I conclude, effectual Convictions are a
Preparative, or a Preparation to Regeneration; the Spirit is a Spirit of
Burning before it is a Spirit of Consolation: Isa. 1.
it first plows up the Fallow-ground, and then when the Seed is sown, it will
take Root, and bring forth Fruit to Salvation.

Fifthly. Moreover, Formality, it may appear to all, from hence is another Evil
that does attend this sort of Men, or is another wicked Spirit that has
possession of their Souls. What a stir did the Pharisees make about Ceremonies?
how zealous were they, like some now adays for outward Rituals and Traditions
of their own devising, or which are mere humane; as if the chief part of
Religion, and the sacred Worship of God, consisted in external Forms, Rites,
and Ceremonies; And art confident (says the Apostle) that thou thy self art a
Guide of the Blind, Romans 2. 19, 20.
a Light to them who are in Darkness, an Instructor of the foolish, a Teacher
of Babes, which have a form of Knowledge, and of the Truth in the Law. A Scheme
or System of Notions, a compendious Model or Method which is artificially
composed, such as Tutors and Professors of Arts and Sciences do read over again
and again to their Pupils and Auditors: Annotators.
these Men are commonly the chief Enemies to the Power of Religion and
Godliness, and like their Brethren of old, great Persecutors of God's faithful
and sincere Children, whilst they cry up their external Forms, considering not
what our Savior says, that God is a Spirit, John 4.
and seeks spiritual Worshippers of him, not formal, not external, or carnal
Modes, bodily Gestures, consecrated Places, attended with glorious Ceremonies,
saying over a few Prayers, in which are many vain Repetitions, not minding
whether their matter of Worship be of Divine Institution or not, nor whether
they perform their Devotion in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, flowing from a
rectified Nature, and from sacred Principles in the Life and Power that attends
all sanctified Christian Worshippers. Others of the same sort may be right in
the matter of Worship, seeming to hate Idolatry and all Superstition, yet
wholly resting on the external part of Religion and Godliness, whose state may
be as dangerous as those before named; though in this they seem to excel them,
i. e. they first miss it both in the matter of Divine Worship, as well as in
the manner of it, they are zealous for the Traditions and Commandments of Men:
as they are formal in their Worship; so their Form is not that form of Doctrine
once delivered to the Saints; it is not the true form of Godliness, having [ a
form] of Godliness, not [ the form;] 2 Timothy 3. 5.
it is like a Mask, or Vizard, or Appearance, an accidental form (as one
observes on that place,) it is a devised, or an humane, nay may be an
Antichristian Form, thinking themselves to be Christians, and the only
Worshippers of Christ, and cry up themselves to be the Church, the Church, and
yet under this Vizard and pretended Piety are very vicious, empty and vain: and
though they deny not the Power of Godliness in Words, yet do deny it in their
Practice, making a Profession, but Strangers to that Life, Peace, Love, Faith,
and Self-denial, which attends and does accompany all true Christians. But the
other sort, though they are formal, yet it is a better Form, hence may be called
Virgins, that is, such who have not, will not, defile themselves with Women;
that is, with false Churches, with Idolatry, or the Superstitions of Men, these
are for the Gospel-Form, the Gospel-Doctrine, Gospel-Precepts and Ordinances;
these are not for a Form of Prayer, nor for any other Form of Worship, but what
Christ himself ordained, as it is contained in the New Testament: These may be
Members of a True Church, and worship with that Church, and be as zealous for
the outward and external Parts and Ordinances as any; like those we read of,
Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13. Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings, Prayer, Incense, New Mons,
Sabbaths, and calling of Assemblies, with appointed Feasts, which were
Institutions of God. But these Men resting on them, and having unsanctified
Hearts and Lives, God hated them, and loathed their Services, being not
performed in Faith, and hearty Love, and sincere Resolutions: that which they
did, was but as if they had offered up a dead Carcass instead of a living
Sacrifice; He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a Man; and he that
sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's Neck; Isa. 66. 3.
and he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines Blood; he that
burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol.

Such who show never so much Zeal for the visible Worship of God, and for all
his Ordinances, if only formal in their performances, are abominated by the
Lord: it is not a Lamp without Oil, a Name without the Nature, a Form of
Godliness without the Power, will avail any Person. O how do many Professors
deceive themselves? Sirs, all is and will be in vain, if the Root of the Matter
be not in you, if not sincere, truly gracious, the garnish of outward Worship,
or formal Services, or the Cloak of a visible Profession will not cover you
from God's all-searching Eye; he sees through all this Deceit, and beholds your
inward Pride, Vainglory, and horrid pollution of your Hearts and Lives: it is
all one to be of a false Religion as to own the true, if not sincere
Christians; these have such unclean Spirits in them, that their State is worse
than before they made no profession at all; these Devils are stronger than the
first, have more cunning, craft, and subtilty to deceive and blind the Eyes,
and so destroy the Soul, than those who rule in open profane People; for these
are commonly Men of great Light and Understanding, can discourse well
concerning Religion, and some of the deep things of God, or the Mysteries of
the Gospel; they can tell you the insufficiency or disability of Man to keep
the Law, and how impossible it is to be justified in the sight of God by it; as
also the absolute necessity of Faith and Regeneration. Counterfeit Christians
are not all of one sort.
These are not only averse to all humane Innovations and Traditions of Men, and
so contend for God's Holy Institutions in respect of his visible Worship, (as I
told you before) but seem to be enlightened very much into that internal Work of
God's Grace upon the Soul, etc. but never come themselves under those saving
Operations of the Spirit, but rest in the Speculative Knowledge of those
Mysteries, and are mere empty and formal Persons, and Strangers to that Divine
Life, and sacred Change of which they speak, and yet possibly may not be
thoroughly convinced of that deceit and delusion they are under, but may hope
all is well with them; but since they are not savingly renewed, but only
reformed, having not Jesus Christ dwelling in their Hearts, nor the Power of
the Holy Ghost to enable and influence their Souls in the performance of their
Duties, and in mortification of their Sins and Corruptions, they are frequently
overcome by Satan, and horrid Evils prevail and predominate in them, by which
means they bring great reproach upon Religion, and all those who do profess it:
hence the Apostle calls this sort, the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.
18. and this further aggravates their Sin and Misery, for whilst openly
profane, and not pretending to Religion and Godliness, they could not injure
the Name of God, nor expose the Gospel and Professors thereof to that scorn and
reproach as now they do.

Sinners openly wicked, though notorious and vile Enemies to God, yet the hurt
and wrong they do is especially to their own Souls; but these by their carnal
earthly Pr^^^, loose and formal walking, hinder the promulgation of the Gospel,
and Conversion of the Souls of Men, besides their weakening the Hands, and
grieving the Hearts of the truly Godly. Moreover, they also pollute and defile
(too often) the Church of Jesus Christ, and bring great trouble upon the same.
Hence there is in most Congregations who keep up a strict and regular
Discipline (...) so much Church-work, which makes the Communion of the Saints
the more uncomfortable to them: for though it cannot be denied but sincere
Persons may fall under Sin and Temptation, and so all the trouble of Churches,
and Reproach that falls upon Religion, does not arise from these counterfeit
Christians, or formal Professors; yet doubtless the chiefest part of them do.
It is said, Offenses will come, but woe to them by whom the Offense comes. From
all which considerations their state seems worse in many degrees than before.

Sixthly; The wicked Spirit, or abominable Sin that some of these Men's Souls
are also possessed with, is Legality. And though this clearly appears by what I
have already said, yet I shall speak a little more fully and distinctly unto
it. All that these Persons do and perform, is in a legal Spirit; and that I may
show you what I mean by Legality, in short it is this, i. e. They act and do
for Life, look upon themselves to be under a conditional Covenant; and whilst
they live up to that Law or Rule which they judge they are bound to observe and
keep, in order to Justification, they have Peace, rendering the Gospel and
Covenant of Grace (by their false Apprehensions of it) no better than a legal
Ministration or conditional Covenant, as was hinted before in respect of
another sort of Men: For like as the Jews of old acted in a legal Spirit, and
sought to be justified by the Works of the Law, so these perform all their
Services and Duties in the same Spirit, viz. not from Life, or a Divine
Principle of Saving-Faith, but for Life. To keep the Commandments of God, and
live religiously, is absolutely necessary. But then this must be done from a
renewed Nature, and flows from Faith, it being the proper Effect or Fruit
thereof; but to strive to live a sober and holy Life, and obey God's Precepts,
and rest upon their so doing, and look to be accepted with God, and justified
thereby, is that which too many of this sort of People do, and this is to act
in a legal Spirit. Possibly a Man may say, I know I cannot perfectly keep the
Law, but I will do (by the help of God) what I can; and wherein I through
weakness do transgress, the Lord is merciful, and I trust will forgive me. But
let me remember what God says, viz. That he will in no wise clear the Guilty.
Moreover, what the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, Romans 3.
19
that all Mouths may be stopped, and the whole World become guilty before God.
It Is evident, as God will not forgive an impenitent Person, so he will not
forgive the Penitent, except they believe in Jesus Christ. It Is not for the
sake or worth of Repentance that God forgives any Man, the Penitent as well as
the Impenitent are guilty, all have broke the Law, all are under Sin and Wrath,
Repentance will not do, a holy Life will not do, Prayer and hearing Sermons
will not do; By the Deeds of the Law (and by any thing we can do) no Flesh
shall be justified. If Men believe not on Christ, let them be what they will,
Professors or Profane, they shall die in their Sins: God pardons no Sinner as
a simple Act of his Mercy, Joh. 8. 24.
without a respect had to the Satisfaction Christ has made to his offended
Justice by his Death: And hence it is that the Apostle says, All have sinned,
Romans 3. 24, 25.
and come short of the Glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Therefore God
does not accept of our Obedience in keeping the Precepts, either of the Old or
New Testament, and forgive all our Deviations as a mere Act of his Mercy; for
if this way Righteousness and Justification were attainable, it is evident
Christ died in vain, as I said before; for could not God have done this, if
Christ had never come to shed his precious Blood?

I remember some Years ago, I heard of a Man who lying on his Deathbed, when a
Godly Person desired him to look out for a Christ; answered, He had lived a
godly Life all along, and why (said he) do you tell me of a Christ? or to that
effect. He thought, ('it is evident,) none needed a Christ but profane Persons;
and I fear many are of his Mind, tho they express it not as he did, with their
Tongues.

But possibly some may say, Object.
We do not think that our Righteousness justifies us any otherwise than through
Christ' s Merits.

To which I answer; Answ.
It Is not throug our personal Righteousness, though joined or coupled with
Christ's Merits, that we are justified, but through the personal Righteousness
of Christ alone, and the Merits of his Blood received by Faith; it is in this
way, and only by this way we must be saved if ever we come to Heaven, 1 Cor. 3.
11.
Another Foundation can no Man lay. He that believes not, Mar. 16. 16
shall be damned. Let him be what he will, Righteous or Wicked, it is a great
Error to think that Christ's Merits make our Services or Performances
meritorious: though (...) are accepted thereby when they flow from Faith, yet
not as the Spring, or procuring Cause of our Justification.

To close with this, let me add one thing further, which shows the Danger these
Persons are in. This Error is a capital One, it is to err in a main Fundamental
of Religion, and therefore Heresy, a damnable Principle. And hence the Apostle
calls it, Act. 15. 24
a subverting the Souls of such who receive it. And it was also from hence God
gave the Jews up to Judicial Blindness, i. e. because they went about to
establish their own Righteousness, and did not submit to the Righteousness of
God. Romans 10. 3.
According as it is written, Romans 11. 8.
God has given them the Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they should not see, and
Ears that they should not hear. That must needs be a dangerous Evil, that
provokes the Holy God thus to leave and give up a Person to blindness of Mind,
and final Impenitency; for such must needs perish of necessity.

Therefore in the last place it follows, that the state of these People is
worse than it was when they were no Professors of Religion at all, but were
openly wicked and profane Sinners: these unclean Spirits are worse than the
first. And from hence let all take heed how they mix Law and Gospel together in
the case of Justification. Romans 11. 6.
If by Grace, then is it no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no Grace. But if
it be of Works, then it is no more Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work. There
is no mixing of the Merits of good Works and the free Grace of God together,
but one of these does exclude and destroy the Nature of the other: for if
Election and Justification were partly of Grace, and partly of (or from
foreseen) Works, then Grace is no Grace, and Works no Works. For whatsoever
proceeds of Grace, Annotat.
(as one observes) that comes freely, and not of Debt; but whatsoever comes
by Merits or Works, that comes by Debt. But now Debt, and free Grace, or that
which is free and absolutely by Grace, and that by desert, are quite contrary
things: therefore to say Men are Called and Justified, partly by Grace, and
partly by Works, (or by whatsoever is done by the Creature) this were to put
such things together that cannot agree, for it is to make Merit no Merit, Debt
no Debt, Works no Works, Grace no Grace, and so affirm and deny one and the
same thing. Therefore how absurd a thing is it for Men to mix the Law and
Gospel together in this sense, or make that which is the Creature's Act or
Work, a procuring Cause of acceptance and Justification in God's sight? seeing
it utterly destroys the nature of Grace, and so consequently the glorious
Design, of God's eternal Purpose in Jesus Christ, and that blessed Covenant of
his confirmed by the Mediator thereof. Where the Creature is wholly abased, and
the free Grace of God alone exalted, Man is not a co-worker or co-partner with
God: therefore those Principles that have a natural tendency so to do, ought to
be abominated by all good Christians.

But it is objected, Object.
That we are said to be justified by Faith, and also that Repentance is
required as a Condition of Salvation, etc.

1. I answer; Answ.
Some put Faith in the room and place of perfect Obedience to the Law; and that
Faith which they speak of they affirm is the sole Act of the Creature: But this
certainly is a grand Error, for it would make our Justification to be still by
Works, and so destroy the Nature of God's free Grace: for that which is the
Creature's Act, is all one with the Creature's Work; it is but to change one
Work of the Creature to another; from an external Work of the Life, to an
internal Work of the Heart. For, as Mr. Carry well observes, It Is Christ's
perfect Righteousness and Obedience only which is put into the room and place
of ours, to justify and save us, and his Sufferings take away the Curse which
our Disobedience brought upon us. Faith therefore is only the instrumental
Cause of our Justification, it is only as an Instrument or Way of our receiving
and applying the Righteousness of Christ, if it justifies, as a Condition of
the New Covenant, (as Works were required under the Old); and as that act or
work injoined on our part to be done by us as Antecedent to the benefit of the
Promise, that would make our Act or Work the formal Cause of our Justification,
and so render the Terms of the New Covenant much of the same Nature with the
Old. Faith is not our Righteousness in it self, as a Work, but in relation to
Christ the Object of it, or as an Act of receiving and applying his
Righteousness and Merits; as Eating nourishes, though it be the Meat that does
it in this sense. Annotat. Romans 4. 5.
Him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness. And now whereas the Apostle James speaks of
Works justifying, and not Faith only, Jam. 2. 24. it is easy to be
comprehended, and the great Apostle of the Gentiles and he reconciled. Paul
speaks of the Cause of our Justification before God, and James of the Signs of
our Justification before Men; or shows how our good Works justify our Faith:
Annotators.
The one speaks of the Imputation of Righteousness, the other of the
Declaration of our Righteousness; or one speaks of the Office of Faith, the
other of the Quality of Faith; the one speaks of the Justification of the
Person, the other of the Faith of that Person; the one speaks of Abraham to be
justified, the other of Abraham already justified. Moreover,

2. That Faith by which we are said to be justified, is as much the Free-Gift
of God's Grace to us, as Christ is the Free-Gift of his Grace for us: and hence
Faith is called the Gift of God Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. and also a Fruit of the Spirit,
Gal. 5. 22. And as it is a Grace wrought in us, so also such a Grace that was
promised to us as part of Christ's Purchase; To you it is given (says the
Apostle) in the behalf of Christ, Phil. 1. 29.
not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake; that is, it is given
freely of God's mere Grace, yet upon the account of Christ's Merits and
Mediation. Their believing in Christ was not in their own Power; No Man can
come to me, Joh. 6. 65.
that is, believe in me, except it were given unto him of my Father: And all
that the Father has given to me, Joh. 6. 44.
shall come unto me, that is, believe on me. And again, No Man can come unto
me, except the Father which sent me draw him. That by the drawing here, is not
meant of any coaction or force upon the Will, is out of Question; the Will acts
freely according to the Nature of that Faculty, but as it is acted and
influenced by the Spirit; according to that Text in the Psalms, My People shall
be willing in the Day of my Power: Ps. 110. 5.
But that it is to be understood only of a rational drawing, by Arguments used
in the Ministry of the Word, we do deny; though in this sense some do take it,
and conclude, it is of the same import with that compelling mentioned, Luke 14.
23. for the Ministers of the Gospel (as one observes) have no other Power to
compel. But the Act of drawing here is not ascribed to the Servants, but to the
Master, not the Preacher, but the Father; therefore doubtless it signifies a
Divine Power put forth upon the Soul of Man, by which the Lord opens the Heart,
as he did the Heart of Lydia, so that he is made obedient to the call of God,
and willing to close with the Offer of Christ. And that this must be the
meaning of the Text, it is rational to conclude, considering the nature of the
motion in coming unto Christ, which is the motion of the Soul to a sublime
spiritual Object to do; which as no Soul has any power of it self, such is the
darkness of the Mind, the obstinacy of the Will, and pravity of the Affections,
unless influenced and wrought upon by the Spirit. So in like manner nothing is
proud Man naturally more averse to, cannot endure to think he is such a poor
Miscreant, a mere beggarly Wretch, that he has not so much as a bit of Bread to
eat, nor a Garment, in a spiritual sense, to cover him, but must be beholden to
his Neighbor for all: For as no Soul is able, without supernatural Grace, to
apprehend spiritual Things [ cannot] discern them; so there is in his mind
enmity against God, Romans 8. 7.
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed [ can] be.

From all which I have said, it appears Faith (as before hinted) is not the
Condition of Justification, tho the Way or Means appointed to receive that
Righteousness that does justify the Sinner; so likewise Faith is God's Gift.
Yet it is foolish to say, Man does not believe, but rather the Spirit for him,
because he cannot believe by any natural Power inherent in him, till he is
divinely influenced by the Holy Ghost: For such may as well say, Lazarus did
not live, or it was not his Life which he had after quickened, because it was
infused into him by the Power and Spirit of Christ. Therefore this and the
former Objection are both gone, and the supposed Condition of the New Covenant
vanquished, since Faith it self being the Fruit of it, cannot be the Condition
thereof.

But says the Objector, Object.
If Faith and Repentance be not Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, then those
whom God has appointed to Salvation, shall be saved whether they believe, or
repent, or no.

To which we answer; Answ.
That Faith and Repentance, etc. are Promises of the New Covenant, as well as
Justification and Eternal Life; and he that has ordained the End, has also
ordained the Means: Jer. 31. 33.
I will put my Law into their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts, and
will be their God, and they shall be my People. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from doing them good, Jer. 32. 40.
but I will put my Fear into their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
That God who has promised to make us Happy, has also promised to make us
Holy; he has promised Grace to us here, and to change our Hearts of Stone, and
to give us Hearts of Flesh, as well as he has promised to give us Glory
hereafter.

Our being called in Time, is but the effect of God's eternal Love before Time,
Jer. 31. 3.
because he has loved us with an everlasting love; therefore with loving
kindness has he drawn us. We are called by the free Grace of God according to
his purpose, Romans 8. 29.
as well as justified and eternally saved. We are predestined that we may be
conformable to the Image of his Son in Holiness here on Earth, as well as in
Heaven hereafter. If Men are left under the power of their Sins, or only to the
bare improvements of their own natural Abilities in a mere reformed Life, and
never brought by the free Grace of God to believe in Jesus Christ, and so to
have real Union with him, Joh. 6. 37.
it is an evident sign they shall never be saved, they being none of them that
the Father has given to Christ; Ephesians. 1. 4.
for, says he, all that the Father gives to me, shall come unto me; and in
these only are infused the Divine Habits of Saving-Grace. The Apostle
positively affirms, that God has chosen us in Christ before the Foundation of
the World, that we should be Holy, and without blame before him in love; not
only chosen to Salvation which is the End, but to Holiness as the Means: Not
because we are Holy are we chosen, but that we may be Holy; but this ought not
to take any Soul from the use of the Means. And as a clear demonstration and
illustration of this, I might mention that passage concerning Paul's Voyage to
Rome, in respect of that assurance God gave him of the Lives of all that were
with him in the Ship; the Angel of God appeared to him, Act. 27. 24, 25, 31.
and said, And lo, God has given thee all them that sail with thee. Wherefore,
Sirs, be of good cheer, for I believe God, that it shall be as it was told me.
This Promise was absolute, yet see what Paul said to them, Except ye abide in
the Ship, ye cannot be saved. That God that has promised us Salvation, does
not save us without the use of Means, although the efficaciousness and truth of
the Promise, does no ways depend upon the virtue of the Means, but the Means
are made effectual by virtue of the Promise, yet whoever neglects the Means,
under any pretense of a free Promise, he does but tempt God, Annotators on the
place.
but does not (as some observe) rightly believe in him.

Seventhly; Amongst the wicked Spirits that are entered into this Man, namely,
into this Counterfeit Christian, that horrid and wicked Spirit of Unbelief must
not be left out, for tho this Sin of Sins is in all unconverted Persons, yet it
reigns and triumphs more in this sort of People than in others. Profane
Persons are kept up by a false Faith, depending, as they will tell you, on the
Death and Merits of Christ, tho it is only cursed presumption in them; for that
cannot be a true Faith, which changes not the Heart and Life of the Creature.
But they believe not, by reason of love to their Sins, which they are not as
yet willing to forgo. But these believe not on Christ, because of that love
which they have to their own seeming Righteousness, which in point of Trust,
Hope, and Dependence, they also are not willing to forgo. These Men place that
Hope on their own Works and Righteousness, which true Christians place on
Christ, and so unbelief in them throws Christ quite away, they having no need
of him.

1. What is Unbelief, but an actual or vertual denial of the Truth of the
Gospel, when Men do not assent to the Doctrine of it, by an act of the
Understanding?

2. It Is a refusal to accept heartily of Christ upon the Terms of the Gospel,
Charnock.
which is opposite to Justifying-Faith, when there is not a fiducial Motion to
Christ as the Center. When Christ, the only Foundation and chief Cornerstone,
is laid aside, and the Need and Worth of him not believed. This Sin binds all
the Guilt of all their old and new Sins upon their Souls, it is a Sin against
the highest Goodness of God, and casts Contempt upon it; for never did God
manifest such sovereign Goodness unto his Creatures as in Jesus Christ. Acts 4.
12.
God has said, there is no Life, no Salvation any other way, but by the Lord
Jesus. But these Men do not assent to this Truth, do not believe the Report God
has given concerning the want of perfect Righteousness and Regeneration, and
Self-debasement, etc. Nay, they seem to contradict the Will of God, Romans 10. 3.
by their going about to establish their own Righteousness, and so not
submitting to the Righteousness of God. In a word, it is a denying of Christ,
and a disesteeming the Price of his Blood, as it also reflects on the Wisdom of
God, in fixing on this way to save Sinners: It Is an invaluating the Excellency
of Christ's Person, Blood and Merits. As Faith counts all things Dung in
Comparison of Christ; so Unbelief accounts the Person, Offices, and Doctrine of
Christ, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.
but as Dung in Comparison of the Excellency of Self-Righteousness,
Self-Wisdom, Self-Sufficiency, etc. These Men are the worst Neglecters of the
great Salvation, they do not only neglect it, but slight and contemn it, there
being in their Thoughts not any need to look for Salvation this way: They that
sin against the Law, fly to the Gospel; but these sin against the Cure held
forth and extended in the Gospel. Whither must these fly? since there remains
no more Sacrifice for Sin: if this be slighted, no other way or means is
ordained for Salvation. Such who refuse the Covenant of Grace, and depend on
the Covenant of Works, how woeful is their Condition? And what hope a Law often
transgressed can give a Malefactor, is (says a worthy Person) easy to imagine:
Millions have perished by it, none can be secured by it, as none ever by it
were or could be saved. At first these Persons transgressed against the Rule,
but now they transgress against the Rule and Remedy too. None but Unbelievers
are despised by God, none but these shall taste of his Wrath and Divine
Vengeance; this is the condemning Sin, this is Satan's strongest hold, hither
he retreats after all, and here he keeps as in chains his miserable Captive.
Mark 16. 16.
He that believes not, shall be damned. And what is Faith but a going out of a
Man's self to Christ for Life and Righteousness, as a poor wretched and
miserable Sinner? But these Men now see not themselves to be in such a State.

Earthly Hypocrisy, it appears from the whole which has been said, is another
of those evil Spirits that is entered into this Man.

Hypocrisy is opposed to that inward Simplicity of the Heart, and all
counterfeit Professors are guilty of it, though all do not act the part of an
Hypocrite with an Intention, i. e. are not convinced, they are Hypocrites: some
deceive their own Hearts, they are the grosser* sort; others their Hearts
deceive them, these are most to be pitied; a Man may doubtless be an Hypocrite,
and he may not know it, he may go on in a way of Duty, and do all things, as he
thinks, exactly according to the Letter of the Word, and in Uprightness as he
may judge, and yet be unsound; certainly thus it was with the foolish Virgins.
Mat. 25.


Hypocrites may be nevertheless discerned; our Savior has given the Character
of them.

1. They are commonly most zealous from the lesser things of Religion, Mat. 23.
23, 24.
i. e. for paying Tithes of Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but neglect the weightier
things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, Faith, and the Love of God: Luke 11. 42.
They strain at a Knat, and swallow a Cammel. They make a stir about external
Rights, Observation of Days and Meats, but to the Power of Religion and
Godliness are Strangers, and experience nothing of a Divine change on their
Souls.

2. As they lay the greatest stress upon the least things, so they are commonly
partial in their pretended Obedience; they lay hard things, Mat. 23. 4.
or heavy Burdens upon others, but they themselves will not touch them with one
of their Fingers: What they preach and press on others, they do not themselves,
they will not obey Christ, nor follow him in the hardest things, nor do they
obey in Love, or always.

3. They are commonly finding Faults in other Men, Mat. 7. 3.
can spy the Mote in their Brother's Eye, but cannot see the Beam that is in
their own. As it is a Sign of notorious Hypocrisy and Impudence, to censure and
judge others for those Sins which Men live in themselves; so it is a Sign of
like Hypocrisy, to spy Faults in others, and reproach them for those Faults,
and yet the Person is guilty of worse himself. What they preach and press on
others, they do not themselves; they will not follow Christ in the most hard
and difficult things of Religion, but pick and choose; will do some things that
they like of, and not only neglect others, but quarrel with them who contend
for it, and faithfully subject to Christ in it. And as they are not universal
in their Obedience, so they do not obey in Love, nor do they obey always as
sincere Christians do, as David intimates.

4. They are generally very confident touching the Goodness of their own
Condition, not questioning their Salvation; thus were the Pharisees, they
judged others were in a damnable State, but as touching themselves, did not
doubt but they were the only People; and blessed God they were not as other
Men: whereas a true Christian is full of Fear, and doubts about the Truth of
Grace received, and Goodness of his Condition.

5. They are vainglorious, do what they do to be seen of Men; John 12. 43.
like the Pharisees, They love the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God:
their Hearts are kept up by the good Opinion others have of them; they, like
their Predecessors, love greetings in the Markets, Mat. 23. 6, 7.
and uppermost Rooms in Feasts, and to be called of Men Rabbi: they also are
subject to Envy, or have their Hearts rise against such who they hear outdo
them; and would be looked upon as the chiefest of Men, in Learning, Parts and
Wisdom.

6. They are commonly very zealous to make Men Proselytes to their own Notions
of Religion, though may be false and corrupt Notions: but if they can but bring
a Person to receive their Principles and external Ordinances, then they glory,
tho hereby he is made twofold (perhaps sevenfold) more the Child of Hell than
before; Mat. 23. 15.
the poor deceived Wretch thinking this change of Religion is a true
Conversion, and so never looks out for any other, but speaking Peace to his own
Soul, judging all is well within. They doubt not but they have Religion enough
when it does commend them to Me^, and are taken for Saints by Saints; their
greatest Labor is to keep up their Name and Credit in Religion; so that if they
may pass unsuspected amongst their Fellow Creatures, or have the Approbation of
Men, and that if none can charge them justly with any immoral Actions, they
rest satisfied; whereas the greatest Care of a true Child of God is so to walk
and labor, that he may be accepted of God, and have his Approbation.

7. Self is commonly in the bottom. In all they do, they aim not at the Glory
of God, but have a carnal Design, Self-Advantage, or Self-Applause, etc. This
moves and quickens them, and animates them in all they perform in religious
Services; and if they miss of their end, be it what it will, they soon are
weary, and grow cold and flat in their Spirits, and become quarrelsome, and
seek Offenses, and disturb the Peace of the Church to whom they belong.

8. Moreover, they are not the same at Home, which they are Abroad; not in
Private, what they seem to be in Public; may be seldom pray, either in their
Family, or Closet; or if they do, it is with little Zeal, Enlargedness, or
Affection to God.

There are diverse other Marks and Characters of Hypocrites, and of these false
Professors, which I must pass by, because I would speak a word or two of
Application.

In the last place; The latter State of these Men is worse than the first. 1.
Because God oftentimes leaves them to judicial Blindness, and to the hardness
of their own Hearts: According as it is written, Romans 11. 8.
God has given them the Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they should not see, and
Ears that they should not hear, unto this day. Even thus, as God dealt with the
Unbelieving Jews, or the People of that Generation, so I say he oftentimes
deals with other formal Hypocrites, etc. and for the very same Cause. Doubtless
it was for those Spiritual Sins, Unbelief and Hypocrisy, the Pharisees, and
other People of Israel were rejected and cast off. And O what Wrath were they
laid under! the Wrath of God (is said) to come upon them to the uttermost.

Moreover, some of these false and counterfeit Professors, also fall into the
very same Sins and horrid Abominations they were guilty of before they made any
profession of Religion; nay, and they prove more vile and notorious in
Wickedness than ever: It has often been seen, that this sort of Men who
forsake the Ways of God, which they seemed to own and profess, have at last
appeared more impudent in Sin than the vilest Men, being ringleaders to all
lewd and cursed Practices and Deeds of Darkness; so that the same unclean
Spirit returns into some of them in the same shape also; though I cannot see
any ground to believe it happens so to them all; for doubtless many of them
retain their seeming Zeal, and external Profession of Religion and outward
Holiness, until they die. Evident it is, our Savior applies this direful Doom
on the People of that Generation, viz. the Jews, particularly to the Scribes
and Pharisees, see the 38th verse. Yet certain it is, many of them never turned
to open Profaneness, but died in their Unbelief whilst they abode proud and
zealous Pharisees. Yet I see no reason to question but this returning Devil,
and those seven other Spirits more wicked, is applied to them as well as to
others, who fell away from their seeming Piety and Profession. But of some of
them especially it has happened according to what St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 2.
20.
For if after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and are again overcome, the latter end of that Man is
worse than the first; that is, such a knowledge of Christ as brings with it, or
does produce, an outward reformation of Life. For as the Elect cannot be
deceived, so they cannot fall finally, having the seed remaining in them,
cannot sin unto Death, they are said to have eternal Life abiding in them; 1 John 3. 15.
Because (says Christ) I live, ye shall live also. He that has begun that
good work in them, will perform it to the Day of Christ. Joh. 14. 19 Phil. 1. 6.
They are passed from Death unto Life, and shall not come into condemnation.
But as to these falsehearted or hypocritical Persons, it happens to them
(that is, to some of them) according to the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to
his own Vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. The Apostle
comparing them to Dogs and Swine, shows what fort they were, viz. such who
never passed under an effectual change of Heart, but were, whilst they made a
great or high profession, like unclean Beasts. A restraint may be put on an
evil Beast, or on a filthy and unclean Nature; where there is not a change of
nature, it is one thing to have the Life washed or cleansed, and another to have
the Heart cleansed.

Furthermore; Some of this sort who have received those high, though common
Illuminations of the Spirit, even to such a degree as they are said to be
enlightened, and to have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, Heb. 6.4.
and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, etc. that is, in the common Gifts
and Graces thereof; and yet after all, they fall away, nay, and so fall, that
they can never be renewed again by Repentance: Therefore some of these Persons
are they who sin the Sin against the Holy Ghost, that shall never be forgiven.
Profane Persons doubtless do not sin this Sin, nor can true Christians commit
it; they cannot sin unto Death. No, no, these are those miserable Souls, those
cursed Apostates, who are liable and in danger to sin the unpardonable Sin.
Nay, and observable it is, that the Lord Jesus in the verses before he spoke
this Parable, intimates, that those very Pharisees, etc. were guilty of, or in
danger of being charged with this Sin, see verse. 30. they showed so much Malice
against our blessed Savior, as to charge him with a Devil, Mat. 12. 24, 28.
and that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub. But when the Pharisees heard it,
they said, This Fellow does not cast out Devils but by Beelzebub the Prince of
the Devils. And from hence he said, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be
forgiven to Men, but the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
Men. Verse. 31.
And therefore he bids them to make the Tree good, intimating, whilst the Heart
was evil, and under diabolical Influences, it would or might carry them away to
all horrid Words, and Blasphemy. And then presently after brings in this
parabolical Speech, When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, etc. It Is not
a speaking of hard words against Christ and the Holy Ghost, What the Sin
against the Holy Ghost is, that shall not be forgiven.
but a speaking them as the Pharisees did, out of spite, designing to destroy
him, and render him odious: This is dangerous. 1. It Is a sinning wilfully after
a Person has received much knowledge; it is a Sin knowingly committed against
the operations of the Holy Spirit, casting contempt or highest reproach upon
Christ and the Holy Ghost, contrary to the rational Convictions of their own
Consciences. Annotators.
2. There is also it appears Malice against Christ and his Spirit in the Hearts
of those Men who are guilty of it; they are said to do despite to the Spirit of
Grace; Heb. 10. 29
they desert the Assemblies where he manifests his Gifts and Graces, they
reject him, viz. the Holy Spirit, with them, and treat (as one observes) his
Gifts and Motions, as if they were mere Delusions and Impostures of an evil
Spirit: and this is done wilfully, out of Malice to Christ, his People, and
Religion. 3. Also doubtless Apostasy is another ingredient thereof in some,
they fall away, etc. they utterly disown that Religion they have professed. 4.
Final Impenitency appertains to it likewise; for what Sins we truly repent
of, we shall be forgiven. But of these it is said, It Is impossible to renew them
again to Repentance, Heb. 6. 6.
because God is withdrawn from them, and has left them for ever, so that no
Means used can do them any good. As God will not renew them again, so none else
can do it: they sin therefore without remorse of Conscience, after they have
made shipwreck of Faith, and that seeming good Conscience they once had; for
Paul intimated he had a good Conscience before he was converted, or whilst a
Pharisee, Act. 23. 1. But those who are unsound at Heart, who do not fall away
from their seeming Holiliness and profession of Religion, and so die not in
Apostasy, yet if they never come to be savingly wrought upon, or to pass under
a Divine Change, they all nevertheless perish in Hypocrisy; so that every way
their State, and the State of all of them, is and will be at the last miserable.

And from the whole we may note,

That the State of the Self-righteous and Pharisaical Persons, Obs. 1.
is far worse than the State of gross and profane Sinners.

These are sick, and know it not; wounded, but see no need of a Physician;
Sinners, but see no want of a Christ: They may conclude they are converted, and
therefore seek not after Conversion. We always think his State is sad, who,
though mortally wounded, yet feels no pain. Some Sinners are said to be past
feeling; their Enemy is hid in them, they think he is gone, when it is no such
thing, for he another way has faster hold of them than ever.

It Is a hard and difficult thing to bring a Pharisaical Person, Obs. 2.
one that looks upon himself to be a religious Man, to see his woeful State and
Condition.

Men may be civilized, Obs. 3.
and make a great Profession of Religion, and go for Saints on Earth, that are
not such in the sight of God in Heaven.

We may also from hence infer, Obs. 4.
It Is a most dangerous thing to make a Profession of Religion, without true
Regeneration be first wrought in the Soul; better be no Professors at all, than
not so as to be sincere.

Hypocrisy is a most cursed and dangerous Sin; Obs. 5.
these Persons Satan has commonly the strongest hold of, of all others.

The State of sincere Christians is happy: Obs. 6.
though Satan does attempt to get into them, and destroy them, yet he cannot do
it, there is no abiding for him; he may foil them, but cannot give them a final
fall; though they fall, they shall rise again.

Satan cannot be said to be quite thrown out of that Man's Heart, Obs. 7.
where the true Grace of God is not implanted, nor the Soul renewed. None but
the Lord Jesus, who is stronger than Satan, can bind this strong Man armed, and
set the Soul at liberty. Where the Heart is not changed, Satan can return, in
one way or another, at his pleasure, he takes them captive at his Will.

Mortality, Obs. 8.
or all external Gifts and common Graces, though it may seem to sweep the
House, yet is the House empty, and all is but like a vain Show or Garnish, all
Reformation is nothing without Regeneration

APPLICATION.
This may inform us of the Cause and Reason there is so great Informat. 1.
Reproach brought upon Religion, and on the Ways of God, and on the People of
God, by some who profess the Gospel. Alas, many of them who are called Saints,
we may justly fear are but counterfeit Christians, such who never experienced a
true Work of Grace; they may have knowing Heads, but unsanctified Hearts. And
from hence it is there are so many proud Persons in many Congregations, who
with brazen Foreheads will brave it out, with impudent Faces, in the presence
of Christ's faithful Ministers; and though reproved, and told of their cursed
Pride and abominable Dresses, high and shameful Towers, hateful to God and good
Men, yet reform not, will not deny themselves of their filthy Lusts, tho the
Name of God and Religion is exposed to great Reproach and Contempt thereby, and
the Hearts of sincere Christians wounded, and mourn for it bitterly before the
Lord. If they had but a spark of true Grace, could they ever stand it out thus
against the Gunshot of Heaven? How fearless do they seem under the rattling
Peals of the Thunder of Heaven? They regard not the whetted Sword of the
Almighty, nor the bending of his dreadful Bow; nor mind the Arrows that are
just upon the String, who is ready to send forth his Anger with Fury, and his
Rebukes in Flames of Fire.

Moreover, Informat. 2.
from hence it is also there are so many covetous, earthly, and hard-hearted
Professors and Members in Churches. Alas, you may tell them of this abominable
Sin a thousand times over, and all to no purpose, their Hearts ('it is to be
feared) are set upon their Covetousness, they love the World more than the
Word, nay, more than God or Jesus Christ; and yet, under a Cloak of Religion,
shelter themselves as if all was well, and they good Christians: And because
they covet no Man's Goods but their own, and so are not guilty of Theft, they
conclude they are not chargeable with this Sin of Covetousness; though Christ's
poor Members are not regarded, the Naked are not clothed, Mat. 25.
nor the Hungry fed, nor the Sick visited. They will give something it is true,
but not according to the Need and Necessity of the Poor, nor according to their
Ability: nor is it out of Love to Christ, nor to his poor Saints neither, they
give what they do give, may be to free themselves from Reproach, or to quiet
their own Consciences. And hence it is likewise there are so many Whisperers,
Tatlers and Backbiters in Congregations, and so consequently so much trouble
and disorder in our Churches. Tho Godly Christians may be guilty of great
Disorders and many Infirmities, yet I am persuaded, were there not many false
and deceitful, carnal and hypocritical Professors, it would never be as it is.
What makes the best Design that ever was amongst us, for the promoting the
Interest of Christ, and good of the Churches, so neglected, and like to sink in
the Bud, but the great discouragement these sort of People lay it under? They
have no mind to such a good and great Work, they are for enriching themselves,
and to lay into their own Coffers and Treasuries, but not to cast into Christ's
Treasury. And this evil Example of theirs, lays a Temptation on sincere and
upright Men and Women. What do such and such do? they are far richer than I,
and they will do nothing. To these let me speak one word: Why, will you do no
more for God, because some who love him not will do nothing? Alas, you had need
do the more: I am persuaded you would not willingly be found foolish Virgins in
the Day of Christ. How do you know but these very Men shall be found to be such
who value the gratifying of a base Lust, above the discharging a holy and
acceptable Duty to Christ? who give more to deck and adorn their Houses, and
please the base Lust of their Children, than they will give to promote the
Gospel, and recover the languishing Interest of Jesus Christ that is in our
hands. And may not this be the reason our Assemblies are so thin on
Lecture-days? is it not because the Hearts of People are not right with God?
Can godly Christians be always under the same Temptation? Can Sin predominate
in them, and they act thus habitually to the scandal of their sacred Religion?
Can Sin be in the Affections of Saints, because there are some Infirmities in
their Conversations? Is not a true Child of God quickly convinced of his Fault?
and does he not straitway reform? But this is a constant course of evil, and
wilfully persisting in: nay, and ye shall incur their displeasure perhaps if
you deal plainly with them. Sure Christ is at the Door. Now the Kingdom of
Heaven may certainly be compared to ten Virgins, five wise, and as many
foolish: read the latter end of Mat. 24. and the beginning of the 25th Chapter.
Multitudes of Foolish Virgins, it is to be feared, are now got into the Church,
as Christ signifies it would be a little before his Coming, whose latter end
will be worse than the first.

This also reproves those who foment such Notions, Reproof 1.
and strive to distill them into the Minds of People that are absurd, and tend
to blind and ruin their Souls, telling them they are in the Covenant of Grace,
and Church Members, by their Parents Faith, and have the Seal of the Covenant;
yet I could never learn what it does seal or make firm to them. For a Seal, all
know, usually makes sure all that is contained in the said Covenant. Shall they
miss of the Blessings of the Covenant of Grace who have it sealed to them?
Alas, hereby it is to be feared, many think they are in a good Condition, though
never united by saving Faith to Jesus Christ. Can it seal, and not seal
Covenant-Mercies to them? Or can they perish after they are in the Covenant,
and have the Seal of it? Circumcision was a Seal, it is true, Romans 4. 11, 12.
of that Faith Abraham had, being yet uncircumcised; it was not a Seal of that
Faith which he had not, but of the Faith which he had; and therefore it could
not be a Seal to his Male Infants of the Righteousness of their Faith which
they had, being yet uncircumcised, because they had no such Faith before
Circumcision, as to believe in God, and to have it imputed to them for
Righteousness, as had Abraham their Father, to whom Circumcision was only
called a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had yet being
uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe. It was a
Seal to him of the latter Blessing as well as the former; Vers^ 13.
for the Promise that he should be the Heir of the World, the Apostle shows was
not through the Law, nor in or through Circumcision, nor had any that dignity
conferred upon them but Abraham only; which clearly shows Circumcision did not
appertain to the Covenant of Faith.

Likewise it may reprehend another sort, Reproof 2.
who tell the People, they were made the Children of God, Members of Christ,
and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, in their Baptism, or rather Rantism. O
the danger of this pernicious Doctrine! how many flatter themselves with the
Hopes of Heaven from this false Foundation, thinking they sucked in the true
Faith, and true Religion, with their Mother's Milk, and were made Christians by
a Priest's scattering a little Water on their Faces when Babes, tho they live
in all manner of horrid Sins, and are Enemies to the Life and Power of
Godliness? This is a way of making Christians which Christ and his Apostles
never taught; and it is a healing of the Hurt of the People slightly, taking
them off from seeking after Grace and true Regeneration; for if they were made
true Christians then, regenerated then, doubtless their State is good; and so
it is to be feared, thousands of them conclude, and never doubt of their
Salvation.

Moreover, Reproof 3.
it reproves all who rest on Morality; who, because they live a sober Life, and
pay every Man his own, doing justly, etc. conclude all is well, yet look after
no other Religion. And it also as much reprehends those who boast of their
Knowledge and spiritual Seize, they conclude their State is good, because
they are Members of a true Church, and have been Baptized indeed, and break
Bread, Read and Pray in their Families, and discharge all other External Duties
of Religion, but rest wholly upon these things, and never were brought to be
poor in Spirit, nor obtain real Union with Christ, but are ignorant of the
Faith, of the Operation of God. What means the Pride of some? their
Earthliness, Contention, Whispering, Backbiting, want of Love, Divisions, etc.
shutting their Eyes at further Light, and discovery of Truth? O look about you
for the Lord's sake, lest after all your high Profession and Hopes of Heaven,
you do not at last drop down to Hell.

Lastly; Reproof 4. Does God allow of nothing for Ornament? We say all immodest
and fantastical Garbs and Dresses are loathsome and to be abominated.
It reproves all such nice and scrupulous Persons, who seem to make it their
chief Business to render all odious who are not of their own fantastical Humor;
Women must not wear a bit of Lace, etc. nor a gold Ring, nor Men wear a
Periwig, though never so short and modest, (and advised to do it by able
Physicians, for their Health-sake) because the Apostle says, It Is a shame for
a Man to wear long Hair; therefore they run into Extremes, and cut their Hair
close to their Ears, and so disguise themselves, and censure others as guilty
of great Abomination, (who will not imitate them) as if the main Points of
Religion lay in these foolish Formalities and Niceties, and as if none were to
be taken for Godly Christians, but such who are just of their Height, and
Length, and Breadth, and conform to them in these smaller things (that may be
lawful notwithstanding what such say); and render those odious, who are better
than themselves, even as such, who hate Instruction, and cast God's Word behind
them, etc. These Men seem to bear the exact Image of the Pharisees of old; and
though they thus strain at a Knat, yet at the same time seem to swallow a
Camel. For one of this sort will be found, it is to be feared, guilty of horrid
Lies and Slanders, backbiting and reproaching his Neighbors, seeming to be
silled with Malice and Envy, rendering a great body or multitude of godly
Christians, as a vile and wicked People, without Exeption, because they deny
Babes Baptism, as if they were Deceivers and cursed Impostors, yet a People
sound in all the Essentials of true Religion, and of holy and gracious Lives,
See Wall's Baptism anatomized.
our Enemies themselves being Judges, and only differ from our Brethren in that
one thing which no wise nor worthy Men make absolutely necessary to Salvation.
And it is not unknown how many learned Persons, who in the Point of Baptism
differ from us, Though this Man has abused me, and my Brethren, yet I do not
think such a scurrillous Adversary worthy of an Answer.
have acknowledged that we have the Word of God plain for us in that matter:
Moreover, have confessed, Infants Baptism is doubtful, and therefore called for
Moderation and Charity. But little of this appears in some censorious Zealots;
though God (but a few Years ago) made a dreadful Example of one Man for his
evil, envious, and reproachful Pen, near this City, enough to make all to
tremble: And it ought never to be forgotten, how he abused the People falsely
called Anabaptists, in a small Pamphlet, is not unknown to many; and what
Terror of Conscience he soon after fell under, and in Despair hanged himself in
Bricklane, See the Narrative of John Child's Life and Death three or four years
ago printed.
under the sense and Aprehension of God's fearful Wrath and Displeasure; crying
out against himself, for writing that cursed Book, to the last; declaring that
his State was worse than Cain's, Judah's, or Spirah's; and that he had touched
the Apple of God's Eye, etc.

This may also reprove the Churches of Christ, Reproof. 5.
and the Pastors of them, more particularly, for their Carelessness and
Negligence in receiving in Persons: tho I know none to charge, yet I am afraid
we have generally failed herein. O that greater care may be taken for the time
to come; it is not a great Church, but a holy and good Church Christ loves. I am
persuaded it would be better with the Churches, if many were severed from them.
But O how seldom have any been dealt with, either for Pride or Covetousness* as
if we were not able to find out such Offender as well as others.

Moreover, Reproof. 6.
it sharply reproves those Preachers whose great Business it is to bring Men
into visible Profession, and make them Members of Churches, whose Preaching
tends more to bring Persons to Baptism, and to subject to external Ordiances,
than to show them the necessity of Regeneration, Faith, or a changed Heart. For
the Lord's sake take heed what you do, if you would be pure from the Blood of
all Men. We too often see when People are got into Churches, they conclude all
is well; and when Conversion is preached, they do not think it concerns them,
but others who are openly profane: and thus they come to be blinded, may be to
their own Destruction; and if their Blood do not lie at some of your Doors, it
will be well. I am afraid some now adays like the Pharisees, may be said to
compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, but when made, are twofold more the
Children of Hell than before, as our Savior intimates.

It may also put us all upon a strict Examination of our own Hearts, Examinat.
lest we should be found some of these false and counterfeit Christians. And
that we may clear our selves in this matter; Consider,

1. Were you ever thoroughly convinced of your sinful and lost Condition by
Nature, Sincerity described.
and of that horrid Evil there is in Sin? Did you ever see Sin as the greatest
Evil, most hateful to God, not only of the evil Effects of Sin, but also of the
evil Nature of Sin, not only as it has made a Breach between God and Man, but
has also defaced the Image of God in Man, and made us like the Devil, Romans 8. 7.
filling our Minds with Enmity against God, Godliness, and good Men.

2. Is there no secret Sin lived in and favored, the evil Habit never being
broke? Is not the World more in your Affections, Desires, and Thoughts, than
Jesus Christ?

3. Are you willing to suffer and part with all that you have, rather than sin
against God? Do you see more evil in the least Sin, than in the greatest
Suffering?

4. Do you as much desire to have your Sins mortified as pardoned, to be made
holy as well as to be made happy? Do you love the Work of Holiness as well as
the Reward of Holiness? Do you love the Word of God for that Purity which is in
it, as well as the Advantage that comes by it?

5. Have you seen (...) your own Righteousness as filthy Rags, and have you
been made poor in Spirit?

6. Have you received a whole Christ with a whole Heart? A whole Christ
comprehends all his Offices, and a whole Heart includes all our Faculties: Is
not your Heart divided?

7. Is Christ precious to you, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
even the chiefest amongst ten thousand? Are you the same in private as in
public? Do you love Christ above Son or Daughter? Do you love the Person of
Christ?

8. Can you bear Reproof kindly for your Faults, and look upon him your best
Friend, that deals most plainly with you.

9. Do you more pry into your own Faults, than into the Miscarriages of others?
Are you universal in your Obedience? And do you obey Christ's Word, his
Commands, because you love him?

10. Have you been the same in a day of Adversity, as now you are in a day of
Prosperity.

11. Can you say you hate Sin as Sin? Is your Mind spiritual, and set upon
Heavenly things? Do you love the Saints, all the Saints, though some of them
are not of your Sentiments in some Points of Religion?

12. Can you go comfortably on in the ways of Christ, though you meet with
little esteem amongst the Saints? Can you stay your Souls upon God, though in
Darkness, having no Light? Is all the stress of your Justification and
Salvation built upon Jesus Christ?

Consider of these few Questions, and do not doubt but that your Hearts are
sincere, when you can give a comfortable Answer to them, though it be with some
fear and doubts that still may arise in you. A true Christian is ready to
mistake his Portion, and take that to be his, that belongs to an Hypocrite; as
an Hypocrite on the other hand, mistakes that which belongs to him, and applies
that to himself, which is the Portion of sincere Christians: but Grace is like
a small Seed at first, that cannot be soon espied in the House, i.e. the Heart,
especially when there is much Smoke and Darkness yet remaining.

But may be some may say, Object.
What you have said, tends to take us off of Holy Duties and Obedience.

God forbid: Answ.
for though we would not have you rest or depend upon your Duties and
Obedience; yet let me tell you, a godly Man, or he that is a true Christian,
Mat. 5. 20.
has such Righteousness wrought in him, and by him, that exceeds the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; if he had not, he could in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

1. His Obedience and Righteousness flows from a Principle of Divine or
Spiritual Life, or from a Principle of saving Grace, or else they would be all
but dead Works; and from thence he acts and does all that he performs Godward.

2. He acts from a Principle of Faith, his Obedience flows from thence, seeing
himself justified and accepted only in Jesus Christ.

3. He acts from a Principle of Love to Christ, and is also always the same,
and for the hardest part of Religion, as well as for the easiest part of it.
Moreover, he is as careful to ^eep a good Conscience toward God, as to keep a
Conscience void of Offense, toward Men; he takes up all the Duties of Religion
in Point of Performance, though he lays them all down in Point of Dependence.
He is as careful of his Heart and Ways, that he ^^y please God, and glorify him
as much, as a Man can be that expects to merit God's Favor thereby; he knows
he must attend upon the means of Salvation, as well as to expect Salvation it
self. 4. He exceeds all others in his end, which is the Honor and Glory of
God, or to live to God on Earth, as well as to live with God in Heaven.

Lastly; How severely does what we have said look upon all Self-righteous
Persons; and those proud People that boast of their Holiness and Perfection,
that think they need no Repentance, Quakers condemned. Acts 4. 11. John 8. 24.
O that they would consider it, and tremble before it is too late, and they
perish eternally, for rejecting the chief Cornerstone. Remember, unless ye
believe that Christ is he, ye shall die in your Sins. Also it looks severely on
all formal and carnal Christians who have nothing but a Name. Alas Sirs! If the
painted Hypocrite, he that is so gloriously garnished with many great Gifts,
Parts, Wisdom, Learning, and seeming Piety, is in a damnable Condition, what
will become of you? Mourn O England* what a Number of filthy, debauched,
treacherous, proud, drunken, swearing and unclean Christians (as they are
called) have thou in the Bowels of thee? they show their Sin as Sodom, and hide
it not, and yet glory as if they were the only People of God. Awake Sinners,
before God's Judgments are poured out upon you, for certainly great Wrath is at
the Door. God has wrought Wonders for the Deliverance of this Nation, but ye
slight and contemn them: Neither Judgments nor Mercy will humble you; what
would you have, since nothing God does, pleases you? Certainly the Almighty
will not bear with you much longer, if you repent not.

But ye who are truly pious and sincere ones, Comfort.
rejoice, you who mourn for your own Sins, and for the Sins of the Land; you
are secured from the hungry Lion, your Day is coming, the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ is near, your Redemption is at hand; lift up your Heads, and praise God
for ever.

SAtan a Spirit is unclean, Sung at the Close of the second Sermon.

From whom all Filth does flow;
A wicked Heart his House has been,
There still he dwells also.
As all true Holiness O Lord,
Is from they self alone;
So we do find from thy blessed Word,
Sin's from that wicked one:
And that he in a filthy Heart
Takes up his cursed Abode;
So thou so good to thy Saints art,
In them to dwell, O God:
And that thou might Possession have,
Satan thou have cast out:
And from all Filth our Souls to save,
Strange things have wrought about.
Let such who garnished are by Art,
And common Graces, fear,
Whilst all those sing with joyful Heart
Who are indeed sincere.
Let Sinners and each Hypocrite,
Consider their sad doom;
Whilst Saints do sing, having in sight
The Glory that is to come.
The latter State of some Men will,
Be worser than before;
But Saints are happy and safe still,
And shall for ever-more.
FINIS.

