A MODEST ANSWER TO Captain SMITH's Immodest MEMOIRS OF Secret Service.

AND HIS REMARKS UPON THE D. of S -- 's Letter, TO THE House of LORDS.

Humbly Dedicated to the Right Honorable The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, In
Parliament Assembled.

By RIC. KINGSTON.

LONDON, Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1700.

A Modest Answer TO Captain SMITH's Immodest Memoirs, etc.
THOUGH the Justice of the Right Honorable the House of Peers in their
Proceedings against Captain Matthew Smith, has given an Entire Satisfaction to
all, that by examining the Stratagem, have discovered that the bottom of the
Design in Publishing his Two Books, was merely the Contrivance of a Party
against a Person of Great Honor and Integrity; yet because others, that either
being in the Party that put the Unthinking Captain, upon so Rude an Enterprise,
or that take every thing for Truth that they desire should be thought so, are
still Whispering their Discontents, and Buzzing it from Ear to Ear, that the
Captain has very hard Measure; I thought fit to rectify that Mistake, and set
the whole Affair in its proper light: Not as a Busy Intermedler in Public
Affairs, but as a Friend to Truth and Justice, that having it in his Power to
Disabuse the Nation, thinks it his indispensible Duty not to neglect this
Opportunity of doing it.

The Author is so perfect a Stranger to his Grace the D. of S. that he never
had the Honor of Speaking to him but once in his Life, and that is now about
Three Years ago, and 'twould be a greater piece of Disingenuity, than he can
believe any Man will be guilty of, to insinuate that the Author is making his
Court to the D. by this discovery of the Artifice, that has been employed to
Asperse his known Honor and Fidelity.

Nor has he any Intention to Lessen Captain Smith's Services, or hinder him
from the Just Reward that is due to them, by making Reflections upon his Person
or Conversation, any further than the necessity of speaking Truth extorts them
from him, nor will advance any thing in Confutation of his Books, or Detecting
his Criminal Confederacy, but from apparent Matters of Fact, and Irreproachable
Evidence.

I am not ignorant that this Narration is Impar Congressus, for which I humbly
beg his Graces Pardon, and entreat the Reader in Honor to make that Allowance
through the whole Discourse; but if any think fit to Chide the Undertaking upon
that Consideration, (having already confessed my Fault) I have only this Boon to
ask; That they would suspend their Censure till they have Read the Book, and
then a God's Name let them speak their Pleasure.

To proceed orderly in this Affair, I am obliged to acquaint my Reader, that
though Captain Smith's Letters of Correspondence with his Grace the D. of S, had
been long transferred from Hand to Hand in Manuscripts; yet the Printing and
Publishing them under the Title of Memoirs of Secret Service, raising all the
Clamor and Noise, that has been made about them since; it will be necessary in
laying open the Design against his Grace, and discovering the Captain's
Practices, to begin with that Book.

And herein I will prove.

First, Though Captain Smith with great Assurance, has Printed his Name in the
Title Page of those Memoirs, as Author of the Book; It was not written by him.

Secondly, That the Writing, and Giving away Five Hundred of those Books,
Publishing and Maintaining the Captain, and the Person that Wrote it, was
carried on by a Contribution, at the Charge of a Party.

Thirdly, That the very Letters of the Captain's Correspondence, as now Printed
in the Memoirs, are so Altered, and in them are so many Additions, Spurious
Glosses, and Artificial Connexions, that they cannot be said to be the same
with the Originals sent to the D, and consequently, that no Inferences can or
ought to be collected from them, to support Captain Smith's Pretensions against
him.

Fourthly, That the Substance of both his Books, generally speaking, are mere
Fardles of Improbabilities, Incongruities, and Invented Falsities.

And having dispatched an Answer to the First, I shall proceed to this Second
Book, Entitled, Remarks upon the D. of S -- 's Letter concerning Captain
Smith, etc.

The Book claimed by Captain Smith, Entitled, Memoirs of Secret Service, was
Written by Mr. Thomas Brown, a Stiff Jacobite, and a Mercenary Poet, that will
Write any thing, or against any Man for Money. And here methinks Captain Smith,
that pretends to be so stout a Williamite, has made a Horrible Blunder in his
Politics, at the Threshold of his Enterprise, in employing a Rank Prostituted
Jacobite, to do (as he calls it) Service for the Government; and I cannot get
over the Aenigma, without the Assistance of a Proverb, Like to like -- Tho some
will applaud his Judgment in the choice of such a Tool; for designing to
Calumniate an Eminent Minister, who was so fit to undertake it, as a Debauched
and Mercenary Jacobite, whose peculiar Talent lies in Scandalizing Mankind.

A Sheet of the first Impression of these Memoirs, by a Mistake, coming to me
to be Corrected, gave me the first Opportunity of Guessing at the Author.

Reading the Preface, the Paraphrase, the Observations, and the Minutes, which
almost compose the whole Pamphlet: And meeting a Quotation in Latin from Titus
Livius, to which Language I knew Captain Smith so perfect a Stranger, that he
familiarly breaks Priscian's Head in English: And knowing that he is no more
able to Write one Line of that Preface, than to run away with the Monument,
confirmed my Opinion, that Mr. Brown was the Author of it. Now

Resolving to make my self Master of the Secret, I sent for Mr. Brown to me. At
his coming, I charged him with the Fact; showed him the Infamy and Danger of
the Action, and he immediately confessed, He was the Author of the Book,
Entitled, Memoirs of Secret Service; Cursed Captain Smith, for drawing him
into a Snare, and employing his Pen to so Base a purpose, for which, he said,
he heartily Begged the D's Pardon; and by way of Atonement, voluntarily offered
to tell me all he knew in the Matter. These Words were spoken in the Presence
and Hearing of Mr. M. S. Physician, Mr. A. R. Bookseller, and Mr. B. B. Printer.

At another time discoursing this Subject with Mr. Brown, in the Presence of
Mr. A. R. he told us how bravely he Lived, while he was Writing the Book
beforementioned; and that when he had finished the Copy for the Press, and
Captain Smith being then out of Pocket, and expecting no great Sum of Money
till the Sitting of the Parliament, he gave him a Bill under his Hand for the
Payment of Fifty Pounds for Writing that Book. And now having proved this
Particular beyond Dispute, I proceed to my Second Head; which is,

That Writing, Publishing, and Giving away above Five Hundred of these Memoirs,
and the Charge of Maintaining the Captain and the Poet, while he was Writing
the Book, was carried on by a Contribution, at the Charge of a Party.

For Proof of this Particular, I must again make use of Mr. Brown, who at the
same Place, and Time, and before Mr. A. R. abovenamed, told it me, in the very
Words they are inserted in above. He also added the Names of several
Considerable Persons that were Contributers to the Charge, which I think is
neither Safe nor Prudent in me to remember: And also that Dr. Chamberlain, who
lives in Suffolk-Street, (to use Brown's own Words) was Casheer to the Party,
and sent Money to Captain Smith by his Footboy, as often as the Captain sent
for it.

Having traveled so far, and successfully in this Affair, and my Curiosity
tempting me to possess my self of the whole Matter, I soon perceived what I had
long suspected, and now am obliged to prove as my Third Particular, viz.

That the very Letters of Captain Smith's Correspondence with his Grace the D.
of S, as now Printed in the Memoirs, are in many Places altered, and so many
Glosses and Artificial Connexions added to them, that they cannot be said to be
the same with the Originals sent to the D, and consequently that no Inferences
can or ought to be collected from them, to support Smith's Pretensions against
him.

Captain Smith in April 1696, delivered all the Copies of his Letters of
Correspondence with his Grace into my Hands; and now upon reading the Book,
finding those in Print run smoother, and that they were more intelligibly
connected, than any I had read that were Written by Captain Smith himself,
without the help of a Prompter, I began to suspect some Foul Play, or Trick,
was in the Wind. I diligently compared the Written and Printed Letters, and
soon found though they are bad enough still, that the Finger of Tom Brown had
been there; for several Passages are added to those in Print, that were not in
his first Written Copies. Some flat Words were changed for better; and in other
Places whole Sentences Altered, to mend the Sense, to smooth the Cadencies, and
to make them speak more to his purpose in Print, than they did in Manuscript.
This I thought sufficient to destroy all his Pretenses to Veracity.

However, because this Proof, though as plain as Demonstration to my self, yet
was liable to Exceptions by those that favored the Person and assisted the
Contrivance.

I enquired from whose Handwriting the Letters were Printed off; and being
assured it was done from Captain Smith's Handwriting, to save the trouble of
Transcribing, I procured the Copy to be left with me, by which I soon
perceived, though the Letters were Written in Smith's Hand, yet they were in
several Places Corrected, Mended, Altered, and several Additions made to them,
by blotting out what had been Written by the Captain, and Interlineations and
Additions made in Mr. Brown's Hand, and the difference between the two Hands as
plain to be seen, as the Nose on either of their Faces: And resolving not to be
single in the knowledge of this Artifice, I showed the Copy with the Additions
and Alterations to a Minister of State; who, if there be occasion, I am sure
will do me Justice in what I have asserted.

Still methinks I hear some Body enquire, How I came by the Blotted and
Interlined Copy? I Answer:

It was delivered into my Hands by the Bookseller and Printer, when the first
Impression was Printing off; and I believe that very Copy is yet in my power to
produce, if required to do it.

After this, having an Opportunity to Discourse Mr. Brown, I charged him with
making the Alterations and Additions aforesaid. He would fain have shuffled it
off at first; but when he heard me say, I would show him his own Hand in the
Copy to prove it. He answered:

What wou^d you have me do? Smith cannot Write Sense; and I having Wrote the
Preface, made Observations, and licked over his Minutes, I was forced to stick
in here and there a Word, and now and then Usher in a short Sentence to make
his Letters speak Sense, and seem of a piece with the rest; for which Captain
Smith promised to bear me Harmless. This was spoken in the presence of Mr. J.
H. and Mr. T. W. and that it might not slip my Memory, I wrote it down about
half an hour after. And this leads to the Fourth Particular, viz.

That the substance of his two whole Books, called Memoirs, etc. are mere
Fardles of Improbabilities, Incongruities, and Invented Falsities.

To Answer the whole Books, will be the business of another time. I shall only
regard them now en Passant; I have sufficiently proved, tho he values himself
upon it, he was not the Author of it, yet to do him a kindness, and supposing
it contains his meaning, I shall treat it as if it were so, without regard to
the dismal Trunk he speaks through.

His Preface, and two first Letters to his Grace, displaies his Quality, tells
you he was of the Inner Temple, and had been Comptroller of that Society, and
then without doubt it was well governed. I think that Dignity is otherwise
called Master of Misrule at Christmas; and since his Extravagant Expenses upon
that Occasion, laid the Foundation of his Ruin, and that the Office so aptly
agrees with the Rakish Qualifications of the Person, I will not grudge him the
Honor of it.

He was also Captain of an Independent Company. p. 8.
Did Duty at Windsor-Castle, when His Majesty came thither upon the Revolution,
and would Insinuate that he was Broke for no other Reason, but because he had
been a Captain in the Late King James 's Reign; but that is a Great Mistake. He
was Broke for being an Errant Coward. For the truth of which I appeal to the
Noble Lords that Broke him. This Passage, would admit of severe Reflections
upon his Honor, for what will a Coward not be guilty of: but I will not add to
his Afflictions.

He acknowledges himself to be a very Weak Man, and I find, in running over his
Letters, that Natural Imbecility has had a strange effect upon his Memory, as
well as his Courage, as appears by the Observations following.

In the 19 and 20 pages, He says the E. of P. next to his Grace the D. of N.
was the first Person he communicated the Contents of his Letters of
Correspondence to, and that this was done in May 1696. but he extremely forgets
himself, for he showed them to Francis Jermy, Esquire and Mr. William Read, at the
latter end of March, left them three Weeks in his Custody, and put them all
into my Hands to peruse on the 23d of April, 96.

He says he had no Design to Accuse his Grace the D. of S. and in page the
26th, out of a tender regard no doubt to his Graces Honor, harrangues sweetly
upon it in these words.

I could not avoid, says he, being upon my Oath, to discover a Correspondence
between a great Minister of State and my self. That Honorable House cannot but
remember, I answered their Questions with all the Submission and Profound
Respect (Oh Fine Tom. Brown!) it was possible for me to express, in relation to
that Noble Peer. I said nothing but what I could not avoid: And I am sure no
reasonable Man will think me guilty of so much Folly, as to believe that I had
a Design to Accuse any Person, or that I would Destroy my Blooming Hopes; for
under the Circumstances I then lay, 'twas not my Interest to Oppose in the
least the Dispositions of the Court.

Poor Man! how he struggles between his Unwillingness to accuse the D, and his
Tenderness of an Oath? This was in November, 1696.

And yet almost Eight Months before, that is to say, at the beginning of April
1696. He told this Story to Mr. Jermy and Mr. Read, and prayed them to assist
him in making his Complaint to the King against his Grace the D. of S.

And on the 16th and 18th of April, 1696. Captain Smith in a Public Tavern
near Charing Cross, in the Company of Mr. Jermy, M. William Read and my Self
said, That he had reason to believe that the D. was in the Assassination-Plot,
because he having given him notice of it, his Grace had not acquainted His
Majesty with it, but went out of Town, as he believed, that it might take
effect, and therefore desired Mr. Jermy and my Self, to recommend him to some
Person of Quality near the King, that he might inform His Majesty, That by this
Great Minister's Omission of his Duty, His Majesty's Life was still in Danger:
Which he aggravated with all his Abilities, and repeated it so often, that we
were almost afraid to hear him, tho he was not ashamed to speak it.

I say Ashamed to speak it, and will leave it to the Readers Judgment whether I
have not authority to serve my Self with that Expression; for after two or
three meetings, where the D's concealing his Services, and the King's Life
being still in Danger, was the whole subject of his Discourse; and I having
promised him, if his Letters made it out, to carry him to a Minister that would
represent it to the King: I was astonished upon receiving a Letter from him,
contradicting all his confident Affirmations but a Week before; and I could not
forbear thinking, if the Devil owed him a shame, he might have took some other
time to have paid it. The Letter is dated April 21. 1696.

Reverend Sir,
I Have for 15 or 16 Months given his Grace the D. of S. an account of such
things as I could by any means obtein the Knowledge of, and have, enclosed,
sent you the Copies of the two last Letters (he sent me the other Letters April
19.) I sent to him, as being the most meterial, they being sent at the very
time the Barbarous Action was to have been committed, and I question not but
his Grace made the designed use of them, and acquainted His Majesty with the
Contents; and by that means preserved His Majesty's Person, and confounded His
Enemies, which was the only thing I aimed at.

Your most humble Servant M. Smith.


This Letter, under his own Hand Writing, I have by me, ready to produce if
their Lordships are pleased to require it; and think it is a full and effectual
Answer to both his Books; for if they labor with any design, except that of
discovering abundance of Rudeness and Ill-manners in the Captain; they contain
little else, but what he has answered himself, in the above-recited Letter, to
all Intents and Purposes.

Showing this Letter to Mr. Jermy, who first brought the Captain to me, he was
very angry with him, saying, What a Vile Fellow he is to Say and Unsay at this
Scandalous Rate, and abuse a Person of Quality? When to wipe his Shoes would be
an Honor to him.

Not long after seeing the Captain in the presence of Mr. Jermy and W. Read. I
charged him with these Ungentle-manlike Proceedings, in Affirming and Denying
in Matters of that Importance: But he thought he excused himself sufficiently
by saying, That when he wrote that Letter, a Friend had told him he would
reconcile him to the D. and put him in hopes of getting him an Allowance; but
now, says he, I see I was deluded, and I will go to the King my self, and if he
will not hear me, I will appeal to the Parliament, where I am promised Friends
that will do his Buisiness for him. This Discourse was about the 3d of May,
1696. by which, and the recited Letter, it is apparent, that all he Designs is
his own Sordid Interest. When he was in expectation from the D. then the D. did
communicate his Services to His Majesty. When he finds nothing coming, then he
changes his Note, and his Grace did not do it. Which, to say no worse, is a
manifest Contradiction, and a Satyr would have turned him out of his Cell, as
all Mankind ought to do out of their Company, for blowing Hot and Cold with the
same Breath.

Till about the middle of November following I heard no more of Captain Smith,
and then he was pleased to tell me, Mr. Jermy and Mr. Read, That he had been
with the L. C. the E. of A. the E. of P -- h and Sir W. T. that they had
promised him a Pension of Four Thousand Pounds a Year; but he mould not accept
it without a Considerable Title. He knew they intended to make him a Lord, but
he scorned to accept of any thing below a Duke. This Relation will appear
strange to those that know him not; but if any Man of Consideration seems to
question the Truth of it, they may when they please have it confirmed under the
Oaths of the three Gentlemen abovenamed.

But while we were expecting the Issue of this bold adventure, we were told
that our Captain's Blooming Hopes were Frost-bitten. It seems they knew him
better at Kensington than he knew himself, and discharged him from appearing
any more at Court: And soon after, as he says himself, all his Friends dropped
him, and I fear those that took him up since, and made him a Property to serve
their own Designs, will e're long desert him also; for that commonly is the
fatal consequence of depending on, and serving the Interest of a Party.

His Rappers are so thick sowed, and grown so Rank through his whole Books,
that I must content my Reader at present only with a few Gleaning, till the
whole Crop is fit for Threshing out, and then he shall have a large Amends. The
Captain says, that Holmes, a Proclamation-man, lay with him one Nigt, when the
Government was in search of him; but he generously suffered him to escape in
the Morning. I hope the Captain does not Reckon that Neglect, among the number
of his Services; but what is more strange, he would not earn the Thousand Pound
Reward for taking him, because he mould not betray any Body for Money. Bravely
spoken, but who can believe it, that considers how he paid his Dear Respects to
his Uncle, and there are Men of Honor that have known his Conversation from
his Coventry Cradle, that are of Opinion, The Captain would have Hanged his --
for half the Money.

To prove his ability to serve the Government, instead of Firm-ground, he lays
hold on two slender Reeds, which are too weak to bear the weight he lays upon
them; and yet upon examining, are strong enough to wound his Credit, and
destroy all his pretension to Merit from them.

His Topping Instance is from his Intimacy and Interest in one Mr. John Hewet,
who was employed by certain Jacobites to deliver their Foreign and Inland
Letters, when they durst not trust them by the Common Conveniences.

The Captain has truly described his pretended Correspondents Employment, but
trifles and imposes upon the Reader, when to make his Intelligence apappear
more considerable then it was; he is forced to set him up for a Gentleman.

John Hewet was a Poor Lad, kept upon Charity, and the Jacobites experiencing
his Fidelity, trusted him with the Delivery of their Letters; but for the
Captain to pretend to an Interest in that Boy, and in six or seven Months time
to make no better use of him; is to say he had undertaken a Province he knew
not how to manage, or in truth that he had no Interest at all in him. Had there
been such an Entire Trust and Confidence between the Boy and the Captain, as he
pretends to: Jack Hewet was able most Weeks in the Year, and almost every Day
in the Week, to have put a Packet of Letters into the Captains Hands, that
being Discreetly Managed, might have been safely returned to Hewet, and
afterward have been delivered by him as directed, without the least suspicion
that they had been opened. Such a smart touch as this had been service indeed,
and deservedly would have made the Captains Fortune; but since this was every
day in the Bov's power, and he would not oblige the Captain with it, there is
no reason to believe that the Boy would trust him with a greater matter, and
what in all probability he was not trusted with himself; for none but Fools and
Madmen, would put so many Lives into the Hands of a Lad but of 13 Years of Age.

But that which puts an End to the Captains Pretense of Corresponding with
Hewet, is, That John Hewet being Interrogated upon Oath by the Lords in
Parliament, declared, That he never Acquainted Captain Smith with any of the
Jacobites Secrets; but finding him Inquisitive, and Prodigal of his Money, he
collected News out of the Post-Boy to get some Money from him, under pretense
that it came from France.

Captain Smith was present when the Lad made this Oath; and as he made no
Answer to it then, neither has he attempted to disprove it in his Memoirs, though
he has impertinently wasted 14 Pages, in giving Reasons why he Corresponded
with Hewet; when Hewet has Sworn he never Corresponded with him. The
Competition and Credibility is to the Captain's Disadvantage; the Lad is upon
his Oath, and the Captain but on his Honor. The Captain assists the Boy with
an Excellent Character, and so gives him Credit against himself; but neither
the Lad, nor no Body else that know him, will bestow one favorable Word upon
the Captain. So that Pretense is vanished.

His next Assylum, or Argument to prove himself capable of discovering the most
Secret Caballings, and closest Designs of His Majesty's Enemies: Nay, if he
might be supplied with as much Money as he wanted, That it should be utterly
impossible for any thing, either Foreign, or Domestic, to escape his
knowledge, was, because Sir William Parkins, one of the Chiefs of the Jacobite
Party was his Uncle, and not only trusted him with his choicest Secrets, but
employed him to Court other Men to assist in the Design, take Commissions under
him; and I know not how many other Good-Morrows, as Incredible as his refusing
to get a Thousand Pounds upon a Point of Honor!

The bare recital of these Improbabilities, as they are apparent in his
Memoirs, naturally lead me to ask Captain Smith a few short Questions?

What necessity was there to be at so much Charge in Corresponding with Hewet,
when Sir William Parkins was so Free with him, that was no Stranger to all
their Designs?

What made him ignorant of the Day when the Treason was to be acted, since all
the Conspirators knew of it above a Fortnight before?

Why was he not more Plain and Particular in his Letters to my Lord D, when his
Grace and Mr. V. so often desired it? There is no question to be made but Sir
William Parkins could have furnished him with the whole Matter, and there can
be no excuse for his Non-complyance with his Grace's repeated Commands, but
that either the Captain forgot to ask his Uncle, and then he neglected his
Business: Or, that Sir William Parkins could not tell him, and then no Body
will believe him: Or that Sir William would not tell him, and then it is plain
he would not trust him; so that take it which way you please, it looks with an
ill Face upon the Captain, and he would do well to lay his Services a little
closer together for the future.

Among other Names that he gives us a Catalogue of, as his Acquaintance among
the Quondam Jacobites, he is pleased unluckily to mention Captain Porter: Let
us hear what that Gentleman is pleased to say in the Matter, whom the worst of
his Enemies never accused for prevaricating in any thing relating to that whole
Conspiracy.

About a Fortnight, or thereabouts, since, having an Opportunity to Discourse
Captain Porter, I took the Freedom to ask him, Whether he knew of any
Correspondence and Trust between Sir William Parkins and his Nephew Captain
Matthew Smith? Captain Porter was pleased* Answer,

That once, and no oftener, as he could remember, Captain Smith came into a Room
where Sir William Parkins, Himself, and others, were in Consultation upon their
Business: Captain Smith was no sooner sat down, but by a private Intimation
from Sir William Parkins, they dropped the Subject they were discoursing on, and
fell a talking about another Business: And when Captain Smith left the Room,
Sir William Parkins took that Advantage, To forewarn his Friends that were
present from keeping Capt. Smith Company, or Discoursing any of their Matters
before him. It Is true, says Sir William, I Married his Aunt, and therefore am
obliged to be commonly Civil to him; But pray have a care of him. He is a --
and a Fellow that I never trusted. This Relation, upon my Request, Captain
Forter was pleased to give me leave, if I thought fit, to Publish in his Name,
and he would own it. And after this, he that can believe any thing that Smith
says will boggle at nothing.

Another Witty Gentleman, and of great Integrity and Honor, that is no
Stranger to Capt. Smith, who will quickly tell you his Name, though I am obliged
to conceal it, told me he knew Captain Smith was the utter Aversion of Sir
William Parkins, the Scorn of the whole Family, and never fit to be trusted
with any thing that he could Tell, Sell, or Pawn for 6 Pence.

He pretends to an Acquaintance with Capt. Boys, who was some time in the
Counsels of the Jacobite Party. I asked that Gentleman what Interest Capt.
Smith had among them; but he averred he never knew him. He is safe in naming
the rest of his pretended Correspondents among the Jacobeans; for they are all
either Dead or Banished England; or there is no reason to doubt but they would
confirm the Opinion of his being a most Notorious Romancer. In short,

All his Pretenses to do Service for the Government, were but Tricks to supply
a Boundless Extravagancy. He was driven to his last Shift, his Inventions were
upon the Wrack how to subsist; and his Relation to Sir William Parkins giving
him a Color to impose upon the Government, he resolves to make the utmost
Penny of it, Trumps it up upon all Occasions, and keeps up his Correspondence
with the Duke by repeated Promises what he could and would do from that
Relation, while he did nothing but abuse and delay his Grace upon those
Pretenses, which, in truth, had Color enough to deceive any Man.

He makes no Pretenses to be qualified for this Employment by virtue of his
Understanding, and Sincerity, which is the Wisest Thing he ever discovered; for
all that have known him from his Birth, till he set up for a Memoirer and
Remarker, are sensible he never carried any such things about him: And I am not
so much surprised, to find him so early discarded by the D, as I admire it was
not done 12 Months sooner; but this must be ascribed to his Plying the D. with
large Promises in every Letter, and his Grace's Unwillingness to neglect any
Opportunity of serving the Government, where there was such a plausible
Pretense as Smith laid hold on to serve himself, and abuse the D's Candor and
Credulity by False Insinuations. However do but

Read all the D's Letters to our Captain: See the Encouragements he gave him,
if he could do Service, and if you don't discover in his Grace a continued
Series of Uneasiness and Suspicion of the Author's Veracity, as well he might
from his Arguing, instead of Informing, which only was his Duty; from his
Stuffing his Letters with Impertinent Trash, and Idle Stories, instead of Real
Services, and his promising many Discoveries, and at best giving but a Dark
sight into any thing, I will forfeit my Judgment. I have already showed what
Tricks have been played with his Letters, and now think it material to add, and
I undertake to prove it by Credible Witnesses,

That before he delivered out any Copies of his Letters, he knew from a Good
Hand, That his Original Letters sent to the D, were lost: And then what might
not a Man of his Principles do, to support his own Pretensions.

Another thing the Captain makes a Noise with, is the Merits of his Service;
which can only be known by his Letters: And though I have said enough to
invalidate the whole, by the Tricks that he has played with them, and the
Suspicion that lies upon them all, by his knowing the Originals were lost, yet
let any unprejudiced Eye View them in the Dress they now appear in, without the
Sham and Trick of Language, Ornament, and Dress, pretended Private Discourses,
Minutes, Notes, and Observations, which have no other Authority to give them
Credit, but the empty Flourishes of the Poet's Fruitful Brain, to Earn the Sum
of Threescore Pounds, and the Naked Affirmation of a Profligate Wretch, to gain
Four Thousand Pounds a Year and a Dukedom by his Services; and if he discovers
any thing in them but Impertinent Chat, Nauseous trifling with a Minister of
State, and dim Discoveries, he has a clearer Eyesight and Understanding than
other Men dare pretend to.

This brings me to take a View of his Second Book, Entitled, Remarks upon the
D. of S -- 's Letter to the House of Lords, concerning Captain Smith; being a
Vindication of his Services, etc.

A general Survey of these Remarks, without Animadverting upon particular
Instances, is enough to Nauseate any Modest Reader; for in no one Line have
they treated that Truly Great Person like a Gentleman, for which the Infamous
Poet is as much to be scorned, as the Malicious Captain, and their Supporters
and Managers.

Every Page is so besmeered with Sordid Clownery, Saucy Language, and Impudent
Reflections, that would shame any Pen, though made of Brass; or any Men, but such
a Couple of Contemptible Wretches, as have club'd their Noddles to render
themselves Ridiculous, and Punishable. There is too much in these Remarks to be
confuted, almost every Line may be disproved, or ought to be Reprehended, they
are well nigh Bursting with Stinging Wind, such as the Hackney Jade Pegasus
lets fly when he is too hard Girt upon a full Belly.

They are nothing but Idle and Impertinent Repetitions of his Memoirs, which
being answered already, I might have slighted for that reason; but since Mr.
Brown, after all his seeming Penitential Sorrow, crying Peccavi, and begging
Pardon for his first Offense in employing his Pen to so Base a Purpose, has
aggravated his Crime by relapsing into his former Faults and Follies, which no
Body will wonder at that knows his Character, give me leave to guess at the
Occasion of it, and give them both a short Answer.

Our Hackney Imp of Parnassus, that all the Vacation stands at Livery to be
Ridden by every Malicious Fop; being extremely out of Sorts, as it often
happens by his Idleness and Debauchery, and reduced to the true State of a
Heathen Philosopher: The Riding-Coat that Smith gave him when they were
Memoiring, being wore Thredbare, and his whole Man calling for Amendments, for
fear of falling into the Rag-Man's Hands, for want of Reparations; he once
more, to his Shame, engages with Smith, and all on a sudden Tom Brown appears
New Rig'd from Stem to Stern; and immediately after, out comes these Remarks to
acquaint the Town who was the Author of them.

The Captain puts his Name to the Pamphlet, and it is flourished with a
Quotation out of Virgil. I cannot but wonder at his Confidence, in pauming
himself upon the World for a Man of Learning, when he is so Notoriously known
to be one of the greatest Dunces in Nature; who if he was to Fast till he could
Construe so many Words in Latin, or Write any three Lines in the whole Remarks,
would certainly Die of Hunger:

But he has so long accustomed himself to claim the Honor of Services he never
did; that it is now grown into a Habit, and he cannot leave it: Though by his good
Favor it lays an indelible Blot upon his Reputation: For he that for nothing
has Forehead enough to own a Book that not one Line of it his own, What will he
not do when Four Thousand Pounds a Year, and a Considerable Title is to be the
Purchase of his Leasing?

I confess, the Remarks are worded to the best Advantage of so ill a Cause. The
Poet has showed his great Abilities in the Black Art of Scandal, and tricking
up other Peoples Malice into a gaudy Dress of Words, to delude the Vulgar
Readers into a good Opinion of what he is advancing. How easy a Matter this is
for a Man of Parts to do, that gives himself a Loose into the Common Place of
Railery, without confining himself to the Laws of Truth, or the Rules of
Decency and Good Manners, is very intelligible to Men of Sense: They both abhor
the Practice and make allowance for it; while the meaner sort are captivated by
the Style, and led Blindfold into Error. I shall therefore disappoint the
latter, and I hope, oblige the former by answering Matter of Fact only, without
being at the trouble to remove the Rubbish and Trumpery that encloses it.

The Preface acquaints us how provoking a thing it is to a Man of any Spirit to
be treated with Contempt; which I suppose is no new thing to him, and he has no
reason to be in such a Chafe, or Passion about it; since he never was, nor
deserved to be treated otherwise.

He is ambitious, you see, all along of a Considerable Title, and yet is angry
that his Adversaries have found a fit one for him, viz. Fool or Madman, tho
others are of opinion, he has so great an Alloy of the former in his
Constitution, that he is in no danger of falling under the denomination of the
latter: Nor will they allow it conferred upon him by the Malice of his Enemies,
since it has been the whole study of his Life to acquire the Title. They are
pleased, as a Specimen of their Good Manners, to join Quality with Insolence,
which is an Argument the Dunghill and the Tann-Fat lay too near both their
Fathers Doors, for either of them to pretend to be Gentlemen. How might I
expatiate on so fruitful a Subject; but I hate to be thought a Trifler.

He runs on with the old story of Stifling and Deprecicating his Services,
which methinks it is now high time to give over, since with all the Interest he
has with a Party to assist him, he could never persuade any body to believe,
that he has done any Service but what he has been very well paid for; and his
bold demanding and threatening for more, has made him slighted and despised by
every body.

His Insolent behavior at Kensington, caused him to be discharged the Court.
Tho he gave away some hundreds of his Books among the Honorable the House of
Commons, he could not find one Member that would deliver his Petition to the
House. He has addressed to the Right Honorable the House of Peers; and their
Lordships have commanded his Book of Remarks to be burnt by the Hand of the
Common Hangman. Whither will he go next? Are not the King, Lords nor Commons
Able to Judge of the Merits of his Service! Had he Wit to his Malice, and Power
to his Venom, he would set the Kingdom in a Flame.

I will next proceed to his Grievances, and the First that presents it self is
a Complaint, That he was taken up by a Messenger when the Plot was warm; and
this he construes as a Design upon his Person and Papers; when any thing,
besides himself, would have known, that it was to comply with his Request of
being concealed, that they did it, tho they would not trust him with the Reason
why they did it. Had he any harder measure than others under his Circumstances?
Was not Sir Thomas Pendergarst and Mr. La Rue, that were the First Discoverers
of the Assassination-Plot, taken up and committed? Was not Mr. Fisher and Mr.
Grimes that knew more of the Plot than the Captain can honestly pretend to,
taken up by Messengers, and kept sometime Prisoners in their Houses? Is there
not many Reasons to be given for these Prudent Proceedings? Well! in some
colder Clymate it is possible our Doughty Captain may come to great Military
Preferment; but certainly his Head is not long enough to make a Statesman.

In his next Complaint he Fights in the Dark, and gives us an unaccountable
Stretch of his Talent. Some Body (he leaves the Reader to Guess who) he says,
suppressed Sir William Parkin's Petition, which after the ineffectual Application
of the House of Commons, pray observe it, I had, says he, the Fortune to
prevail with him to make. What an incredible Story have we here? That after the
Honorable Members of the House of Commons, that visited Sir William in
Newgate, could not prevail with him to make a Confession; yet our Captain, that
was his utter Aversion, effected it. Can any Man in his Right Mind, imagine
that Sir William Parkins was so void of Sense, to believe that Smith could more
effectually prevail with the King to Pardon him, than a Whole House of Commons!
Away Captain! This Remark lies so Wide, and Broad, it is impossible to swallow
it without Choking. Farther, he says,

The Lady Parkins went to Kensington to give a Petition to his Grace the the D.
of N. to deliver to His Majesty. His Grace had prepared the King to Receive it;
was expected; the D. of N. sent to enquire for the Lady Parkins; she was not to
be found: yet a certain Person, without so much as a Letter to Guess at his
Name or Quality, found her, when no body else could, and sent the Lady away
full of Sorrow and Despair, assuring her it would not be received. There is
little Reason to believe the Lady would take her Answer from any Person, but
the D. of N. who had promised to deliver it, nor that any Certain Person would
suppress a Petition that His Majesty expected. When Smith told this Story
first, he laid the Blame upon the Lady for not coming to Kensington till the
Council was up, and gone, and the King retired into His Bedchamber, tho now he
lays it upon a Certain Person.

His Invention is so Barren, and he is at so great a Loss for New Matter, that
he is forced to harp upon the same Strings in his Remarks, that he had before
almost fretted to pieces, by his nauseous Repetitions in his Memoirs: His
Interest in Hewet and Sir William Parkins is still the Burden of the Song; and
yet neither in his former nor latter Book takes he any Notice, that Hewet has
denied it upon Oath, and that Sir William has branded him with a Hard Name, and
discharged the whole Party from trusting him with the Knowledge of their
Matters; for tho he was his Wifes Relation, he knew him too well to repose any
Confidence in him.

To magnify his own Intelligence, through both his Books, he undervalues the
discovery of Sir Thomas Pendergarst and Mr. La Rue, tho the whole Nation is
satisfied with their Candor and Sincerity in the whole Affair.

Upon this Head he has so remarkable a piece of Effrontery, that I cannot pass
it over without admiring at his Confidence, in setting up himself for a common
Calumniator, and one that never Starts in publishing the most Notorious
Falsehoods in the World: Such as every Eye can discover, and every Man detect
that has read any thing in these Proceedings. He was ignorant of the Day on
which His Majesty was to be Murdered, and therefore would persuade the Reader,
that the Conspirators themselves did not know it; tho you may read it in all
the Trials upon Oath, that the Day was appointed before the Date of his Letters
to the Duke; and all that were to be Actors in were enjoined to be ready on it.
But this is not what I principally intended, but that which follows.

In Page the Eighth he has these Words, Whoever will take the pains to compare
the Evidences of Captain Porter and Mr. Pendergarst with my Memoirs, will find
there a sufficient Confirmation of every Tittle, that I say: Tho he will
plainly see, that They were even then but half informed of those things which I
had long before fully discovered.

There might be some pretense for his saying he knew more of the Plot, and
before Sir Thomas Pendergarst did, whom Captain Porter sent for to Town, but a
little before the Treason was to be put in Execution; but to say he knew it
sooner, and better than Captain Porter, is to tell the World, that if he has
any Conscience, it is so Case-hardened it will boggle at nothing, and that
Beelzebub would Keck at a Story that Captain Smith makes no Scruple at. Captain
Porter and Sir William were Hand and Glove in the whole Conspiracy, and
mutually corresponded in every Circumstance. Smith does not pretend to have the
Discovery of this Plot from Sir William, but from Jack Hewet; and in short,
Smith would persuade us, that Jack Hewet knew more of the Assassination-Plot
than either Sir W. P. or Captain Porter.

He says his Grace knew what he was, and what he is, before he had any
Correspondence with that Noble Peer: I have no Faith in that Article, but on
the contrary am of Opinion, that if his Grace had known Smith's Veritable
Character, he would have dismissed him much sooner than he did; tho his Grace
could not have done it so early as he deserved it. However, since he values
himself upon being known to the D. that he may not give himself any further
trouble in publishing his own History, a Gentleman has undertaken to write his
Life, and then every Body may know him also.

The next thing he makes a Noise with, is the Merits of his Services; but since
he is unable to value them himself, what Expectations can he have from a
Subject, when his Demands are so extraordinary, that he scorns Four Thousand
Pound a Year, unless one of the most Considerable Titles of Honor in the
Kingdom be Tacked to his Squireship. But to balance the Account. He served in
Secret Service as he calls it, after he has made the whole Nation Ring of it)
full Seventeen Months, his Grand Tour beyond Sea being thrown into the Scale to
make Weight, for which he acknowledges to have received from His Majesty above
Three Hundred Pounds; which if the Proper Judges had not thought sufficient,
there is no Question but he would have received (if he had known how to ask it)
a further Compensation; and therefore he ought to have been determined by them.
This was paid above-board; but when the Captain and I am at leisure, to a^^^unt
for all the Sums of Money he ^as clandestinely received from the Party that
Fooled him into being an Author, it will surprise the Nation to hear there was
so much mischief carried on, under so Thin and Mean a Cover.

To Conclude. In his Memoirs, he says, he never complained of his Grace. In
page the 15th of his Remarks he says, he did complain of him, and that he had
reason for it, but that he did it in an Unhandsome manner, or threatened to
complain of him in Parliament, he utterly denies. And,

Yet as confidently, as he denies it, it will be proved upon the Oaths of
Three Witnesses, (when ever required) that he did do it, and that very
Unhandsomely too, as you will find immediately.

After asserting so notorious a Falsity, he Wonders that his Grace should think
it neither Safe, nor Decent, to have any more to do with him, and says, it is a
Mystery that none but the D. can unfold; but for once, and use it not, without
troubling his Grace, I will be the Captains Oedipus, and, in short, am ready to
produce the Person, that in April, 1696. told his Grace at his House, in St.
James's Square, that Captain Matthew Smith in a Tavern near Charing Cross, in
the presence of Francis Jermy, Esquire Mr. William Read and the Author, did vilely
abuse his Grace in a very reproachful Language, and said he would complain of
his Grace to the King; and if His Majesty would not hear him, he would complain
against him the next Parliament, where he was promised the Assistance of
Friends that would do his Business for him. And after this I presume neither
the Captain, nor no Body else, will wonder at his Graces Future Conduct toward
him: Who is so False and Vain a Creature, then when his Book was Printing, and
he upon the Pinn of commending his own Politics, he said in the presence of
two Reputable Citizens, That it was in his Power either to Preserve or Ruin
the Present Government at his Pleasure; with other like Rhodomontades, that I
am both afraid, and ashamed to Publish.

FINIS.

