THE SURFEIT. TO A B C.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Dod at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1656.

THE SURFEIT. To A B C.
1.
APollo was a Gentleman rather then a Physician, and yet both: I apply to you
for counsel in my malady, as a Classical Compeere with Hermes and Asclepius.
A whole autumn of hypocondraical passions and symptoms are fallen upon me,
which is a melancholy disease, and must be handled gently with preparatives;
for the humor is sturdy, and violence will rent and destroy all the fabric.
The cause proceeds from a surfeit: Of reading men and books.

I have read over your Ovids Metamorphosis; at first view I took it to be a
heap of sand without cement, all independent; but upon the review, I take it
to be the best piece of a School boy that has well labored and beaten out
only two theams. The first, Ante obitum nemo -- which takes up the whole first
half part of the infelicity of Agenors Progeny. The latter part, -- Nihil est
toto quod perstet in orb. Where the mutations and vicissitude of things are
summarily enumerate.

I have lately read Balzac, where I have been set upon the rack and torture,
expecting some high conceit, and never more delighted, then when I most failed,
admiring with others what I least understood. His Letters to the Cardinal and
Bishop seems to be a piece of David's Psalms conferd upon man for the most
excellent piece; to be a Courtier, is to be something profane. His love
letters to Clorinda sound as if they were translated out of some old Ballads,
only leaving out the counterpit play, the Ging of Rhyme. I do passionately
disaffect that trite obsolete valedure; your most humble, your tres humble and
affectionate Servant, it seems like the overworne Statute lace of your Groom
or Footman, and best befits them. In all his Letters like Lipsius, or Sir Henry
Wotton, ever grumbling and complaining of his invalitude.

I have read over Heywoods Commentaries upon Merlins, or rather his own
propehsies, until Hen. 2. days, speaking of Rosamond; so far good and true out
of the Copies of Ieffery of Monmouth and Alanus de Insulis Expositions; all the
following is false and feigned, yet a good Poet, but no Prophet. And whatsoever
is cited by our late Prognostics as pretented from Merlin, is forged and
supposititious, making new Prophesies to fancy their desires^ or sound to the
present times and histories.

I, wearied with reading books, began to study Men^ I made a Survay of all the
Gentlemen's houses, and without a pack of Cards last christmas played alone. I
see one a general good housekeeper for a very age, he keeps hospitality, pays
his servants wages quarterly: But what is the Catastrophe? He dies, his servants
have spent their Wages for their Masters honor, and their own reputation; when
they be dissolved, an habitual idleness brings poverty, misery. An other
runns in debt unto his servants; but at the close weakens, almost ruins his
own estate; here are objects of piety; pity I can not, I am not yet so weak.
An other out of an ample soul, and unbounded liberal Disposition, flies into
high exorbitances, vast expenses, but foreseeing the future inconvenience
breaks o^^ suddenly; and this is least to be lamented, for you shall only find
some Pantomimes and Parasites disshevel'd, and in short time all redintegrated.

And who gets the advantage? the Country Farmer will tell you, these great
housekeepers bring all the beggars in a Region to his parts, ^and never a one
of these beggars, but expect from us some Alms, with continual clamours at our
doors. Your private Gentleman finds the price of provision raised to a third
part, and therein suffers. And for my part, I am as afraid to lie in a great
Gentleman's house as in an Inn, besides the abatement of my content, for I had
rather be observed, then observe the will of an other.

If I look upon the Countrieman, he is no other to me then one that is borne some
thousand leagues out of Christendom, or rather men moving like trees: and if I
breath a gentle gale of a good morrow, they will move and bend with a soft
murmur. If I tread upon a dogs tail by chance, he will turn back and bite.

In these lumpish passions I have some pleasing Intervals, I can both laugh and
sleep. I take a merry book into my hand, say it be that Mortuum Caput, old
Aristotle his Organon in the bare Latin text. Oh! how I can chink at his
pretty Conceits; the burden of all his merry catches is, Necessarium enim est.
I have an other better remedy to my malady; I take a piece of that Astaticke
redundance under mine elbow, Galen de temperamentis or his Commentaries upon
Hippocrates, I Will undertake he is so tedious, that before you have read one Page
and perfectly understand it, you shall fall asleep.

For Bishop Andrews and Dr. Done, I could never conceive better of them, then
as a voluntary before a lesson to the Lute, which is absolutely the best
pleasing to the ear; but after finished absolutely forgotten, nothing to be
remembered or repeated.

I have lately made an Essay to beat out a Them tending to Papisme from the
prmitive Fathers, although I am no Romanist; The same on the contrary for the
Protestant. I faithfully searched and copied out with mine own eyes and hands
the proofs from the Authors themselves. But the term of mine intention was
this; I Am thoroughly persuaded that none of the first 600. Centurists knew
either Papist or Protestant, as questions not at all questioned at those times.
And therefore I will neither appeal to them as judges or advocates or
witnesses: But like unto Pigeon feathers of which the Optics write, the causes
of the variegations and diversity of lustres proceeds from the contrary lights,
or lookings through Mediums diversely tincted: diversity of education, and
discrepancie of the first principles instilled into each man begets a pertinacy
in Paradoxes; In these Controversies, the disputant and Latter writers wrest
the Fathers to their own appetite, making them like a Bell to sound as they
please to interpret, or like the indented January tablets which represents two
several figures at several stations, like changeable taffeties or Marmoles in a
decaying fire, every one phansies his own Phantasms.

Bless me, and far be it from me to derogate from the sanctity integrity and
purity of the Ancient Fathers, but that reading of them does conduce to
knowledge and holiness; only I averr that in our quarrels in Religion they
were neither sticklers or seconds.

Sir,
A little slumber begin,
neth to seize upon me,
and so I take leave
until I awake
Your most observant. P. K.


. 2.
HIstory -- The reading of the Jews and Romans is superlative for admiration:
and what is to be wondered at in all these except two, one David, and one
Augustus? The Country of Judea a small Canton, some threescore miles over, and
sixscore long, an other Yorke-shire^ And for their Kings they walked all in the
sins of their Fathers, and he did evil in the sight of the Lord, walking in the
way of his father: and I know not how many times repeated in walking in the way
of Jeroboam; for he walked all the ways of Jeroboam. The reading of these
Kings breeds danger; for they are for the most part writ Historically, not
exemplarily for imitation. I writ not this to derogate from the power and glory
of our Savior; For the first page of St. Matthews Gospel is sufficient for me
to give belief to his descent from David, and to believe the ten Ancestors of
Joseph supplied by St. Matthew, rather then if I had them from the Old
Testament: or rather upon even terms Saint Luke that has nothing from the Old
Testament until he come to Nathan the son of David, except Salat^i^l and
Zorobabel. From the cratch to the cross all our Saviors proceedings argued
his humility; and therefore no marvel if he was born in so base degenerous a
Nation.

For the Romans! what people more base, more subdued and enslaved! The first
ten or twelve Emperors slain by one another. The other following all
strangers; so that they have been subject, I say subdued, by all the barbarous
Nations of the world. Trajan a Spaniard, Antonie Pius a Franck, Pertinax of
base ignoble progeny, Severus an Affrican, that great enemy and emulous^
compeer to the Roman Empire; Heliogabalus an Assyriu^, AE^ilian a Mauritane,
Probus a Da^matian, Ala^^eus the G^oth s^cked Rome^ And at present they will
rather suffer the German, the Spaniard, the French, then a native Italian
Prince.

Let us examine the Authors; Livie with Holinshed and St^w I compare: Livie
sild up with the names of Consuls and Officers; and the other with Lord Majors
feasts and Sheriffs of London. Let Lipsius sum up his syllable, and tell you
of his Polybiu^, Herodotus, Xenophon, his Master Tacitus, and others, and give
you his Encomiums and Criticisms: As if all the erudition of the World was
confined to that former age: You shall find as high Polities, as gallant
elegant polite phrase, as ever Livie, or Sueton, or any of the ancient writ, if
you peruse Mariana for the Spanish History. Rosiers for the French, Cambden and
Polidore for the English, Buchanan for the Scot; of all I commend an obscure
man, Egnatius, a sweet compendium of the Empire, with a right elegant Livian
phrase.

The Abbot of Vxsperge: I believe to his age (I mean in his time) writ an
elaborate and right elegant style, though now it seems barbarous. The same I
say of Matthew of Westminster, Henry ^f Huntington, Paris the French Herald,
Hector Boethius, and Mariana the Scot, with the rest of their age. My reason,
being now translated into our modern Languages, they make perfect Language;
which in their days was dissonant to ours: my conclusion, by how much they
differed from the common Idiome at those days, they seemed so much the more
polite, terse, and gallant.

Baronius and his Contractor Spondanus for Ecclesiastical History are plain
handsome good Latin: But Functius and our renowned Mountague, the ligh^ and
honor of our Nation and age, upon the same subject writ with more grace,
magnificence and elegancy. Where I note unto you that Mountague to my knowledge
had been as voluminous as any (whose pieces I believe are extant still in
Manuscripts) did not the disingenuous parsimony of our English people hinder
the glory of our Nation in disbursing for the Press.

The Elzevirian Edition in small manuals of all the Kingdoms and
Commonweatlths to the number of about forty; Th^se are choice pieces selected
from all the best Authors: But I can not tell how the Authors will take it, to
be thus shu^^^^d and cut, mutilated, dismembered, and mangled, and thus hashed
and made into a^ Olla-Podrina, I know not how (if living) they would relish it?

Speeds Chronicle is incomparable for good; A Partycoloured Cento ( A^soni^s
never writ so good) con^ardinated from the only wits of those days; for the
compiler was taken from a Manual trade; amongst the rest the life of Hen. was
written by Doctor Barkham, in opposition or rather to suppress the same life
written by one Mr. Boulton a Roman Catholic, who did too much favor the
haughty carriage of Thomas of Becket; poor Mr. Draper had a principal hand in
composing and collecting all together.

But I have read and run over for use all domesticke and exotic Authors; I
have composed a piece, a work I dare call it, and greater then all envy own
it^ if the adstipulation of Sir Iohn-Beaumont the Father, Mr. Camden and Mr.
Seldom will take place.

The Contents a Genealogy to the Protoplast Adam, continued without any
intermission, for the most part above twenty lines, at the least with seven or
six, digested Cronologically by Centuries, to decline deceit with the
generation and lives of all the Emperors, Kings and Princes of the uuiversal
world, inoculated into my greater stemm, provided, if any history have made
mention of them. This I have writ in Latin called Eugenia. But o miserable
Catastrophe! all this was written for the honor of the late King Charles: And
since he has lost his life and Kingdoms, I must lose my labors. And my dear
child (for so I call it) begot in the vigor of my virility, which I ever hoped
should have been transanimated into an Amaranthus, shall now I fear be
Metamorphosed to the fading flower called Filius ante Patrem.

Adieu History.
. 3.
LAnguages -- English I speak, Latin I write. In the Hebrew and Greek, I can
beat out a theme and a root; Spanish and Italian I understand; and what must I
do with these languages? for the former, if I were a public professor with
an annual and life terminal pension, I could chop and change many readings, and
perhaps add amongst a thousand some new Criticisme. For the latter Provincial
languages! will you have me a translator? a thing less then my self, and an
ingenuous English soul to be a Sectarie to any foreign Nation; and privately
to make use, and assume as mine own invention any of their writings. I scorn
to be a Mango and a Plagiarie. The French language I am wilfully ignorant of,
my reason reserved. Take this excursion, the Latin within it self is a very
empty and hungry language, borrowes all his words both of arts and offices from
the Greek. Great Tiberius might have saved its complement of asking leave when
he named the words Monopoly, and an Emblem: he might needs have long and
tedious Circumquaques to express them, which after so many years are not yet
invented. I! the Latins are so ignorant, that they knew neither God, father
nor mother: and so uncivilized, that they knew not what a pair of gloves was
until they had them from the Greeks. And what beggarly, rude, barbarous
Sirnames they have for their Gentry; Fabius Piso, Scipio, Caligula, Asinius,
Goodman Bean, and Pease, Mr. Cudgel, Giffer small-bre^ks, Goodman Ass. And
moreover take notice, it seems the Venetian was bound for the repayment to the
Greek. For the Grand-seignior, and the Greeks altogether use in their terms of
War and trade the Italian stamp. The Spaniards and we, I find, have no
interchange of words either by commerce or conquest. I only find these two
words common to both, Mucho and Dozeno, much and a dozen.

But, I speak to the whole world, I have a new repertion, the Universal
Character. Neither will I rake into the great Sealigers urne; his device
required more then a Caesar to support it. I cast all up with a few Counters;
the labor is already finished; the l^arner, let him be but an ordinary
Abcdarian in his own language, may read and w^ite within two hours space any
missive letters. This I dare promise for Ten languages, if not more: The
China's have a way, so goes report, sure time and traffic had by this
transported it, if either true or seasonable: My way I could express in less
then a sheet of paper, which if I should expose to the public view, would
seem no bigger then a ballad, which not being annexed to a greater volume, my
name (which I have ever studied in an honest way to preserve, and to transmit
to posterity) this name would be lost in so small a trifle.

Music -- I do not love that one of the Seven liberal Sciences, nay one of the
four and none of the Trivials, should be made a prostitute at every door with a
Fiddler. Vocal, when I was young, I knew, but drawn from it, because those
convents begat good Company, but bad husbandry. Instrumental and Cathedral, I
have ever been wilfully ignorant of, because I have dearly loved them, and if I
had learnt them to a perfection, this sa^iety might have bred a nauseous
distaste and furfeit, as in other things, and then I had had nothing to delight
in. But, alas! this conceit has failed me, for now all Church- Music, my
highest terrene content, is abandoned amongst us.

Farewell Delights.
. 4.
BEcause Aristotle and Cicero were wise in some things, must they be Demigods
in all? perchance I can not be Aristotle if I would, and what if I could? I
wou^d not. Thus writes Peter Ramus; and what if I said as much of them, I! and
of Peter too?

They talk of Catholic doctrines, which every one is bound to believe. I know
no universals but these three. Two notional, that there is a God, And number,
one, two three, ten, twenty, etc. which has the same account amongst all men
in all nations. Numeri una est and eadem apud omnes ubique gentium ratio. You
may add to this a practical universe, your Mummarium minutum, your Gold^miths
grain (not a barley corn) which is one and same in all nations of the world
inviolate, the same stamp, the same example con^erd.

The third universal is appetite; every perfect and imperfect living creature
acquires sustenance to eat and drink. For existential or sensual, I g^ant
many, that there is a Sun that shines, that the fire heateth, etc. yet a blind
man and the Paralytick denies both.

Some talk of the virtue of herbs, others of the influence and effect of stars,
Botanology and Astrology: both vain, both false, because man is prone to
become like God to divine and work miracles, are these toys or rather pretty
conceits thrust upon u^. The Merchant to vend his druggs devises large
promises by wonders; And always observe, his last invented carries the
greatest name for miracle. Your Herbarist to beget a love to the knowledge of
plants (which indeed is commendable in it self,) but would perish, except
upheld by the vain promises of Cures^ The event indeed, which is only by
accident or imagination, has sometimes confirmed the Cure. We might spare an
abundance of Mr. Iohnsons and Mr. Parkinsons individual and accidental additons
which are only lusus luxuriantis Naturae.

Astronomy, a noble science of perpetuals, would be neglected. For I could know
the day by the rising and setting of the Sun, and Noon by the barn door or
Churchwall sufficient for use. But hope of Divination by Astrology does perfect
it to every degree and moment. I am not ignorant in the trial of both, and
therefore speak with more confidence. Passion a me! see where Mr. Doctor comes
Pelting and chasing like his Apothecary? Good Mr. Doctor a word, we know your
trade well enough; all is bnt fast and loose; Bole and Jalap, or Plantane and
Spurge will do all this. Or^ we will go a little farther and make your whole
business Addition and Substraction, both which fasting and feasting will
perform; fasting with a little barley-water, and feasting with your Aromatical
spices, Cinnamon, Nutmegs and Cloves, Wassal powder, perhaps a little black
Ambar, which are your chiefest ingredients for cordials. But now reverend Sir,
to you that understand without Sarcasmes; If you be Master of Method, which
requires long study, great judgment, a few things will suffice; neither need
ye that Emperical trash of numerous simples.

But above all in all, avoid, nay abhor the judgment of the stars; it is
abominable false, scandalous to infamy; if you but once erect a Figure for
experience, you will hear that word Conjurer, a foul stain, that all the
earth of Owburne will not scowre out.

Now comes in the four Elements, fire, air, earth, water, the Principles of
which man and all bodies are compounded. M^lum! a pox on it there is no such
thing. If indeed I were to plant my self and build a house, I would take
special care of all these, wood and coal for fire, the best earth for corn and
meddow: fair rivers or springs to have my water without charge; and a good air
for the health of my body. I would have my house not composed, but fitted with
these Elements: But to example these into the four complexions, and tell me of
temperamentum ad pondus and ad justitiam, etc. chips chips, pigeon feathers,
tricae apinae quisquiliae. I have seen tall men and low, the bright hair and
the black, all constitutions; wise and foolish, valiant and cowardish, sick
and healthful; And he that tells me the fish in the Sea have fire in their
bellies, I had as lieve they told me the Sea burnt. But we must supply you with
something in lieu of these; what say you to virtus stellaris? cast off your old
obsolete words, occult quality, Sympathy and Antipathy, betake you to
Synentebechy and Idiosyncresy, these puzzle you, and make you little the wiser;
well, I will give you an account of them the next moo^e at our Gossip Scepticks
house. But if you talk Greek, you will be discovered; betake you to the
Atlantis language for raisons in nature. Say Iliaster Archaeus, that is the
internal star, the syderian spirit, faber occultus, and that this sperma primum
or ens seminis in a grain or wheat is the 8200 part, proportio anatica. For
minerals, you may rant it over thus; concerning their generation, that they
have the seeds of Petrification, and Sal in Gorgon within themselves, dilating
the terrestrial residence by the hands of their own concretive spirit. Then
fall upon the Rabbis fifty gates of Intelligence and light. And if you fall
upon the extatique Fancy of the Oplocrisme, the Theory of Magnaetisme and
doctrine of ef^luxions, that this radical activity s^reames in Semi-immaterial
threads of Atoms conducted by the Mumial efflux, etc. wonder and amazement!
Never Abraham-man or Parico spoke purer language.

An other talks of reason; I acknowledge none, but that we are governed by
sense. One writes that the soul retired unto her self, into her self, and
reflexed by the principles of her own divini^y, sees every thing, etc. Toys,
vanities, how many thousand Chymaera's, strange forms phantomes, illusions,
does the brain retired present, which presently are vanished, when the eyes do
open and fix upon any known object: where is our faith but in our eares^ faith
comes by hearing: Ob. Yet a mad man has his sense yet no reason! It Is denied,
look upon his eyes; they stare, they roll, they are unfixt: place his eyes
firm and you rectify that which you call reason. Children have fears and
Bugbear^ in the dark; a candle does disperse them and rectify their weak eyes.
Mopsa and Philoclea have the same or equal souls, only distinguished by
breeding or their Organs of sense. I will account him a sublime rational, that
can discribe his last nights dream with all the scenes, variations, motions,
figures, colors, transactions, transcursions: And him a true rational that can
ex tempore speak nonsense; no man can do either that is master of his common
sense; But it is an other matter if any one will contradict me with his eyes
shu^, clausis quod dicitur oculis maledicere.

But I shall have such a skull of Sophisters pelting at me with their Ats and
Ergos^ Aristotle and Keckerman hooe eaial raonale. Good boys be a little
patient, I will rectify your Masters. Logicon and Logica are the derivatives
of logos; Logos is sermo as well as ratio, or number, so that you may define a
man to be a living creature that can number^ where as no other Creature can
number except man. But rather homo est animal orationale, man is a creature
that can speak. We have no other definition of a dog, but that he is a
four-footed beast that barks; a cock that he is a feathered fowl that crows; a
partridge Jeukes etc. The Latins from the Greeks have a more ready expression
for the inarticulate voice of every creature and fitter for definition. Cer^us
glocitat, Lepus vagit, L^pus ululat, Vulpecula gannit, Mu^ mintrat, perdix
cacabat, accipiter pipat, Milvus lipit, Passer pipit, Regulus Zinzilulat, etc.

An other talks of Seven Planets; amongst these Mercury; I acknowledge none
such, nay I deny him. I never saw him, though early and late I have waited for
him. Nay, no man ever saw him. Origanus and ^rgalus our only two Ephemerists
differ twelve degrees in their Calculation, others seven; when as in others
they miss not a second third or tenth. Now my merchant Mercury ( Mercuricus
dicitur a mercibus) is never 27 or 30 degrees from the Sun; and if he be within
15. he is combust and invisible; by this consequence, when and where must I go
seek my stilbo? And what a ridiculous thing is it, that Mercury never being
above 27 degrees from the Sun (called his maxima distantia) should ever
appear, when the Moon a more glorious body, more diaphanous, and more capable
of luster, never appears until the prime, which is about three days after her
departure from the Sun, and is near or about 36 degrees. An. Do^. 1652. Ian.
25. 26, 27. Venus and Mercury conjunct, all clear evenings, Venus most full of
luster; no other Star appearing near her by ten yards in the eyes Computation,
Anno praedicto May 18 8. ^. no appearance of Mercury, their distance 23
degrees. But then you will have me take one of the days out of the week, and
mark Wednesday with a black coal, and brand all antiquity with ignorance. No,
we will find a supply, neither assume any thing to^ our own invention, but
revive antiquity; I have found out an other Mercury retired into his far
recesse. Your stella Crinita, your blazing star, your Comet, he bears the same
office of Secretary or Herald to denounce war, never above 60 degrees from the
Sun, sometimes before, sometimes after his master; sometimes visible, more often
not appearing, yet always in being. Read with me the part of Albohazen par. 8.
lib. compl. in Iudic^ stella^um in revolutione annorum mundi, cap. 32. p. 94.
Scias etiam quod cu^ Comet. etc. Know also that when a Comet shall appear in
the ^Revolution of the year, or in any quarter, or in any sign, the occasion
will be according to the place of Mercury in that year: if he be oriental, it
will be oriental; if occidental, the Comet will be occidental, and it will be
removed when Mercury shall be combust: Ptol. tract. 2. c. 9. the Star with a
tail is assimulate to Mars and Mercury in nature.

An other spetious presumption. Hermins amongst the Armorists are derived of
Hermae, squared stones which did resemble Mercury, or Hermes without a head to
adorn Sepulchers, so that every spot should stand, for a Hermae containing the
images of Ancestors: our blasing Star or Comet represents this Mercury with his
flaming hair thus

The Israelites knew this indicial Mercury in their passage through the
wilderness ( Exodus 13.) when the Lord went before them in the night in a
pillar of fire; And the Magi in the new Testament were guided by the same.
These in memory or in semblance of the Mercuri^l statues, were fixed in all high
ways to point the several passages.

Sir, Still these are directed to you whose absolute dexterity and judgment is
able either to create a new opinion in me or perfect our proceedings. I hope I
shall take good rest; till morning I humbly take leave.

. 4.
UPon a slumber a rough Su^vay fell upon me, of the fashion of ages, and
diversity of Church governments: how sacred and superstitious the ancients were
in the number of their prayers, their Pater Nosters; How Idolatrous we are
become to the number seven in Idolizing a Sabbath, with two s^rmons and long
conceived prayers. In Q Elizabeth's time when religion was in her purity, even
at very Court a few lent Sermons served the turn: But both these in their
extremes may be moderated; and if we did well consider the 6. of St. Matthew,
we ought not to be Battologists, and Polulogist^, like the Gentiles thinking to
be heard for their much babbling: But this mine opinion (God reform me if I
think amiss) Our Father, or rather the Lords prayer once repeated with a true
submission to the ordinance and a mental energy, we shall have all things
sufficient granted, for so the text promises, for the Father knows whereof
ye have need before ye ask of him. And the particle (...) is derived from the
primitive (...) quasi (...), i.e. ipse; the adverb hoc, idem the same, not
varied with a periphrase hoc modo, and the Greeks will admit of such adverbs as
the Latin do not, you may force one, ipsissime. The Eucharist in the Primitive
Church was celebrated with only repeating the Lords prayer. St. Luke has (...)
say, and no more.

The numerous volumes of the primitive Fathers (in this doubt in reverence I
spare to name them) but let it be Plutarch or Pliny, I much amaze at them; all
the s^eep-skins in a Region will not make Parchment for one foul Copy, 3000 at
least. In so much that I believe, that posterity using the Criticisms of
comparing styles when the phrase did symphonize, did bestow other men's writings
to other Authors Classesses of most renown.

I could name some in these our very days that have written styles masculine
and sinewy; Their method, matter and conceit, rich, pious, reserched: But I
find upon every occasion, they are pressing into the Press, and so become
exhausted, grow enervate, ^laccide, have not their pristine vigor and
vivacity. I Will pass them by, and only meddle with them whose ashes are covered
in the Flaminian fields; such in times past was Barnaby Rich the Phi^o^ogist
with his Motto Malo me divitem esse, that boasted, this was the 36 book writ by
the Author. Or old Mr. Barnard of Odcomb the Theologue, that upon every
occasion of controversy offered in those days (which were many) would ever be
sure to be bobbing into print. These were accounted in those days rare men, but
now an act of oblivion has passed upon all their works; And what style and
Authors the future age will produce, and whether they will be perpetuate, shall
nothing trouble me.

Bellarmine and our Countriman Stapleton with some other Schoolmen, I have read
some part of them (though but little) or run over. Voluminous men farced up
with authorities, and fathers gathered to their hands, of which if they were
divested, they would appear but poor naked Sceletons^ Let them lie aside;
versing with Papists and Pitch are alike.

Knoxe the Scot (an argument drawn from the notation of the name) his
Discipline has begot so many knocks that I absolutely renounce him.

The Attick Archeologist (full of reading, pains and learning) has molded up
a piece of Antiquity, extracted for the most part from the Poets, Ly^ophron,
Sophocles, Aristophanes, Enripides and the Scholiasts, and obtrudes upon us
these to be the general customs of the Athenians: As if one in future age
should make all England in ages past to be a Bartholomew^ Fair, because Ben.
Johnson has writ it. Or that the condition of all our English women may be
drawn out of Shackespeers merry wifes of Windsor; or the religion of the
low-Countrimen from Mr. Aminadab in the Alchymist. Or from Massingers Mr.
Greedy, a hungry Justice of Peace in Nottingham-shire: Or Will-doe the Parson
of Gotham the Condition of all the County. These may be applied to Rosinus and
Goodwins Roman Antiquities.

Oh! my left side! now I quarrel with mine old shoes Antiquities; for why
should I value them better then my new ones? only they will serve to burn by
the fire side, and save my shins, rather then walk abroad a la-mode according
to the times.

For Armory and Algebra, I leave them to great men; by the arms in a Church
window they may know the tenure of lands; by Algebra the value of their Leases
and moneys.

Hold me not vain glorious; I speak it to my shame; Ptolomies, Copernicus,
Scenerus, Q. Elizabeth's the Prutenick tables, Tycho I have calculated by them
all: Vain man that I am, I was not born to that fortune to be a mere
contemplative man; And the Period of these Sciences is to make a ridiculous
Almanac, or calculate a Nativity, full of pains, full of falsehood, docti
errores, mendacia deliciis plena, operosi ^ndi, and to the prudent --

And for Geometry and Trigonometry how ravishing soever in the reading, I was
not born to so low a fortune as to lead the devil in a chain.

The art of Shadows I know well, and have added new repertions to find a
Polaritie by the Suns ray, to know the less then a minute by a Horizontal; to
take the altitude of the Sun or stars exactly by a house end: Simple man that I
am (quoth Caxton) these are fit for none but a brother Squire of the
Clock-house to attend Bow-bell.

I have read some part of the translation de ovo, and the generation of
Animals; exquisite bawdery; the man is horrible obscene and scurrilous, yet
with the laws and rules of nature, he is mad with reason, and maintains
Aretinisme in the abstract by the highest Philosophy. Had they kept it locked up
in the Latin Vestery, and none but the Arch Flamines of AEsculapius his Temple
to have entered into it, the piece had been incomparable.

Your Roman^es and Gazettes are the only harmless useful readings; there is
pleasure in the reading, and nothing to burden the memory after: For to speak
the Archadias Phrase, is an affectednesse distasted by all, and to relate a
story from thence is ridiculous to the prudent; only you may say such is a
pretty piece, and such a pretty passage.

I could save you a great deal of labor in buying and reading your Critics or
Comments upon any Authors, Servius, Beroaldus, Agellius, Varro, Vitruvius,
Julius Pollux,; your Civilians de rerum and verborum significatione, Vlpian,
Terentius, Cicilius, Martianus and a 100 more. You may find all these gathered
together in a handful in Holyocks Dictionary.

Oh! how the wind rise^h and fumes into my head? your Statute books, your Laws
civil and common, you may lay them aside: for every quarter we have a repeal;
and why should I read them, when they will not serve for practice?

For your ^hysitians and Philosophers, I find them all to be but Friday
mornings, and Sundays in the afternoon, nothing but repetitions and
elutriations: Only sometimes varying the method, and sometimes the Phrase, and
many times like Plagiaries stealing whole pages without commemoration of his
Author. And it will anger a man that within less then an age Burgerdicius
should shoulder out my old friend Keckerman, And Sennertus my dear Fernelius,
and my illuminate Doctor Leonard; what hopes of eternity shall our best Authors
have?

I compare Virgil and Silvester, and write them absolutely the best Poets in
their respective languages: Silvester had all from Dubart^^^ Virgil from Homer^
if my assertion fail, Macrobius will attest it^ Homer from an Egyptian Poet,
and Du^bartas from an old Latin Copy which I have seen, composed, as thought,
by some religious man in a riming hexameter.

I far prefer Homers Ulysses before Don Quixot, as the more exquisite piece of
Drollery: Besides, the phrase in the bare Latin translation runns like a
smooth blanck Jambick with a Mystic concealed number.

There Is an old School-book lies by there, you may know it to be bound in a
sheepsskin by the mouldinesse, a neglected thing; But take it up, perhaps it
may be the pelt of the Golden-fleece; ^Tis Palingenius. If you aim at the
height and pitch of humane learning, prefer him before Agrippa, Geber de
Fluctibus, Lullius, Libanius or Hermes, to conver^e with Angels, to attain to
the Philosophers stone, the universal medicine, the Elixar; in his Capricorn
and Pisces he excells them all (so by relation given me, and commended to me)
But, good faith I confess though I have read them over, I understand none of
them.

Sir,

A little rest. And I beseech you let your fair white hands be the milken way
in this our lower sphere, whereby these may pass to our lesser Gods. If you
present it to the illustrious and illuminate, if they but cast one ray of their
splendour upon it, it may uncloud all mine enveloped Melancholy, and produce in
me better thoughts.


. 5.
OH! now, now comes the torture, now my allegorical headpiece is rent with
Scotoms. A relapse of the Surfeit of men. I have exposed my self to all sorts
and conversed with them; The illiterate and Proselite in humane letters
understands me not; the learned will have the same liberty to reject me, or
aspire to the same kind of Tyranny to usurp over me, or rather a livid passion
will possess them; or at least that they know more and better things
themselves: Alas! the whole Island of Anticyra brings not forth medicine
sufficient for this mischief, though applied by Melampus hands; I must apply
to mine own remedies. Abstinence in the first place; hereafter farewell men,
farewell books, only some elect and singular reserved.

The Parergon is past the result follows (...).

Postscript.
Zoili Collyrium Nardinum and Zoili Collyrium Nicarium are two of the best
washes for dimm sighted decaying eyes, and old ulcers.

P. K.
Written by the Author of this sentence, Philippi Triaconta-Syllabon';
Neminis sanguinem pro mea religione effundi cupio, praeter salvatoris nostri
Jesus.

Cognomen alias quaere

The second reading, an additional Survay of Men. Of the decay of Learning. A
Letter written in an Exotic Language to Seignior Giovanni Iunctino, and
Metaphras'd into our modern times.
MY dearest Iunctino, living, in a manner, out of the Pale of Christendom,
where I only see men walking like trees, I wearied my self with close scrutinie
into the c^use of the decay of Learning and contempt of Learned men.

In the first place I found this decay to proceed from want of flattery.
Mistake me not! Adulation is a general term for complacency, and blandishment
(so says our great Master of the Sums) To commend a man, if not according to
what he is, yet according to that he should be: not so much to praise him, as
to provoke him to make himself worthy of such praise. To delight a man
disconsolate with a tender collubencie least he faint in tribulation, these are
an act of friendship, a laudable virtue which we call Eutrapelia, Candor,
affability; Society and conversation cannot subsist without delight. If
Eutrapelia after the Ephesian Dialect be taken in the worser sense, let
Eucharistia take place, a grateful recordation of good turns

The Romanist has a superlative way of exalting his party: if the man be dull
and cloudy, slow in expres^ion; oh! he is a sanctisied man, wrapped with
Enthusiasme, drawn into himself with ecstasies, ravished with divine afflation,
and struck into a transport. If of more loquacity: he is the sword and target,
an Achilles of the Cause; he forms all his notions into a Syllogistick
Pyramid, and smites with the point; he has an Herculea^ Energy of some
Chemical Panchreston. If his parts be more eminent; no man speaks more
waightily, more concisely; his prevailing eloquence consists in his own grace,
an exalted Charact: is this all? no! He is the light of his nation and the
Christian world; the Exemplar of Sanctity, the Salt of the people, the Doctor
of the Church. Nay, if you find him in a Tavern or a Brothel house, Saint Mary
Mawdlin must be converted: and our Savior frequented the assemblies of
Publicanes and sinners, Nay! their Region is so full of Deities, that you may
find sooner God then a man amongst them. They ascribe larger Horizons then
their Circumscription requires, and the people receive them with amplification
more then a reality will well admit. I have known by experience a renowned
Knight sometimes waving or palliating his religion; who when he was a Romanist,
was accounted a Vatican of all the faculties, in whom all vigor of invention
and judgment had filled up all numbers; But after his revolt was reputed as a
fellow full of fungous and empty inflations, a terra damnata, no salt, no
nitre in him: But upon his return again to his mothers lap, he became a
competitour with Adam in his state of innocence.

Now review what stigma's they have for the Adversary the Protestant. If a
temperate man, you shall find his judgment faint, obscure, imperfect, all his
expressions want Sunshine. If of more language, a fellow made up of puffed past
and cork; he has an affected sprucenesse of speech, an infatuated Salt.

Run over with me now the other extreme, what a blandishment and Palliation
they have for their rude and horrid absurdities. If he have a confident
presuming garrulity, such as play a Geneva gigg upon the Scotch small-pipes
without a Muzzle; Oh! say they, quench not the Spirit. If he be a Saint new
dubd of the last edition, whose Asteriske is this, one that is drunk with the
violence of selfe-action and singularity, of a turbulent spirit, a lunatic
conscience and splen, a seminary of seditious motions and reprovings, A Bull of
Basan bellowing and beating with his fore-hoof, an Eager from Humber, an
Hurrican^ and Whirlewind storming all before him: what say they? He is a
Boanerges, a son of thunder.

Now how faint and frigid are we amongst our selves! we quarrel with an
Emphasie or letter; whereas these are many times rather voluntary errors,
disdaigning pedantick trivials by a generous carelessness. And if he be some
eminent man, we discourse his wisdom in dividing, his subtilty in arguing his
researched conceits, we wind him up with a Periphrase, and transfigure him to
some higher region: Then comes in this particle of three letters, BUT; worse
then Plautus his trium literarum, worse then the Hebrew Tau, the Greek Theta,
or the Latins black Checker and Cole, worse then our Criminal stigmaticks at
an English arraignment. T.R.F. and disjoynts all, dismantles all, blurrs,
blots, dashes all out, and at the highest Careere, like a resty Jade, makes a
full stop, and casts his rider. And in this we see how implacable we are in
other men's errors, and insensible in our own detractions. I Will give you some
instances. If the man be of temper mild, and timorous in his Message from his
Maker, that durst not trust his own extemporancy, but consults with his
remembrancer, his book, extracted from the best Divines, and digesting his
notions into a Congenial coalition, from whom you may hear things choice and
pertinent, succinct, and depending, all apted to the occasion, season, auditor,
how disingeniously will his friend come off scattering these words, He Is a
pretty man, but I could read as good a piece out of Dr. Andrews, or Mr. Perkins
Sermons: An other thus, If his notes were lost, where was all his learning? If
a man have Emphasie and Elocution, whose conceptions and delivery receive
Spirit and Luster from each-other, whose gesture breathes out living passions,
and whose vocal hands reign in men's affections, and inspire his auditory; in
whom you may find a continued strength without deficiency, without inequality:
How comes he of? His classical friend will cry out he is a Drammatist, fitter
to personate upon a Theater a Cassius or a Cataline.

Will you have me then Sum a perfection in one man, and give you an exemplary
Idea for all men's imitation? It is impossible, I must borrow an abstract from
that Lystrians Mercury that elect vessel, his words: Spiritual gifts are
diversely bestowed: The ear is not the eye, the foot the hand; follow after
love, it envieth not, it thinks no evil; in this love (my dearest Iunctino)
let us concenter: let every one share his part, if not ad pondus, yet at
justitiam. He can not be so bad, if he be my friend, but I have something good
to say of him: and if we do ^lip in our expressions, let us rather commend his
pains then blame his deficiency. To the wise it will seem a friendly error,
to intimate, if not what he is, yet to others it will appear what he ought to
be. Ever declining the two shelves of detraction and blandishment; blandishment
that sinister Genius of flattery, a vice that humors with intent to gain, to
nourish vice, or fraudulently to hurt.

FINIS.

