A Sermon ON The 30th of January, BEING The day, on which that Sacred MARTYR,
King CHARLES the First was murdered. By JOHN KING D. D. and Dean of Tuam in
Ireland.

Lamentation 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our head. Woe unto us that we have
sinned.

London, Printed for John Playford at his Shop in the Temple 1661.

LAMENT. 4.20. The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken
in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the
Heathen.
Public Calamities charge every man with a rate of sorrow proportionable unto
the tenure of his Understanding, put him upon a serious enquiry of the Causes
and Consequences of them, and exact from him a diligent provision of means to
stop, or divert them: Calamity, like the flood, is now lifted up above our
Earth, and has almost covered the highest Hills of our temporal felicity;
could our sorrow swell as high, as that the sense of our present and impending
miseries would drown us; if we search into the causes of them, we shall find
those in our selves, [ our sins] their sad consequences are by so much the
superabounding matter of our just fear, by how much they go beyond our
knowledge, nay, even conjecture, and all our power to prevent them: such is the
inundation of miseries now prevailing over the three Kingdoms: Would you see
the head of these overflowing Cataracts? this Text will make the discovery unto
you, The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their
pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the Heathen.

The Words are the groundwork and foundation on which the Prophet Jeremiah
raised the whole sorrowful structure of his Lamentations, composed on the
mournful Obsequies of the best of the Kings of Judah, Josiah, 2 Chr^ 35.25.
(hurried away by a violent and (unto all but himself) untimely death) made a
mourning Ordinance for Israel, Calvin*
and enjoined as the signal expression of their grief, and deep sense of the
future, numerous and unavoidable Calamities would by his death befall them;
Judah's sins having provoked God unto so speedy execution of those Judgments
formerly denounced against them; that they might not longer plead the
privileges of their Princes piety to reprieve their punishments, 2 King 23.25,
27.
God removes this remora unto his justice (their good King) from them; Lam. 2^
that he might bring upon them the fierceness of his great wrath, he plucks
down their hedge and fence, their devout Prince from them, that he might rush in
upon them by unexpected judgments to destroy them: there lies not among all the
files of sacred Records an evidence of so exemplary and princely Piety, as King
Josiah, Like unto him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to
all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him; yet the sins
of his People drew upon him a violent death acknowledged worthy of a longer
life; the peoples sins put the religious and deserving Prince into the toils
of his persecuters, they hunt after his precious life, and he falls into their
pits.

He who stood in the Gap to hinder the way of the Destroyer, that bulwark that
stood betwixt them and the furious batteries of Gods wrath, was now torn down;
just cause then had the Prophet to fear the sharp assaults of Gods judgments,
ready to storm the Kingdom of Judah, and to break out into this dolorous
Lamentation, (as pointing at the spring and source of their sorrows and
calamities) The breath of our Nostrils, etc.

How is the happiness of a Kingdom twisted with the welfare of a religious
King? how close does the ruin of a people follow the loss of a pious Prince? A
good King is a Rampire and security unto his Kingdom, that being slighted, the
destruction thereof is an easy undertaking; yet who so apt to sap and
undermine these their own fortifications, as the people themselves? -- foelices
nimium bona si sua norint, Sufficiently happy if they knew the things which
belonged unto their welfare; Sufficiently happy, if they were not so
industrious to make themselves unhappy; Josiah was the best of Princes, yet by
the sins of his people, pushed into the fatal pits of his Adversaries, and
his fall proves the utter destruction and downfall of the people themselves;
this Consideration makes them mourn for their deceased King, weep Elegies and
lament thus, The breath of our Nostrils, etc.

A spreading and thick Cloud, whence lasting showers of tears might continually
descend, That the breath, etc.

The words (not to torture them) offer unto us two things,

First, Gods Letters patents of the royal prerogatives, and beneficial
privileges granted unto King Josiah, and that in these 3 eminent and
significant expressions: 1. He was the breath of their Nostrils. 2. The
Anointed of the Lord. 3. Of whom they said, Under the shadow of his wings they
should live among the Heathen.

Secondly, there is the Nulling of these letters patents of Josiah, He was
taken in their pits, God by a violent death reversed them.

The Prophet and people of Judah well knew the sacred and royal prerogatives of
their deceased King, yet acknowledge these glorious privileges taken away by
his death for their punishment.

The breath of our nostrils, an high and emphatique expression, borrowed from
the chief and choicest work of the Creation, Man, Genesis ^
whom when God formed out of the dust of the earth, he breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and he became a living Soul; thus contriving
within this trunk of dust and clay the inimitable hability of his own deity,
and from him is this significant and effective operation; in an inferior and
remiss degree attributed unto his Vicegerent King Josiah; that as in the
natural body, Life, and all the animal faculties and principles of action, owe
their Original unto the infusion of Gods breath, the Soul: So a man; a Subject
considered in a politic respect, has the life of his Civil Constitution from
the King; and as the rational faculties planted in the Understanding, Memory,
and Will, are from the Soul; so the religious actions of men refer their growth
unto the Prince, (...). 13.3
in which respects is it, that the King is termed (...), the Minister of God;
^ab. ^ 16.
an august denomination, implying him the chief Officer for the exercise of
sacred Jurisdiction, great in regard both of the Author thereof, God; and the
end thereof, Man's good. This royal Jurisdiction consisting in the Legislative
and Executive power of Kings, to make and execute Laws, for regulating the
actions of men as well in the outward and religious worship of God, as in civil
conversation; that as the Soul is the fountain of corporal motion and rational
action; so the Laws, divine and humane, (of which the King is the proper
Custos) are the beginning and rule of all civil and religious actions; and as
to make Laws is the life of authority, so the execution of them is the life of
the Law: Herein a pious Prince being eminently the representer of his God, and
may be said, the breath of his Subjects, (as unto their civil and religious
life) in making and executing such Laws as may dispose them in order unto God
and salvation: But this divinely alluding and cryptick similitude, appropriate
unto a pious Prince, ( to be the breath of our Nostrils) has not a more lively
fea^ure of divine resemblance, then the vigorous exemplarity of personal pie^y
in the Prince himself; his example giving life, reputation, and luster unto
Religion; in which sense is it, that a King is termed, ^am. 14.
An Angel of God, the light or Candle of his people: ^am. 21.
from all these Considerations, good K. Josiah was justly acknowledged, the
breath of their Nostrils, he restored the Law even lost, punished and
extirpated Idolatry, settled the Church, restored Religion, encouraged the
Priests, judiciously ordered the whole service of Gods houses and for his
personal sanctimony (besides these Acts of royal prudence and zeal) the Holy
Ghost affords him this great and gra^ious testimony, ^hro. 27.
that his heart was tender, and that he did humble himself before God: his
chief care and solicitude was to decline those things that would offend God,
and preserve his Conscience a clear, and unspotted glass, wherein the glorious
Image of divine holiness did show it self transparent in the whole conduct of
his actions: yet this great and royal pattern of piety, the life of their
Religion and Law was taken in their pits, for the sins of his Subjects he fell
into the fatal snares of his Adversaries; yea notwithstanding he bare yet a
mo^e visible cognizance, and livery of Gods own divine and supreme Authority,
being

The Anointed of the Lord, Gods Christ, sacred by holy Unction unto God: Unto
no material thing has God fastened such significations of his Graces unto
mankind, as unto Oil, the whole influence of Gods jurisdiction over man, being
(as the most lasting pieces are drawn in Oil) represented unto us by a
mysterious application thereof, through Unction therewith, of those unto whom
God has by a deputation conferred the great and chief Places of Trust for the
exercise of his supreme power over mankind, as the Kingly, Priestly and
Prophetic Offices; they whom God had delegated unto these subservient Offices
of Supreme Authority, and constituted his own Underofficers, having the
Warrant for the execution of their Places signed by the outward Act of sacred
Unction.

^. Ecc. ^. 1.
The Title Anointed, says Eusebius, is of great reverence and glorious,
delivering types and symbols of heavenly things, and secret images, and
representations, full of mystery. But whereas Priests and Prophets in Scripture
are barely called Vncti, Anointed; for Kings the style always runs, Vncti
Domini, the Lords Anointed: God having given unto Kings by a more immediate
consignation, greater relations, and proportions of his power, than unto either
the Priest or the Prophet. Kings were by divine instinct of God, Eusebius. supra.
unto his Prophet anointed with Oil and made Christ's, or anointed; that they
should resemble Christ, because they by themselves resemble the image and
figure of regal and principal power, which is seen in the only and true
Christ: So Saint Augustine speaking of Readiness Unction, which made David fear
even to touch him, says, Oleum illud, Civ. D. ^ l. 17. c. ^
etc. mystice accipiendum and magnum Sacramentum intelligendum est: That Oil
with which Saul was anointed, and from that Crisme or Unction was termed
Anoinned, is to be understood mystically, and is a great Sacrament, (so the
Ancients usually termed the representations of things holy.) When Sylvester the
Bishop of Rome anointed Constantine, Consignationem Spiritus Sancti adhibuit,
sancti Chrismatis Unction, dicens, signet te Deus sigillo fidei, In nomine,
etc. says the Author. He gave a Consignation of the Holy Ghost, by the Unction
of the holy Oil, ^ Vet. ^cil.
saying, Almighty God imprint in thee the seal and character of his faith, In
the name of the Father, etc.

Now the plenitude of the Regal power derived from Unction, is visible in
these proportions of similitude:

1. Unction conferred upon them, Vim supereminentis Domini, the power of
absolute and supreme Authority; ^^eum ^num ^uid ^ficat, ^ibus (...) hu^^bus
^remi^ Aug. ^^rb. D. ^ 23. ^e. 8.4. ^t. 2.
Oil denoting Sovereignty, in that being mixed with any Liquor, it maintains a
superiority in the supernatation, appearing still uppermost: the Exercise of
which supreme Authority consisted in the making and abrogating of Laws Civil
and Ecclesiastical, (which in matters indifferent, and not against the clear
evidence of Gods word) should bind the Conscience; David, Solomon, Hezekiah,
Socra^ proae. l. 5.
Josiah, ordered the Affairs of the Jewish Church; and Socrates tells us, that
after the Emperors became Christians, matters of the Church wholly depended
upon them, and that it was by their summons and pleasures that the greatest
Counsels were called, and therefore Constantine the Great would usually say
unto the Bishops, Vos intra, Eusebius. vit. Co^ m. l. 4^ 24.
ego extra Ecclesiam Episcopus a Deo sum constitutus, ye are Bishops within the
Church, and without the Church I am a Bishop appointed by God; he was Communis
Episcopus, the common and ecumenicall Bishop in his Empire.

It gave them power to denounce War, the merum Imperium, Romans ^ 4. P^al. 47*
Cont. Faust. ^ Mani^. 2^. c. 7*
and absolute power of the Sword, being his from God. Ordo ille naturalis
mortalium paci accommodus hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli authoritas atque
Concilium penes principem sit, even natural order accommodate unto the peace of
mankind requiring this, that the power of making War rem^ins wholly in the
Prince: which when the people usurped, we see they were punished, Numb. 14.44.

3. To conclude peace and make Confederations and Leagues, as King David and
King Solomon did: ^m. 10.
the Olive from which Oil comes is the Emblem of Peace and Unction, ^ngs 4.
notably insinuates those ready inclinations and endeavou^s in Kings to procure
the peace of their Subjects; ^ngs 5.
^ngs ^.
and in order unto peace to make Cessations and Truces, which when broken even
by D^vids General, he was sentenced as for murder. ^hron. ^, 9.


4. The free Election of their Servants, and disposition of all Offices in
Church and State.

5. To pardon unto Offenders their lives, 2 Sam^ 4. 1 Kin^ 27. Esth. ^ 1 Kin^^
Acts ^ 10.1.
reprieve or to punish them with death, as in Joab's and Shimei's case.

6. To receive Appeals from all other Judicatures, that absolute submission
unto the supreme Magistrate being taught Christians, (as Polycarpus the holy
Martyr and Bishop told the Proconsul) which brings no hurt unto the salvation
of our Souls and Religion. Eusebius. Hist. l. ^ c. 14.


And from this divine signature of supreme power in Kings by Unction, flows
their indemnity and inviolability in word and deed, they are not to be smitten
even with the tongue, much less the hand: Against thee only have I sinned,
says David: which St. Ambrose expounds by his absolute exemption from humane
Judicature: Psalm. 5.
There is no rising up against a King, says Solomon, who may say unto him,
what do thou? ^on ^^bat (...) sa^menti ^ctita^, quid ^o ve^abatur ^vid? ^g.
Cont. ^et. l. 2.^.
David acknowledged the Image of God by holy Unction in the worst of Kings,
Saul, insomuch though he were his irreconcilable Adversary, he would not even
stretch forth his hand against him; he had not the new way to expound
Scriptures unto his own distorting passions, though that course was pressed
upon him with the advantage of a Crown, he checks the wrested and carnal
application, The Lord forbid that I should do this thing: yea, when the Son of
a stranger, ^am. 24.
an Amalekite, (who might perhaps plead ignorance of the sacred relations by
Unction) although Saul had already received his deaths wound; beside that it
might be counted a kind of rescue to save him from being taken Prisoner, and
come alive into the enemies hands, and that he might seem also to have merited
by preserving the Regalia, the Crown and royal Habiliaments from the Enemy,
David Saule^ propt^ sacro^^ctam ^^ctione^ honor^ vivum^ vi^di^ occisu^ Aug. ^
lit. o^t. c. 48. In Ap^ Ep. l. 2. Ep. 13^ Dig. v^ l. 1. tit. H. leg. 3^ Tho. A^
Ia. II^ 96. a. 5^ III m.
and presenting them unto the lawful Successor David, yet he is so awed with
the sacred regards conveyed unto King Saul by Unction, that he punishes him
with death for shortning Saul's life as for the breach of a known and natural
right. How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand against the Lords
Anointed? David honored Saul for his holy Unction living, and revenged him
being dead. A King in his Kingdom is solo Deo minor, inferior unto God only,
says Tertullian, and then surely above his people: Deo subditus, subject to
God only, says St. Ambrose unto Valentinian, Princeps legibus solutus est,
that the King is free from the power of the Law (is a Maxim as old as
Christianity) that is from the penalties of it, Laws have only a directive, no
coercive power over him; though not as a moral man; yet in his politic
consideration he is above the Law. Divino sunt judicio reservandi Reges, (...)
Car^ Ep. ^.
Kings stand or fall unto their own master God; satis est ad poenam, quod Deum
habeant ult^rem, it is sufficient that God will punish their Crimes; he is the
only Judge, not the people, unto whom our Appeal lies against the injuries of
their proceedings; in such cases our proper address is unto Gods Tribunal: if
arbitrary Government, Oppression, Murder, Sacrilege, Demonaick possession,
Witchcraft, (of all which sins King Saul was notoriously guilty) could give
sufficient warranty unto his punishment by his Subjects, and were the people
competen^ Judges, the peoples hate of Saul, and David's merit from them, and
sufferings from Saul, might probably lead him to propound the people an High
Court of Justice, but informed by a better spirit than that which actuates
these times, he puts up his Charge against Saul (even when his life was in his
power) unto God (unto whom the judgment of Kings belongs) in these words, The
Lord judge between thee and me, 1 Sa^ 14.
and the Lord avenge me of thee, but mine hand shall not be upon thee; yea,
afterward upon Saul's continuance of his mortal hatred and bloody persecution
of David and his Followers, and that Abishai preached unto David the modern
doctrine, the divine and infallible equity of outward Successes, that God had
delivered King Saul into his hands, and offered himself a ready Executioner of
the fact, David countermands ^is active and interessed malice (cloaked with
usual pretensions of Religion and Liberty) Destroy him not, for who can stretch
forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? but he refers for
remedy unto the proper Court of Justice against Kings, ^m. 26.^.
the Lord shall smi^e him* or this day shall come to dye, or he shall descend
in Battle and perish; the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand
against the Lords Anointed. Saul had not Innocence, and yet he had Sanctity,
(...) non ^^ebat ^^ocen^^, and (...) ha^^at san^^tem, (...) vitae ^^sed
sa^^menti (...) quod ^alis ^^inibus ^tum ^ubi (...)
not of Life but of the Unction, which even in wicked men is holy, says Saint
Augustine. The first and best Christians continued their practice toward their
most re^^actory and imperious Emperors; when Valentinian the Younger
dispossessed the Orthodox of their Churches in Millain, and gave them unto the
Arians; Saint Ambrose the Bishop only offered up his supplications unto God to
alter the Emperors purposes, Adversus Arma, Amb. (...) l. 2. Ep. ^
Lacrymae meae Arma sunt, against Arms, tears are my defensive weapons;
aliter nec debeo, nec possum repugnare, no other way ought I, or can I resist,
says he: the carriage of the Citizens of Millaine was the same, exhibiting
their Petition unto the Emperor, they all cry out, Rogamus, non pugnamus, We
humbly entreat you oh Emperor, we fight not against you.

The testimony of Plynius secundus, given unto Trajan, that the Primitive
Christians practiced nothing against the received Laws, and were ready rather
to suffer then oppose, procured them not only a respite from their bloody
persecution, Eus^. Hi^ Ecc. l. 3^ c. 27. Theod. l* 3. f. 19.
but also the free exercise of their Religion.

Tears and Prayers unto God, and humble supplications unto Princes, the
ancient Christians held the only powerful means to divert their miscarriages;
(...) de^m non ^dide^^ in (...) Chri^^ni non (...) terre^regibus ^equi. ^g. Con
^in ^l. 118. Ps. 114.
they never denied them any duty of Subjection. Saint Austustine witnesses,
that this was the behavior of the Christian Soldiers, even under Julian the
Apostata an Idolater. When Maximus entered Italy with a great Army, under
pretense of restoring the Orthodox, ejected by Valentinian, who patronized the
Arrians; he was held by the Orthodox but for a Tyrant, and was so far from
receiving assistance from them, that they overthrew him, ^^om. ^.7. cap. ^^ 14.
and established Valentinian.

And as Unction is the divine seal of supreme power, Indemnity, and
Inviolability unto Kings, so does it likewise suggest unto them, the duty of
the Regal Administration toward their Subjects; That as Oil is of a
spreading and diffusive quality; Psalm. 133.2. Lev. 19.15.
So in the Prince is required Impartiality and Justice equally distributive
unto all. Luke 10 34. Isa. 3.7
As Oil likewise has in it a lenitive and healing virtue: So should the
Supreme Magistrate be an Healer, and binder up of the wounds, and sores of his
Subjects.

Oil has in it also an especial virtue to comfort and strengthen the parts
unto which it is applied: So is a King the Minister of good unto his Subjects
for good: he is to cherish virtue, to esteem honest and commendable Action: in
which sense are Kings styled by our Savior, Romans 13*4.
(...), Benefactors, Luke 22.25. Add hereunto, that Oil is of a nourishing
and cheering quality, and taken as sustenance; Psalm. 104*15.
is of easy and fine distribution, causing a good and wholesome nutriment,
therefore it is reckoned among the principal blessings of a land; so is the
Grace and Countenance of a King, of a nourishing, and improving operation; The
Kings favor is like the dew upon the grass, Prove. 19.12. in which respect God
promises unto the Christian Church, that Kings should be nursing Fathers, and
Queens the nursing Mothers thereof, Isa. 49.23.

Thus we see the many sacred Impressions of Divine Jurisdiction imposed by God
himself on Kings through holy Unction, whereby his Dominion over Mankind, is
delegated unto Kings, the Lords Anointed; God by this Symbol, and outward
sign agreeable and connaturall unto man, consigning the ordinary exercise of
his Government over Mankind unto them; so that the holy Oil thus employed is
no longer bare and common Oil, Cyril. Cat. 3.
but (...), the gif^ of Grace; which (however vilified by Enthusiastiques and
Solifidians) betokens the Grace (...) Christ unto Kings; and prescribe
necessary submission and duty unto their Subjects: We are not (whatever
phantastique men may presume) ^o spiritual in this life, but that we stand in
need of outward representations to carry on our faith and hope unto things
spiritual, the greatest favors unto lapsed mankind are the Sacraments, where
the visible and corporeal Elements are the means to convey by faith
spiritual graces and the whole benefit of Christ's sufferings unto us: the
sublimated and metaphysicall Professors of our times endeavor too irreverent
a close with Almighty God, they will have no King but Christ, no Unction but
that of the Spirit, which is not that sober and peaceable Spirit that leads
into all truth, but the Spirit of giddiness; Elihu's spirit, Job 32.18.
the spirit of their belly which leads into all error, Carnal interests
constraining them to shake off Gods Government in Princes; to effect which, the
most compendious way is, to throw all Ceremony (which is unto Religion as the
Scaberd unto the Sword, to preserve it from the rust of contempt,) (as Saint
Augustin^ speaks. ^^nt. (...). l. 12.11.
) The sacred regards of Unction, of King, of Priest, of Prophet, of Churches,
of Tithes, stand betwixt them and their sacrilegious ends, they must be
removed, no railes or bounds must be set unto them, they will up into the Mount
and run the hazard if not of temporal flames, ^od. 19.^.
yet certainly (without hearty repentance) of the Everlasting burnings: These
men who will be solely swayed by the guidance of their own spirit, (which being
as various as the several tempers of the Continents it inhabits) will make
Religion full of uncertainties, merely imaginary and wholly depending upon the
doubtful Insufficiencies of men's weak Conceptions, so that hereby, the
essential truths of Religion must needs daily decay, the substance thereof be
reduced into the smoke of every man's unbounded Fancy; and the Christian faith
will die by degrees. But Unction puts Gods Dominion into the Kings hands, that
must not be resisted; for it is the resisting of God himself: It is the very
language of the Holy Ghost unto the ^en revolted Tribes, 2 Ch^ 13. (...) c. 14
that they resisted the Kingdom of God in the hands of the Sons of David:
and Josephus assigns this the Cause of the subversion of them (no memory of
them being left.) The sedition (says he) that they moved against Rehoboam,
establishing hi^ Servant for their King* was the original of their mischiefs:
Ammon was a most wicked and idolatrous Prince, yet God punished the Treason of
his Servants against him, (...) ^3.24.
because he was Gods Anointed: Many sacred regards are by Unction conveyed from
God unto Princes: great cause then had the Prophet and people of Judah to
lament the death of their good King Josiah, The Anointed of the Lord, That he
was fallen into their pits.

3. Of whom we said, Under the shadow of his wings we shall live among the
Heathen: King Josiah his regal prerogatives and personal virtues were a
protection unto his people, he was the fountain of their liberty and safety;
The happiness of Subjects depends upon the wel-being of their Kings, and the
preservation of the Regal dignity is a sure pledge of Gods goodness, and the
continuance of his favor unto a people; for this cause is it that when the
Apostle had exhorted that prayers should be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1. as
though this precept were too universal, he reduces it, v. 2. unto Kings, and
adds the reason, that ye may lead a quiet and peaceable life, and for the same
cause did the Prophet command the Israelites to pray for the King of Babylon,
Nebuchadnezzar: Jer. ^
This consideration also made David's Subjects apprice his life at so high a
rate, is not now thy life worth ten thousand of ours? 2 Sa^ 3. 1 Samuel 17.
The King is the Head of the people, there is a sacred and near relation
betwixt them, a disease or pain in the Head causes a discrasie in the whole
body, an indisposition throughout all the members: So the calamity and
sufferings of the King affects every conscientious man in his Kingdom* this
honest zeal and pious sympathy between the He^d and (...) the King and the
people, made our Prophet and the men of Judah so passionately bewail the loss
of their good King Josiah: they promised unto themselves a lasting security in
this life, Of whom we said, Under the shadow of his wings we shall live among
the Heathen. Gods grant of Regal prerogatives unto Josiah, afforded not only
protection ( as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, our Saviors
allusion) to defend them from the Birds of prey, but a strength also and
vigorous warmth to make them grow up unto an ability to guard themselves and
dwell with safety among the Heathen, the known Enemies of their Nation and
profession; when then this Royal Oak was cut down, and they deprived of the
thriving benefits of its shelter, their sorrows must needs plentifully spring
up from the sense of so great and irrepa^^able a loss, and the fear of those
storms which now threatened to overturne their felicity: But the depth of this
sorrow was not to be fathomed, when they found the bottomless Abyss of their
own sins the head thereof, that notwithstanding the great privileges of
Josiah's Regal dignity and pie^y, that the fierceness of Gods greater wrath
was so kindled against Judah, that the Lord said, I will remove Judah out of my
sight, 2 Ch^^ 24.^
as I have removed Israel, and therefore that his fury without obstruction or
let might be powered out upon them, God suffers the breath of their Nostrils,
the Anointed of the Lord, of who^ they said, Under the shadow of his wings they
should live among the Heathen: Good King Josiah, the life of their Religion,
Law; he who was empowred by God with the Supreme Authority, had a divine grant
of humane Indemnity and Inviolability, their righteous Justicer, their
Physician, their nursing Father, their Protector, and the great Conservator of
their Liberty and Safety. To fall into their pits, to die by the hands of his
Adversaries: being the second consideration in the Text.

2. The breath of our Nostrils, etc. was taken in their pits. Here is the
nulling of Gods letters patents, and the grant of Regal prerogatives and
beneficial privileges made unto King Josiah, by a violent death. God for the
punishment of the people of Judah's sins, takes away their pious Prince by
the power of his Enemies: The force of the relation betwixt the head and the
members, the King and the People, is the true reason why God punishes the best
of Kings with temporal judgments for the offenses of his Subjects, (as here in
Josiah) The anger of the Lord was moved against Israel, and he moved David to
number the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. The divine Justice vindicated that sin of the
King upon the people; for whose transgressions he was suffered to sin: ^
Divinely holy Gregory, secundum meritum plebi^^m disponuntur Corda Rectorum,
According unto the deserts of the People, the hearts of the Governors are
disposed; the just Judge punished the fault of the Offender, upon them who had
caused him to offend. What an impious absurdity is it to sly in the face of
our Prince for those errors, which receive their birth and strength from our
own native corruptions! we should rather say (as Job tells his supercilious
Reprovers) why persecute w^ him, Job ^
since the ground of the matter is found in me? Where the Prince is vicious,
the accusation properly lies against the Subjects, whose sins make him so: for,
as the prosperity of the King is the sure earnest of Gods favor unto a people,
^
(as Saba shows the Israelites from the glory of King Salomons Court) so is the
oppression and misery even of the worst of Kings an infallible mark of Gods
anger resting upon a people, as in King Saul: Josiah's single default (fighting
with Pharaoh Necho without Gods allowance) brings the punishment of a violent
death upon him, for that only registered error into which the peoples sin; had
pushed him, their sins were now ripe for punishment by his one offense, for
whose punishment he was suffered even then to offend, that so their judgments
might commence from his death, whose guilt permitted not unto him a longer
life. He fell into their pits, (a speech taken from Hunters, who way-lay those
Beasts they chase, setting snares and toils for them in those paths and places
they run unto for refuge) that they might know, that since God had divested
Josiah their sacred head of all Regal Prerogatives, and let him fall by the
practices and power of his cruel Foes, they could no longer urge a respite from
the execution of those judgments given against their former transgressions, but
acknowledge and bewail this sad and evil occurrent, (the violent death of their
King) the fatal consequence of their own sins, for which there was now a
recession of God (in his Government by Josiah) from them, and an abandoning
them up into the hands of Strangers and Usurpers, from whom they could not but
expect all the wearisom traverses of Tyranny, the heavy weight of a continued
Oppression, and all those not to be reckoned unhappy inconveniences which
attend upon a Government obtained by conquest, supported by force, and
maintained and actuated by the Law of the sword: so that even this violent
death appears an absolute assurance of Gods mercy and goodness unto King
Josiah, to take him out of this life, that he might not behold those woeful and
thronging miseries which were ready to rush in upon and bear down the present
(for his sake only) happy condition of his Subjects, which would have procured
unto him more anxiety, than the consideration of undergoing ten thousand
violent deaths; a good Prince having so strong a sympathy with his Subjects
sufferings, that he fe^ls every pricking pang and painful touch of their
ttoubles, in which respect this violent death was an incomparable favor unto
him, and (which at first sight procures our wonder) proves his greatest
temporal blessing, and the gracious reward of his eminent piety, and so much
the Holy Ghost tells us, Because thine heart was tender, 2 (...) 34.17
and thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his words
against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thy self
before me, and did rend thy clothes, and weep before me, I have even heard
thee also, says the Lord. Behold, I will gather thee to thy Fathers, and thou
shall be gathered unto thy Fathers in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all
the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the
same: So that as the Prophet Isaiah speaks we may Lay it to heart, Isa. 57.
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come: Hezekiah's piety
likewise found this divine favor a respite from the sight of those judgments
his peoples sins had contracted, that there should be peace and truth in his
days, ^hron. 19.
and he thankfully and humbly acknowledges the greatness of that mercy.

These sad Considerations quickly pull up all the sluices of sorrow, and let in
floods of tears to overwhelm them, they lament and mourn with a great and
grievous mourning, ^hron. 24.
All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah: a mourning wherein the whole
Kingdom wore the blacks of sorrow, a mourning renowned for the universal and
sad solemnity thereof, a mourning made the highest prescription of mourning the
utmost bounds and confines of sorrow, chapter 11.1
as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, where every family of
the whole Kingdom distinguished themselves by the variety and solitariness of
their sorrow, every family mourning apart, the Princes of the blood apart, the
Priests apart, the People by their several Families apart, and all their Wives
apart, every part of every Family having a several share in this general
sorrow? and a particular part in this common sadness and Lamentation for
Josiah: the Priest and Prophet Jeremiah he is the chief Mourner, composeth
Josiah's Funeral Elegies (this Book of the Lamentations) gives them unto the
skilful Quire to chaunt forth, he begins the first sad Note, the Singing-men
and Singing-women consort with him in the doleful plaints, and all Judah and
Jerusalem make up the sad Chorus in this general sorrow.

Just cause had every man in Judah and Jerusalem to mourn for Josiah's death,
since every man's sin had made way by a several wound to take away Josiah's
life, and so must needs bear a share in the crying guilt of his blood, which
nothing but a flood of penitent tears could wash away: This makes every man's
particular sorrow as several lines, meet in the center of the Text, the common
cause of their teeming grief, The breath of our Nostails, the Anointed of the
Lord, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live
among the Heathen.

From these sacred Truths naturally flow these divinely informing Conclusions.

That a good Prince is the life of Religion, Law, and civil Conversation.

That Kings by holy Unction, as by Gods visible deed and conveyance, are
invested with the supreme Authority, Inviolability and Indemnity; and
therefore to think reverently of them, consecrated with so many mysterious
regards, and relations, the characters of Gods supreme jurisdiction over man.

That Unction suggests unto Kings that duty they stand obliged in unto their
Subjects, in the impartial distribution of justice to heal them, to comfort
them, to nourish them.

That a good King is designed by God a Protector of his Subjects, and the
Conservator of their Liberty, Safety and Peace.

That the best King may be punished with the greatest temporal punishment for
the sins of his Subjects.

That the Errors of Kings take their rise from their Subjects sins.

That God first takes away a good King before he will bring judgments upon his
Subjects.

That Gods violent taking away a good King from a People is an evidence of his
heavy displeasure, and a certain Prognostique of the many miseries he will
bring upon them.

That a violent death proves a temporal blessing unto a King, when it takes
from him the sight and sense of his Subjects sufferings.

That a violent death may justly be reputed a departing in peace, compared with
a continuance of the sense of troubles and durable calamity.

That all men are strictly and deeply engaged unto the most solemn sorrow for
the calamity of their King, as caused by their sins, and ushering in their
approaching miseries.

Let us see whether our Kingdoms may not truly calculate their griefs by the
Ephimerides of Judah's sorrow; we have had a British Josiah, whose Graces and
Prerogatives fully answered the proportion and size of their pattern: Could
Judah's sins snatch away their pious King JOSIAH from them, and do not we
conceive that our sins have hurried our Religious King CHARLES from us? Was
King Josiah's death the Inlet of Judah's miseries, and do not we suppose that
King Charles his life may be the period of our temporal happiness, and his
death the first act of that tragical Woe which is to be presented upon the
Theater of this Kingdom, likely to continue longer than the now-living
Spectators? We have had as great an Ebb of Felicity in the loss of our King
Charles, as Judah had in her Josiah's; should not the Tide then of our sorrows
run as high as theirs? Surely the parallel considerations of the Virtues and
Prerogatives of both these pious Kings, of the causes of their Calamities, and
the sad consequences attending them, will command an equality of ours with
Judah's sorrow; we will a little invert the method: Begin with King Charles his
divine and regal Prerogatives, next show his personal Virtues and Graces, then
his Sufferings, point at their Causes, and conclude with our own constrained
Sorrows.

^^rius ^estis ^egno (...). An^rit. p. 5 ^ Vica^ summi ^is. Leg. Reg. c. Lamb.
England in her best and loudest language, the Law, has largely declared the
sacred sovereignty of her Kings, spoke them Gods Vicars, assigned unto them the
fullness of Regal power, laid forth their jurisdiction by as large bounds as
the Scripture does King Josiah's, or any other Kings of Israel or Judah: Are
not these legal, registered and public acknowledgments, That every man is
under the King, and he under God only. That he is not inferior unto his
Subjects, even collectively considered. That he is a mixed person, and capable
of Spiritual Jurisdiction through holy Unction. That he is the fountain of
Honor, has the sole power to pardon and punish Offenders; to leavy War, to
make Peace, to constitute Officers. That he can do no wrong? Do not these
expressions amount unto, The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord,
etc. And these are the Regal peculiars of the Kings of England inseparably
annexed unto their Crown and Dignity, which he that runs may read, being
written in those large and known characters of the Law: Certainly these
significant delineations of the sacred and regal power of the Kings of England
were copied out of the holy Scriptures, ^ud. ^. Lex (...).
which those that now wrest them, (and make that fair Face of the Holy Ghost a
vizard alterable unto the disguise of their personated piety and hypocritical
practice) seeing, will not see. Doubtless the Crown of England was held from
the Lord paramount of Dominion, God, by as free, noble and regal a tenure, as
any under Heaven: And from him by a lineall and unquestionable right of
succession, had King Charles the investure thereof, and grant of all these
royal acknowledged Prerogatives until (without any divine or humane warrant)
He was violently disseized of them, and taken in their pits: These were his
sacred and regal Prerogatives.

Let us now look into that spacious field of His personal Virtues, a fragrant
tract, having the sweet smell of A field which the Lord has blessed; and since
time will not permit the perusal of every pleasant walk of grace, and the
delightful Ambits of his virtues, let us as Moses from Mount N^bo take a
general and distant survey of this blessed circuit flowing with milk and honey,
King Charles his Celestial gifts and graces, A Jove principium --

His religious piety renders i^ self glorious in his great love, fear and
honor of God; His zeal and devout frequency in prayer, receiving the
Sacraments, and reading the holy Scriptures, his reverence in Gods House, his
attention unto God^ word preached, the esteem he had of Gods Messengers, his
hatred of Heresy, and the zealous care he had (as it was consistent with
charity) to propagate the true worship of God, the Protestant Religion; this in
the purity thereof he established by his Laws, enlarged with his Regal
Authority, cleansed from that Rust it had contracted through the Atheism and
ignorance of the Times, by the contemptibleness of the outward worship, adorned
with Decency and Order in the public service, and with cost upon the places
dedicate unto that service; but chiefly he beautified it with the glorious
example of his holy life, and encouragement of the Officers thereof, whom he
rewarded with the rewards of Honor and Maintenance: His Royal Palace (as
Theodosius Juniors) was a constant Receipt for learned and pious Prelates, whom
he entertained and cherished as the Servants of the great God, Socra c. 22.
and Dispensers of the mysteries and means of Grace; which as it was an
especial and infallible mark of the sincerity of his humble piety, so through
the supercilious irreligion of the times, did that (which should have most
endeared him unto Christians) draw neglect and contempt upon him, from them
(and those Great ones too) who love nothing of Christianity but the naked name:
he knew that Church-maintenance was the best Nurse of Religion, and therefore
no weight of difficulties could so press upon him, to alien Gods portion the
Patrimony of the Church; to preserve which from the sacrilegious invasion of
the first movers of these Troubles (who thought the best way to shake off
Government was to destroy Religion, and the most effectual and quick course to
destroy Religion to take away Church-maintenance) He tendered the sale of so
much Crownland as would amount unto the value of the Church-land. That great
and strict care he took to keep the Throne and Kingdom of God in his Soul (His
Conscience) inviolable, shows that although he made his abode among Men, yet
his Conversation was in Heaven: The continual acknowledged remorse he was
seized with, for consenting (against the dictate of his Conscience) unto the
Earl of Strafford's death, speaks him another David, and A Man after Gods own
heart, such were the tender impressions that Act ever left in him, as David
when he cut off the skirt of Saul's garment, ^^ngs
his heart smote him, and indeed his Majesty found that fate which the Rabbis
assign unto David's fact, that he found no heat in his clothes afterward: So
His Majesty found not that comforting warmth in the advices of others, which he
did in the solid Counsels of that ever to be honored Earl. How many invincible
Arguments have we of his Majesty's singular sanctimony? How in that his great
Trial of his afflictions, did the abundance of his joy, the riches of his
graces, and the absolute and complete contentation of piety shine forth in all
his speeches and actions? as that first great Patron of Christianity,
Constantine the Great, would have his Effigies kneeling engraven on his Coin,
Eusebius. Constable. l. 4. c. 1
with his hands spread, and his eyes advanced toward Heaven, the posture of an
humble suppliant at the Throne of Grace; so did our late most Religious KING
desire that unto that his Golden Manual might be prefixed his Representation
kneeling, contemning a Temporal, holding our blessed Saviors Crown of Thorns,
and aspiring unto an eternal Crown of Happiness; which clears unto us, that
his large Soul was not possessed with narrow and temporal considerations, but
with the regards of lasting and eternal Interests; so that of all the Christian
Kings of this Isle, he may be positively said the most Christian.

From his piety let us pass over unto his prudence, which although it be fairly
measured out unto us in his great piety; (the practice whereof is the supreme
prudence and best evidence of a good Understanding) yet morally considered, as
it is an habit acting in humane affairs by the ordered rules of Reason, we
shall find his Majesty nobly accomplished with this Virtue, furnished with a
strong memory of things past, with a sound judgment in their reference and
relation unto things present, with a clear and quick apprehension to discern
the operations and tendencies of Occurrents, and with a singular providence and
wise disposition of things fit to attain unto his ends, which were ever
honorable and worthy of so great a Prince; who ever judged a Christian
simplicity the best policy: With the gravest Nation of Europe, the Spaniard, he
gained in his younger years the reputation of A sober, grave, wise Prince;
which will fully appear if we look upon him in his particular relations, His
Majesty was a most kind Husband, religiously observant of the holy ties of
Wedlock, a tender and indulgent Father unto his Children, unto whom he paid the
due of Paternall care in their religious and royal Education: His Kingly
bounty unto his Servants show him a liberal and good Master, and his good
affection unto his People (whose welfare he ever prized above his own; and
unto the last minute was much more afflicted from the sense of theirs than his
own sufferings) show him a most gracious Sovereign. And however he was by those
who long since took away his Civil life, and destroyed his royal reputation
with his Subjects (to set up themselves, and drive on their own ends)
represented a Prince of mean and contemptible endowments, and unfit for
Government; the whole World now sees their gross falsehood, and their
Confessions give the Lie unto their loud and lewd Calumnies; for since his
solitary and close Confinement, when he could have no Counsel but what he
fetched from Heaven, all rational and unprejudiced men see, His sober, wise,
satisfactory and resolute Answers, unto all their arrogant, dull, destructive,
dissolute Pro^ositions; so that it is a positive and measured judgment (made
from the whole carriage of his transactions with this Parliament) that he was
incomparably the wisest Prince in Christendom, and better understood the
Constitution and affairs of his Kingdoms than any man now living: Neither may
we here (as the con^tant Attendant and sworn Servant unto his princely
prudence) but with wonder reflect upon his Kingly Eloquence, his flowing and
(as Tacitus speaks of Augustus) King-becoming style, sweet, pure, acurate,
perspicuous, grave, full of copious facility, and elegant felicity, without
strained affectation, or servile and forced imitation; so that had he not some
natural difficulties in Pronuntiation, he would have been approved the best
Orator and perfect Master of Language (as he was of Reason) that ever Britain
yet bred; but who ever with more judgment bethought those things that were to
be spoken? or who ever fitted his Consult thoughts with a more handsome and
clean apparel of speech, and maturity of weighed words? This Age shows not a
man able to take up his Princely pen, his style may well be the object of men's
wishes, never of their imitation, unto an equality of like perfection.

This his princely prudence receives likewise further illustrations from his
Justice, in the free and equal administration thereof unto all; some
surreptions and corruptions in particular Officers of State, as they are not to
be defended, so (whilst men are men) they will hardly be avoided: but the sweet
influence of His Majesty's justice upon all appears, in the Peace of His
Kingdoms, the serenity of His people, the tranquillity of Public affairs,
the increase of Trade, the growing riches of His Subjects, and the universal
happiness of His Government; these three Kingdoms being thrice happy until
the Helm of Government was wrested out of His sacred hands; and now we see
since these State-emperiques have practiced upon the body politic, with what
strong convulsions and mortal maladies it is affected: The best experienced
Physician under Heaven, and He only who could have cured England from the
diseases of her distemper, without opening her veins, is taken away from her;
she lies now sn the hands of young and desperate Practitioners, it is to be
feared, unless God prevent their violent administrations and corrosive
potions, with Antidotes of mercy, in stead of mending her, they will end her
health, life, and liberty.

Look upon his true Christian fortitude, in the magnanimity of his carrying on
with Constancy of Resolution his weightiest Affairs even in their greatest
difficulties, in his confidence with Gods assistance to overcome them; in his
exceeding patience, in a tollerance (free from despondency) in the greatest
molestations and pressures to compose them; and in his matchless and Kingly
perseverance, even in the furnace of affliction, and hottest flames of
adversity, (as Gods Cause) to maintain them; He went unto the Scaffold,
tanquam Apis ad Alveare, as a Be unto his Hive, with our Savior, as a Lamb
unto the slaughter, and cheerfully undrest himself unto his spiritual repose.

Observe his great temperance, his exemplary chastity, (so rare a virtue in a
Prince of so active and firm a constitution) so far f^ee from uncleanness,
that it had a refined purity from all lasciviousness of either gesture or
speech: his abstinence in his feeding gave unto him constancy in health, and
readiness unto action, and his sobriety in drinking (whom the Sun, nor all the
Sons of Men ever saw overcome or disguised by ingurgitations of strong Liquors)
made him unconquerable by Wine or Women.

His divine clemency even in the heat and cruelty of the bloody rage of his
Adversaries, is a contemplation will raise us up unto the very top of
admiration: whose life (after they had butchered his dearest and nearest
Servants) did he take away? how many of his most active and resolved Enemies in
his power, did he dismiss with our Saviors caveat unto the blind man, Sin
no more? His Majesty in this divine clemency (which yet some interpreted a
cruelty unto Himself) imitating the Father of mercies, who makes the Sun of
his favor equally to shine upon the just and unjust; being so far from
procuring or desiring the death of his Enemies, (unto which he wanted not
inciting animosities from others) that he often wished that he could recover
those that were already dead.

Neither are there wanting egregious Monuments of his Kingly munificence and
liberality; the great acquisitions of his Servants under him show it, from many
of whom notwithstanding, he had the unhappy returns of ingratitude, desertion,
and disloyalty.

And as unto his own Servants he was munificent, so especially unto those who
were set apart for the service of God, whom (with those religious Kings,
Hezekiah, Josiah, and Constantine) he encouraged by giving the portion of God,
and our pious Ancestors, unto them, to recover which out of the hands of
sacrilegious persons, he used many pious endeavors, and propounded
Compensations which would only have entrenched upon his own profit: when
former Grants from the Crown of Impropriations for years determined, His
Majesty always restored them unto the Church, conceiving his best and most
royal right unto the Goods of the Church (which he was otherwise by the Laws
of this Realm invested of) to be that of Patronage and Disposition; and from
this Princely munificence do I, with all the devotion of an humble and hearty
thankfulness, acknowledge to have received a particular encouragement in my
profession; ^
This nursing Father of the Church, knew the best way to support that, was by
Church maintenance: so that by his bounty, the Churches in the three Kingdoms
were lifted up out of the mire of contemptible poverty, and Clergymen of noted
piety and greatest abilities of learning, daily increased; so that setting
aside some few, either illiterate, wand^ing, cockbrain'd, discontented or
unconscionable Levites, who were in the great reserve of the sacrilegious and
rebellious Jeroboams of our time, (to secure those two Calves of their
Government and Worship which they fought for) no Kingdoms of the World were
beautified with so many Lights of learning and piety as these Kingdoms.

Observe the divine graces of this glorious King, the unmovable stability of
his faith, a firm Rock; which no storms of popular rage, no swelling surges
of the multitude, nor all the proud billows of his insulting Adversaries,
could alter or unsettle in his pious purpose to preserve the Protestant
Religion and the Laws of this Realm: how great was the intention of his
sacred hope? and of what exceeding latitude was his charity, which included and
enclosed his fiercest and most mortal Enemies: But the lively features, and
fair lineaments of his graces and virtues are best and more largely drawn out
by his own Pencill, His works praise him in the Gate, his writings present
unto us the heavenly pourtraicture of his divine, large, and grasping Soul;
these (what they are wanting in volume, recompensing an hundred fold in worth)
are the Repertory of all his Actions, and the truest Index of his virtues: (...)
that Book is the quintessence of knowing zeal, the storehouse of the ripe and
choice fruits of Christian piety: there are the principles of Religion
perfectly digested into holy practice: there is the true Princely Image of King
Charles that Golden Manual, being a stately building of Meditations,
Consultations, Essays, Debates, and Devotions, raised upon emergent occasions,
with such judicious artifice of grace, adorned with so rich furniture of piety,
enlarged with so many fair rooms and convenient receipts for grace, that it
shows his Body was the Temple of the Holy Ghost, that there was no corner or
vacuity in his great and glorious Soul.

I doubt not (without the height of an Hyperbole) to affirm, that in what we
have of this holy Kings draught, we are abundantly repaired in the loss of
Solomon's physiques, for here is a shop full of heavenly medicines for all the
maladies of the soul: by so much then is their sin the greater, whose malice
has deprived us of those other later pieces of His Majesty. What already we
have is the greatest monument of piety of any Kings (after theirs whose
writings become authentic from God, as being Penmen of his own divine
dictates) since the Creation, and shall have continual and unwearied travailes
made unto it in all Languages and Kingdoms, by all Men and Women, who know,
love, and honor piety, prudence, and all divine and moral graces and virtues,
every of which has its several achievement and particular Trophy erected in
this one work, which will be as long lived as Time.

I conclude this short and general survey of His Majesty's personal virtues
(worthy of a just Volume, and exceeding the limits of a Sermon) with that
Eulogy and Honor of Praise given unto Constantine the Great by Eusebius, (...)
l. ^ 1.
he was most dear unto God, and proposed by him a great and excellent example
of an holy and religious life for all men's imitations.

The memory of his piety and glorious reputation of his virtues shall be for
ever precious, and whatever Dogs bark against it, (...). 16.
always remain a fixed and shining Star of the greatest magnitude in the
firmament of Honor. And thou carnal Prophet who walk by the light of thine
own eyes, and call thy darkness light, thou who (as the Jews unto our
Savior) did reach the Vinegar and Gall unto Gods Anointed in the Agony of
his sufferings, offered'st that false, furious, Isa. 14* 18, 19, and 20.
and forced application of Scriptures, which thy counsels must fill up with an
interpretation, (as the event shows) know that there is a lying and seducing
Spirit in thee, Acts 13 10.
that thou wrestest the Scripture unto thine own damnation: thou Sorcerer and
chief Witch of these times, full of all subtility and all mischief, thou child
of the Devil, thou Enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert
the right ways of the Lord? Thy Epicurean and sublunary Divinity cannot admit
that a violent death should be a singular testimony of Gods favor, yet here
thou see it in Josiah; will thou have all temporal judgments to be
punishments due unto sin? will not thy triumphant wickedness let thee know,
that some afflictions are for Trials, and the additions of grace and glory unto
Gods Children, ^. 2.10.
and therefore the chief marks of Gods favor: As in our gracious King Charles,
who was also taken away from the evil to come, (...). 12.
in Gods mercy unto him; which thou even thou, unto the shame and confusion of
thy face (although thou have hardened it) shall see in the approaching day of
Englands calamity, which in a great part is procured and hastened by thy
infernal counsels; thou needst not to have given that Scripture such a violent
stretch so to streine it as to make it reach from Assyria unto England, or to
travail so far for a reason why His Majesty should not have a royal
interment with His Auncesters; the causes were nearer thee, Let me assign them:

First, it had been a Condemnation of your selves to have allowed him solemn
and Kingly Funerals, unto whom you gave so unjust and cruel a death, that
were to build up what you were resolved to destroy.

Next, you could not but know, that ^he neighbourhoo^ of his sacred earthly
remains must needs refricate the scarce skinn'^ sorrows of London; when they
should have such a standing and still present Monument of their former
happiness, in His Majesty's peaceable Government; and of their new mise^y in
your Tyranny, which would serve also (this being the place of the greatest
confluence) to recrude the grief of the whole Kingdom, and probably beget
such compunction and reluctance in both City and Kingdom, as would testify it
self, by their attempt to cast you down headlong from your new and wickedly
acquired Dominion.

Another reason was, lest the nearness of his Body whom you murdered, might
too frequently offer unto you the horror of your Guilt, and redouble unto you
those inward cheques and lashings of your Consciences (which you cannot be
without) and so impede and trouble your Counsels.

^^eod. l. c. 9.
The Devil at the Oracle of Apollo of Daphne could not give his Answers unto
Julian the Apostate, who sent to consult him about his undertakings against the
Persians, so long as the body of the Martyr Babylas lay by him; so it is to be
presumed that the same Spirit (which the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.2.
powerfully works in the Children of disobedience) might be hindered in his
cooperation and influence upon those unto whom he has consigned the chief
exercise of his power in our English world, if King Charles his sacred relics
were lodged so nigh unto them as Westminster, and therefore Windsor was near
enough.

But from the view of His Majesty's undeniable matchless Virtues, let us pass
on unto that of His sufferings:

Sinful envy never fails to give a malicious attendance upon virtue, which
by how much the more it is illustrious, with so much the greater rancour does
she dog and persecute it, and therefore many are the troubles ^f the righteous;
and no (mere) man had ever more, then righte^us King Charles: behold and see if
any sorrows and sufferings were like unto His. See one of the most potent
Monarchs of Europe, loved at home, and feared abroad, most injuriously and
strictly Imprisoned, debarred from the most dear society of the most virtuous
and best Wife, from the converse and sight of his most sweet and hopeful
Children, from the attendance of his most faithful Servants, from Gods house,
from Gods public worship, and all Gods Servants, forced to cohabite with
Beasts, brutish, savage, and wicked Men, and these to be made the Instruments
of their cruelty unto him, who were his sworn Subjects and Servants, upon whom
all civil and divine obligations of duty and affection unto His Majesty
rested, and that upon pretensions of Religion and liberty, of which He was the
truest and most undoubted Defender; to lie under the weight and wounds of so
many scandals reproaches, wants, and miseries besides the most grievous sense
of the sufferings of his Kingdoms and best Subjects, to be daily tortured with
so many iterated, unreasonable Propositions, and insolent Demands, to be racked
out of his undoubted Royal Rights, to make so many Concessions and such great
Condescentions in his propensness unto peace, which notwithstanding his Enemies
never meant; to be tormented (if it were possible) unto perjury, sacrilege,
and Atheism; and to have no other Conditions propounded for the Enjoyment of
his Crowns and Kingdoms, then that which the Devil made unto our Savior,
All these will I give thee if thou will fall down and worship me; to offer his
own (that which never was theirs) to deny God, which God gave them him to
acknowledge and worship him: These must needs be sorrows and sufferings as
beyond expression, so above our conception; most terrible tests, and trials of
all his virtues; certainly no man had ever more, and more strict examinations
of Gods graces in him, all which he fully answered with a learned and
invincible piety; for in all these who ever heard him murmr, repine, or
charge God foolishly? who ever heard him accuse, rai^e at, or threaten his most
confirmed Foes? with Job, his eyes still powered out tears unto God, (...) 16.
whose justice in their greatest injustice he acknowledged, and although he
vindicated his own Innocence, ( having wherewith to justify homselfe before
man) from theirs; yet not before God, he cleared the equity of his judgment
upon him, for acting against his Conscience in the Earl of Straffords death.

But it was the great and crying guilt of these Nations sins ( Englands
principally) which made this righteous man fall into the pits of his
Adversaries, to ripen Gods judgment upon this Nation, by that great addition of
guilt [ the shedding of his innocent bloud] who had so many characters of Gods
supreme power and spiritual graces upon him, as must needs make this Crime
committed against God, and draw his speedy and unavoidable vengeance upon them
for it.

God usually punishes one sin by suffering Sinners to fall into others, and
those customary sins accompanied with senslessnesse and impenitency, which
fills up the measure of sin brimfull for judgment to take it off: so that this
pious Prince fell in the very corruption of Christianity, which is of far
more malign aspect, and has a more malicious influence of impiety upon the
actions of men then Atheism it self, for then men profess that they know
God, yet in their works they deny him; using the name of God and Religion, as
Conjurers in their Incantations to perpetrate those things are most contrary
unto God, and destructive unto Religion; for as the Devil never does mo^e hurt
then when he appears in the likeness of an Angel of light; so are men never
so mischievous, as when they drive on wicked designs under the show of
Godliness.

Englands former sins which caused this Gods just dereliction, and the
abandoning them up unto greater, were their exceeding luxury, in turning the
grace of God (temporal favors) into wantonness, the long continuance of their
peace, the increase of their Trade, riches, and plenty, begot in them a
general insolency and pride, so that when they waxed fat, like Jesurun, they
kicked against God, in the Authority and regard due unto his principal
Officers, the Prince, and the Priest: Hence the people of England (in their
generality) became self-willed, heady, high-minded, and incorrigible, they
slandered the footsteps of Gods Anointed, smote him with t^^ ^^ngue, contended
with Gods ^^iests; and usurped that sacred Jurisdiction which God had delegated
unto them, a those Conspirators did ( Ye take too much upon you ye Sons of
Levi, since all the people of the Lord are holy) under pretense of the Ambition
of the Clergy; and being like Elihu's new bottels, ready to burst, with that
liquor of flatuous and superficial knowledge instilled into them by the giddy
preachments, and undigested, swelling, and tedious prayers of their Lecturers,
(who reduced all Religion unto lip-worship, and canting Scriptures.) Hence came
it to pass that contemning the old paths, the truth of the reformation in the
Protestant Religion they contended unto blood to corrupt by their phanatick
Alterations, the pure Doctrine and Evangelical discipline established in the
Church of England, to effect which with the more ^ase, they adventure upon
sacriledg^ to carry on that, they must pull down Episcopacy, (the fence of the
Church) and here, the King, as a nursing Father interposing, they render Him
unable by encroaching upon his Prerogatives, quarrelling him, seize upon his
Strenghs, Arm, fight against him, imprison, and then Murder Him; which last
Act of Rebellion, though the greatest part of the first Engagers may be thought
never to have intended, yet they may see the first violation of their Obedience
due unto His Majesty punished, by a guilt (thus far) of his Innocent blood,
that that power which they raised, spilt it; So dangerous it is to vary from a
Christian Principle, or to do evil that good may come of it, God only having
power to direct, limit, and determine any evil action: so that look over the
pedigree of Englands sins through the several descents thereof, and you will
find it thus, Peace begot wealth, that plenty, that pride, that vanity, that
curiosity, that contention, that hate of the Clergy, that Sacrilege, that the
downfall of Bishops, that the contempt of the KING, that War, that
imprisonment, and that the murder of the King, a murder, the most horrid
murder that ever the Sun saw, for Subjects to take away their King's life,
without the prescription of a single example, or a law; nay, even against all
laws divine and humane, to Try him after the form of a Judiciary proceeding,
this is to entitle God unto the greatest sin; to establish iniquity by a Law,
^. 19.7.
and to make God such as themselves: Thus the Jews dealt with our Savior, We
have a Law, and by that Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God, although there was no such Law; but a new-made Law, a Juncto-law,
Straffords law, Canterburies law, the King's law (consequent Laws; Laws without
names or cognizance) made because he was KING. Neither does their power any
more prove the equity of this Fact (the great scandal of the Christian name,
and height of Anabaptistical fury) than the Devils power (which is from God)
does justify his malice (which is from himself.)

They have now indeed made King Charles a glorious King, proved him glorious in
his personal Virtues, glorious in his divine Graces, but most glorious in the
Christian Constancy of his glorious Sufferings for Gods Cause, the true
Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the three Kingdoms: thus
has God extorted a truth from them; for this spoke they not of themselves, but
(God forceing their testimony) they prophesied.

As we have seen His Majesty's sufferings and their causes, our sins, so let us
reflect upon their punishments; as the Springs from which our sorrows should
arise. The exceeding avarice and hypocrisy (two noted Court-sins with which
the greatest Christian Prince Constantine was abused) of the State-Grandees,
Vit. Co^ l. 4. c. 2
the deep pits wherein they laid the fatal snares into which pious King
CHARLES fell, will be visibly punished, for God will not be mocked. The pride,
vanity, sacrilege, rebellion, and the cruel murder of His Majesty will have
particular judgments levelled against these sins; every man's sin even of those
who have fought for His Majesty, who have yet fought against him by their sins,
has given force unto this great stroke and wound given unto these Kingdoms in
His Majesty's death; and therefore ought every man to proportion his sorrow
unto his sins. As King Josiah from Judah, so the strong Baricado King Charles
is taken away betwixt Gods judgments, and this Kingdom, the great and wide
Inlet of all misery is made by his death, could our sorrows answer them, like
a Torrent, it would overflow all the banks of Reason, and grow too big to be
carried away by the channels of our senses: behold every spring of Jeremiah and
Judahs sorrow open, to send forth these flowing streams of affliction upon us,
and all arise from the same head, The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of
the Lord, was taken in their pits of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall
live among the Heathen.

Those heavy judgments which the Prophet Jeremiah foresaw impending, and after
came to pass by King Josiahs death, are in a great part by King Charles his
death already come upon us. Gods House, his beautiful house, is laid waste,
Lam. ^ and 2.7^
the Heathen have entered into the Sanctuary, they have made a noise in the
House of the Lord as in the day of a solemn Feast: So that they who in the
beginning pretended God, Religion, the Church, [their Cause] have dealt with us
as that Faction among the Jews, Jos. (...) Jud. l. ^ c. 12.
who called themselves The Zealous, in the war with Titus did under pretense of
defending Religion and the Law they possessed themselves of the Temple, yet
were themselves the first who put fire with their own hands into the holy
places.

How has the avarice and carnal interests of the Teachers of these times
corrupted the purity of our Religion, as Judahs, so Englands only Prophets
have seen vain and foolish things for her, (...). 2.14.
^.13.
and they have not discovered her iniquity, to turn away her captivity, but
have seen for her false burdens and causes of banishment; they have shed the
blood of the just (K. Charles) in the midst of her Englands greatest
Adversaries are chief, ^.5.
and her Enemies prosper; ^.8.
Servants do bear rule over us, and there is none to deliver us out of their
hand.

^.5.
They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets, they that were
brought up in scarlet embrace dunghils. ^.12.
Princes are hanged by their hands, and the faces of the Elders are not
honored. War, desolation and famine, with their sad effects, foretold in these
Lamentations, appear in our Horizon already like Elihu's little Cloud, which
will shortly overspread our whole English firmament; and all these calamities
have and will fall upon us, because the Crown is fallen from our Head; the
British Josiah, 5.1*
King Charles is taken from us, and we have no comforter; 1.9
and how great and just causes of our sorrows are all these Calamities? But let
this sorrow have the full advantage in its fall, (to add motion unto all the
turning wheels of our afflicting griefs) the fall from our great happiness in
his Majesty's Government: Let London, let England, let Scotland, let Ireland,
let every of them Remember (as Jerusalem did) in the days of her afflictions
and her miseries, 1.7.
all the pleasant things that she had in the days of old. All the pleasant
things they had in the blessed days of King Charles his blessed Reign, the
glory and truth of her Religion, the just execution of her Laws, her peace, her
riches, her plenty, her liberty at home, and her protection and honor abroad.
^.15.
England was the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole earth. The
Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have
believed that the Adversary and Enemy should have entered into the Gates of
(our) Jerusalem, London, that Churches should be turned into stables, Gods
Houses made Courts of Guards, the Royal Palaces made Garrisons, the Tithes
(the portion of Gods Ministers) made the Soldiers salary, that the Law should
be turned into wormwood, our Religion and Liberty measured out unto us by the
Pikes length, the decisions of the Sword become the Principles of Faith, and
that (which is the cause of all this) mechanic persons, Tradesmen (who will
certainly mar, never can mend, so great concernments, they never before
handled or were acquainted with) the sole Moderators of Public affairs, and
the chief Princes and Potentates of our Kingdom.

But now The glory is departed from (our) Israel, 1.1*
the Ark of God is taken, and how is England become a Widow? made a prey unto
cruel people, and skilful to destroy, who daily force and prostitute her unto
their wicked purposes: for these things let England (and every true-hearted
Englishman) say, I weep, 1.1*
mine eye, mine eye runs down with wa^er, because the Comforter (King
CHARLES) that should relieve my soul is far from me. The breath of our
Nestrils, the Anointed of the Lord, etc. The life of our Religion, of our Laws,
of our Liberties, is taken from us; the Image of Gods power in supreme
Authority, Indemnity, and Inviolability, is taken from us; our Physician, our
nursing Father, our Comforter, our Protector, is taken from us, and for our
sins was taken in their pits, so that now we want the wings of his protection
among these Heathen among whom we live; we are now made very Slaves unto the
worst of Heathen, a people without God, without Faith, without Law, without
Rule, without Reason, without Humanity, without all these and whose unruly will
only, i^ unto them all these. These calamities are all fallen upon us, because
The breath of our Nostrils, etc. pious King Charles is taken from us like Elias
in a ^iery Chariot, ^onst. ^. 73.
(or as Constantine the Great after his death was impressed on a Coin plucked
up by a divine hand) into Heaven, that his eyes might not see, nor his
righteous soul be afflicted with all the evil which is come upon us to consume
us; woe unto us for we have sinned. These are but the contracted heads of those
miseries, which we shall all read over in the vast Volumes of our approaching
woes; and justly bes^eaks such sorrows as might transform us into Niobes, make
our heads Rivers of sorrows, and our eyes Fountains for continual tears.

The Lord in mercy look upon us, and wipe away these tears from our eyes, and
their causes, our sins from our souls; and since the blood of the Martyrs is
the seed of the Church, in mercy unto his Church restore the seed of his Martyr
King Charles the First unto the Government of these Kingdoms, that Religion,
Peace and Liberty may be restored unto us: I conclude these ours, as the
Prophet does his Lamentations, Turn thou unto us, O Lord, and we shall be
turned; renew our days as of old, ^.21,
if thou have not utterly dejected us: Hear our prayers, O Lord, for thy Sons
sake, unto whom with the Holy Ghost be ascribed, etc.

FINIS.

